
      
         
            
            
            The Execution of Iuſtice in England for maintenaunce of publique and Chriſtian peace, againſt certeine ſtirrers of ſedition, and adherents to the traytors and enemies of the Realme, without any perſecution of them for queſtions of Religion, as is falſely reported and publiſhed by the fautors and foſterers of their treaſons. xvii. Decemb. 1583.
            ❀Imprinted at London. 1583.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧The Execution of Iuſtice in England, for maintenance of publique and Chriſtian peace, &c.
            
               IT hath bene in all ages and in all countries,All offenders couer their faults with contrary cauſes. a common vſage of all offendors for the moſt part, both great and ſmall, to make defence of their lewd and vnlawfull facts by vntruthes and by colouring and couering their deedes (were they neuer ſo vile) with pretences of ſome other cauſes of contrarie operations or effectes: to the intent not onely to auoid puniſhment or ſhame, but to continue, vphold & proſecute their wicked attempts, to ye full ſatiſfaction of their diſordered and malicious appetites. And though ſuch hath bene the vſe of all offendors,Rebels doe moſt dangerouſly couer their faults. yet of none with more danger then of Rebels & traitours to their lawfull Princes, Kings and countries. Of which ſort of late yeeres, are ſpecially to be noted certaine perſons naturally borne ſubiects in the Realme of England and Ireland, who hauing for ſome good time profeſſed outwardly their obedience to their ſoueraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth,
               Rebellion in Englād, & Ireland. haue neuertheleſſe afterward bene ſtirred vp and ſeduced by wicked ſpirites, firſt in England ſundry yeres paſt, and ſecondly and of later time in Ireland, to enter into open rebellion, taking armes and comming into the field againſt her Maieſtie and her Lieutenants, with their forces vnder banners diſplayed, inducing by notable vntruthes many ſimple people to followe & aſſiſt them in their traiterous actions. And though it is very well knowen, that both their intentions

and manifeſt actions were bent, to haue depoſed the Queenes Maieſtie from her Crowne, and to haue traiterouſly ſet in her place ſome other whom they liked, whereby if they had not bene ſpeedily reſiſted, they would haue committed great bloodſheddes and ſlaughters of her Maieſties faithfull ſubiects, and ruined their natiue countrey. Yet by Gods power giuen vnto her Maieſtie,The rebels vāquiſhed by the Q. power. they were ſo ſpeedily vanquiſhed, as ſome few of them ſuffered by order of Lawe according to their deſerts, many and the greateſt part vpon confeſſion of their faultes were pardoned, ye reſt (but they not many) of the principall,Some of the Rebels fled into forreine countries. eſcaped into forreine countries, & there becauſe in none or few places rebels and traitours to their naturall Princes and countries dare for their treaſons chalenge at their firſt muſter open comfort or ſuccour, theſe notable traitors and rebels, haue falſely informed many Kings, Princes and States, and ſpecially the Biſhoppe of Rome, commonly called the Pope, (from whome they all had ſecretely their firſt comfort to rebell) that the cauſe of their fleeing from their countries was for the religion of Rome,
               Rebels pretend religion for their defence. and for maintenance of the ſaid Popes authoritie. Whereas diuers of them before their rebellion liued ſo notoriouſly, the moſt part of their liues, out of all good rule, either for honeſt maners, or for any ſenſe in religion, as they might haue bene rather familiar with Catalyn, or fauourers to Sardanapalus, then accōpted good ſubiectes vnder any Chriſtian Princes. As for ſome examples of the heads of theſe rebellions, out of England fled Charles Neuill Earle of Weſtmerland, a perſon vtterly waſted by looſeneſſe of life, & by Gods puniſhment euen in the time of his rebellion bereaued of his children that ſhould haue ſucceeded him in the Earledome, and how his bodie is nowe eaten with vlcers of lewde cauſes, all his companions do ſee, that no enemie he had can wiſh him a viler puniſhment. And out of Ireland ranne away

one Thomas Stukeley, a defamed perſon almoſt through all Chriſtendome, & a faithleſſe beaſt rather then a man, fleeing firſt out of England for notable piracies, and out of Ireland for trecheries not pardonable, which two were the firſt ringleaders of the reſt of the rebelles,Ringleaders of Rebels, Charles Neuill Earle of Weſtmerland, and Thomas Stukeley. the one for England, the other for Ireland. But notwithſtanding the notorious euill and wicked liues of theſe and others their confederates, voide of all Chriſtian religion, it liked the Biſhop of Rome, as in fauour of their treaſons, not to colour their offences as themſelues openly pretend to do, for auoyding of common ſhame of the worlde, but flatly to animate them to continue their former wicked purpoſes, that is, to take armes againſt their lawfull Queene, to inuade her realme with forreine forces, to purſue al her good ſubiects and their natiue countries with fire & ſworde: for maintenance whereof there had ſome yeres before, at ſundrie times, proceeded in a thundring ſort, Bulles, excommunications & other publique writings,The effect of ye popes but againſt ye Queene of Englād. denouncing her Maieſtie being the lawfull Queene, and Gods anoynted ſeruant, not to be the Queene of the realme, charging and vpon paines of excommunication commanding all her ſubiects, to depart from their natural alleageances, wherto by birth and by othe they were bounde. Prouoking alſo and authoriſing all perſons of al degrees within both the realmes to rebell, and vpon this antichriſtian warrant, being contrarie to all the Lawes of God and man, & nothing agreeable to a paſturall officer, not onely all the rabble of the foreſaid traitors that were before fled, but alſo all other perſons that had forſaken their natiue countries, being of diuers conditions and qualities, ſome not able to liue at home but in beggerie, ſome diſcontented for lacke of preferments, which they gaped for vnworthily in Vniuerſities & other places, ſome banckerupt Marchants, ſome in a ſort learned to contentions, being not contented to learne

to obey the Lawes of the lande, haue many yeres running vp and downe, from Countrey to countrey, practiſed ſome in one corner,The practiſes of the traitors, Rebels, & fugitiues to execute the Bull. ſome in an other, ſome with ſeeking to gather forces and money for forces, ſome with inſtigation of Princes by vntruethes to make warre vpon their natural countrey, ſome with inwarde practiſes to murder the GREATEST, ſome with ſeditious writings, and very many of late with publique infamous libels, ful of deſpitefull vile termes and poyſoned lyes, altogether to vpholde the foreſaide antichriſtian and tyrannous warrant of the Popes Bull. And yet alſo by ſome other meanes, to furder theſe intentions, becauſe they could not readily preuayle by way of force, finding forreine Princes of better conſideration and not readily inclined to their wicked purpoſes,Seminaries erected to nurſe ſeditious fugitiues. it was deuiſed to erect vp certeine ſchooles which they called Seminaries, to nouriſh & bring vp perſons diſpoſed naturally to ſedition, to continue their race and trade, and to become ſeedmen in their tillage of ſedition, & them to ſend ſecretly into theſe the Q. Maieſties realmes of England & Ireland vnder ſecret Maſkes, ſome of Prieſthood, ſome of other inferior orders, with titles of Seminaries for ſome of the meaner ſort, & of Ieſuites for the ſtagers and ranker ſort & ſuch like, but yet ſo warely they crept into the land, as none brought the marks of their prieſthoode with them, but in diuers corners of her Maieſties Dominions theſe Seminaries or ſeedemen and Ieſuites, bringing with them certeine Romiſh traſh, as of their hallowed Waxe, their Agnus dei,
               The Seminary fugitiues come ſecretly into the realme to induce the people to obey the Popes Bull. many kinde of Beades, and ſuch like, haue as tillage men laboured ſecretly to perſwade the people to allowe of the Popes foreſaid Bulles and warrantes, and of his abſolute authoritie ouer all Princes and Countries, and ſtriking many with prickes of conſcience to obey the ſame, whereby in proces of ſmall time, if this wicked and dangerous, traiterous and craftie courſe had not bene by

Gods goodnes eſpied and ſtaied, there had followed imminent danger of horrible vprores in the realmes, and a manifeſt blooddy deſtruction of great multitudes of Chriſtians. For it cannot be denied but that ſo many as ſhoulde haue bene induced & throughly perſwaded to haue obeyed that wicked warrant of the Popes, and the contents thereof, ſhould haue bene forthwith in their hearts and conſciences ſecret traitors, and for to be in deede errant and open traitours, there ſhoulde haue wanted nothing but opportunitie to feele their ſtrength and to aſſemble themſelues in ſuch nombers with Armour & weapons, as they might haue preſumed to haue bene the greater part, & ſo by open ciuill warre, to haue come to their wicked purpoſes. But Gods goodnes by whome Kinges doe rule, and by whoſe blaſt traitors are commonly waſted and cōfounded, hath otherwiſe giuen to her Maieſtie as to his handmayde and deare ſeruant, ruling vnder him, the ſpirit of wiſdome and power,Sowers of ſedition taken, conuē
                  ted, & executed for treaſon. whereby ſhe hath cauſed ſome of theſe ſedicious ſeedemen and ſowers of rebellion, to be diſcouered for all their ſecret lurkings, and to be taken and charged with theſe former poyntes of high treaſon, not being delt withall vpon queſtions of religion, but iuſtly condemned as traitors. At which times, notwithſtanding al maner gentle wayes of perſuaſions vſed, to moue them to deſiſt from ſuch manifeſt traiterous courſes and opiniōs, yet was the canker of their rebellious humors ſo deepely entred and grauen into the heartes of many of them, as they woulde not be remooued from their traiterous determinations. And therefore as manifeſt traitours in maintayning and adhearing to the capitall enemy of her Maieſtie and her Crowne, who hath not only bene the cauſe of two rebellions alreadie paſſed in England and Ireland, but in that of Ireland did manifeſtly wage and maintaine his owne people Captaines and Souldiours vnder the Banner of

               Rome, againſt her Maieſtie (ſo as no enemy coulde doe more:) Theſe I ſay haue iuſtly ſuffered death not by force or forme of any newe lawes eſtabliſhed, either for religion or againſt the Popes ſupremacie, as the ſlaunderous libellers would haue it ſeeme to be, but by the auncient temporall lawes of the realme,The ſeditious traitors condē
                  ned by the auncient lawes of the realme, made 200. yeres paſt. and namely by the lawes of Parliament made in King Edward the thirds time, about the yere of our Lorde .1330. which is aboue 200. yeres and moe paſt, when the Biſhops of Rome and Popes were ſuffered to haue their authoritie Eccleſiaſtical in this realme as they had in many other countries. But yet of this kind of offenders, as many of them, as after their condemnations were contented to renounce their former traiterous aſſertions,Perſons cōdemned, ſpared frō execution, vpon refuſall of their treaſonable opinions. ſo many were ſpared from execution, and doe liue ſtil at this day, ſuch was the vnwillingnes in her Maieſtie to haue any blood ſpilt, without this verie vrgent iuſt and neceſſary cauſe, proceeding from themſelues. And yet neuertheleſſe, ſuch of the reſt of the traitors as remayne in forreyne partes, continuing ſtill their rebellious myndes, and craftily keeping them ſelues aloofe off from dangers, ceaſe not to prouoke ſundry other inferiour ſeditious perſons,The forrein Traitors continue ſending of perſons to moue ſedition in the realme. newly to ſteale ſecretly into the realme, to reuiue the former ſeditious practiſes, to the execution of the Popes foreſaid bulles againſt her Maieſtie and the Realme, pretending when they are apprehended, that they came onely into the realme by the commandemēt of their ſuperiours, the heads of the Ieſuites, to whome they are bound (as they ſay) by othe againſt either king or countrie, and here to informe or reforme mens conſciences from errors in ſome poynts of religiō, as they ſhal thinke meete: but yet in very trueth the whole ſcope of their ſecret labours is manifeſtly proued, to be ſecretly to winne all people, with whom they dare deale, ſo to allowe of the Popes ſaid bulles, and of his authoritie without exception, as in obeying thereof, they

take themſelues fully diſcharged of their alleageance, and obedience to their lawfull Prince and countrey, yea, and to be well warranted to take armes to rebell againſt her Maieſtie when they ſhall bee thereunto called, and to be readie ſecretly to ioyne with any forreine force that can be procured to inuade the realme, whereof alſo they haue a long time giuen, and yet doe for their aduantage,The ſeditious fugitiues labor to bring the Realme into a warre externall & domeſtical. no ſmall comfort of ſucceſſe: & ſo conſequently the effect of their labours is to bring the Realme not onely into a daungerous warre againſt the forces of ſtrangers (from which it hath bene free aboue xxiii. or xxiiii. yeres, a caſe very memorable and hard to be matched with an example of the like:) but into a warre domeſticall and ciuill, wherein no blood is vſually ſpared, nor mercie yeelded, and wherin neither the vanqueror nor the vanquiſhed, haue cauſe of triumph.
            And foraſmuch as theſe are ye moſt euident perils that neceſſarily ſhould follow, if theſe kind of vermin were ſuffered to creepe by ſtealth into the Realme, and to ſpreade their poyſon within the ſame, howſoeuer when they are taken, like hipocrites, they couloure and counterfeit the ſame with profeſſion of deuotion in religion:The duetie of ye Queen and all her gouernors to God & their countrie, is to repel practiſes of rebellion. it is of all perſons to be yeelded in reaſon, that her Maieſtie and all her gouernours and magiſtrates of Iuſtice, hauing care to mantaine the peace of the Realme (which God hath giuen in her time, to continue longer then euer in any time of her progenitors) ought of duetie to almightie God the author of peace, and according to the naturall loue and charge due to their countrie, and for auoiding of the floods of blood, which in Ciuill warres are ſeene to runne and flowe, by all lawful meanes poſſible, aſwell by the Sword as by Lawe, in their ſeuerall ſeaſons to impeache and repell, theſe ſo manifeſt and daungerous coulourable practiſes, and workes of ſedition and rebellion. And though there are many ſubiects knowen in the realme, that differ

in ſome opinions of religion from the Church of England, and that doe alſo not forbeare to profeſſe the ſame, yet in that they doe alſo profeſſe loyaltie and obedience to her Maieſtie▪
               None charged with capitall crimes, being of a cū
                  
                  
                     ••
                  arte religion, and profeſſing to withſtād forreyne forces and offer readily in her Maieſties defence to impugne and reſiſt any forreine force, though it ſhould come or be procured frō ye 
               Pope himſelf, none of theſe ſort are for their cōtrary opinions in religiō proſecuted or charged wt any crymes or paines of treaſō, nor yet willingly ſearched in their conſciences for their contrarie opinions, that fauour not of treaſon. And of theſe ſortes, there are a number of perſons, not of ſuch baſe and vulgare note as thoſe were which of late haue bene executed, as in particular, ſome by name are well knowen, and not vnfit to bee remembred. The firſt and chiefeſt by office was D. Heth, that was Archbiſhop of Yorke, and lord Chaunceler of England in Queene Maries time, who at the firſt comming of her Maieſtie to ye Crowne, ſhewing himſelf a faithfull & quiet ſubiect, continued in both the ſayde offices, though in religion then manifeſtly differing, and yet was he not reſtrayned of his libertie, nor depriued of his proper lands and goods, but leauing willingly both his offices, liued in his owne houſe, and inioyed all his purchaſed lands during all his naturall life, vntill by very age he departed this world, and then left his houſe & liuing to his friendes: an example of gentlenes neuer matched in Queene Maries time. The like did one D. Poole that had bene Biſhop of Peterborough, an auncient graue perſon, and a verie quiet ſubiect. There were alſo others that had bene Biſhoppes and in great eſtimation,Names of diuers Eccleſiaſticall perſōs profeſſing contrarie religion, neuer charged wt capitall crunes. as D. Tunſtall Biſhop of Dureſme, a perſon alſo of very quiet behauiour. There were alſo other, D. White and D. Oglethorpe, one of Wincheſter, the other of Carlile, Biſhops: and D. Thurleby, and D. Watſon yet liuing, one of Ely, the other of Lincolne, Biſhops: not preſſed with any capitall payne, though they maintayned

the Popes authoritie againſt the lawes of the realme: and ſome Abbots, as M. Fecknam yet liuing, a perſon alſo of quiet & courteous behauiour for a great time. Some alſo were Deanes, as D. Boxall Deane of Windſore, a perſon of great modeſtie and knowledge: D. Cole Deane of Paules, a perſon more earneſt then wiſe: D. Reinolds Deane of Exceter, and many ſuch others hauing borne office and dignities in the Church, and had made profeſſion againſt the Pope, which they began in Queene Maries time to change, yet were they neuer to this day burdened with capitall peanes, nor yet depriued of any their goods or proper liueloods, but onely remoued from their Eccleſiaſticall offices, which they would not exerciſe according to the Lawes. And moſt of them for a great time were retayned in Biſhops houſes in very ciuill and courteous maner, without charge to themſelues or their friends, vntill the time that the Pope began by his Buls and meſſages, to offer trouble to the realme by ſtirring of rebellion: about which time onely, ſome of theſe aforenamed being found buſier in matters of ſtate tending to ſtirre troubles, then was meete for the common quiet of the Realme, were remooued to other more priuate places, where ſuch other wanderers as were men knowen to moue ſedition, might bee reſtrained from common reſorting to them to increaſe trouble, as the Popes Bull gaue manifeſt occaſion: and yet without charging them in their conſciences or otherwiſe, by any inquiſition to bring them into dāger of any capital law, ſo as no one was called to any capitall or bloody queſtion vpon matters of religion, but haue all inioyed their life as the courſe of nature woulde: and ſuch of them as yet remayne, may, if they will not be authors or inſtruments of rebellion or ſedition, inioye the time that GOD and nature ſhall yeelde them without danger of life or member. And yet it is worthy to be well

marked,
                  
                     〈…〉
                   ſ
                     •
                  r
                     ••
                  s o
                     ••
                   ſame, 
                     〈…〉
                   and writinges. that the chiefeſt of all theſe and the moſt of them, had in the time of King Henrie the eight and King Edward the ſixt, either by preaching, writing, reading or arguing, taught all people to condemne and abhorre the authoritie of the Pope: yea they had many times giuen their othes publiquely, againſt the Popes authoritie, and had alſo yelded to both the ſaid Kings the title of ſupreame head of the Church of England next vnder Chriſt, which title the aduerſaries doe moſt falſly write and affirme, that the Queenes Maieſtie doeth nowe vſe: a manifeſt lie and vntrueth. And for proofe that theſe foreſaide Biſhoppes and learned men had ſo long time diſauowed the Popes authoritie, many of their bookes & ſermons againſt the Popes authoritie remayne printed to be ſeene in theſe times, to their great ſhame and reproofe to change ſo often, and ſpecially in perſecuting ſuch as themſelues haue taught and ſtabliſhed to holde the contrary.
            
               A great nomber of lay perſōs of liuelood, being of a contrary religion, neuer charged with capitall crime.There were alſo and yet be a great nomber of others, being lay men of good poſſeſſions and lands, men of good credite in their countries, manifeſtly of late time ſeduced to hold contrary opinions in religion for the Popes authoritie, and yet none of them haue bene ſought hitherto to be impeached in any poynt or quarrel of treaſon, or of loſſe of life, member or inheritance, ſo as it may plainely appeare, that it is not, nor hath bene for contrarious opinions in religion, or for the Popes authoritie, as the aduerſaries doe boldely and falſly publiſh, that any perſons haue ſuffered death ſince her Maieſties reigne, and yet ſome of theſe ſort are well knowen to holde opinion, that the Pope ought by authoritie of Gods worde to be ſupreame and only head of the Catholique Church, and onely to rule in all cauſes Eccleſiaſticall, and that the Queenes Maieſtie ought not to be the gouernour ouer all her ſubiectes in her realme being perſons Eccleſiaſticall: which opinions are neuertheleſſe

in ſome part by the laws of the realme puniſhable in ſome degrees, & yet for none of theſe poyntes haue any perſōs bene proſecuted wt the charge of treaſō,No perſon charged wt capitall crime for the onely in
                     ••••
                  enance of ye Popes ſupremacie. or in danger of life. And if thē it be inquired, for what cauſe theſe others haue of late ſuffered death, it is truely to be anſwered as afore is often remembred, that none at all are impeached for treaſon to the danger of their life, but ſuch as do obſtinately maintaine the contents of the Popes Bull afore mentioned, which do import, that her Maieſtie is not the lawfull Queene of England, the firſt and higheſt poynt of treaſon:Such condēned onely for treaſon, as mainteine the effects of ye Popes bul againſt her Maieſtie and the realme. & that al her ſubiects are diſcharged of their othes and obedience, mother high poynt of treaſon: and all warranted to diſobey her and her laws, a third and a very large poynt of treaſon. And thereto is to be added a fourth poynt moſt manifeſt, in that they would not diſalow the Popes hoſtile proceedings in open warres againſt her Maieſtie in her realme of Ireland, where one of their companie D. Sanders, a lewde ſcholler and ſubiect of England, a fugitiue & a principall companion and conſpirator with the traitors and rebels at Rome, was by the Popes ſpeciall commiſſion a commaunder, as in forme of a Legate, and ſometime a treaſorer or paymaſter for thoſe warres, which D. Sanders in his booke of his Church monarchie,D. Sāders maintenance of the Popes Bull. did afore his paſſing into Ireland openly by writing, gloriouſly auowe the foreſaid Bull of Pius Quintus againſt her Maieſtie, to be lawfull, and affirmeth that by vertue thereof one D. Mooreton, an olde Engliſh fugitiue and conſpirator, was ſent from Rome into the North partes of England, to ſtirre vp the firſt rebellion there, whereof Charles Neuill the late Earle of Weſtmerland was a head captaine. And thereby it may manifeſtly appeare to all men, howe this Bull was the grounde of the rebellions both in England and Ireland, and howe for maintenaunce thereof, and for ſowing of ſedition by warrant and allowance of the ſame,

theſe perſons were iuſtly condemned of treaſon,The perſons that ſuffered death, were condēned for Treaſon & not for Religion. and lawfully executed by the auncient lawes temporall of the Realme, without any other matter then for their practizes and conſpiracies both abroade and at home againſt the Queene and the realme, and for maintaining of the Popes foreſaid authoritie and Bull, publiſhed to depriue her Maieſtie of her crowne, and for withdrawing and reconciling of her ſubiects from their naturall allegeaunce due to her Maieſtie and to their countrie, and for mouing them to ſedition: & for no other cauſes or queſtions of religion were theſe perſons condemned, although true it is, that when they were charged and conuinced of theſe poyntes of conſpiracies and treaſons, they woulde ſtill in their anſweres colourably pretend their actions to haue bene for religion: but in deede and trueth they were manifeſt for the procurement and maintenaunce of the rebellions and warres againſt her Maieſtie and her realme.
            And herein is nowe the manifeſt diuerſitie to be ſeene and well conſidered betwixt the trueth of her Maieſties actions, and the falſhood of the blaſphemous aduerſaries: that where the factious partie of the Pope the principall author of the inuaſions of her Maieſties dominions, doe falſely alleadge, that a nomber of perſons, whome they terme as Martyrs, haue dyed for defence of the catholique religion, the ſame in very trueth may manifeſtly appeare to haue died (if they ſo wil haue it) as martyrs for the Pope, and traitors againſt their ſoueraigne and Queene in adhering to him,A full full proofe that the mainteiners of the bull are directly guilty of treaſon. being the notable and onely open hoſtile enemie in all actions of warre againſt her Maieſtie, her kingdomes and people: and that this is the meaning of all theſe that haue ſo obſtinately maintayned the authoritie and contents of this Bull, the very wordes of the Bull do declare in this ſort, as D. Sanders reporteth them.
            
               
               Plus Quintus Pontifex Maximus, de Apoſtolicae poteſtatis plenitudine, declarauit Elizabetham praetenſo Regni iure, necnon omni & quocunque dominio, dignitate, priuilegio
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   priuatam: Item
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Proceres, ſubditos & populos dicti regni, ac caeteros omnes qui illi quomodocunque iurauerunt, à iuramento huiuſmodi ac omni fidelitatis debito, perpetuò abſolutos: That is to ſay, Pius Quintus the greateſt Biſhop, of the fulneſſe of the Apoſtolique power, declared Elizabeth to be bereued or depriued of her pretended right of her kingdome, and alſo of all and whatſoeuer dominion, dignitie & priuiledge: and alſo the Nobles, ſubiects & people of the ſaid kingdome, and all others which had ſworne to her any maner of wayes, to be abſolued for euer from ſuch othe and from all debt or duetie of fealtie, and ſo forth, with many threatning curſings, to al that durſt obey her or her lawes. And for execution hereof, to proue, that the effect of the Popes bul & meſſage was a flat rebelliō, it is not amiſſe to heare what D. Sanders the Popes firebrād in Ireland alſo writeth in his viſible Church Monarchie, which is thus. Pius Quintus Pontifex Maximus,
               D. Mortōs ſecret Ambaſſage frō Rome to ſtirre ye rebelliō in the North. 
               Anno D. 1569. reuerendum praeſbyterum Nicolaum Mortonum Anglum in Angliam miſit, vt certis illuſtribus viris authoritate Apoſtolica denunciaret, Elizabetham quae tunc rerum potiebatur, haereticam eſſe: ob eam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cauſam, omni Dominio & poteſtate excediſſe, impune
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ab illis velut ethnicam haberi poſſe, nec eos illius legibus aut mandatis deinceps obedire cogi: That is to ſay, Pius Quintus ye greateſt Biſhop, in the yere of our Lord 1569. ſent the reuerend prieſt Nicolas Morto an Engliſhmā into England, yt he ſhuld denoūce or declare by ye Apoſtolique authority to certaine noble men, Elizabeth, who thē was in poſſeſsiō, to be an heretike: & for ye cauſe, to haue fallen frō al dominion & power, & that ſhe may be had or reputed of thē as an Ethnike, and that they are not to be compelled to obey her

lawes or commandements, &c.
               
            
            Thus you ſee an Ambaſſade of rebellion frō the Popes holines, the Ambaſſadour an old doting Engliſh Prieſt a fugitiue and conſpirator, ſent as he ſaieth to ſome noble men, and thoſe were the two Earles of Northumberland and Weſtmerland, heads of the rebellion.
            And after this, he followeth to declare ye ſucceſſe thereof which I dare ſay he was ſory it was ſo euil, wt theſe words.
            
               Qua denuntiatione multinobiles viri adducti ſunt, vt de fratribus liberandis cogitare auderent, ac ſperabant illi quidem Catholicos omnes ſummis viribus affuturos eſſe: verum etſialiter quàm illi expectabant res euenit, quià Catholici omnes nondum probè cognouerant, Elizabetham hereticam eſſe declaratam, tamen laudanda illorum Nobilium conſilia erant: that is, By which denuntiation, many noble men were induced or ledde, that they were boldened to thinke of the freeing of their brethren, and they hoped certainly that all the Catholiques would haue aſſiſted them with all their ſtrength: but although the matter happened otherwiſe then they hoped for, becauſe all the Catholiques knewe not that Elizabeth was declared to be an heritike, yet the counſels & intentes of thoſe noble men were to be prayſed. A rebellion and a vanquiſhing of rebels very ſmoothly deſcribed.
            This noble fact here mencioned was the rebellion in the North: the noble mē were the Earles of Weſtmerland and Northumberland: the lacke of the euent or ſucceſſe was that the traitours were vanquiſhed, and the Queenes Maieſtie and her ſubiects had by Gods ordinance the victorie: and the cauſe why the rebels preuayled not, was becauſe all the Catholiques had not bene duely informed that the Queenes Maieſtie was declared to be (as they terme it) an heretike: which want of information, to the intent to make the rebels mightier in nomber and power,

was diligently and cunningly ſupplyed by the ſending into the realme of a great multitude of the Seminaries & Ieſuites, whoſe ſpecial charge was to informe the people thereof, as by their actions hath manifeſtly appeared.
            And though D. Sanders hath thus written, yet it may be ſaid by ſuch as fauoured the two notable Ieſuites, one named Robert Perſons (who yet hideth himſelf in corners to continue his Trayterous practiſe) the other named Edmond Campion (that was found out being diſguiſed like a roiſter and ſuffered for his Treaſons) that D. Sanders treaſon is his proper treaſon in allowing of the ſayde bull, but not to be imputed to Perſons and Campion.
               Perſons & Campion are offenders as D. Sanders is, for allowance of the Bull. Therefore to make it plaine yt theſe two by ſpeciall authoritie had charge to execute the ſentence of this bul, theſe actes in writing following ſhall make manifeſt, which are not fayned or imagined, but are the verie writings taken about one of their complyces, immediatly after Campions death.
            
               
                  
                     
                        Facultates conceſſae pp. Roberto Perſonio & Edmundo Campiano, pro Anglia, die 14. Aprilis. 1580.
                        PEtatur a ſummo Domino noſtro, explicatio Bullae declaratoriae per Pium Quintum contra Elizabetham & ei adhaerentes, quam catholici cupiunt intelligi hoc modo, vt obliget ſemper illam et haereticos, catholicos vero nullo modo obliget rebus ſic ſtantibus, ſed tum demum quando publica eiuſdem bullae executio fieri poterit. Then followed manie other petitions of faculties for their further authorities, which are not needefull for this purpoſe to be recited: but in the end followeth this ſentence as an

anſwere of the Popes, Has praedictas gratias conceſſit Summus pontifex patri Roberto Perſonio, & Edmundo Campiano in Angliam profecturis, die 14. Aprilis. 1580. Praeſente patre Oliuerio Manarco aſſistente. The engliſh of which latten ſentences is, as followeth.
                        
                     
                     
                        Faculties graunted to the two fathers Robert Perſons and Edmond Campion for England, the 14. day of April. 1580.
                        
                           Faculties graunted to Perſōs & Campiō by Pope Gregory 13. anno 1580.
                           
                           LEt it be aſked or required of our moſt holy Lorde, the explication or meaning of the bul declaratory made by Pius the fifth againſt Elizabeth, and ſuch as doe adheare or obey her, which bull the catholiques deſire to bee vnderſtand in this manner, that the ſame bull ſhall alwayes binde her and the heritikes, but the Catholiques it ſhall by noe meanes bind, as matters or things doe now ſtande or be, but hereafter, when the publique execution of that bull may be had or made.
                        
                        Then in the end the concluſion was thus added.
                        
                           The higheſt Pontiffe or Biſhoppe, graunted theſe foreſaid graces to father Robert Perſons and Edmonde Campion, who are nowe to take their Iourneyes into England, the fourteenth day of Aprill, in the yere of our Lorde. 1580. Being preſent, the father Oliuerius Manarke aſſiſtant.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            Hereby is it manifeſt, what authoritie Campion had to impart the contents of the Bul againſt the Queenes Maieſtie, howſoeuer he himſelfe denyed the ſame.
            And though it be manifeſt that theſe two Ieſuites, Perſons and Campion, not only required to haue the Popes minde declared for the Bull, but alſo in their owne petitions,

ſhewed howe they and other Catholiques did deſire to haue the ſayd Bull to be vnderſtand againſt the Queen of Englande: yet to make the matter more plaine howe all other Ieſuites and Seminaries, yea howe al Papiſts naming themſelues Catholiques, doe and are warranted to interpret the ſaide Bull againſt her Maieſtie and her good ſubiects, you ſhall ſee what one of their fellowes, named Hart, who was condemned with Campion, did amongſt many other thinges declare his knowledge thereof the laſt of December in the ſame yeere .1580. in theſe wordes following.
            The Bull of Pius Quintus (for ſo much as it is againſt the Queene) is holden among the Engliſh Catholiques for a lawful ſentence,Harts cō
                  feſſion of the interpretation of the Bul of Pius Quintus. and a ſufficient diſcharge of her ſubiects fidelitie, & ſo remayneth in force, but in ſome poynts touching the ſubiects, it is altered by the preſent Pope. For where in that Bull all her ſubiectes are commanded not to obey her, and ſhee being excommunicate and depoſed, all that doe obey her are likewiſe innodate and accurſed, which point is perillous to the Catholiques: for if they obey her, they be in the Popes curſe, and they diſobey her, they are in the Queenes danger: therefore the preſent Pope to relieue them hath altered that part of the Bull, and diſpenced with them to obey and ſerue her, without perill of excommunication: which diſpenſation is to endure but till it pleaſe the Pope otherwiſe to determine.
            Wherefore to make ſome concluſion of the matters before mencioned,A concluſion that all the infamous bookes againſt the Queene & the realme, are falſe. al perſons both within the realme and abroade, may playnely perceiue that all the infamous libels lately publiſhed abroade in ſundrie languages, and the ſlanderous reportes made in other Princes courtes of a multitude of perſons, to haue bene of late put to tormēts and death onely for profeſſion of the Catholique religion, and not for matters of ſtate againſt the Queenes Maieſtie,

are falſe and ſhameles, and publiſhed to the maintenance of traitours and rebelles. And to make the matter ſeeme more horrible or lamentable, they recite ye particular names of all the perſons, which by their owne Catalogue exceed not for theſe twentie fiue yeeres ſpace, aboue the number of iii. ſcore,Difference of the ſmal numbers that haue bene executed in the ſpace of xxv. yeres, from the great numbers in v. yeres of Queene Maries ſaigne. forgetting or rather with their ſtonie and ſenſles heartes not regarding, in what cruell ſort in the tyme of Queene Marie, which litle exceeded the ſpace of fiue yeeres, the Queenes Maieſties raigne being fiue times as many, there were by impriſonment, torments, famyne and fire, of men, women, maidens and children, almoſt the number of foure hundred: and of that number, aboue twenty that had bene Archbiſhops, Biſhoppes, and principall Prelates or Officers in the Church lamentably deſtroyed, and of women aboue three ſcore, and of children aboue fourtie, and amongſt the women, ſome great with child, out of whoſe bodyes the child, by fire was expelled aliue, and yet alſo cruelly burned: examples beyond al heathen cruelty. And moſt of ye youth that then ſuffered cruell death, both men, women, and children (which is to be noted) were ſuch, as had neuer by the Sacrament of baptiſme, or by confirmation, profeſſed, nor was euer taught or inſtructed, or euer had hearde of any other kinde of religion, but onely of that which by their blood and death in the fire they did as true Martyrs teſtifie. A matter of another ſort to be lamented with ſimplicitie of words, and not with puffed eloquence, then the execution in this time of a very fewe Traytors, who alſo in their time, if they exceeded thirtie yeeres of age, had in their baptiſme profeſſed, and in their youth had learned the ſame religion which they now ſo bitterly oppugned. And beſide that, in their opinions they differ much from the Martyrs of Queene Maries tyme: for though they continued in the profeſſion of the religion wherin they were chriſtened, yet they neuer at their death

denied their lawfull Queene, nor maintained any of her open and forreine enemies, nor procured any rebellion or Ciuill warre, nor did ſowe any ſedition in ſecret corners, nor withdrewe any ſubiects from their obedience, as theſe ſworne ſeruants of the Pope haue continually done.
            And therefore all theſe thinges well conſidered, there is no doubt, but all good ſubiects within the realme doe manifeſtly ſee, and all wauering perſons (not being led cleane out of the way by the ſeditious) will hereafter perceiue, how they haue bene abuſed to goe aſtray. And all ſtrangers, but ſpecially al Chriſtian Potentates,An aduertiſement to al Princes of coūtries abroad. as Emperours, Kings, Princes and ſuch like, hauing their ſoueraigne eſtates, either in ſucceſſion hereditarie, or by conſent of their people, being acquainted with the very truth of theſe her Maieſties late iuſt and neceſſarie actions, only for defence of her ſelfe, her crowne, and people, againſt open inuadors, and for eſchewing of ciuill warres, ſtirred vp by rebellion, will allow in their owne like caſes, for a trueth and rule (as it is not to be doubted but they will) that it belongeth not to a Biſhop of Rome as ſucceſſor of Saint Peter, and therein a paſtor ſpirituall, or if hee were the Biſhop of all Chriſtendome, as by the name of Pope he claymeth, firſt by his Bulles or excommunications, in this ſort at his will in fauour of traytours and rebels, to depoſe any ſoueraigne Princes, being lawfully inueſted in their Crownes by ſucceſſion in blood, or by lawfull election, and then to arme ſubiects againſt their naturall Lordes, to make warres, and to diſpenſe with them for their othes in ſo doing, or to excommunicate faithful ſubiects, for obeying of their natural Princes, and laſtly himſelfe to make open warre, with his owne ſouldiers, againſt Princes mouing no force againſt him.
            For if theſe powers ſhoulde be permitted to him to exerciſe, then ſhoulde no Empire, no kingdome, no countrey,

no Citie or Towne, be poſſeſſed by any lawful title, longer then one ſuch onely an earthly man, ſitting (as he ſaith) in S. Peters chaire at Rome, ſhould for his will and appetite (without warrant from God or man) thinke meete and determine:The authoritie claymed by ye Pope not warranted by Chriſt, or by the two Apoſtles, Peter and Paul. An authoritie neuer chalenged by the Lorde of lordes the ſonne of God, Ieſus Chriſt out onely Lord and Sauiour, and the onely head of his Church, whileſt he was in his humanitie vpon the earth, nor yet deliuered by any writing or certaine tradition frō 
               Saint Peter, from whome the Pope pretendeth to deriue all his authoritie, nor yet from Saint Paul the Apoſtle of ye 
               Gentiles, but contrariwiſe by all preachings, preceptes & writings, conteined in the Goſpel and other Scriptures of the Apoſtles, obedience is expreſly commaunded to all earthly Princes, yea, euen to Kings by ſpeciall name, and that ſo generally, as no perſon is excepted from ſuch duetie of obedience, as by the ſentence of Saint Paul euen to the Romanes, appeareth, Omnis anima ſublimioribus poteſtatibus ſit ſubdita, That is, Let euery ſoule be ſubiect to the higher powers: within the compaſſe of which law or precept, Saint Chriſoſtome being Biſhoppe of Conſtantinople, writeth, that euen Apoſtles, Prophets, Euangeliſts, and Monkes are comprehended. And for proofe of Saint Peters minde herein, from whome theſe Popes claime their authoritie, it can not be plainlyer expreſſed, then when he writeth thus: Proinde ſubiecti eſtote cuiuis humanae ordinationi, propter Dominum, ſiue Regi, vt qui ſuperemineat, ſiue preſidibus ab eo miſſis: That is, Therefore be you ſubiect to euery humane ordinance or creature, for the Lorde, whether it be to the King, as to him that is ſupereminent, or aboue the reſt, or to his preſidents ſent by him. By which two principall Apoſtles of Chriſt, theſe Popes the pretenſed ſucceſſours, but chiefely by that which Chriſt the Sonne of God the onely

Maſter of trueth ſayde to Peter and his fellow Apoſtles, Reges gentium dominantur, vos autem non ſic, That is, The Kings of the Gentiles haue rule ouer them, but you not ſo, may learne to forſake their arrogant and tyrannous authorities in earthly and temporall cauſes ouer Kings and Princes, and exerciſe their Paſtorall office, as Saint Peter was charged thriſe at one time by his Lorde and Maſter, Paſce oues meas, Feede my ſheepe, and peremptorily forbidden to vſe a ſworde, in ſaying to him, Conuerte gladium tuum in locum ſuum, or, mitte gladium tuum in vaginam, that is, Turne thy ſword into his place: or, Put thy ſworde into the ſcabbard. All which precepts of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, were duely followed and obſerued many hundred yeeres after their death, by the faithfull and godly Biſhops of Rome, that duely followed the doctrine and humilitie of the Apoſtles, and the doctrine of Chriſt, & thereby dilated the limittes of Chriſts Church and the fayth, more in the compaſſe of an hundred yeeres,Pope Hildebrand the firſt yt made warre againſt the Emperour. An. Do. 1074.
                then the latter Popes haue done with their ſwordes and curſes theſe 500 yeeres, and ſo continued vntil the time of one Pope Hildebrand, otherwiſe called Gregory theſeuenth, about the yeere of our Lorde, 1074. who firſt beganne to vſurpe that kinde of Tyrannie, which of late the Pope called Pius Quintus, and ſince that time, Gregory nowe the thirteenth hath followed, for ſome example as it ſeemeth, that is: Where Gregory the ſeuenth, in the yeere of our Lord 1074. or thereabout, preſumed to depoſe Henry ye fourth, a noble Emperour then being, Gregory the thirteenth nowe at this time, would attempt the like againſt King Henry the eightes daughter & heire, Queene Elizabeth, a ſoueraigne Queene, holding her Crowne immediatly of God. And to the ende it may appeare to Princes, or to their good Counſellours in one example, what was the fortunate ſucceſſe yt God gaue to this good

Chriſtian Emperour Henry againſt the proud pope Hildebrand, it is to be noted, that when the pope Gregory attempted to depoſe this noble Emperour Henry, there was one Rodulphe a noble man, by ſome named the Count of Reenfield, that by the Popes procurement, vſurped the name of the Emperour, who was ouercome by the ſayde Henry the lawfull Emperour, and in fight hauing loſt his right hand,The iudgement of God againſt the Popes falſe erected Emperour. he, the ſaid Rodulphe, lamented his caſe to certayne Biſhoppes, who in the popes name had erected him vp, and to them he ſaid, that ye ſelfe ſame right hand which he had loſt, was the ſame hande wherewith he had before ſworne obedience to his Lorde and maſter the Emperour Henry, and that in following their vngodly counſelles, he had brought vpon him Gods heauy and iuſt iudgementes. And ſo Henry the Emperour preuailing by Gods power,Pope Gregorie the vii. depoſed by Henry ye 
                  4.
                cauſed Gregory the pope by a Synode in Italy to be depoſed, as in like times before him his predeceſſour Otho the Emperour, had depoſed one pope Iohn for many heynous crymes: and ſo were alſo within a ſhort time, three other popes, namely, Silueſter, Bennet, and Gregory the ſixt, vſed by the Emperour Henry the third, about the yere of our Lord 1047. for their like preſumptuous attemptes in temporall actions againſt the ſaid Emperours. Many other examples might be ſhewed to the Emperours maieſtie,Henry. 5. Fredrick. 1 Fredrick. 2 Lewes of Bauar, Emperors and the Princes of the holy Empire nowe being, after the time of Henry the fourth: as of Henry the fifth, and after him, of Fredericke the firſt, and Fredericke the ſecond, and then of Lewis of Bauar, all Emperours, cruelly and tyrannouſly perſecuted by the popes, and by their bulles, curſes, and by open warres, and likewiſe to many other the great Kings and Monarches of Chriſtendome, of their noble progenitors, Kinges of their ſeuerall dominions: whereby they may ſee howe this kind of tyrannous authoritie in popes to make warres vpon Emperors and

Kings, and to commaund them to be depriued, toke holde at the firſt by pope Hildebrande, though the ſame neuer had any lawefull example or warrant from the Lawes of God of the olde or new Teſtament, but yet the ſucceſſes of their tyrannies were by Gods goodneſſe for the moſt parte made fruſtrate, as by Gods goodneſſe there is no doubt, but the like will followe to their confuſions at all times to come.
            And therefore, as there is no doubt, but the like violent tyrannous proceedings by any Pope in maintenance of traitors and rebels, would be withſtoode by euery Soueraigne Prince in Chriſtendome in defence of their perſons and Crownes, and maintenance of their ſubiectes in peace: ſo is there at this preſent a like iuſt cauſe that the Emperours Maieſtie, with the Princes of the holy Empire, and all other Soueraigne Kings and Princes in Chriſtendome,Whatſoeuer is lawful for other princes Soueraignes, is lawfull for ye Queene & crowne of Englād ſhoulde iudge the ſame to be lawfull for her Maieſtie being a Queene, and holding the very place of a King and a Prince ſoueraigne ouer diuers kingdomes and nations, ſhe being alſo moſt lawfully inueſted in her Crowne, and as for good gouerning of her people, with ſuch applauſe and generall allowance, loued, and obeyed of them, ſauing a few ragged Traitours or rebels, or perſons diſcontented, whereof no other Realme is free as continually for theſe xxv. yeeres paſt hath bene notably ſeene and ſo publiquely marked, euen by ſtrangers repairing into this Realme, as it were no cauſe of diſgrace to any Monarchie and King in Chriſtendome to haue her Maieſties felicitie compared with any of theirs whatſoeuer: and it may be, there are many Kings and Princes coulde be well contented with the fruition of ſome proportion of her felicitie. And though the Popes be nowe ſuffered by the Emperour, in the landes of his owne peculiar patrimonie, and by the two great Monarches the

               French King and the King of Spaine, in their dominions and territories (although by other Kings not ſo allowed) to continue his authoritie in ſundrie caſes,The title of vniuerſal Biſhop is a preamble of Antichriſt. and his glorious title to be the vniuerſall Biſhop of the worlde, which title Gregorie the great aboue nine hundreth yeeres paſt, called a prophane title, full of ſacrilege, and a preamble of Antichriſt: yet in all their dominions and kingdomes, as alſo in the Realme of Englande, moſt notably by many auncient Lawes it is well knowen, howe many wayes the tyrannous power of this his exceſſiue authoritie hath bene and ſtill is reſtrained, checked and limitted by lawes and pragmatiques, both ancient and newe: a very large fielde for the Lawyers of thoſe countreyes to walke in and diſcourſe. And howſoeuer the Popes Cannoniſtes being as his Bombarders, doe make his excommunications and curſes appeare fearefull to the multitude and ſimple people: yet all great Emperours and Kings aforetime, in their owne caſes, of their rightes and royall preeminences, though the ſame concerned but a Citie or a poore Towne, and ſometime but the not allowance of ſome vnworthie perſon to a Biſhopricke or to an Abbey, neuer refrayned to deſpiſe all Popes curſes or forces, but attempted alwayes, eyther by their ſwordes to compell them to deſiſt from their furious actions, or without any feare of them ſelues, in body, ſoule, or conſcience, ſtoutly to withſtande their curſes, and that ſometime by force, ſometyme by Ordinances and Lawes: the auncient hyſtories whereof are too many to be repeated, and of none more frequent and effectual then of the kings of Fraunce. But leauing thoſe that are auncient, we may remember howe in this our owne preſent or late age, it hath bene manifeſtly ſeene, howe the army of the late noble Emperour Charles the fift, father to King Philippe that nowe reigneth, was not afrayde of his curſes, when

in the yeere of our Lorde 1527. Rome it ſelfe was beſieged and ſacked, and the Pope then called Clement,
               
                  1527. Rome ſacked, and the Pope Clement taken priſoner by the Emperours army. and his Cardinals, to the nomber of about 33. in his mount Adrian or Caſtell S. Angelo, taken priſoners and deteined ſeuen moneths or more, and after ranſomed by Don Vgo di Moncada a Spaniarde, and the Marques of Grasto, at aboue foure hundred M. duckates, beſides the ranſomes of his Cardinals which was very great, hauing not long before time bene alſo notwithſtanding his curſes, beſieged in the ſame Caſtell by the familie of the Colonies and their fautors his next neighbours being then Imperialiſtes, and forced to yeelde to all their demaūds. Neither did King Henry the ſeconde of Fraunce,
               
                  1550. King Henry the ſecond of Fraunce his Edicts againſt the Pope and his courts of Rome. father to Henry nowe King of Fraunce, about the yeere 1550. feare or regard ye 
               Pope or his court of Rome, whē he made ſeueral ſtraight edictes againſt many partes of the Popes claymes in preiudice of the crowne & clergie of Fraunce, retracting the authoritie of the court of Rome, greatly to the hinderance of the Popes former profites. Neither was the army of king Philip nowe of Spaine,The beſieging of Rome and the Pope by the D. of Alua with King Philips army. whereof the Duke of Alua was generall, ſtricken with any feare of curſing, whē it was brought afore Rome againſt ye 
               pope, in the yeere of our Lord 1555. where great deſtruction was made by the ſaid army, and al the delicate buyldings, gardens and orchardes next to Rome walles ouerthrowē, wherewith his holineſſe was more terrified, then he was able to remoue with any his curſes. Neither was Queene Mary the Queenes Maieſties late ſiſter, a perſon not a litle deuoted to the Romane religion, ſo afraid of the popes curſings, but that both ſhe and her whole counſel, and that with the aſſent of all the Iudges of the realme, according to the auncient lawes, in fauour of Cardinall Poole her kinſman, did forbid the entrie of his bulles, and of a Cardinall hatte at Callis, that was ſent from the pope for one

Frier peyto, whome the pope had aſſigned to bee a Cardinall in diſgrace of Cardinall Poole, neither did Cardinall Poole himſelfe at the ſame time obey the popes commandements, nor ſhewed himſelfe afraid, being aſſiſted by the Queene, when the pope did threaten him with paine of excommunication, but did ſtill oppoſe himſelfe againſt the popes commandement for the ſaide pretended Cardinall Peyto: who notwithſtanding all the threatninges of the pope,
               D. Peyto a begging Fryer. was forced to goe vp and downe in the ſtreetes of Londō like a begging Frier: a ſtout reſiſtāce in a Queene for a poore Cardinals hatte, wherin ſhe folowed the example of her Grandfather King Henrie the vii. for a matter of Allum. So as howſoeuer the chriſtian kinges for ſome reſpectes in pollicie can indure the pope to commaunde where no harme nor diſaduantage groweth to thēſelues, yet ſure it is,The kings of Chriſtē
                  dome neuer ſuffer the Popes to abridge their titles or rights, though they ſuffer them to haue rule ouer their people. and the popes are not ignorant, but where they ſhall in any ſort attempt to take from chriſtian princes any part of their dominions, or ſhall giue ayde to their enemies, or to any other their rebels, in thoſe caſes, their Bulles, their curſes, their excommunications, their ſentences & moſt ſolemne Anathematicals, no nor their croſſe keyes, or double edged ſword, wil ſerue their turnes to compaſſe their intentions.
            And now, where the pope hath manifeſtly by his bulles and excommunications attempted aſmuch as he could, to depriue her Maieſtie of her kingdomes, to withdraw from her the obedience of her ſubiectes, to procure rebellions in her realmes, yea, to make both rebellions and open warres, with his owne captaines, ſouldiers, banners, enſignes, and all other things belonging to warre: ſhal this pope, or any other pope after him, thinke yt a ſoueraigne Queene, poſſeſſed of the two realmes of England & Ireland, ſtabliſhed ſo many yeeres in her kingdomes as three or foure popes haue ſit in their chayre at Rome, fortyfied

with ſo much duetie, loue and ſtrength of her ſubiectes, acknowledging no ſuperiour ouer her realmes, but the mightie hand of God: ſhall ſhe forbeare, or feare to withſtand and make fruſtrate his vnlawful attemptes,The Queene or England may not ſuffer the Pope by any means to make Rebellions in her Realme. eyther by her ſword or by her lawes, or to put his ſouldiers inuadours of her realme to ye ſword martially, or to execute her lawes vpon her owne rebellious ſubiectes ciuilly, that are prooued to be his chiefe inſtruments for rebellion, and for his open warre? This is ſure, that howſoeuer either he ſitting in his chaire with a triple crowne at Rome, or any other his proctors in any part of Chriſtendome, ſhal renewe theſe vnlawfull attemptes, almightie God, whome her Maieſtie onely honoureth and acknowledgeth to be her onely ſoueraigne Lord and protectour, and whoſe lawes & goſpel of his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt ſhe ſeeketh to defend, wil no doubt but deliuer ſufficient power into his maydens hand his ſeruant Queene Elizabeth, to withſtand and confound them all.
            And where the ſeditious trumpetters of infamies and lies,Additaments to ye Popes martyrologe. haue ſounded forth and entituled certaine that haue ſuffred for treaſon, to be martyrs for religiō: ſo may they alſo at this time if they liſt, adde to their forged catalogue, the headles bodie of ye late miſerable Earle of Deſmond, who of late, ſecretly wandering without ſuccour, as a miſerable begger, was taken by one of the Iriſhry in his caben, and in an Iriſh ſort after his owne accuſtomed ſauage maner, his head cut off from his bodie: an end due to ſuch an archrebell. And herewith to remember the ende of his chiefe confederates, may be noted for example to others, the ſtrange maner of the death of D. Sanders the popes Iriſh legat, who alſo wandring in the mountaines in Ireland without ſuccour, died rauing in a phrenſey. And before him, one Iames Fits-Morice the firſt Traitour of Ireland next to Stukely the rakehel, a man not vnknowen in

the popes palace for a wicked craftie traytor,
                  The ferang endes of Iames Erle of Deſmond. D. Saunders.
                  Iames Fitzmorice.
                  Iohn of Deſmond.
                was ſlaine at one blow by an Iriſh noble yong Gētleman, in defence of his fathers countrey which the traitor ſought to burne. A fourth man of ſingular note was Iohn of Deſmonde, brother to the Earle, a very bloody faithles traitor, and a notable murderer of his familiar friendes, who alſo wandring to ſeeke ſome pray like a wolfe in the woods, was takē & beheaded after his own vſage, being as he thought ſufficiently armed with the popes Buls & certaine Agnus dei, & one notable ring about his necke ſent frō the popes finger (as it was ſaid:) but theſe he ſaw ſaued not his life. And ſuch were the fatal ends of al theſe, being ye principal heads of ye Iriſh warre & rebelliō, ſo as no one perſon remaineth at this day in Ireland a knowen traitor. To this nōber, they may if they ſeeke nomber, alſo adde a furious yong man of Warwickeſhire,Iohn Someruile by name Someruile, to increaſe their Kalender of ye 
               popes martyrs, who of late was diſcouered and taken in his way, comming wt a ful intent to haue killed her Maieſtie (whoſe life God alwayes haue in his cuſtodie.) The attempt not denied by ye traitor himſelfe, but confeſſed, and that he was moued thereto in his wicked ſpirit, by inticements of certaine ſeditious & traiterous perſons his kinſmen and allyes, and alſo by often reading of ſundry ſeditious vile books lately publiſhed againſt her Maieſtie. But as God of his goodnes hath of long time hitherto preſerued her Maieſtie from theſe and the like trecheries: ſo hath ſhe no cauſe to feare being vnder his protection, ſhe ſaying with king Dauid in the Pſalme, My God is my helper and I will truſt in him, he is my protection, and the ſtrength or the power of my ſaluation. And for the comfort of al good ſubiects againſt the ſhadowes of the popes Bulles, it is manifeſt to the world, that from the beginning of her Maieſties reigne, by Gods ſingular goodnes, her kingdome hath enioyed

more vniuerſall peace,The proſperitie or England, during the Popes curſes. her people increaſed in more nombers, in more ſtrength, and with greater riches, the earth of her kingdomes hath yeelded more fruits, and generally all kind of worldly felicitie hath more abounded ſince and during the time of the popes thunders, bulles, curſes and maledictions, then in any other long times before, when the popes pardons and bleſſings came yeerely into the Realme: ſo as his curſes and maledictions haue turned backe to himſelf and his fautors, that it may be ſaid to the fortunate Queene of Englande & her people, as was ſaid in Deuteronomy of Balaam, The Lord thy God woulde not heare Balaam, but did turne his maledictiōs or curſes into benedictions or bleſſings: the reaſon is, for becauſe thy God loued thee.
            Although theſe former reaſons are ſufficient to perſwade all kind of reaſonable perſons to allow of her Maieſties actions to be good, reaſonable, lawfull and neceſſarie: yet becauſe it may be, that ſuch as haue by frequent reading of falſe artificiall libels, and by giuing credite to them, vpon a preiudice or foreiudgement afore grounded, by their rooted opinions in fauour of the pope, will reſt vnſatiſfied: therefore as much as may be, to ſatiſfie all perſons as farre foorth as common reaſon may warrant, that her Maieſties late action in executing of certaine ſeditious traitors, hath not proceeded for the holding of opinions, either for ye 
               popes ſupremacie, or againſt her Maieſties regalitie, but for the very crymes of ſedition & treaſon, it ſhal ſuffice briefly,Reaſons to perſuade by reaſon ye fauorers of ye Pope, that none hath bene executed for religion but for treaſon. The firſt reaſon. in a manner of a repetition of the former reaſons, to remember theſe things following.
            Firſt, it cānot be denied, but yt her Maieſtie did for many yeres, ſuffer quietly the popes buls & excommunications without puniſhment of the fautors thereof, accompting of thē but as of words or winde, or of writings in parchment wayed downe with leade, or as of water bubbles, cōmonly

called in Latin Bullae and ſuch like: but yet after ſome proofe that courage was taken thereof by ſome bolde and bad ſubiectes, ſhe coulde not but then eſteeme them to be very preambles, or as forerunners of greater danger: and therefore, with what reaſon coulde any miſlike, that her Maieſtie did for a bare defence againſt them, wtout other action or force, vſe the helpe of reuiuing of former lawes, to prohibit the publication or execution of ſuch kinde of Bulles within her Realme?
            
               The ſecond reaſon.Secondly, when notwithſtanding ye prohibition by her lawes, the ſame bulles were plentifully (but in ſecret ſort) brought into ye realme,The Bul of Pius Quintus let vp at Pauls. & at length arrogantly ſet vpon the gates of ye Biſhop of Londons pallace neere to ye Cathedrall Church of Pauls, the principal citie of ye realme, by a lewd perſon, vſing ye ſame like a herald ſent frō the pope: who can in any cōmon reaſon miſlike, yt her Maieſtie finding this kinde of denunciatiō of warre, as a defiance to be made in her principal citie by one of her ſubiects, auowing and obſtinatly maintaining the ſame, ſhould according to iuſtice, cauſe the offender to haue the reward due to ſuch a fact? and this was the firſt action of any capital puniſhmēt inflicted for matter ſent from Rome to moue rebellion,The firſt puniſhmēt for ye Bull. which was after her Maieſtie had reigned about the ſpace of twelue yeres or more.
            
               The third reaſon.Thirdly, when the pope had riſen vp out of his chaire in his wrath, from words and writings to actions, and had contrary to the aduiſe giuen by S. Barnard to his predeceſſor, that is, whē by his meſſages he left Verbum & tooke ferrum, that is, left to feede by ye word, and began to ſtrike with ye ſword, and ſtirred her noble men & people directly to diſobedience and to open rebellion,Rebellion in the North. and that her lewde ſubiects by his commandement had executed ye ſame with al the forces which they could make or bring into the fielde who with common reaſon can diſallow that her Maieſtie

vſed her Principall authoritie, and by her forces lawfull ſubdued rebels forces vnlawful, and puniſhed the authors thereof no otherwiſe then the pope himſelfe vſeth to doe with his owne rebellious ſubiects, in ye Patrimonie of his church? And if any Prince of people in the world, would otherwiſe neglect his office, and ſuffer his rebels to haue their wils, none ought to pitie him, if for want of reſiſtāce and courage, he loſt both his Crowne, his head, his life & his kingdome.
            Fourthly,The fourth reaſon. when her Maieſtie beheld a further increaſe of the popes malice, notwithſtanding that ye firſt rebellion was in her North partes vanquiſhed, in that he interteined abroade out of this Realme, the traytours & rebelles that fledde for the rebellion, and all the rable of other the fugitiues of the Realme, and that he ſent a number of the ſame in ſorts diſguiſed into both the Realmes of England and Ireland, who there ſecretly allured her people to newe rebellions, and at the ſame time ſpared not his charges to ſende alſo out of Italy by ſea, certaine ſhippes with Captaines of his owne, with their bandes of ſouldiers,The inuaſion of Ireland by the Pope. furniſhed with treaſure, munition, victuals, enſignes, banners, and all other things requiſite to ye warre, into her Realme of Ireland, where the ſame forces with other auxilliar cō
               panies out of Spaine landed, and fortified themſelues very ſtrongly in the ſeaſide, and proclaymed open warre, erecting the popes banner againſt her Maieſtie: may it be nowe aſked of theſe perſons, fauourers of the Romiſh authoritie, what in reaſon ſhould haue bene done by her Maieſtie otherwiſe, then firſt to apprehend all ſuch fugitiues ſo ſtolne into the Realme, and diſperſed in diſguiſing habites to ſowe ſedition, as ſome Prieſtes in their ſecrete profeſſion, but all in their apparell, as roiſters or ruffins, ſome ſcholers, like to the baſeſt common people, and them to committe to priſons, and vpon their examinations of

their trades and haunts, to conuince them of their conſpiracies abroade, by teſtimonie of their owne companions, and of ſowing ſedition ſecretly at home in the Realme? What may be reaſonablie thought was meete to be done with ſuch ſeditious perſons, but by the lawes of ye Realme to try, condemne and execute them? and ſpecially hauing regard to the dangerous time, whē the popes forces were in the Realme of Ireland, and more in preparation to followe as well into England as into Irelande, to the reſiſtance whereof, her Maieſtie and her Realme was forced to be at greater charges, then euer ſhe had bene, ſince ſhee was Queene thereof. And ſo by Gods power, which hee gaue to her on the one part, ſhe did by her lawes ſuppreſſe the ſeditious ſtirrers of rebellion in her Realme of England,The Popes forces vanquiſhed in Ireland. and by her ſword vanquiſhed all the popes forces in her Realme of Ireland, excepting certaine captaines of marke that were ſaued from the ſworde, as perſons that did renounce their quarrel, & ſeemed to curſe or to blame ſuch as ſent them to ſo vnfortunate & deſperate a voyage.
            But though theſe reaſons, grounded vpon rules of naturall reaſon,The politique aduerſaries ſatiſfied. ſhall ſatiſfie a great nomber of the aduerſaries (who will yeelde that by good order of ciuill and chriſtian policie and gouernement, her Maieſtie could nor can do no leſſe then ſhe hath done, firſt to ſubdue with her forces her rebelles and traytours, and nexte by order of her lawes to correct the ayders & abettors, & laſtly to put alſo to the ſword ſuch forces as the pope ſent into her dominions) yet there are certaine other perſons, more niſely addicted to the pope,
               Obiection of the papiſts, that the perſons executed, are but ſchollers and vnarmed. that will yet ſeeme to bee vnſatiſfied, for that, as they will terme the matter, a nomber of ſillie poore wretches were put to death as traytours, being but in profeſſion ſchollers or prieſtes, by the names of ſeminaries, Ieſuites or ſimple ſcholemaſters, that came not into the Realme with any armour or weapon, by force to aide

the rebelles & traitours, either in England or in Ireland in their rebellions or warres: of which ſort of wretches ye comiſeration is made, as though for their contrary opinions in religion, or for teaching of the people to diſobey ye lawes of the Realme, they might haue bene otherwiſe puniſhed and corrected, & yet not with capitall peane. Theſe kinds of defēces, tend only to find faule rather with the ſeueritie of their puniſhments, thē to acquite them as Innocents or quiet ſubiects. But for anſwere to the better ſatiſfaction of theſe nyſe and ſcrupulous fauorers of traitors, it muſt be with reaſon demaunded of them (if at leaſt they will open their eares to reaſon) whether they thinke that when a King beeing ſtabliſhed in his Realme, hath a rebellion firſt ſecretly practiſed, and afterward openly rayſed in his Realme by his owne ſeditious ſubiectes, & whē by a forreine potentate or enemie, the ſame rebellion is mainteyned, and the rebelles by meſſages and promiſes comforted to continue,Many are traytors though they haue no armour nor weapon. and their treaſons againſt their naturall prince auowed, & conſequently when the ſame potentate and enemie, beeing authour of the ſaid rebellion, ſhall with his owne proper forces inuade the Realme and ſubiectes of the Prince that is ſo lawefully and peacebly poſſeſſed: in theſe caſes, ſhal no ſubiect fauouring theſe rebelles, and yeelding obedience to the enemie the inuador, be committed or puniſhed as a traitour, but onely ſuch of them, as ſhall be found openly to carrie armour and weapon? Shal no ſubiect, that is a ſpial and an explorer for the rebell or enemie, againſt his naturall Prince, be taken and puniſhed as a traitour, becauſe he is not found wt armour or weapon, but yet is taken in his diſguiſed apparell, with writings, or other manifeſt tokens, to proue him a ſpie for traitors, after he hath wandered ſecretly in his ſoueraigns campe, region, court or citie? Shall no ſubiect be coūted a traitour, that will ſecretly giue earneſt and preſt money to

perſons to be rebelles or enemies, or that will attempt to poiſon the victual, or the fountaines, or ſecretly ſet on fire the ſhips or munition, or that will ſecretly ſearch & ſound the hauens and creekes for landing, or meaſure the depth of ditches, or height of townes & walles, becauſe theſe offenders are not founde with armour or weapon? The anſwere I thinke muſt needes be yeelded (if reaſon and experience ſhall haue rule with theſe aduerſaries) that all theſe and ſuch like are to be puniſhed as traitours: and the principall reaſon is, becauſe the actions of all theſe are neceſſarie acceſſaries, and adherents proper, to further and continue all rebellions and warres. But if they wil denie, that none are traitours that are not armed, they wil make Iudas no traitour, that came to Chriſt without armour, colouring his treaſon with a kiſſe.
            
               The application of the ſcholaſticall traitors, to others, yt are traitors without armour.Nowe therefore it reſteth to applie the factes of theſe late malefactours that are pretended to haue offended but as ſcholers, or bookemen, or at the moſt but as perſons that onely in wordes and doctrine, and not with armour did fauour and helpe the rebels & the enemies. For which purpoſe let theſe perſons be termed as they liſt, ſcholers, ſchoolemaſters, bookemen, ſeminaries, prieſtes, Ieſuites, fryers, beademen, romaniſtes, pardoners, or what elſe you wil, neyther their tytles, nor their apparel doth make them traitours, but their traiterous ſecret motions & practiſes: their perſons make not the warre, but their directions and counſels haue ſet vp the rebellions. The very cauſes final of theſe rebellions & warres, haue bene to depoſe her Maieſtie from her crowne: the cauſes inſtrumentall, are theſe kinde of ſeminaries and ſeedemen of ſedition: the fruites and effectes thereof, are by rebellion to ſhedde the blood of all her faithful ſubiectes: the rewardes of the inuadours (if they could preuaile) ſhould be the diſinheriting of al the nobilitie, the clergie, and the whole comminaltie, yt would (as

they are bounde by ye lawes of God, by their birth, & othes) defend their naturall gracious Queene, their natiue country, their wiues, their children, their family, and their houſes. And now examine theſe which you cal your vnarmed ſchollers and prieſtes, wherefore they liued and were conuerſant in companie of the principall rebels and traitours at Rome, and in other places, where it is proued that they were partakers of their conſpiracies? Let it bee anſwered why they came thus by ſtealth into the realme? why they haue wandered vp and downe in corners in diſguiſed ſort, changing their tytles, names, & maner of apparel? Why they haue intiſed and ſought to perſwade by their ſecrete falſe reaſons, the people to allowe and beleeue all the actions and attempts whatſoeuer the pope hath done or ſhal do, to be lawful? Why they haue reconciled & withdrawen ſo manie people in corners from the lawes of the realme to the obedience of the pope, a forreyne potentate and open enemy, whom they know to haue already declared the Queene to be no lawful Queene, to haue mayntayned the knowne rebels and traitours, to haue inuaded her Maieſties dominions with open warre? Examine further, how theſe vagarant diſguiſed vnarmed ſpies haue anſwered, whē they were taken and demanded what they thought of the Bul of pope Pius Quintus,
               Six Queſtions to trye traytours frō ſchollers. which was publiſhed to depriue the Queenes Maieſtie, and to warrant her ſubiectes to diſobey her: whether they thought that all ſubiectes ought to obey the ſame bull, and ſo to rebell? Secondly, whether they thought her Maieſtie to be ye lawful Queene of the realme, notwithſtanding the ſaid bull or any other bull of the pope? Thirdly, whether the pope might giue ſuch licence as he did to the Earles of Northumberland & Weſtmerland, and other her Maieſties ſubiectes to rebel as they did? or giue power to D. Sanders a natural borne ſubiect but an vnnaturall worne prieſt, to take armes and

moue warred as he did in Ireland? Fourthly, whether the pope may diſcharge ye ſubiectes of her Maieſtie, or of any other princes chriſtened, of their othes of obediēce? Fiftly, whether the ſayd traiterous prieſt D. Sanders or one Briſtowe a rebellious fugitiue, did in their bookes write truely or falſly, in approuing the ſaid bull of Pius quintus, and the contentes thereof? Laſtly, what were to be done, if the pope or any other aſſigned by him, would inuade ye realme of England, and what part they would take, or what part any faithful ſubiect of her Maieſties ought to take? To theſe queſtions very apt to trie the trueth of falſhoode of any ſuch ſedicious perſons, being iuſtly before condemned for their diſloyaltie, theſe lewde vnarmed traytours I ſay would no wiſe anſwere directly hereto, as all other faithful ſubiectes to any prince chriſtian ought to doe. And as they vpon refuſall to anſwere directly to theſe queſtions onely, might haue bene iuſtly conuinced as guiltie of treaſon,The offendours executed for treaſon, not for religion. ſo yet were they not thereupon condemned, but vpon all their other former actions committed both abroade and in the Realme, which were no leſſe traiterous then the actions of all other the ſpyes and traitours, and of Iudas him ſelfe afore remembred which had no armour nor weapon, and yet at all times ought to be adiudged traitours. For theſe diſguiſed perſons (called ſchollars or Prieſtes) hauing bene firſt conuerſant of long time with the Traitours beyonde the ſea in all their conſpiracies, came hither by ſtealth in time of warre and rebellion by commaundement of the Capitall enemie the Pope or his Legates, to be ſecret eſpialles & explorers in the Realme for the pope, to deliuer by ſecret, Romiſh tokens, as it were an earneſt or preſt, to them that ſhoulde be in readines to ioyne with rebels or open enemies, and in like ſort with their hallowed baggages from Rome to poyſon the ſences of the ſubiectes, powring into their hearts malicious and peſtilent opinions againſt her Maieſtie and the

Lawes of the Realme, and alſo to kindle and ſet on fire the hearts of diſcontented ſubiectes with the flames of rebellion, and to ſearch and ſound the depthes and ſecretes of all mens inwarde intentions, either againſt her Maieſtie, or for her: and finally, to bring into a beadroll, or as it were into a muſter roll, the names and powers with the dwellings of all them that ſhoulde be readie to rebell and to ayd the forrein inuaſion. Theſe kinds of ſeditious actions for the ſeruice of the pope and the traitours and rebels abroade, haue made them traitours: not their bookes nor their beades, no not their cakes of waxe which they call Agnus dei, nor other their reliques, nor yet their opinions for the ceremonies or rites of the Church of Rome: and therefore it is to be certainly cōcluded that theſe did iuſtly deſerue their capital puniſhmēts as traitors, though they were not apprehended with opē armour or weapon.
            Nowe if this latter repetition, as it were of all the former cauſes and reaſons afore recited, may not ſerue to ſtop the boiſterous mouthes, and the peſtiferous tongues, and venimous breathes of theſe that are infected with ſo groſſe errors, as to defende ſeditious ſubiectes, ſtirrers of rebellion againſt their naturall Prince & countrey:Vnreaſonable & obſtinate perſons are left to Gods iudgemēt. then are they to be left without any further argument, to the iudgement of the Almightie God, as perſons that haue couered their eyes againſt the ſunnes light, ſtopped their eares againſt the ſounde of Iuſtice, and oppreſſed their heartes againſt the force of reaſon, and as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, They ſpeake lyes, they are as venemous as the poiſon of a ſerpent, euen like the deafe Adder that ſtoppeth his eares.
            
            Wherefore with charitie to conclude, if theſe rebels & traitors, and their fautors woulde yet take ſome remorſe and compaſſion of their natural countrey, and would conſider how vaine their attempts haue bene ſo many yeres,

and howe many of their confederates are waſted by miſeries and calamities, and would deſiſt from their vnnatural practiſes abroade: and if theſe Seminaries, ſecret wanderers, and explorators in the darke, woulde imploy their traueiles in the workes of light and doctrine according to the vſage of their ſchooles, and content them ſelues with their profeſſion and deuotion: and that the remnant of the wicked flocke of the ſeedemen of ſedition would ceaſe frō their rebellious, falſe, and infamous railings & libellings: there is no doubt by Gods grace (her Maieſtie being ſo much giuen to mercie and deuoted to peace) but al colour and occaſion of ſhedding the blood of any more of her naturall ſubiectes of this ſand, ſhould vtterly ceaſe. Againſt whoſe malices, if they ſhall not deſiſt, Almighty God continue her Maieſtie with his ſpirit & power long to reigne and liue in his feare, and to be able to vanquiſh them and all Gods enemies, and her rebels & traitors both at home and abroad, and to maintaine and preſerue all her naturall good louing ſubiectes, to the true ſeruice of the ſame Almightie God according to his holy worde and will.
            Many other things might be remembred for defence of other her Maieſties princely, honourable, and godly actions in ſundry other things, wherein alſo theſe & the like ſeditious railors haue of late time without all ſhame, by fained and falſe libels ſought to diſcredit her Maieſtie & her gouernement: but at this time, theſe former cauſes and reaſons alleadged by way of aduertiſements, are ſufficient to iuſtifie her Maieſties actions to ye whole worlde in the caſes remembred.
            FINIS.
         
      
   