
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Credo Eccleſiam Sanctam Catholicam.
                        
                        I beleeue the holy Catholike Church.
                        THE Authoritie, Ʋniuerſalitie, and Viſibilitie of the CHVRCH, handled and diſcuſſed.
                        
                           By EDWARD CHALONER, Dr. in Diuinitie, and Principall of ALBAN Hall in OXFORD.
                        
                        LONDON Printed by William Stansby, and are to bee ſold in Pauls Church-yard at the ſigne of the Gray-Hound.
                        1625.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM, Earle of PEMBROKE, Lord HERBERT of Cardiffe, Lord Par and Roſſe of Kendall, Lord Marmion, and Saint Q
                        •
                     intin, &c. Lord Chamberlaine of his MAIESTIES Houſhold, Lord Warden of the Stanneries, Knight of the moſt Noble Order of the Garter:
Chancellor of the Vniuerſitie of Oxford; And one of his Maieſties moſt Honorable Priuie Councell.
                  
                     MY LORD,
                  
                  
                     THe firſt aſſault which was euer made vpon mankind, appeared in the ſhape of aGen. 3. 1. queſtion, for in that manner did the Serpent ſett vpon Eue; and the victorie then purchaſed, hath euer ſince animated

the Viperous brood of that arch-enemie, to encounter the Church of God with the ſame engin. Ariſtotles poſitiue formes of diſputing, ſute not ſo well with their diſtempered materials as thoſe of Socrates, which conclude in Queſtions. As it was at the building of Babel, ſo is it now in Babylon, their confounded language ſerues onely to aske and demand, not to reply. For what are the cryes of Rome, which more frequently walke the ſtreets, and fill them with lowder clamours then thoſe of London, other then theſe? Whereupon doe you laſtly ground your beliefe? How doe you know the Scriptures to be the Word of God? Where was your Church in all ages? If the Church of Rome profeſſe not the ſame faith which anciently it did, when did it alter or varie from her firſt integritie? Argumentations of other natures, are forbidden the Laytie vnder paine of curſe, this kinde onely of diſputing by Queſtions, is diſpenſed vnto the rudeſt by the prouerb, which ſaith, An Ideot may propound more in an houre, then the learnedſt in a Kingdome can reſolue in a yeere. Hauing therefore diſcourſed vpon theſe ſubiects, partly in ſome Lectures had

in a famous Metropolitan Church of thisCanterburie. Kingdome (where for a time abiding, I aduentured to thruſt in my Sickle into the Harueſt of more worthy Labourers) partly in my ſeuerall attendances vpon our late Soueraigne of happy Memorie, and his Gracious Maieſtie now being, I preſume in humble acknowledgment of your noble fauours conferred vpon me, to preſent theſe my poore endeauours to your honourable protection, beſeeching your Lordſhip to paſſe a fauourable conſtruction vpon my boldneſſe, and to accept of them as from him, who is, and alwayes will remayne
                  
                     Your Lordſhips humbly▪ deuoted;
ED. CHALONER▪
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  
                     The Contents of the firſt Part of this Booke.
                     
                        SECT. I. THe Preface and partition of the enſuing ſubiect. pag. 1.
                     
                        SECT. II. What act of Faith is implyed in this Article of the Church, and the errours of Romiſh Interpreters touching the ſame. pag. 3.
                     
                        SECT. III. The Romaniſts diſtractions touching the Church, ſet downe in eight Gradations. 
                     
                        SECT. IIII. The palpable abuſe offered the Laytie, by obtruding the Church vnto them as their ſoueraigne Iudge, diſplayed by the preſent practice of the Ieſuites. pag. 26.
                     
                        SECT. V. The obiections out of the Scriptures touching the Churches infallibilitie, anſwered. pag. 30.
                     
                        SECT. VI. The obiection drawne from the queſtion, how wee may know the authoritie, ſenſe, puritie and perfection of the Scriptures, handled and reſolued. pag. 36.
                     
                     
                        SECT. VII. The new ſleights and deuices, which the Ieſuites vſe in enforcing theſe arguments touching the Church and the Scriptures. pag. 51.
                  
                  
                     The Contents of the ſecond Part.
                     
                        SECT. I. THe firſt way whereby one may know the Church to bee Catholike or Vniuerſall. pag. 71.
                     
                        SECT. II. The ſecond way whereby one may know the Church to be Catholike or Vniuerſall. Together with an Application of the ſame to the preſent queſtion of theſe times, touching the exiſtency of our Church in all Ages. pag. 83.
                  
               
               
                  Errata.
                  Page 58. The • which is in lin. 7. ought to be in lin. 14. ibid. lin. 12. for obligation, r. Religion. ibid. lin. 14. for but ſearch, r. but by ſearch, pag. 91. lin. 19. for The fift, r. The ſixt.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Credo Eccleſiam Sanctam Catholicam.
                  I beleeue the holy Catholike Church.
                  
                     
                        SECT. I. The Preface and partition of the enſuing ſubject.
                     
                        THis parcell of the Creed, how compendious ſoeuer it ſeems in wordes, yet is it in ſignification ſo ample, that if the Ieſuites Comment exceedes not the Text, this, alone, is an abridgement of Diuinitie, this, a Catechiſme ſufficient to engroſſe the Layties whole ſtudie and beliefe. It is not a matter of ſmall conſequence to them which oppoſe names to things, and triumph in the naked ſounds of Church and Catholike, whether you apparell the

ſenſe in any other furniture of Language then this: they cannot reply as Auguſtin. Cont. Creſcon. gram. lib. 2. c. 1. 
                        Demoſthenes did to Aeſchines, whē being vpbrayded with the improper vſe of a word, hee anſwered, that the fortunes of Greece conſiſted not therein; No, in hoc ſit a ſum fortunae Romae, in theſe Sillables the fortunes of Rome are entrench'd; not the ſeuen Hils whereon ſhee is ſeated, not her extended Wals whoſe auncient Tracts are almoſt en
                           •
                        omb'd with Age, not her Caſtle of Saint Angelo are halfe ſo relied vpon by her, as this ſingle Article; For why? Shee hopes, the Church will ſerue her for a Cittadle or Towre of defence, Holyneſſe will colour her title, and Catholicke will from all quarters furniſh her with a voluminous Armie of ancient and experienced ſouldiers. Howſoeuer therefore I am not able to vndertake this ſubiect, either with that power or skill, as thoſe which haue preceded me in the ſame, yet becauſe, as Rome was not built in a day, ſo neither can ſhee bee ſurueied in an houre, or as ſhee is Reu. 13. 1. the Beaſt with ſeuen heads and ten hornes, reſembling Hydra, which as ſoone as Hercules had ſmitten off one head, maintained the fight with another; ſo there may remaine after thoſe greater labours of others, ſomething for vs of ſucceeding times and ages to meete withall; Be it as it will, I ſhall not thinke my paines miſpent, if whileſt others haue pared off an head, my weaker ſtrookes force her but ſo far as to ſhrinke in a horne.
                     But to leaue Prefaces, and come to the handling of the point. The words now read vnto you,

containing in them a matter of Faith and Beliefe, doe preſent two thinges to our conſideration; Viz.

                           1. Firſt the act of Faith, in theſe words, (tacitely implied) I beleeue.
                           
                           2. Secondly the obiect of this Faith, the Church, pourtraited and deſcribed by two properties. Viz.

                                 1. Sanctitie in that it is called, Holy.
                                 
                                 2. Vnjuerſalitie, in that it is ſtiled Catholicke.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        SECT. II. What act of Faith is implied in this Article of the Church, and the errours of Romiſh interpreters touching the ſame.
                     
                        COncerning the acte of this faith (I beleeue) though it be not prefixed to the beginning of this Article, as neither to the reſt which follow it; yet is it to be vnderſtood; the former (I beleeue) which precedes the Article of the holy Ghoſt, communicating it ſelfe to this and the ſubſequent, and that chiefely for two reaſons.
                     The one, to teach vs, that the principall obiect of our faith is God himſelfe, conſidered in vnitie of Eſſence, and Trinitie of perſons, and therefore to each of the perſons, there is either a (Beleeue) prefixed, or the Particle (in) ſet before, to ſhew

that on them we are to build the certaintie and aſſurance of our hope; but as for theſe Articles of the Church, the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, the Reſurrection of the body, and the like, they being creatures, are but the ſecondarie obiects of our Faith, not to be truſted vpon immediately in themſelues, but onely vnder God and through God, and therefore haue not a Credo a (Beleeue) a part to themſelues, but prefixt to one of the perſons (I beleeue in the holy Ghoſt.)
                     The other, to ſet out and diuide by this meanes vnto euery of the perſons an appropriate and ſpeciall worke. For as God the father hath Creation in the Articles attributed vnto him, and the Sonne Redemptionem merito, Redemption by the merit of his Death and Paſſion, vnto him; ſo the holy Ghoſt by the (Beleeue) which is prefixt to his Article, and is in part of ſenſe to be conuei'd vnto the following; hath the application of our redemption, Virtute & efficacia, by his vertue and efficacie appropriated vnto him alſo; to wit, The ſanctifying of the holy Catholicke Church, the vniting of the members in a communion with their head, the infuſion of iuſtifying faith, which apprehends the remiſsion of ſinnes, the quickning of the dead in the Reſurrection, and the conferring of life, both vitam gratiae, the life of Grace, and vitam gloriae, the life of glorie in the world to come.
                     So then, the act of faith (I beleeue) which belongs to this Article of the Church, is to bee fetch'd and deriued from the preceding Article of the holy Ghoſt. And yet becauſe it deſcends not

in the ſame forme and garbe of ſenſe altogether, which it beares there, but ſomething altered and transfigured, the queſtion will be, what act it properly imports in this place towards his obiect, the holy Catholicke Church.
                     
                     For the better reſoluing whereof we muſt neceſſarily call to minde that ancient diſtinction of Aug. 181. ſerm. de temp. P. Lom. 3. ſent. diſt. 23. Thom. 2. 2. q. 2. art. 2. Saint Auſtens, and the Schoolemen touching Credere to beleeue: That there is

                           1. Credere in aliquem, to beleeue and put ones truſt & confidence in one.
                           
                           2. Credere alicui, to beleeue or giue credit to one.
                           
                           3. Credere aliquem, to beleeue that one is in being, or to beleeue that one is after this or that manner in being.
                        
                     
                     The firſt of theſe, which is Credere in aliquem, to beleeue in one, doth virtually indeed include the other two, for one cannot beleeue in one, but he muſt preſuppoſe that hee is, and that hee is to be credited, but yet the proper obiect of it, is bonum, a thing as it is good, and the formall act which it exerciſeth, is chiefly an act of the will; whereas the reſt haue rather for their obiect, verum a thing as it is true, and the act which they exerciſe, appertaines onely to the vnderſtanding; but with this difference, that when I ſay, credo alicui, I giue credit to ones ſaying, the act of faith hath relation to his obiect, as to obiectum formale, a kind of principle for whoſe ſake and cauſe I beleeue; but when I ſay, Credo aliquem, I

beleeue that one is in being, the act of faith hath relation here to his obiect, as onely to obiectum materiale, or quod, (as the Schoolemen ſpeake) a concluſion, which it beleeues, and not as to the motiue or inducement for which it beleeues.
                     Now to bring this home to the marke; The Church of Rome and we doe agree, that the (beleeue) which is prefixt to the Article of the holy Ghoſt, doth not communicate it ſelfe with the reſtriction cauſed by the Particle (in) to this Article of the Church and the reſt which follow it (for that were to beleeue in them, and then no difference ſhould be made betweene the Creator and the Creatures) but ſimply and without addition, and the queſtion is, what act it now exerciſeth; whether ſuch an one as whereby our faith hath relation to the Catholicke Church, as onely to a materiall obiect or bare concluſion which it beleeues, by reaſon wherof we may ſay, Credo Eccleſiam, I beleeue that there is a Catholicke Church, or moreouer, ſuch, as whereby our faith may reflect vpon the Church as a formall obiect, cauſe and principle, for whoſe ſake it yeelds credit and aſſent to all other things, ſo that thereby, though not expreſly yet tacitly is implied, Credo Eccleſiae, I yeeld faith & beliefe To the Catholicke Church?
                     The 
                           Greg. de Valent. in Thom. Tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 1. §. 6. Ieſuites, howſoeuer they would palliate the matter, and make ſhew, that the Church is onely a condition, and not a formall cauſe of our beliefe, yet others of them ſpeake more plainely what the reſt ayme at; Scot. 3, ſent. diſt. 23. q. vn. Gab. q. 2. Can. lib. 2. c. 7. Durand. 3. d. 24. q. 1 Et d. 25. q. 3. For Scotus and Biel, to whom Canus ioynes Durand, doe teach that our

faith is laſt reſolued into the authoritie of the Church; and Staplet. cont. Whitak. de authorit. ſcriptur. l. 1. c. 14. §. 6. & lib. 8. princip. doct. cap. 21. 
                        Stapleton yet more punctually affirmes, that this Article of the Church is inſerted into the Creede, Tanquam medium credendi alia omnia, as the onely meanes whereby we beleeue all other things, importing thus much, Credo illa omnia, quae Deus per Eccleſiam me docet, I beleeue all thoſe things which God teacheth me by the Church. Whereby we may eaſily collect, that the Papiſts by this Credo Eccleſiam, I beleeue that there is a Church, doe vnderſtand alſo, Credo Eccleſiae, I yeeld faith and beliefe to the Church.
                     We for our parts doe reuerence the name and teſtimonie of the Church, we acknowledge it to bee of all humane the greateſt, wee confeſſe moreouer that the Catholicke Church in the whole neuer hath erred, nor euer ſhall erre in fundamentall points, the prouidence of God ſuſtayning it. In regard whereof, it hath the promiſe of our Sauiour Matth. 16. Joh. 16. 13. 1. Tim. 3. 15. 
                        that the gates of Hell ſhall not preuaile againſt it, that the ſpirit ſhall lead it into all truth, and it is called by the Apoſtle, the pillar of truth, as who would ſay, that it retayneth a ſauing profeſſion of heauenly truth, and vpholdeth the ſame againſt all the ſtratagems of Satan and his complices. But that it is not either in it ſelfe, or in this place to be taken, for the formall cauſe of our beliefe, that is, the foundation of our faith, vpon whoſe credit and authoritie wee are wholy to depend, I ſhall by theſe following reaſons drawen out of the Creed it ſelfe eaſily make apparant.
                     
                        Firſt by the Grammaticall conſtruction of this Credo, I beleeue, which when it imports to yeeld credit or aſſent to a thing, is not ioyned with an Accuſatiue caſe, as here in the Creede, but with a Datiue, whereas wee ſay not, Credo Eccleſiae, but Credo Eccleſiam, to ſhew that the Creede in this place implies veritatem in eſſendo, a beliefe of the Churches being; and not veritatem in ſignificando, a beliefe of the Churches ſaying: Staplet. lib. 8 princip. doct. cap. 21. 
                        Stapleton notwithſtanding would faine find an cuaſion from this argument, ſaying, that to yeeld beliefe to the affirmations of the Church, is the Theologicall ſenſe of the Creede, though it bee not the Grammaticall; much like as Bellarmine, who endeauouring to proue Purgatorie from theſe words of Chriſt, Matth. 12. It ſhall not be forgiuen him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, 
                        Reſpondeo non ſequi ſecundum regulas dialecticorum, id quod inferimus ex verbis Domini ſed tamen ſequi ſecundum regulam prudentiae. Bell. lib. 1. de purgat. cap. 4. Confeſſeth in the end, that it followes not indeed according to the rules of Logicke, but onely according to the rule of Prudence, as if forſooth the Arts were contradictorie to Diuinitie and not ſubordinate vnto it, and that one might not iuſtly ſuſpect ſomething to bee amiſſe in that houſe, where the Miſtreſſe and her hand maides are at variance.
                     Secondly I argue from the word Catholicke in the Creede, which by the Precipuè vero in hoc articulo non praeſides ſolum ſed etiam qui parere debent ſignificat. Catech. Roman. part. 1. cap. 10. §. 9. & 13. Tridentine Catechiſmes owne confeſſion, ſignifying the Flocke as well as the Paſtors, and excluding no time, no perſons, nor any condition of men, is not poſſible to be ſeene, nor capable to be heard, nor able to bee conſulted with, and therefore according to

the ſenſe which the Church beleeues in this place, it is abſurd to conceiue that theſe words Credo Eccleſiam, I beleeue that there is a Church, ſhould bee equiualent to theſe, Credo Eccleſiae, I yeeld faith and beliefe to the Church.
                     But for breuities ſake, omitting other proofes as more behoofull for thoſe which write large Tracts, than for my ſelfe, who deſire to obſerue as neere, as I can the lawes of Catechiſing, my third reaſon ſhall bee drawen from the word Church, which being by the Papiſts inuolued with ſo many contrarieties and contradictions, from it, I thus argue.
                     That which is to be the foundation of my faith, and to which I am to yeeld aſſent in all things, that muſt be a thing certainely knowne and determined, what it is; It is not ſufficient to be acquainted with the word, but wee muſt alſo vnderſtand the thing; for faith is not verball but reall, neither are we conueied to heauen by bare ſounds, as by Magicke ſpels, but by truths and verities which are couched vnder them. But according to the Papiſts owne aſſertions, this Church, which they here would make to be the foundation of their faith: and to which (ſay they) we are to yeeld aſſent in all things, is not to them a thing, as yet certainely knowne and determined what it is, which by theſe Gradations following I ſhall demonſtrate.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        SECT. III. The Romanists diſtractions touching the Church, ſet downe in eight Gradations.
                     
                        THe Church is deuided by ſome of the PopiſhI Silueſt. Prierias in Luth. tom. 1. pag. 159. fundam. 1. Doctors into the Church,

                           1. Eſſentially, which they make to be the Conuocation of all that beleeue in Chriſt.
                           2. Repreſentatiue, which they ſay, are either the Biſhops aſſembled in a generall Councell, as moſt doe affirme, or the Colledge of Cardinals, as Silueſter Prierias imagines.
                           3. Virtually, which they conceiue to be the Pope.
                        
                     
                     
                        The firſt Gradation.
                        1. NOw graunt the Church to be ſuch a Pillar of truth, that who ſo heares it cannot erre, yet, Firſt, it is not determined by Popiſh writers which is that Church, to whoſe Oracles and definitiue ſentence we are to liſten.
                        1. The 
                              Cap. 24. q. 1. c. a recta. Quaero de qua Eccleſia intelligas quod hic dicitur, quod non poſſit errare? Reſp. Ipſa congregatio fidelium hic dicitur Eccleſia. Gloſſe vpon Gratians Decrees, which containe the Popes owne lawes and conſtitutions, asking the queſtion, what Church it is to be meant off, when it is ſaid, that the Church cannot erre, anſweres, that it is to be meant not of the Pope but of the Congregation of the faithful, that is the Church Eſſentially.
                        
                        2. But this opinion of the Church is generally

by almoſt all the Papiſts reiected, for being the iudge of Controuerſies, and conſequently the foundation of our faith; the reaſons are, Firſt, 
                           Ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               tamen debere Pontificem fidelium omnium Sententiam inquirere; Hoc enim ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               fieri poteſt, ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſi poſſit expediret. Fere enim eiuſmodi ſunt quae in controuerſiam fidei adducuntur, vt captum vulgarium fidelium longe ſuperent Valent. in Thom Tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. § 47. becauſe ſuch a multitude diſperſed farre and wide throughout the face of the earth, cannot be ſo marſhalled as to haue their opinions calculated. Secondly, becauſe the greater part of theſe are Lay-people, whoſe apprehenſions oftentimes reach not vnto the matters controuerted. Laſtly, 
                           At poſſet tamen nihilominus errare maior illorum pars. 
                                 Ʋalent. 16. §. 45. becauſe there is no promiſe made either to the flocke or to the Paſtors and doctors of the Church, that a greater part of them ſhal not erre, but only that all of them ſhal not erre. Wherefore though the whole Church in this ſenſe cannot erre, errore perſonali, with a perſonall error, yet Bellarmine in his fourth Booke De Rom. Pont. and fourth Chapter, tels vs, that we muſt ſeeke out for one that cannot erre, errore iudicali, with a iudiciall errour.
                        Some therefore of the Papiſts are of opinion that the Church in this ſenſe, as it is taken for the iudge of controuerſies and foundation of faith is the Church, repreſentatiue in a generall Councell of Biſhops, no matter whether with the Pope or without him, becauſe the Pope 
                              Bell. lib. 2. de concil. cap. 14. §. At alij auctores. (ſay they) though he be the head of all Chriſtians and all Churches in ſeuerall, yet is he not of all the Church aſſembled in a Councell togeather. And of this opinion, beſides thoſe which Bellarm. 16. § Porro de propoſita. Ocham in dialog. Dried. de deg. Eccleſ. lib. 4. c 4. Concil. Conſtant. ſeſſion. 4. Baſil. act. 2. & 18. 
                           Bellarmine reckons vp, as Cardinalis Cameracenſis, Ioh. Gerſon, Iacobus Almanus, Nic. Cuſanus, Panormitanus, Cardinalis Florentinus, and Abulenſis, we may ioyne, Ocham, Driedo, the Biſhops aſſembled in the generall Councels of Conſtance
                           
                           and Baſill, and in a word the Vniuerſitie of Paris, as Coriolanus in his Preface to the Councels Praelud. 5. doth confeſſe.
                        3. But many of the later Papiſts and eſpecially 
                              Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 45. the Ieſuites, perceiuing that the former opinion touching the Authoritie of a generall Councell aboue the Pope, (Ideo vſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ad hanc diem, quaeſtio ſupereſt, etiam inter Catholicos, Bell. lib. 2. de concil. c. 13. howſoeuer the contrarie bee not yet determined) doth indeed ouerthrow the verie faith of the Popes Primacie, and finding (as they ſay) no promiſe made to a generall Councell without the Pope, for that the Church is to be built vpon the rocke; and not the rocke vpon the Church, they doe concurre, that the Church whoſe definitiue ſentence wee are bound to beleeue, is nothing elſe but the Church virtually, that is the Pope, whereby they delude, and impoſe vpon the world more than euer, for whilſt they boaſt of the Church their Mother, they meane and intend nothing elſe thereby, but onely the Pope their father.
                     
                     
                        The ſecond Gradation.
                        BVt ſecondly, graunt for the Church at the Ieſuites requeſt, that it be the Pope, vpon which we are to relie, yet is it not agreed vpon by them for the manner, whether it bee the Pope alone, or whether the Pope in an aſſembly of the Church repreſentatiue, and again whether this Church repreſentatiue be the Colledge of Cardinals, or whether a generall Councell.
                        
                        1. For no meane Writers amongſt them doe hold that the Pope may erre if hee define without a

generall Councell, as beſides many of the Pariſiens 
                           Alphonſ. a Caſt. lib. 1. cont. haereſ. c. 2. Adrian. 6. quest. de confirm. Vid. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Rom. Pont. cap. 2 
                           Alphonſus a Caſtro, and Pope Adrian the ſixth doe auerre, that we may ſee not onely priuate men, but alſo Popes themſelues to haue ſuſpected the Papall authoritie in this point. And here though Bellarmine vaunts, that all Catholickes doe conſpire in this, that when the Pope defines any thing in a generall Councell, hee is then out of danger of erring, either in faith, or generall precepts touching manners, yet it is not decided ſay Reſp. ſecundum Abb. in cap. nimis de praeb. in fi. quod non reperitur Specificè deciſum, qui debeant Concilio vniuerſali inter eſſe, nec in text. nec in gloſſa. Gloſſ. i
                                    •
                                  inſtitu. Iur. Can. lib. 1. tit. 3. in princip.
                            Canoniſts, of whom this generall Councell is to conſiſt. For as it is generally defined it imports Inſtit. Canon. ibid. Bell. lib. 1. de concil. c. 4. an aſſembly of Biſhops or holy Fathers, met together out of all quarters of the earth. But Si omnes, nullum ſuit ergo hactenus concilium generale, ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               videtur deinceps futurum, Paulo post. Sic in concilio Nicaeno primo ex occidente Solum fuerunt duo Presbyteri miſſi ex Italia, vnus Epiſcopus ex Gallia, vnus ex Hiſpania, vnus ex Africa. In Concilio ſecundo & tertio, nulli fuerunt ex Occidente, Bellarm. li. 1. de concil, c. 17. 
                           Bellarmine in his firſt Booke, De Concil. & 17. Cap. ſaith that ſuch a generall Councell neuer was, nor poſſibly can bee, ſince in the firſt generall Councell there were preſent but two Prieſts out of Italy, one Biſhop out of France, one out of Spaine, and one out of Africa. In the ſecond and third there were none out of the Weſt, and in the fourth, onely the Legate of Leo, which deliuered the conſent of the other Biſhops of Spaine, France and Italy, who had before ſent the ſame in Writing vnto the Pope forth of their owne Prouinces. And on the contrarie in Councels celebrated in the Weſt, few Eaſterne Biſhops haue bin found. What then thinkes the Cardinall beſt to bee done? Quatuor conditiones ſufficere, Prima vt euocatio ſit generalis, ita vt innoteſcat omnibus maioribus Chriſtianis prouinc ijs. Bell. ibid.
                            Why, he tels vs, it is enough if it be publiſhed and made knowne to all the greater Chriſtian Prouinces,

neither matters it (ſay Canus lib. 5. de loc. Theolog. c. 2. Turrecrem. lib. 3. de Eccleſ. c. 16. Ʋalent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 45. Vid. Bell, vt ſup. 
                           Canus, Turrecremata and Gregorie de Valentia) that all bee Cited, much leſſe that all doe Come; ſufficient it is (ſaith Bellarmine) if no Biſhop be excluded, if out of the greater part of Chriſtian Prouinces ſome doe appeare, and if the foure chiefe Patriarchs, which are beſides the Biſhop of Rome, bee preſent, either by themſelues or by their ſubſtitutes, though hee thinkes that this Condition bee not very neceſſarie at this day; conſidering they are either Heretikes or Schiſmatikes. So that here they commit mayne Contradictions. For firſt, they make a Councell to be generall, and to repreſent the whole Church, and yet to Ex quo ſequitur poſſe interdum concilia nationalia eſſe multo maiora generalibus, quoad numerum Epiſcoporum. Bellar. ibid.
                            conſiſt oftentimes of fewer Biſhops than a Nationall, and thoſe for ſubſtance but of one Angle of the World onely, the reſt either not cited, or not expected. Secondly, they iudge it ſufficient for the Patriarchs which are abſent, to depute others in their roome, 
                              Ʋid. Catalog. ad fin. Concil. Trident. the which was alſo practiſed by their Biſhops at Trent, and yet (as Quia vt Turrecremata lib. 3. de Eccleſ. c. 6. 8. & 38. & Canus lib. 5. de locis Theol. c. 5 recte docent, poteſtas ipſa Pontificis ad infallibiliter definiendum deligari alijs nequit. Valent. in Thom. vt ſup.
                            
                           Valentia and others well diſpute in the Caſe of the Popes Legates) the aſſiſtance of the holy Ghoſt is a thing perſonall, and cannot bee delegated vnto another. Wherefore to ſalue all ſores with one playſter, Quin etiam licet non conuenerint in eiuſmodi aliquibus Romanis Concilijs Epiſcopi variarum Prouinciarum, tamen ratione Pontificiae authoritatis, quae vniuerſalis eſt, Vniuerſalia quodammodo dici poſſunt, vt notauit Turrecremata, lib. 3. de Eccleſ. cap. 3. 
                                 Ʋalent. in Thom. ibid. Vid. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Concil. cap. 5. 
                           Valentia and Turrecremata, doe affirme, that conſidering thoſe difficulties, the Popes owne authoritie (it being vniuerſall) is capable to make a particular Councell to bee

Vniuerſall, as it hath done in ſome of the Roman. But ſee then a third contradiction, no leſſe miſſeſhapen than the former, aſcends the Stage; for whereas, 
                              Bellar. lib. 1. de Concil. cap. 15. §. prior autem ſententia refellenda nunc eſt, ac primo ratione deſumpta ex Scriptura. Item, Fran. Longus a Coriol. praelud. 4. ad Sum. Concil.
                            
                           Bellarmine in his firſt booke de Concil. and fifteenth Chapter, and others, and endeuour to proue jure diuino, by the Law of God, that Biſhops onely haue deciding voyces in a generall Councell, and that the promiſe of deliuering the truth is made to them onely, as being the ſole Paſtors of the Church, Ex priuilegio autem & conſuetudine, etiam Cardinales, Abbates, & Generales Ordinum licet Epiſcopi non ſint. Bellar. lib. 1. de Concil. c. 15 Vid. ſubſcript. ad fin. Concil. Trident.
                            they confeſſe notwithſtanding in their writings and declare by the practiſe of the Tridentine Councell, that Cardinalls, Abbots, and Generalls of Orders haue voyces there, though not ordinarie and by right, yet by priuiledge and cuſtome, whence it followes, that either the Church hath that prerogatiue to aſſigne and appoint whom the holy Ghoſt ſhall aſſiſt; or elſe that a major part in a Councell may bee made vp by thoſe to whom the holy Ghoſt hath paſt no promiſe that they ſhall not erre.
                        2. Theſe abſurdities therefore conſidered, ſome of the Church of Rome doe abaſe that high eſteeme which for a long time was conceaued of generall Councells, making either their firſt originall to bee but humane, as Albert. Pigh. lib. 6. coeleſt. Hierarch. cap. 1. 
                           Albertus Pighius, or their vſe not abſolutely neceſſarie, as Bellar. lib. 1. de Concil. c. 10. 
                           Bellarmine and others. Hence it is that a ſecond ſort contracting the face of the Church into a leſſer modell, doe teach that the Church here diſputed of to bee the Iudge of Controuerſies, is the Pope in the Church, repreſented, not by Biſhops in a Councell, but by the Colledge of Cardinalls in the Conſiſtorie, which opinion is

recited by Valent. to. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 42. 
                           Greg. de Valentia, in his Diſputations vpon Thomas.
                        
                        3. But becauſe the Colledge of Cardinalls ſeemes too compendious a walke wherein to impale the greatneſſe of the Pope, and a generall Councell too vncertaine a path to tread, therefore the greater cry rings this peale, that the Church wee talke of is the Pope himſelfe, whether with a Councell or without a Councell, whether with the Cardinalls or without them, as in the next Gradation ſhall appeare.
                     
                     
                        The third Gradation.
                        BVt thirdly; grant for the manner, that it bee the Pope himſelfe, which is this Church, whether with a Councell or without a Councell, whether with Cardinalls or without them, yet is it not determined for the time when, it is the Pope.
                        1. For ſome teach, that it is the Pope at all times, in that hee cannot poſſibly be an Hereticke or publiſh a falſhood, and of this opinion is Albertus Pighius, in his fourth booke de Hierarch. eccleſ. cap. 8.
                        2. But others hold, that it is the Pope then onely, when hee publiſheth a doctrine vnder this condition, to bee beleeued by the whole Church as an Article of Faith, and of this opinion is Bell. lib. 4. de Rom. pont. c 2. Aquin. 22. q. 1. art. 10. Walden lib. 2. doct. fid. c. 47. &. 48. Turrecrem. lib. 2. Summae. c. 109. Dried. lib 4. de eccleſ. dog. c. 3. part. 3. Caiet. in opuſc. de poteſt. Papae & concil. c. 9. Hoſ. lib. 2. cont. Brent. de legit. iudic. Eck. lib. 1 de prim. Petri. Ioh. a Lou. de perpet. cathed Petri protect. cap 11. Pet. a Soto in Apolog. part. 1. c. 83. Can. lib. 6. c. 7. de locis. Valent. tom. 3. diſp. 1. p. 7. q. 1. §. 40. Becan theol. Scholaſt. 
                           Bellarmine himſelfe, and by his account, Thom. Aquinas, Waldenſis, Ioannes de Turrecremata, Driedo, Caietan, Hoſius, Eckius, Ioannes a Louaine, Petrus a Soto, Melchior Canus, beſides Valentia, Becanus, and the whole fraternitie of Ieſuites.
                     
                     
                        
                        The fourth Gradation.
                        BVt fourthly, grant for the time, becauſe haec eſt communiſsima opinio, this is the moſt common opinion of all Catholicks (ſaith Bellarmine) that the Church is then the Pope, when hee propounds a doctrine to bee beleeued by all men as an article of Faith, yet is it not ſufficiently reſolued by them, for the matters, what matters they muſt bee, in reſoluing whereof his propoſition is infallible.
                        1. For you haue beene hitherto made beleeue, that whenſoeuer hee buckles himſelfe to define any thing to bee beleeued as an Article of Faith, that then hee is in his Chaire, and then hee cannot erre, and amongſt other points in which they ſay that wee are to beleeue aſſuredly that the Pope cannot erre, Bellarmine, and Greg. de Valentia reckon vp Bell de ſanct. beat. lib. 1 cap. 12. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q 1. p. 7. § 41. the Canonization of Saints to be one, and that the Bell. lib. 2. de Rom. Pont. cap 12. Valent. vt. ſup. §. 37. 
                           Pope is the ſucceſſor of Peter to bee another.
                        2. But on the other ſide, it is firſt confeſt by Bell. lib. 4. de Rom. Pont. cap. 2. Conueniunt omnes Catholici poſſe Pontificem etiam vt Pontificem & cum ſuo caetu confiliariorum, vel cum generali Concilio, errare in controuerſijs facti 
                           Bellarmine, and as hee ſaith by all Catholickes, that the Pope may erre euen with a generall Councell at his elbow, in matters of fact which depend vpon information, and the teſtimonies of men, and ſuch is the queſtion touching the legitimacie of the Pope, confeſt to bee by Bell. lib. 4. de Ro. Pont. c. 12. 
                           Bellarmine. And becauſe the Canonization of Saints is of the ſame nature, Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. punct. 7 §. 41. Non eſt autem ita prorſus ab Eccleſia tradita haec doctrina, qua ponimus Pontificem non poſſe etiam errare in Canonizatiorne Sanctorum. 
                           Valentia confeſſeth that the Popes infallibilitie therein is not ſo altogether deliuered by the Church, and Canus in his fifth booke de locis theolog: chap. 5. ſaith that it is not certaine, de fide, as a matter of faith,

neither will hee pronounce him to bee an Heriticke who after ſo great a pudder as hath beene kept about Saint Francis, ſhall yet deny him to bee in heauen. Secondly Turrecrem. lib. 2. de eccleſ. cap. 112. ad arg 7. & lib. 4. part. 2. cap. 16. Sylueſt. in Sum. Verbo. Opinio. 
                           Turrecremata in his ſecond booke de Eccleſia, and Sylueſter in his ſummes do grant that the Pope may ſo farre as in him lyes, endeàuour to eſtabliſh his owne hereſie, and obtrude it vpon the Church; nor doe Valent. ibid. Namſi tantummodo voluerunt Pontificem vt priuatam Perſonam errare poſſe, aut etiam priuatum aliquem ſuum errorem in fide manifeſtum, peruerſe velle Eccleſiae ipſi, aduerſus exploratam aliorum in eadem Eccleſia fidem obtrudere, rem illi opinantur non penitus improbabilem. Sic Bellarm. lib. 4 de Ro. Pont. c. 7. 
                           Valentia and Bellarmine diſſalow their poſition vnder theſe two prouiſo's, the one, that if he doe it effectually, then the contrary hath beene formerly determined by the Church; ſo that the Church can then receiue no danger thereby of erring; the other, that if the contrary was neuer before determined, then the Pope may indeed attempt it, as did Valent. vt ſup. §. ad confirmationem. & Bell. l. 4. de Rom. Pont. c. 14. Voluit autem lobannes queſtionem definire, &c. 
                           Ioh. 22. in a queſtion touching the ſtate of the ſoule after death, but God in his prouidence will take ſuch courſe, as that he neuer ſhall accompliſh it.
                     
                     
                        The fifth Gradation.
                        BVt fiftly, grant for the matters, that the Pope be this Church in determining any matter of Faith whatſoeuer, yet is it not reſolued clearely by them for the perſon in generall, whether the Pope vpon which wee are ſo to relie, bee the preſent Pope, or whether the Popes deceaſed.
                        1. For the voice of the Ieſuites ſpeakes this, that it is the preſent Pope, nay Valent. tom. 3. in Thom. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 3. 
                           Gregorie de Valentia is ſo confident therein, that neque Scriptura ſacra (ſaith hee) neque etiam ſola traditio (ſi ab ea ſepares praeſentem
                           
                           in eccleſia authoritatem) eſt illa authoritas infallibilis, magiſtra fidei &c. that is, neither the Scriptures, nor yet traditions, if you ſeparat from the preſent authoritie in the Church, is that infallible miſtreſſe of Faith & Iudge of controuerſies. So Bellarmine, 
                           Bell. lib. 2. de Sacram. cap. 25 
                           omnium conciliorum veterum, & omnium dogmatum firmitas pendet ab authoritate praeſentis Eccleſiae, the ſtrength of all ancient Councells and all aſſertions, doth depend vpon the authoritie of the preſent Church; and Valent. ibid. §. 12. Sicut de authoritate ſcripturae, neceſſe eſt per aliquam aliam certam authoritatem conſtare, ita etiam de authoritate traditionis. Et Paulo poſt. Cum traditio fere ſcriptis doctorum conſeruetur, queſtiones moueri poſſunt de ſenſu illius, &c Bell. ibid. Non enim habemus teſtimonium infallibile, quod Concilia illa fuerint & legitima fuerint, & hoc aut illud definierint, niſi quia Eccleſia quae nunc eſt, ita ſentit & docet. their reaſons alleadgedare, for that without the authoritie of the preſent Church, wee neither can be aſſured of the certainty of Traditions and Councells, nor of the ſenſe & meaning of them.
                        2. But contrariwiſe, the caſe being put (as you haue heard) by Turrecremata and Silueſter; that the Pope may doe, what lyes in him to propoſe an hereſie, both Valent. ibid. § 41. Bell. lib. 4. de Rom. Pont. cap. 7. 
                           Valentia and Bellarmine grant the poſition not to be impoſſible, vpon condition that the hereſie haue beene condemned formerly by the Church, for then according to their doctrine the Church is to examin the errors of the preſent Pope, by truthes reſolued by precedent Popes. So that if in all points neceſſarie to ſaluation the truth haue beene already determined by former Popes (as in 1600. yeeres ſpace they haue had leaſure enough to doe it) the preſent Pope ceaſeth to bee a competent Iudge in ſuch matters, hee may erre touching them hee may doe his beſt indeuour to obtrude vpon the Church hereſies concerning them, nay hee ſtands himſelfe to bee arrained at the barre, and Tribunall of his Clergie, whether he be Orthodoxe or no and that by the preſcripts of his predeceſſors.
                     
                     
                        
                        The ſixt Gradation.
                        SIxtly, graunt for the Perſon in generall, that it bee the preſent Pope which is the Church, in that no danger can accrue from the Popes propounding an hereſie, if that hereſie haue beene formerly condemned, becauſe Bellar. lib. 2. de Rom. Pont. c. 30. §. Eſt ergo quinta opinio vera. (as they ſay) the Church may then know him not to bee their Shepherd, but a Wolfe, yet is it not agreed or determined ſufficiently amongſt them for the meanes, how the Church may bee able to iudge or truly diſcerne him to be ſuch an one.
                        1. For they which hold a Generall Councell toVid. Grad. 1. be aboue the Pope, and that it cannot erre, as Gerſon, Cameracenſis, and others aboue mentioned, doe hold likewiſe that the Pope ſo erring may bee iudged both for his perſon and doctrine by the church in a Generall Councell.
                        2. But they which hold a Generall Councell not to be aboue the Pope, but that wanting his companie it may erre euen in matters of faith, as Bellar. lib. 2. de Concil. cap. 11. Valent. vt ſup. §. 45. Cajet. in Apolog. part. 2. c. 21. Turrecrem. lib. 3. c. 23. 
                           Bellarmine, Valentia, Cajetan, Turrecremata, and others, theſe diſable any for being competent Iudges of the Popes doctrine. For howſoeuer they may pretend that the Councell proceeding according to former Popes declarations cannot erre, yet becauſe they teach that the certaintie & ſenſe of former Decrees depends vpon the iudgement of the preſent Pope, I cannot ſee what meanes may, according to their opinion, be affoorded for the triall of the Popes doctrine, if he ſhould chance to erre.
                     
                     
                        
                        The ſeuenth Gradation.
                        SEauenthly, graunt for the meanes that the Church neuer neede to paſſe verdict vpon the Popes doctrine, yet is it not agreed vpon by them for the See, whether the Popedome bee neceſſarily vnited to the See of Rome, ſo that the word Roman for ought they know aſſuredly, is not conuertible with Catholike, but that he which brags he is a Roman Catholike to day, may, if the Pope ſhould chance to die, prooue a Vid. Bellar. lib. 1. de Sacram. in Gen. c. 27. Geneua Catholike tomorrow.
                        1. For Dom. a Soto in 4. ſent. diſt. 24. 
                           Dominicus a Soto vpon the fourth of the Senten. ſaith, that the Apoſtolicall ſeate and power of vniuerſall Biſhop is annext to the Biſhoprick of Rome onely jure Eccleſiaſtico, that is, not by the Law of God, but by the Churches conſtitution, ſo that by the authoritie of the Church, a Biſhop of another See may be choſen Pope. And Bellar. lib. 2. de Rom. Pont. c. 12. & lib. 4. c. 4. Quod non ſit omnino de fide, a Romana Eccleſia nō poſſe ſeparari Apoſtolicam ſedem, patet, quia neque Scriptura, neque Traditio habet ſedem Apoſtolicam ita fixam eſſe Romae, vt inde auferri non poſſit. 
                           Bellarmine graunts, that it is no matter of faith, that the Apoſtolicall ſeate may not bee ſeparated from the Church of Rome, foraſmuch as neither Scripture nor Tradition doe auouch it.
                        2. But Canus lib. 6. loc. Theol. c. 4, 5. & 6. Dried. lib. 4. de varijs dogmat. c. 4. part. 3. Turrecrem. lib. 2. de Eccleſ. c. 40. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 38. 
                           Canus, Driedo, Turrecremata, and Gregorie de Valentia, doe hold the contrarie, that the Biſhop of Rome is Peters ſucceſſor, not onely by the conſtitution of the Church, but alſo by the inſtitution of Chriſt, though Valentia confeſſeth, varias hac de re doctorum ſententias, that the opinions of the Doctors be diuers in this point.
                     
                     
                        
                        The eighth Gradation.
                        EIghtly (for I ſhall not yet leaue them) graunt for the See that the Biſhop of Rome bee the ordayned Succeſſour of Peter by the inſtitution of Chriſt, not onely in the Popedome, but alſo in the particular See of Rome, yet is it not certayne for the particular perſon of this or any preſent Pope, whether hee bee the true and lawfull Biſhop of Rome or no?
                        1. For although Valent. ib. §. 39. At
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ipſe mihi perſuadeo nunquam futurum, vt incapax eligatur, Deo id prohibente. Sed quia graues etiam doctores eiuſmodi caſum tanquam poſſibilem admittunt, &c. 
                           Gregorie de Valentia doth thinke that Gods prouidence will alwayes ſecure the Church of a lawfull Pope. 2. Yet hee confeſſeth that graue Doctors doe admit the caſe as poſſible, and this according to them, may fall out diuers wayes.
                        Firſt, if the Pope be promoted by Simonie, and that this is not impoſſible, Aquinas affirmes it, 2a. 2a. q. 100. where hee ſaith, Papa poteſt incurrere vitium Simoniae ſicut & quilibet alius, the Pope may incurre the ſinne of Simonie as well as any other. The which opinion Cajetan and others vpon Thomas doe follow, and it is moreouer a clauſe in the Bull of Pope Iulius the ſecond, That if any Pope happen to be choſen ſimoniacally, the ſame election ſhall bee actually void, although inthronization, protraction of time and adoration of the Cardinalls haue eſtabliſhed him in the See.
                        Secondly, if the perſon elected by the Cardinalls bee not of the Valent. ib. Mulier autem & infidelis Pontificatus minime ſunt capaces. maſculine gender, as not a few of their owne writers doe affirme to haue beene ſometimes experimented.
                        
                           Thirdly, Valent. ib. Praeterea idem patet, ſi errore eligeretur infidelis quiſpiam non baptizatus. & Bellar. lib. 1. de Sacram. cap. 28. if the partie choſen Pope were neuer truly baptized, and of this by their Tenents one can neuer be aſſured. For the Papiſts doe make the Sacraments to depend vpon the intention of the Prieſts, and therefore Bellarmine in his third booke de Iustif. and eight chapter, diſputing againſt Ambroſius Catharinus concerning the certaintie of grace, Ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               poteſt quis eſſe certus certitudine fidei, ſe percipere verum ſacramentum, cum ſacramentum ſine intentione ministri non conficiatur, & intentionem alterius nemo videre poteſt; that is, no man can by the certaintie of Faith be aſſured that he receiues the true Sacrament, ſeeing that the Sacrament without the intention of the Prieſt is not made, and the intention of another doth no man ſee. To theſe Turrecrem. lib. 4. p. 2. c. 20. 
                           Ioh. de Turrecremata addes, that the Pope is depoſed by God euen for mentall hereſie, which we know, is a thing not liable to the ſenſe.
                        Whereby wee may behold into what laborinths the Papiſts doe caſt themſelues by proiecting their faith vpon the Pope. For if he haue intruded vpon the Papacie by Simonie, or be of the wrong Sexe, or that the Prieſt at his baptiſme owing his parents a ſpight, or his wits being a wooll-gathering, intended not to baptiſe him; nay, put the caſe that hee bee rightly baptiſed, yet if the Biſhop which conferred prieſt-hood vpon him, or thoſe which baptiſed or ordayned that Biſhop miſſed their right intention, or farther, if any of his predeceſſor Popes which either made Lawes for the forme and manner of electing the Pope, or created ſo many Cardinalls as might make a major or excluſiue part,

in the election of ſucceeding Popes, fayled by reaſon of the forenamed Caſes, or laſtly (according to Turrecremata) if being truly elected, hee chance to fall into mentall hereſie, then is not ſuch a man by their owne poſitions true Biſhop of Rome, that ſuppoſed Biſhop of Rome not lawfull Pope, that Pope hath not the ſpirit of infallibilitie annext vnto him, and yet this may happen Vid. ſupplicat. ad Imperat. Reg. Princip. &c. (nay, by ſome it is proued to haue happened) and yet the Church neuer the wiſer.
                        For howſoeuer Franciſc. Long. ſumm. Concil. praelud. 10. aſſert. 2. 
                           Franciſcus Longus in his late Summes of the Councells, finding that their faith muſt needes ſtagger which depend altogether vpon the infallibilitie of the Pope, if it may not bee certainly knowne who is true and lawfull Pope, makes this aſſertion, De fide eſt dicere, hunc numero Papam viz. Gregorium XV. eſſe verum ſucceſſorem Petri & Chriſti Vicarium, that is, That it is an article of faith, to ſay, this very Pope in particular, to wit, Gregorie the fifteenth, is the true ſucceſſor of Peter and Vicar of Chriſt; yet by his leaue, I ſhould hardly graunt that priuiledge to a priuateman, which is not due to a Generall Councell, and the Pope himſelfe; or thinke it equitie to impoſe any thing vpon men to be beleeued as an article of faith, concerning which the Doctors of the Church, and the Biſhops of Rome themſelues may erre and be deceiued.
                        Now, who knowes not, that Pope Stephen the ſixt in a Councell of Biſhops, did diſanull the acts of Formoſus his predeceſſor, and commanded thoſe which had beene ordayned by him, to bee reordayned againe, as not acknowledging him for a true

and lawfull Pope. Againe, how Iohn the ninth diſanulled the acts of Stephen the ſixth, and approued the acts of Formoſus; yet farther, how Sergius the third re-eſtabliſhed the acts of Stephen, and made void the acts of Formoſus, and by conſequence thoſe of Iohn, both which notwithſtanding, all ſucceeding Popes haue receiued as right and vndoubted ſucceſſors of Peter in the Papall Throne. Nor doth Bellar. lib. 4 de Rom. Pont c. 12. Reſpondeo erraſſe Stephanum 6. & Sergium 3. ſed in quaeſtione facti non iuris. Et paulo poſt, Praecipua ergo quaeſtio fuit, an Formoſus fuiſſet Papa legitimus, necne? in qualibus quaeſtionibus non negamus poſſe errare Pontifices, & de facto erraſſe Stephanum & Sergium. 
                           Bellarmine otherwiſe defend theſe errors of the Popes, then by ſaying that they erred, in quaeſtione facti non iuris, in a queſtion of fact not of right, and concludes, that the chiefe queſtion was, whether Formoſus were lawfull Pope or no, in which kinde of queſtions (ſaith he) we denie not but the Popes may erre, and that Stephen & Sergius erred indeed. In like manner, did not Iohn the three and twentieth ſit fiue yeeres as Biſhop of Rome, and moreouer in that ranke which is eſteemed by the Ieſuites to bee the right Line; yet Bellar. lib. 4. de Rom. Pont. c. 14. 
                           Bellarmine tells vs, that hee was not a certaine and vndoubted Pope, and therefore not needfull to bee defended, conſidering that there were three at the ſame time; neither could it be eaſily decided amongſt ſo many learned Patrones which each of them had, whether of them was legitimate. And if it bee true which the Bellar. lib. 2. de Concil. c. 19. Cardinall tells vs in another place, diſputing the depoſing of this Iohn, that dubius Papa habetur pro non Papa; a doubtfull Pope is held for no Pope, ſurely of whoſe election wee may any way doubt, his deciſions wee may iuſtly feare, and the validitie of his pardons prouidently ſuſpect.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        SECT. IIII. The palpable abuſe offered the Laytie, by obtruding the Church vnto them as their ſoueraigne Iudge, diſplayed by the preſent practice of the Ieſuites.
                     
                        NOw by this which hath beene alreadie ſpoken touching the Church and the Pope, may appeare what ſophiſtrie is currant in the Romiſh pale, and what legerdemayne, is practiſed in popiſh markets, whileſt one thing is ſhewed and another ſold, the Title of the Church being vſed but as a clowd, wherein they carrie poore people, whileſt the myſterie of iniquitie more couertly workes; which being reuealed, it will appeare that a lay-papiſt (whoſe faith is lapt vp in the implicite beliefe of the Church) being defined, will proue no better, than a creature that beleeues hee knowes not what, and credits it hee knowes not why, reſembling ſomewhat the patient which receiued this precipe of his phyſician.
                     
                        
                           If thou wouldeſt bee cured of I know not what diſeaſe, thou muſt take an herbe I know not what, put it I know not where, and thou ſhalt bee cured I know not when. Si vis ſanari de morbo neſcio quali,
                        Accipias herbam, qualem ſed neſcio vel quam,
                        Ponas neſcio vbi, ſanabere neſcio quande.
                     
                     To make this the more palpable and euident to the ſenſe, I will wade a little into the practicall part of this doctrine, and ſhew to what miſerable ſhifts the learnedſt of the Romiſh ſide are driuen, by vndertaking the defence of the Churches preeminency in matters of faith.
                     Imagine therefore, a poore papiſt thus tormented in his conſcience. I am (ſaith hee) enioyned by

my Confeſſor, to ground my faith and beliefe vpon the authoritie of the Church. Now, woe is mee, what ſhall I doe? Our Maſters which ſhould bee lights to the blinde, and informe vs, which is that Church whereon we are to depend, they are diſtracted in their opinions, one ſaith a Generall Councell, although without the Pope, another a Councell and the Pope together, a third that it is the Pope alone, and ſurely there is but one Truth, beſides which can there poſſibly be (in ſo important a buſineſſe as this is) hope of ſaluation? Yes (will Bellar. lib. 4. de Rom. Pont. c. 2. Non eſt haeretica, nam adhuc videmus ab Eccleſia tollerari, qui illam ſententiam ſequuntur &c. 
                        Bellarmine reſolue you) for though it be hereticall not to beleeue the Church in groſſe, yet is it not hereticall to miſtake the acception of the Church, which is in effect to beleeue a falſe Church; for examples ſake, To take a Generall Councell without the Pope for the infallible Church, inaſmuch as wee ſee (ſaith hee) theſe tolerated by the Church which defend that opinion, although it be erronious and next to hereſie. But alas (replyes the poore man) now that I am come ſo farre by your inſtructions, as to know that the Pope is the Church, which is a great deale farther than many of my ghoſtly Fathers are come, yet becauſe I perceiue a diſſention amongſt you, and that you which hold this Tenent are not agreed, when and in what matters, it is that the Pope cannot erre, I finde my conſcience but a little eaſed by your reſolution. No matter for the Popes erring or not erring, will Bellarmine anſwer, for all Catholikes 
                        Bellar. ibid. Deinde omnes Catholici conueniunt, Pontificem ſolum, ſiue errare poſſit, ſiue nō, eſſe ab omnibus fidelibus obedienter audiendum. (ſaith he) doe accord in this, that the Pope, whether he may erre or no, is yet to be heard with all obedience. But what comfort (will the man obiect) can this be

to me, that liue haply in England or Spaine, farre remote from Rome; It is the preſent Pope (you ſay) vpon whoſe iudgement I am to depend, whom I am neither able to heare, neither doth your Bellar. lib. 3. de verbo Dei, c. 5. § Si etiam intelligamus, &c. Cardinalſhip thinke it neceſſarie that hee ſhould be a preacher to be heard. Tuſh (ſaith Bellar. ibid. Nee enim poteſt Pontifex omnibus ho. minibus concionari, nec eſt opus, cum ſint in ſingulis Eccleſijs qui concionentur. 
                        Bellarmine) it is not materiall that you heare the Pope, when as there bee Preachers in your owne Pariſh who may informe you. But (faith the man) there is no promiſe made, that whatſoeuer my Parochian teaches mee, is forth with the true and vndoubted doctrine of the Church, conſidering that he may erre and be deceiued. Nor haue you (will Bellarmine tell you) more aſſurance of the Popes word, if you and your whole Nation ſhould trauaile to Rome to heare his reſolution, Bellar. lib. 4. de Rom. Pont. c. 14. §. Quadrageſſimus eſt Innocentius octauus. 
                        For aſmuch as when he teacheth not the whole Church, he is in as much poſsibilitie to erre, as Innocent the eighth was, when hee permitted the Norwegians to celebrate the Euchariſt without wine. What then is to bee done? Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. quaeſt. 2. punct. 5. Nam vt infra quaeſt. 11. docebimus, quando
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            poteſt cōtingere, vt quis teneatur conari ad eliciendum aſſenſum fidei ſupernaturalé, circaid cuius contrarium reipſa eſt verum. Vt ſi, Verbi gratia, Synodus Epiſcopalis, aut etiam communis conſenſus plurium Theologorum ſtatueret aliquam propoſitionem eſſe propoſitam ab Eccleſia vt de fide, atque adeo iuberetur quis praebere illi propoſitioni aſſenſum fidei; tunc talis teneretur conari ad eliciendum talem aſſenſum ex praecepto fidei, & tamen cum Synodus Epiſcopalis & plures etiam Theologi errare poſſint, poſſet contingere &c. 
                        Greg. de Valentia in his third tome vpon Thom. 1. Diſp. makes this anſwer, That if you finde but an Epiſcopall Synod, or the conſent of diuers Diuines onely affirming ſuch a doctrine to be the ſentence of the Church, you are bound to beleeue it, though it bee a lye. But is it not a ſinne (will the man reply) to beleeue a lye. Gab. lib. 3. diſt. 25. q. vn. art. 1. Si quis ipſe ſimplex & in eruditus audire praelatum ſuum praedicare aliquid contrarium fidei,—putans hoc a Praelato ſuo ſic praedicatum eſſe creditum ab Eccleſia, talis non ſolum non peccaret, ſed etiam ſic credendo falſum, meretur. 
                        Gabriel Biel, and

                        Tollet. de inſtruct. Sacerdot. lib. 4. cap. 3 §. 7. Rurſus ſi ruſticus circa articulos credat ſuo Epiſcopo proponen. ti aliquod dogma haereticum, meretur in cre dendo, licet ſit error; quia tenetur credere, donec ei conſtet eſſe contra Eccleſiam. 
                        Tolet the Ieſuite (to the end that we may ſee how both ancient and later Papiſts haue beene forced to the ſame ſtreights) will anſwere, that if one heare his Biſhop or Prelate preach contrarie to the Faith, thinking that it is ſo beleeued by the Church, ſuch an one ſhall not onely not ſinne, but alſo in beleeuing that falſhood, ſhall commit an act meritorious.
                     
                     It is no maruaile then if the Romaniſts boaſt ſo much of Viſibilitie, conſidering that their faith is built fiue ſtories high; the Layties beliefe vpon his Paſtor, the Paſtors vpon the common opinion of neighbour Diuines, or an Epiſcopall Synod, that Epiſcopall Synod vpon the Church, the Bell. lib. 3. de Verbo Dei. c. 10. §. Reſpondeo ad hoc argumentum. Church vpon the Pope; and the Pope vpon Chriſt. Wherin how skilfull Artizans ſoeuer the Ieſuites are in other Trades, I know not, ſurely in architecture they ſhew but little skil, hauing not prouided any thing to ſupply the roome of the Pope in the vacancie, ſo that for a yeare, and more, ſometimes, the vpper ſtories muſt like Eſops Towers bee ſeene to hang in the aire For howſoeuer Vid. Bell. lib. 2. de concil. cap. 14. thoſe which hold the ſupreame authoritie, to bee ſubiectiuely and formally in the Church, and inſtrumentally onely in the Pope, may ſupply the place of the dead Pope with a generall Councell, yet the Ieſuites and others which with open cry, now adayes condemne this opinion as falſe and next to hereſie, may be challenged of more folly, then Matth. 7. 26. hee which built his houſe vpon the ſand.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        SECT. V. The obiections out of the Scriptures touching the Churches infallibilitie, anſwered.
                     
                        WHat now remaines, but that we anſwer thoſe arguments, wheron our aduerſaries ſeem to ground this ſuppoſed power of the Church, in challenging abſolute beliefe to what ſhe affirmes.
                     The firſt rank of arguments containes ſuch places of Scripture as concerne the priuiledges of the Church in generall. As 1. Tim. 3. 15. That thou
                        Rhem. Tranſl. 
                        mayeſt know how thou oughtest to conuerſe in the houſe of God, which is the Church of the liuing God, the piller and ground of truth. I anſwer that the Church here mention'd is not that Church, which the Papiſts make to be the Iudge of Controuerſies, that is, either the Church repreſentatiue, which is a generall Councell, or the Church virtuall, which they imagine to be the Pope; but the Church eſſentiall, in whole or part, which is the congregation of all faith full beleeuers and therefore not to the purpoſe. For the Papiſts themſelues doe diſcharge it in this ſenſe from the office of defining, becauſe in part it is fallible, and in whole it is avaſt bodie, compoſed of parts farre aſunder, and wanting a ſpeaker. And that the Church in this place is ſo taken, beſides the confeſſion of Bell. lib. 3. de Eccleſ. cap. 14. Probatur haec veritas, primo de Eccleſia vniuerſa, vt continet omnes fideles, ac primum ex illo 1. Tim. 3. Eccle ſia Dei eſt collumna & firmamentum veritatis. 
                        Bellarmine who acknowledgeth it; the very circumſtances of the place doe carrie it; for Saint Paul tells Timothie here, that hee wrote this Epiſtle vnto him, that hee might know how to conuerſe or behaue himſelfe in the houſe of God, which hee expounding to bee the Church, it muſt

on neceſſitie bee conſtrued of the Church eſſentiall as conſiſting of the faithfull, in groſſe, vnleſſe one ſhould be ſo abſurd, as to ſay that Saint Paul deliuered directions vnto Timothie in this Epiſtle, how he ſhould conuerſe in a generall Councell, whereof there were none in three hundred yeeres after, or elſe (which is more abſurd) how he ſhould behaue himſelfe diſcreetly and with circumſpection in the Popes belly.
                     So Matth. 18. 16. And if hee will not heare them,
                        Rhem. Tranſl. 
                        tell the Church; and if hee will not heare the Church, let him bee to thee, as the Heathen and the Publican. I anſwer, that here be three degrees of admonitions and reproofes ſet downe by our Sauiour, in caſe that one brother treſpaſſe againſt another.  Viz.

                           Firſt corripiendus amore, he is to bee reproued with loue, verſe 15. goe and rebuke him betweene thee and him alone.
                           
                           Secondly corripiendus pudore, hee is to bee reproued with ſhame, verſe 16. if hee will not heare thee, ioyne with thee beſides one or two.
                           
                           Thirdly corripiendus timore, he is to be reproued with feare, verſe 17. if hee will not heare them, tell the Church.
                           
                        
                     
                     So that I willingly grant this honour to haue beene here giuen by our Sauiour, to his Church, that the laſt reſort and appeale vpon earth ſhould be made vnto it; but you muſt remember withall how farre this preſent caſe will beſteed you. For he ſaith not abſolutely, whatſoeuer thy brother ſhall ſay or beleeue, but if thy brother ſhall offend or treſpaſſe againſt thee, which (make the moſt wee can) Bell. lib. 3. de Verbo Dei. cap 5. Obſeruandum hic quidem dominum loqui de iniurijs quas vnus ab aliquo paitur. is but

                        quaeſtio facti non iuris, that is, a matter of fact, not of faith; it is onely touching ſome perſonall and perticular iniuries, in deciding whereof, the Papiſts themſelues denie not, but the Church may erre. See aboue, Grad. 4.
                     So Matth. 23. 2. Vpon the chaire of Moſes haue
                        Rhem. Tranſl. 
                        ſitten the Scribes and the Phariſees, all things therfore whatſoeuer they ſhall ſay vnto you, obſerue ye and doe ye. I anſwere, that theſe words whatſoeuer they ſhall ſay vnto you, are either to be taken conditionally, that is, with this prouiſe; that they ſpeake the truth, otherwiſe not and then aduantageth it nothing the Papiſts cauſe; or elſe abſolutely, and then our Sauiour ſhould contradict himſelfe, who reproued the errors of the Scribes and Phariſes, Math. 5. and forewarned his Diſciples to take heed of their leauen. Matth. 16. 6. Beſides, all precepts concerne the time preſent or future, now Bell. lib. 2. de concil. c. 8. Reſpondemus Pontifices & Concilia Iudaeorum, non potuiſſe errare antequam Chriſtus veniret, ſed eo praeſente potuiſſe. Sic. lib. 3. de Ecclecap. 17. §. ad tertium. 
                        Bellarmine himſelfe confeſſeth that the high-Prieſts Councels of the Iewes were at this preſent, lyable to errour, nay farther, that it was propheſied that they ſhould erre and denie Chriſt. Iſa. 6. Dan. 9. and therefore this could bee no ſuch abſolute precept of obedience, as the Papiſts imagine, eſpecialy to thoſe which now liued, when (by their owne acknowledgement) ſuch as poſſeſt the Chaire of Moſes might erre and be deceiued.
                     Other places are alleadged by our Aduerſaries, which, becauſe they run rather in the plurall number with vos, you, arguing a democracie or ariſtocracie in the Church, then with te, thee, implying a Monarchie, (which to maintaine the Ieſuites bend all their forces) and for that they are to bee vnderſtood

primarily, totally, and abſolutely of the Apoſtles, ſecondarily, partially, and conditionally only of other paſtors, as Iohn 16. The ſpirit of truth ſhall leade you into all truth, and Luke 10. Hee which heareth you, heareth mee, therefore the weight and load is laid vpon ſuch particular promiſes, as our Sauiour is thought to haue made vnto Peter in the Goſpells. Where, to omit that of our Sauiour to Peter, Luke 22. 32. I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith faile not for which, the Cardinall cannot produce one ancient father (Popes excepted) to proue that our Sauiour intended therein any ſpeciall benefit to Peters Succeſſors, ſaue onely to his perſonall faith; as alſo that which he ſpake vnto him, Iohn. 21. 15▪. Feede my Sheepe, which of a precept, they would willingly change into a promiſe, contrarie to the rules of Grammer or Logicke, as if Saint Peter had made Popes of the inferior paſtors of the Church and their Succeſſors, when he bad them in like manner, Feede the flocke of Chriſt, foraſmuch as Chriſts word is the ſame in his owne mouth, and in the mouthes of his Apoſtles. The maine foundation whereon at length they pitch, is that of our Sauiours to Saint Peter, Matth. 16. 18. And I ſay vnto thee, that thou art Peter; and vpon this rocke will I build my Church and the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt it. In which words, they let not a tittle fall to the ground without admiration. Our Sauiour (ſay they) ſpeaks not as at other times, Simon thou ſonne of Ionas, this was his vulgar ſtile, he brought with him frō home, and it was of his fathers bequeathing; nor as otherwhile hee did by the ſirname impoſed by himſelfe

pronouncing it barely without an Emphaſis, onely Peter and no more; but making as it were a preface to ſome new dignitie which he purpoſed to beſtow vpon him, I ſay vnto thee, thou art Peter, as who would ſay, thou art a rocke, and vpon thee, that rock I will build my Church. To giue more colour to this interpretation, they will vs to take notice how our Sauiour ſpake not in the Greeke, but in the Syriack language, in which Cephas, the name of Peter, is the ſame in termination, ſound and ſenſe, that Peter is, implying both of them a rocke. This is a faire gloſſe if they were Maſters of Languages, and had commiſſion to ſet forth new Calepines. But firſt, how chance that the Apoſtles which were better ſeene in the Syriacke Tongue (it being their naturall dialect) than you can be, vnderſtood not this elegancie, but did afterwards quarrel about precedency, not knowing that their Maſter had before paſt his promiſe thereof vnto Saint Peter. How comes it that the Fathers pickt not out your ſenſe, who liued neerer the times of the Apoſtles, as S. Auſten, Chriſoſtom, Hilarie, Baſill, Ambroſe and others, by this rocke, vnderſtood not Peter, but either his confeſſion, or Chriſt whom hee confeſſed, ſeeing this knowledge of the Church, how by Scripture it is built vpon Peter, was as behoofull for them as for vs. But ſecondly, what if our Sauiour foreſeeing that this Rocke would be lapis offendiculi a ſtone of offence (and that ſome ſuppoſing Peter to bee it, would at the ſight thereof, no leſſe then at Gorgons head; be ſtupified and turned into ſtones) hath in the Greeke edition of Saint Matthewes Goſpell (which themſelues

deny not to be authenticall) diſtinguiſhed between the one & the other by a threefold Gramatical difference? then we cannot without contempt offered to Grammarians admit it, or at leaſt the ſirrop of blind obedience, ſwallow it downe. Now our Sauiour ſaith not, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        thou art Peter and vpon thee Peter, or 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            thou art a rock and vpon thee, that rock I will build my Church, but with a triple mutation and alteration in the conſtruction, firſt of the Perſon, thou Peter in the ſecond, and that rocke, in the third; ſecondly of the gender 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         the maſculine and 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         the feminine; thirdly of the ſenſe 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         which by the iudgement of the moſt iudicious Grecians ſignifies vſually but a ſingle ſtone and 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         which implies a Rocke; ſo that as our Sauiour in another place tels vs, that God can of ſtones raiſe vp children vnto Abraham, in like manner hee doth now by a nominall Metamorphoſis conuert a Sonne of Abraham into a ſtone, and a ſtone of his building too, yet he doth not by this Charter ſo inlarge his ſhoulders, as to ſerue for a rocke, whereon to ſupport his whole building. Say farther hee did make him a 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         a deriuatiue or denominatiue from that rocke, and ſo (as the Fathers ſometimes vſed the word) by a Metonymie terme him a miniſteriall rocke, by which he built his Church, yet did hee not by this make him the principall rock, on which he built it. Grant againe, that hee was taught, that amongſt the miniſteriall rocks, he ſhould be Petra primaria, a prime rocke, yet was he not made Petra ſolitaria, the only rock. In a word he might be admoniſhed by this name, to be Petra deuotione, a rocke for

deuotion and zeale in adhering, and yet not promiſed to bee petra virtute, a rocke for vertue in ſuſtayning. So that to conclude, there may be (as you ſee) in many things a likeneſſe betweene petrus & petra, this rocke and that ſtone, yet not ſo much, as that a reaſonable lapidarie may not diſtinguiſh them.
                  
                  
                     
                        SECT. VI. The obiection drawne from the question, how wee may know the authoritie, ſenſe, puritie and perfection of the Scriptures, handled and reſolued.
                     
                        THe laſt forme of argumentation which they vſe, is drawne from the dependancy, which (they ſay) the Scriptures haue vpon the Church, though not abſolutely in themſelues, yet in reſpect of vs & our diſcerning of them. Whence they thus argue; if the teſtimonie of the Church be not infallible, how ſhall we be reſolued in theſe three interrogatiues.
                     The firſt is touching the Scriptures authoritie, whether they be the vndoubted Word of God, or no?
                     The ſecond touching their interpretation, what their ſenſe and meaning is?
                     The third concerning their puritie and perfection, whether they be perfect and entire, or maymed and corrupted?
                     To prepare the way for the reſoluing of theſe queſtions; we are to note, that as to the right apprehenſion of an obiect by the ſenſe, ſo to the due comprehenſion of the Scriptures by the ſoule, three things are ordinarily required.

Viz.

                           1. Firſt, that the Scriptures bee an obiect capable to be apprehended and diſcerned.
                           2. Secondly, that there bee organs and faculties, as thoſe of the bodie, ſo theſe of the ſoule, fitly diſpoſed and qualified to receiue and diſcerne that obiect.
                           3. Thirdly, that there bee a medium, that is, a middle inſtrument, or meanes, to conuey, preſent, and vnite the obiect to the organ.
                        
                     
                     1. For the firſt, wee agree, that to the end, the1. Obiect. Scriptures ſhould bee an obiect capable to bee ſeene and diſcerned, it is requiſite, that they ſhould be endowed with ſuch remarkable properties and notes, as may diſtinguiſh them from other writings. For we take not to taske to teach vnreaſonable creatures as did Saint Francis, neither doe we dreame of fanaticall inſpirations, imagining that God reueales things vnto vs ouer and beſides the Word, but wee inuite you to looke vpon the markes and characters of the Word, and we ſay as Philip did to Nathaniel, Ioh. 1. Come and ſee. Now theſe properties, notes, and Characters, by which the Word of God becomes an obiect, diſtinct and capable to be knowne by vs, are Either

                           1. Outwardly accompanying it, as antiquitie, miracles, fulfilling of propheſies, teſtimonies of Martyrs, and the like, which doe onely procure attention, and prepare men to beleeue probably, and with leſſe difficultie.
                           2. Inwardly imprinted in it, as firſt, the diuine and ſpirituall matters therein contayned,

ſurpaſſing all humane wiſedom, being things which neither eye hath ſeene, nor eare hath heard, neither haue entred into the heart of man. Secondly, The forme of the ſtile, void of affectation, yet tranſcending in quickneſſe, maieſtie, and fulneſſe, the Maſter-peeces of the moſt polite and elaborat Orators. Thirdly, The ſweet harmonie and conſent of parts with parts. Laſtly, The efficacy and vertue which it hath to produce the loue of God and our Enemies, to procure the peace of our Conſciences, to alienate a man from the delights of the Fleſh and the World, to make him reioyce in afflictions, to triumph ouer Death, all which doe neceſſarily conclude the diuine authoritie of the Scriptures, ſeeing nature it ſelfe is thereby vanquiſht, and a ſtrong man cannot be bound, but by a ſtronger than himſelfe.
                        
                     
                     2. For the ſecond, wee agree, that ſeeing wee are2. Organ and Faculties. not able to diſcerne the Scriptures, by any naturall habit or inbred qualitie of our owne, For the naturall man (as the Apoſtle ſpeakes) receiueth not the things of the Spirit of God, becauſe they are fooliſhneſſe vnto him, neither can he know them, for that they are ſpiritually diſcerned, 1. Cor. 2. that therefore wee are enabled thereunto by faith, and by the inward enlightning and perſwaſion of Gods Spirit. But I neede not inſiſt vpon a point, which Bellarmine himſelfe labours ſo to proue in his 6. lib. de Grat. &
                        
                        lib. Arbit. cap. 1. 2. and is confirmed by the Tridentine Councell in the 6. Seſſ. & 3. Can.
                     
                     3. For the third, which is the medium; wee are3. Medium. not of Democritus opinion, who thought, that if the aire (which conueyes the beames of the Starres vnto vs) were away, one ſhould bee able to ſpie a piſmire in heauen, but rather with Ariſtotle, we thinke wee ſhould then ſee nothing, according to that axiome in philoſophie, In vacuo & per vacuum nulla fit viſio; wee conſeut therefore, that God hath appointed an ordinarie meanes to conuey and preſent ſuch celeſtiall obiects as the Word of God, to our view, and this ordinarie meanes wee ſay is the Church; to which wee willingly attribute theſe two ordinarie vſes in that imployment. Viz.

                           1. Firſt, of a witneſſe, teſtifying the authoritie and ſenſe of the Scriptures vnto vs, wherein for the effect, the papiſt and wee differ but this, that wee ſay it produceth a faith no more than humane; they, leſſe than diuine.
                           2. Secondly, of Gods inſtrument, by whoſe miniſterie in preaching & expounding the Scriptures, the holy Ghoſt begets a diuine Faith and other ſpirituall graces within vs.
                        
                     
                     So that the queſtion betweene vs, is not whether
                        Stat. quaeſt. 
                        we are to exclude the ordinarie miniſterie of the Church teſtifying and propounding the Scriptures vnto vs, for this, wee doe not: Nor on the other ſide, Whether the authoritie of the Church, be a ſufficient argument of it ſelfe, to produce a diuine aſſent vnto the ſame, for this the learneder ſort of them (as anon you ſhal

heare) will not affirme; But this, Whether to the end that we may by the aſsiſtance of Gods Spirit, and thoſe inward notes and properties found in the Scriptures, diſcerne the Word propounded by the Church vnto vs, to be the Word of God, infallibilitie be a requiſite condition in the Propounder? As if in playner termes one ſhould ſay, whether to the end, that I may by the viſage, geſture, and garments diſcerne my friend approaching towards me, to bee ſuch an one, it bee needfull that the aire which conueyes thoſe formes to my eye, bee neuer and at no time capable by reaſon of miſts or other accidents, to repreſent falſe and deceitfull formes? Or this, whether to the end, that a Gold-ſmith may by his touch-ſtone diſcerne a piece of gold deliuered him, to bee good and currant, it bee required, that the parties credit which ſells it him ſhould bee vnqueſtionable? This is that which in effect they affirme, and this we denie.
                     To reſolue therefore the difficultie; We graunt,Reſolut. that where the Propounder is the principall, finall, and onely cauſe, for whoſe ſake we beleeue a thing, there, if the Propounder bee liable to error and deceit, a firme and vndoubted beliefe of ſuch a thing cannot be had. As for example, if one onely Trauailer haue beene in the Indies, and brings relation by word of mouth, touching the commodities of the Countrie, and of the priuiledge of trafficke which the King thereof tenders to our countrimen, in this caſe, if the Relators credit bee ſuſpitious, it were dangerous to build vpon his report, becauſe here he is the principall and only cauſe, vpon whoſe ſole affirmation we can finally reſt. In like manner,

if two perſons onely bee preſent at the death of a friend, and depoſe, that in this or that manner he beſtowed legacies: in this caſe, if they be of doubtfull repute, it will be hard to determine poſitiuely, what is the truth, becauſe that here they are the principall and onely witneſſes, and there are no other authentike proofes whereby their depoſitions may be examined. But where the Propounder is onely the inſtrument, by whoſe meanes, wee are brought to ſee proofes of an higher nature, and by whoſe miniſterie, arguments of greater importance doe diſplay themſelues; (as if the Trauailer ſhall bring letters of Credence, vnder the Hand & Seale of the Prince confirming his Relation, or if the perſons preſent at the death of their friend, ſhall, beſides their owne teſtimonie, produce a formall will, ſubſcribed by the hands of lawfull witneſſes, and ſtrengthened by an authentike ſeale) here the poſſibilitie of erring in the Propounder, takes not away the certaintie of the things propounded by him, becauſe, in this caſe, the ſame may be ſupplyed by other more ſufficient demonſtrations, vpon which, as the principall cauſes of our beliefe, wee may finally reſt. Now to apply this to the Church. I ſay, that if the Church were the principall or onely Cauſe, for whoſe authoritie, our faith doth finally aſſent to the myſteries propounded by her, then and vpon this ſuppoſition, it were to be acknowledged, that if the Church might erre, and that her teſtimonie were not infallible, the aſſured truth of things, ſo aſſented vnto could not bee attayned by vs. But wee ſay, that in working an vndoubted aſſent vnto the myſteries

propounded and deliuered vnto vs, the Church, though it bee one cauſe, to wit, an inductiue or preparatiue, Sed non propterea vltima fidei noſtrae ratio & ſuprema cauſa haee vox & determinatio Eccleſiae eſt. Quia tota haec vox, tota haec determinatio, vna tantum cauſa fidei noſtrae eſt, eaque minus principalis. Stapleton. triplic. aduerſus Whitak. cap. 16. yet is it not the onely, no nor the principall or finall vpon which wee laſtly depend. The principall and finall cauſes, for whoſe ſake we firmely beleeue thoſe truths which the Church propounds vnto vs touching the Scriptures, are two. The one the Word of God it ſelfe with the properties, notes, and characters (aboue mentioned) imprinted in the letter thereof, which ſerue as the hand-writing and Deed of the great Maker, produced by the Church in confirmation of what ſhee vtters. The other, the inward teſtimonie of Gods Spirit, enlightning the eyes of our vnderſtanding to diſcerne the Scriptures, by thoſe notes, and perſwading vs what we diſcerne, ſtedfaſtly to beleeue, ſeruing as a ſeale which confirmes to the conſciences of the Elect, the Deed to bee lawfull and authentike.
                     The former (which is the Word it ſelfe and the notes thereof) cannot bee denyed by an ingenious Papiſt to bee there found; for howſoeuer ſome of them, by a iuſt iudgement of God for being iniurious to the Scriptures, in branding them with obſcuritie, imperfection, &c. haue beene ſo blinded by the Prince of darkneſſe, that (ſetting aſide the iudgement of the Church) no reaſon to them hath appeared, wherefore Aeſops Fables ſhould not as well as the Scriptures themſelues bee thought Canonicall, yet others, as Bellar. lib. 1. de verbo Dei, c. 2. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. Gretſerus tract. de agnoſcendis Scripturis Canonicis, cap. 4. 
                        Bellarmine, Greg. de Valentia, Gretſer, &c. doe acknowledge theſe diſtinguiſhing notes to be in their kinde argumentatiue, and to

ſhine in them, as the excellency of the Doctrine, concord, efficacie, and the like, whereby may be verified of the whole Booke of God, what the Officers ſent by the Phariſies and Prieſts, ſaid of our Sauiour, Ioh. 7. Neuer man ſpake like this man.
                     
                     Nor is the later (which is the inward teſtimonie of the Spirit) denyed by the learneder ſort of Papiſts to poſſeſſe another chief place in the diſcouerie of the Scriptures. For although in popular aire they ſeeme to vent the contrarie, yet when they are called to giue a more ſober account in writing, they vtter the ſame in effect which we doe. Staplet. lib. 5 de authoritate Script. c. 12. §. 11. Vt denique intelligas Eccleſiā quidem ratione ſui miniſterij & magiſterij a Deo accepti, facere vt credamus, formalem tamen rationem, non eſſe cur credamus, ſed Deum intus loquentem, ſuoque diuino ſpiritu omnem nobis veritatē intus teſtificantem. Staplet, ibid. §. 12. In hoc quidem judicio acquieſcit fidelis animus, ſed nō per hoc iudicium, ſed per internam diuini Spiritus gratiam. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. punct. 1. §. 7. 
                        The Church (ſaith Stapleton) by reaſon of her miniſterie and maſterſhip receiued of God, doth make vs to beleeue, but yet the formall reaſon wherefore we beleeue, is not the Church, but God ſpeaking within vs. Againe, The minde of a faithfull beleeuer (ſaith hee) doth reſt in the iudgement, but not by the iudgement of the Church, but by the inward grace of the holy Spirit. So Gregorie de Valentia; The infallible propoſition of the Church (ſaith he) is as obſcure to vs, as any other article of faith whatſoeuer, alleadging out of Canus, That if a man ſhould aske wherefore he beleeues the Trinitie, he ſhould anſwer incommodiouſly, in ſaying, becauſe the Church doth infallibly propoſe it. And Canus 
                        Can. loc. lib. 2. c. 7. &c. 8. Vltima fidei reſolutio, non fit in Eccleſiae teſtimonium, ſed in cauſam interiorem efficientem, hoc eſt, in Deum intus monentem ad credendum. giues the reaſon, Becauſe the last reſolution of faith (ſaith he) is not into the teſtimonie of the Church, but into a more inward efficient cauſe, that is, into God inwardly mouing vs to beleeue. 
                        Becan, Theol. Scholaſt. part. 2. tom. poſter. tract. 1. c. 8. q. 8. 
                        If therefore (addes Becanus) you be asked, wherefore you beleeue, that God
                        
                        reuealed ſuch a thing, and you anſwere, that you beleeue it for the authoritie of the Church; it is not the aſſent of a theologicall faith, but of ſome other faith of an inferiour ranke. Many more teſtimonies might bee added, it being a firme poſition amongſt the Schoolemen, that principles of faith, ſuch as the Scriptures are, cannot bee beleeued (as they ought to bee) but by infuſed faith. But I will conclude where: I began, with our Countriman Stapleton, becauſe he layes downe the very fundamentall reaſon vpon which this Doctrine is grounded. Staplet. lib. 8 princip. c. 20. Fides eadem eſt in reliqua tota Eccleſia, quae eſt in Prophetis, Apoſtolis, &c. 
                        There is the ſame faith (ſaith hee) in the reſt of the whole Church, which is in the Prophets, Apoſtles, and all thoſe who are immediately taught of God. They haue one and the ſame formall reaſon of their act of beleeuing. But the faith of the Apoſtles and Prophets which was by immediate reuelation, was lastly reſolued into God alone the Reuealer, and did end and rest vpon him onely, as the ſupreme and laſt cauſe of beleeuing, therefore the faith of the reſt of the whole Church, hath the ſame formall obiect.
                     
                     Theſe foundations being laid, it ſhall not be hard to ſhape diſtinct anſweres to the ſeuerall queſtions aboue propounded. To the firſt, if the teſtimonie of the Church bee not infallible, how ſhall wee vndoubtedly knowe the Scriptures to bee the Word of God?
                     I anſwere, that wee may know them to bee ſo, partly, by the light of the Word, that is, the diuine notes and characters therein imprinted, and partly by the enlightning and perſwading grace of Gods Spirit, enabling vs to ſee, and mouing vs to beleeue what wee ſee.
                     
                        Now on the contrarie, I demand of them; (If one cannot bee aſſured of the certaintie of the Scriptures propounded by the Church, vnleſſe the propoſition of the Church bee infallible) how the lay Papiſts in this Land doe know any article of faith to be infallibly true, conſidering that few or none of them euer heard the voyce of that Church, which they ſuppoſe to bee infallible; (that Church being according to their ſuppoſition, either the Pope in his chaire, or a Generall Councell) but are engaged altogether to the reports of particular Prieſts and Ieſuites, whom none will exempt from being ſubiect to error and deceit.
                     
                     2. To the ſecond queſtion, if the expoſition of the Church be not infallible, how doe we know the ſenſe and meaning of the Scriptures?
                     I anſwere, that although all places of the Scripture are not alike perſpicuous, as all are not alike neceſſarie to ſaluation, yet for the opening of the ſenſe thereof, ſo farre as is behoofefull for his Church, God is the beſt Interpreter of his owne meaning, expounding outwardly one place of the Word by another, & inwardly both opening ones eyes to diſcerne, and enclining ones heart to aſſent vnto the truth. As for thoſe which cannot ſee but with the Popes ſpectacles, and pretend the Scriptures to bee euery where throughout ſo ouerſhadowed with a miſt, that nothing preſents it ſelfe cleerly to their view, I wonder the leſſe at them, becauſe their blindneſſe is ſuch, that they cannot ſee to ſerue God, without burning Tapers and lighted Candles at noone day.
                     Now, on the other ſide I demand of them, if one

cannot know the certaine meaning and ſenſe of the Scriptures, vnleſſe the expoſition of the Church be infallible.
                     1. Wherefore hath not the Church of Rome all this while publiſht a ſet interpretation vpon any one book of the Bible, conſidering, that they ſay, it is ſo neceſſarie, and that the Popes Commentaries vpon it, haue for ſo many Marts beene expected?
                     
                     2. How a man which cannot diſcerne the ſenſe of the Scriptures in plaine places, ſhall be able to ſhun the proceſſe in infinitum, and not runne his wits out of breath, conſidering that according to the Papiſts themſelues, the voyce of the Church vttered in former Decrees, requires the expoſition of the preſent Church, meaning the Pope, and that the Churches Canons are inuol'd with no leſſe, if not more perplexeties than the Scriptures? I could inſtance in ancient Councells, as the Nicen, and aske whether the ſixth Canon, wherein theſe wordes be, Quoniam talis eſt Epiſcopo Romano conſuetudo, are to bee vnderſtood, according to the opinion of Ruffinus, or Balſamon, or Caranza, or Bellarmine, which foure are recounted by Bellarmine lib, 2. de Rom. Pont. c. 13. But becauſe I deſire to confine my ſelfe to that which is pure Roman, let's caſt the water of the Tridentine Synagogue, and ſee whether that runnes ſo cleere as they pretend. I aske therefore, firſt, touching the Canonicall bookes, the number and names whereof the Fathers therein aſſembled, were ſo carefull to ſet downe, Seſſ. 4. whether that which we call the Apocrypha. Eſther, be there canonized, as Bellarmine affirmeth, lib. 1. de verbo Dei
                        
                        c. 7. or whether that booke and thoſe which are called additaments, bee there excluded from the Canon, as Sixtus Senenſis in lib. 1. & 8. biblioth. ſanct. doth auouch? Secondly, for the intention required by the Councell in him which adminiſters the Sacrament, Seſſ. 7. I aske, whether the wordes of the Councell, be to be vnderſtood according to Catharinus opinion, in opuſc. or Bellarmines lib. 1. de Sacram. in Gen. c. 27. Thirdly, I aske how it comes to paſſe, that Priſcian and our old Grammarians will not ſerue to conſtrue the text of the Councel (if the Roman Church can endite with ſo perſpicuous a ſtile) but that Seſſ. 7. Can. 8. Opus operatum, muſt, contrarie to the Grammar rules (as Bellarmine confeſſeth, lib. 2. de Sacram. c. 1.) be vnderſtood paſſiuely. And that in the ſixth Seſſ. cap. 5. de iuſtif. it is ſaid, Neque homo ipſe nihil omninò agat, whereinVid. hiſt. Concil. Trident. lib. 2. contrarie to Grammar, are two negatiues expreſſed, which cannot bee reſolued into an affirmatiue. Fourthly, if the interpretations of the Church are ſo facile and eaſie, whether was the Councell of Trents meaning concerning Originall ſinne and Iuſtification, the ſame that Vide, Dominici a Soto, de Natura & Gratia libros tres, ad ſanctū Concilium Tridentinum. Item, Apologiam Dom. a Soto, qua Ambroſio Catharino de Certitudine gratiae reſpondet. Item, Expurgationem Ambroſ. Catharini, aduerſus Apologiam Domin. a Soto. Denique, confirmationem defenſionis Catholicorum pro poſſibili certitudine gratiae, Amb. Catharini ad Dominicum Soto. 
                        Dominicus a Soto affirms it to be, or that which Ambroſius Catharinus attributes vnto it, ſeeing both were preſent at the drawing of the Canons, both preſented books for proofe of their opinions to the Councell (which are now extant) and the Hiſt. Concil. Trident. lib. 2. Councell it ſelfe being appealed vnto, could not decide the Controuerſie, nor agree what was her owne meaning therein.
                     
                        To the third queſtion, if the tradition of the Church be not infallible, how ſhall we know, whether the Scriptures be perfect and entire, or maimed and corrupted? I anſwer, that there is a double perfection of the Scriptures, the one of integrall parts, which appertaines to the perfection of each booke, Chapter, and verſe in particular, the other of eſſentiall parts, which pertaine to the perfection of ſauing knowledge. If the queſtion be of the integrall puritie and perfection, how I know, that there be copies of the Scriptures in the world, by iudicious comparing whereof, light may bee giuen to correct all manifeſt errors and defects crept into the Text, whether by negligence or ignorance of the tranſcribers or otherwiſe, I anſwer, that I am aſſured thereof, by the promiſes of God in generall to eſtabliſh a perpetuitie of ſauing knowledge and true beliefe in his Church, and conſequently, by that firme foundation of his prouidence, which appointing the end, to witte eternall life, will neuer ſuffer the meanes conducting thereunto, either to periſh, or being diſparaged by corruptions, to become fruitleſſe. Neither doth Greg. de Valent. in Tho. tom. 3. diſp. 1. qu. 1. p. 7. §. 41. §. Reſpondeo ad hoc argumentum. & §. 43. §. Ad primumigitur. 
                        Greg de Valentia run for farther proofes to ſecure the Popes legitimacie, and ſalue the danger to which the Latine vulgar edition of the Bible is lyable by often impreſſions, then this prouidence of God. But if the queſtion be of the eſſentiall puritie and perfection of the Scriptures, how one may be aſſured, that ſo much as contaynes points neceſarie to ſaluation, is preſerued perfect and entire in them; I anſwer, that to reſolue ones ſelfe herein, he hath (beſides the generall promiſes of God, and his

neuer fayling prouidence) an experimentall knowledge, alſo ſpringing from that amplitude of comfort and conſolation, which Gods Spirit effects by the Scriptures in the hearts and conſciences of true beleeuers. For ſuch is the vnion and coherence of points neceſſarie to ſaluation on with the other, that one workes not his proper effect, where the other is not, at leaſt in ſome reaſonable and conuenient meaſure knowne and beleeued.
                     Now on the contrarie, I demaund of them, (if we cannot bee aſſured of the puritie and perfection of the Scriptures, vnleſſe the Tradition of the Church concerning it, bee infallible) how a man can euer bee reſolued thereof from the Church of Rome?
                     
                     
                        Which, firſt could neither heretofore preſerue her Latine vulgar editions of the Bible, (which ſhee preferres before the originall) from manifeſt Corruptions, as may appeare by the corrections of Origen and Hierom, 
                        Sixtus Senenſis. Bibliot. lib. 8. pag. penult. De erroribus vero quos Hieronimus in veteri tranſlatione annotauit, & recentiores in hac noua editione pariter annotarunt, ingenue fatemur & nos multos errores ab Hieronimo emendatos, in veteri traductione, & ſimiliter in hac noſtra noua editione nonnullas inueniri mendas, ſolaeciſmos, barbariſmos, hyperbata, & multa parum accomodate verſa, & minus Latine expreſſa, obſcure & ambigue interpretata, itemque nonnulla ſuperaddita, aliqua omiſſa, quaedam tranſpoſita, immutata, ac vitio Scriptorum deprauata, quae Sanctis Pagninus, Th. Caietanus, Franciſcus Forerius, & Hieronimus Oleaſtrius, viri ex Dominicano ordine eruditiſſimi interpretationibus & explanationibus ſuis indi carunt. 
                        nor at this day hath been able to Canonize any edition, without permitting faults, ſoleciſmes, Barbariſmes, Miſinterpretations, Ambiguities, Additions, Subſtractions, Tranſpoſitions, Immutations, Deprauations and the like, which are confeſt by Pagnine, Caietan, Forerius, Oleaſter, Sixtus Senenſis, 
                        Bellarm. lib. 2. de Verbo Dei. cap. 2. §. Dices ſi ita eſt. 
                        Bellarmine and others, to bee found in their neweſt and moſt approued Bibles.
                     Secondly, which diſparageth the Churches fidelitie and care, teaching that it hath loſt many bookes of the
                        
                        Old Teſtament, of which 
                        Becan theol. ſcholaſt. tom. poſt. part. 2. tract. 1. q. 7. 
                        Becanus reckons vp particularly no fewer then 18. theol. ſcholaſt. part. 2.
                     Thirdly, which actually hath loſt many articles of faith, heretofore defined & declared by it, as Valent. in Thom. tom 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 12. Poſtremo multae in Eccleſia varijs temporibus definitae ac declaratae ſunt ſenten. tiae, fidei, de quibus non ex. tet vſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            adeo expreſſa traditio. 
                        Valentia grants, Tom. 3. in Thom. diſp. 1.
                     All arguing her to bee an incompetent Miſtris of other mens purſes, which hath beene ſo negligent a guardian of her owne.
                     So then let vs caſt vp the reckoning, and ſee what ſmall aduantage the Papiſts haue of vs in theſe queſtions of the Scripture: Wee runne on thus farre together, that to a diſtinct reſolution of them, there is required the teſtimonie of the word ſpeaking outwardly to our eares, the teſtimonie of the ſpirit ſpeaking inwardly to our hearts, and the teſtimonie of the Church preparing the way by her meſſage for the other two. The combate ſtands chiefely in this, that they beleeue the meſſage, becauſe they thinke the Meſſenger cannot lye, wee beleeue the meſſage not becauſe wee thinke the Meſſenger cannot lye, but becauſe he which ſent him ſpeakes the ſame by his deede and ſeale; nay farther, comes in perſon along with him, and by a double affirmation, the one of his word, the other of his ſpirit, confirmes the Meſſengers ſaying in this particular to bee true; ſo that in fine, their luſtie brags obtayne but this iſſue, that we beleeue the man for the maſters ſake, they beleeue the maſter for the mans ſake.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        SECT. VII. The new ſleights and deuices, which the Ieſuites vſe in enforcing theſe arguments touching the Church and the Scriptures.
                     
                        BVt ſee, what the Lyons pawes can effect, they think to compaſſe by the Foxes wiles, and therefore they haue inſtilled a method of diſputing into the common people, which howſoeuer it will not hold water in the ſchooles, yet becauſe it haply paſſeth the throng in the ſtreets, it ſhall not be amiſſe to diſcouer ſome trickes and deuices of theirs in this kinde, that you may ſee how they detaine the truth in vniuſtice (as the Apoſtle ſpeakes) and that the penurie to which they are driuen, is ſuch, that now their chiefeſt warre is but defenſiue.
                     The firſt tricke of theirs is, to teach the people to require vs to proue and ſhew by euident demonſtration, the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and that to thoſe which beleeue them not. As if one ſhould ſay; Imagine that I gaue no credit to the Scriptures, how will you (which depend not finally vpon the authoritie of the Church) make it appeare by euident conuincing proofes and reaſons vnto me, that they are the Word of God? I could retort, and how will you conuince me by the authority of the Church that they are the Word of God, if firſt I beleeue them not to bee ſo; conſidering that your owne Diuines, Bel. lib. 4. de Eccleſ. cap. 3. Dicimus ergo notas Eccleſiae quas adferemus, non facere euidentiam veritatis ſimphciter—apud eos autem qui admittunt Scripturas diuinas &c: faciunt etiam euidentiam veritatis. Tametſi enim articularum fidei veritas non poteſt nobis eſſe euidens abſolute tamen poteſt eſſe euidens ex hypotheſi, id eſt, ſuppoſita veritate Scrip turarum. 
                        Bellarmine by name lib. 4. de Eccleſ. cap. 3. confeſſe, that one cannot euidently demonſtrate the true

Church by any notes, to bee the true one, but to ſuch an one as firſt beleeues and receiues the Scriptures, becauſe the notes of the Church are from thence to bee taken and deduced. But by this queſtion you may perceaue, that Poperie is a diſeaſe working vpon corrupt humours, and cannot domineere, but there, where the fleſh and humane reaſon weare the breeches. Firſt they require one to proue that by ſuch euidence as it is not capable of. For principles of faith (ſuch as the Scriptures are) are apprehended by faith, and this faith, howſoeuer it bringeth with it certaintie, yet it doth not clearneſſe, Whether you reflect vpon the matter, which are things not ſeene, Heb. 11. or the manner, it being through a glaſſe, darkely. 1. Cor. 13. Againe, that certaintie being inward, it ſerues but for the ſatisfying of ones ſelfe, not for the conuiction of others. Secondly they bid vs proue it to one, who by AriſtotlesAriſtot. 1. Eth. cap. 3. rule, in a like caſe, ſhould bee excluded from being partaker of ſo high myſteries, in that hee is not idoneus auditor, that is, one that by reaſon of vnbeliefe is not capable of the right & proper proofes, which is as much, as if one ſhould diſpute of colors with a blind man. Againſt which fopperies, Thomas Aquinas layes downe two remarkeable propoſitions. 1. part. q. 
                              •
                           . art. 8. The one, that Diuinitie is not argumentatiue, to proue her principles, but onely to proue her concluſions. The other, that againſt one which abſolutely denies her principles, and namely the Scriptures, one cannot proceed probando, but ſoluendo, that is, not by prouing the truth thereof, but by diſſoluing the reaſons brought to the contrarie.
                     
                        Their ſecond deuice is, to queſtion vs not onely how wee proue the Scriptures in generall to bee the Word of God, but alſo in ſpeciall, how wee know the Goſpell of Saint Matthew to bee the Goſpell of Saint Matthew? how we are aſſured of the ſenſe and interpretation of ſuch a particular verſe? how wee reſt ſatisfied that this or that ſyllable is correctly imprinted, or that haply not vnderſtanding Hebrew and Greeke, one may bee confident that our tranſlation accords throughout with the originall? This forme of queſtioning might indeed carry ſome credit with it, if wee either dreamed of a perfection of knowledge in this life, or conceiued a paritie of gifts in all men for the diſcerning of this Word, or an equalitie of neceſſitie in the things therein contayned. But foraſmuch as we acknowledge neither perfection nor paritie of gifts to be found here, nor laſtly an equalitie of neceſſitie in the things; to require a diſtinct anſwer to all ſuch queſtions from all men, is moſt vniuſt, and altogether beſides the purpoſe. For as touching perfection, we confeſſe with the Apoſtle, that we know but in part, and propheſie but in part, 1. Cor. 13. 9. And as for equalitie, as we aſcribe not that degree of iudgement to any one member which we doe to the whole Church, ſo we make the skill of diſcerning to differ in the members, and that in a three-fold reſpect.
                     1. Firſt, in reſpect of the grace of God enlightning vs, which is giuen vnto euery one, not equally, but according to the meaſure of the gift of Chriſt. Epheſ. 4. 7.
                     2. Secondly, in reſpect of the meanes wherewith

the holy Ghoſt cooperates, which are hearing of the Word of God preached, meditation, ſtudie, skill of tongues and the like, which are diuers in all. For we relye not (as I ſaid before) vpon ſpeciall and immediate reuelations, as the Prophets and Apoſtles did, but on the grace of God concurring with our meditations, and the vſe of the publike meanes.
                     3. Thirdly, in reſpect of the matters contayned in the Scriptures, whereof all diſplay not themſelues alike, being not all equally and alike neceſſarie to ſaluation, ſome impoſing an abſolute neceſſitie of beliefe, others onely a conditionall, that is, a preparation of minde to giue fuller credence, when it ſhall pleaſe God farther to enlighten one; as in the queſtion of the authoritie of the Scriptures, the knowing of the Inſtrument or Pen-man, whether it bee Saint Matthew or Saint Paul, is not ſimply ſo requiſite, as to know the principall Authour which is God, nor to determine punctually of the wordes ſo oblieging, as to beleeue the ſenſe; nor againe of the ſenſe of ſome places and texts as of other; all are to ſtriue vnto perfection, but as the difference is in the gifts of arte, grace, and nature, ſo ſhall the difference be in the meaſure of the knowledge of all or ſome.
                     The third trick and ſleight of theirs, which they put vpon the people in this kinde, is, that bidding them to vrge vs to proue the Scriptures to bee the Word of God, or that they are cleare and eaſie in points neceſſarie to ſaluation, and knowing that the chiefe proofes vpon which we reſt, are embowelled in the very body of the Text itſelfe; firſt, they forbid the lay people to reade the Scriptures, vnleſſe

they obtayne ſpeciall licence from the Biſhop or Inquiſitor to doe it; as appeares by the fourth rule of prohibited bookes, which is at the end of the Tridentine Councell. And the granting of theſe licences, is now againe taken away by Clement the eighth as may bee ſeene in his Index of prohibited bookes, printed at Paris by Laurentius Sonius, and cited alſo by Iuſtinianus a Prieſt of the Congregation of the Oratorie, lib. 1. de Scriptura, cap. 9. Secondly, becauſe they know that ſome people will bee itching (notwithſtanding this prohibition) to looke into the Scriptures, and to ſee whether matters bee ſo as wee affirme them to bee, therefore they crie downe our Bibles, and preſent a Bible of their owne tranſlation, which (to argue the obſcuritie of the Scriptures) they patch vp with ſuch gallimaufrie and inke-horne termes, that an ordinarie man may bee confounded with the ſtrangeneſſe of the wordes. As in the old Teſtament publiſht by the Colledge of Doway; in ſtead of Fore-skin, they put Prepuce; Gen. 17. for Paſſeouer, Phaſe; for vnleauened bread, Azims, Exod. 12. for high places, Excelſes, 2. King. 15. for the holy of holyeſt, Sancta Sanctorum, 1. Chr. 6. Nor are they leſſe ridiculous in the new Teſtament, ſet forth by the Colledge of Rhemes, where you haue theſe Engliſh wordes piping hot out of the Popes mint, Depoſitum, Exinanited, Paraſceue, Didragmes, Neophyte, Gratis, with the ſpirituals of wickedneſſe in the Celeſtials, and many more, labouring by what meanes they can (as our learned Fulke ſhewes in his Preface to that Teſtament) to ſuppreſſe the light of Truth vnder one pretence or another.
                     
                        Their fourth ſtratagem is, that after their lay diſciples haue giuen ſo loud a defiance to our Cauſe, as may make ſimple ſtanders by conceiue, ſo great a crie muſt needes carrie ſome wooll with it; (then if by chance any of the companie vndertake to anſwere them) to fetch them off againe with aduantage, by making it knowne afore-hand vnto their Pupils, that howſoeuer they may bragge, it is forbidden yet vnto a lay man vnder paine of excommunication, to diſpute of matters of faith, which conſtitution is in the Popes owne Decretals, and
                           De haereticis, cap. Quicun
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , in 6. Inhibemus quo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ne cuiquam laicae perſonae liceat publice vel priuatim de fide Catholica diſputare, Qui vero contra fecerit, excō
                           municationis laqueo innodetur. Eman. Sa, Aphoriſm. voce, fides, §. 3. Prohibitum laico ſub excommunicationis ferenda paena, diſputare de fide, cap. 1. lib. 6. de haeret. quam prohibitionem ſi ſciens contra faciat, peccabit mortaliter. 
                        Emanuel Sa hath it in his Aphoriſmes, voce, fides. By which meanes, they both barre vs, after iuſt prouocation, to informe and ſatisfie their adherents, and with all cheriſh preſumption in their followers, as not being ſilenced by the weakneſſe of their cauſe, but by the command of their Superiors.
                     Their fifth deuice is, that if notwithſtanding the prohibition to diſpute, aboue mentioned, ſome of their lay Auditors ſhould be ſo hardie as to venture a skirmiſh, then to diuert them from reaſoning out of the Scriptures, leaſt the light thereof ſhould ſome manner of way or other diſplay it ſelfe, they buſie their heads with queſtions aboue their capacitie, as where was our Church before Luther, what the expoſition of the Doctors in all Ages, what the Doctrine of the Fathers, Councells, and Schoolemen? which is the common Theame of this Age; hoping that either a few old wiues fables or fragments of antiquitie, ſhall ſerue to puffe vp their men with conceit of victorie; where they finde not equall opponents; or where they doe, yet they ſhall not abate

thereby any whit of their courage, as being for want of artes and languages, vnable to ſee the point of the weapon which is darted at them, I meane the truth of thoſe things which are alleaged.
                     Their ſixt deuice is, that if any of their laytie, notwithſtanding thoſe prohibitions and this diuerſion, will preſume ſo farre vpon the indulgencie of their ghoſtly Fathers, as to hazard a diſpute out of the Bible, yet to doe it with aduantage enough on their ſide, they counſell him to make no thruſts, but to lie onely vpon the ward, and therein to enioyne vs, to ſhew the articles of Faith eſtabliſhed in our Church, in iuſt ſo many wordes and ſyllables in the Scriptures and (as if grace deſtroyed nature) to forbid vs the benefit of Reaſon or Conſequences.
                     1. If we infer any thing by way of conſequence, they tell vs, that wee violate that which wee haue promiſed to the World, which is, to proue all our Aſſertions out of the pure Word of God. Whereas, according to the grand principle of Ariſt. lib. 1. Prior. Analyt. cap. 1. Logicke, De omni & de nullo, a truth deduced out of another truth, is acknowledged to bee contayned therein; for otherwiſe it could not bee drawne from thence. So that to bee in the Word of God, is to bee the Word of God. As Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 6. 
                        Gregorie de Valentia ſaith, of the more diſtinct conceptions of any obiect, that they are contayned implicitly in the more generall, as particulars are in vniuerſalls. And therefore Bellar. lib. 3. de Iuſtif. cap. 8. Non poteſt aliquid certum eſſe certitudine fidei, niſi aut immediate contineatur in verbo Dei, aut ex verbo Dei per euidentem conſequentiam deducatur. 
                        Bellarmine ſpeaking of matters of faith, makes thoſe things as well to bee knowne by certaintie of faith, which are deduced by neceſſarie conſequences from the Scriptures, as thoſe which are immediatly contayned therein.
                     
                        2. If we deduce an article from premiſes, whereof any one propoſition is not in the Bible, (though otherwiſe it be a principle of nature) as for example, that a body cannot be in two places at the ſame time, they aske how ſuch a Concluſion can bee of faith, or how wee can auerre that our articles of faith are proued out of the pure Word of God, Bellar. lib. 3. de Eccleſ. c. 15. Quod vt melius intelligatur, notandum eſt, omnem ſententiam de fide naſci vel ex duabus propoſitionibus de fide, & tunc totam cō
                           cluſionem ineuidentem eſſe, vel ex vna de fide, altera euidenti, &c. Talis eſt iſta concluſio, Iſti homines qui nunc profitentur fidem ſub Rom. Pont. ſunt Eccleſia Chriſti. conſidering that a Concluſion takes his efficacie not from one, but from both the premiſes? Which argument concludes our Aduerſaries as much (if not more) then it doth vs. For the mayneſt principle of their to wit, That thoſe which profeſſe the faith vnder the Biſhop of Rome, are the Church of Chriſt, cannot be deduced by Bellarmines logick, but ſearch made in the Court Rolls of Nature, and by borrowing an Euidence from thence to ſupply the place of one of the premiſſes. But to ſpeake more punctually, we ſay, that thoſe principles of Nature which we imploy in this kinde, are alſo vertually included in the Scriptures, though not expreſly. As hee that faith, Socrates is a man, faith alſo by conſequence that Socrates is a ſubſtance, that he is a liuing creature and that hee is reaſonable, becauſe Man contaynes all theſe things in his nature. So the Scripture ſaying that Chriſt hath a body, ſaith by conſequence, that according to his humane condition, he is finite, and being finite hath a limited and bounded exiſtencie, and therefore cannot bee in many places at the ſame inſtant. For arte in this, is grounded vpon nature, and in nature the immediate cauſe implyes the effect, the ſpecies the genus, the ſubject the properties, the whole the parts, & one contrarie remooues
                        
                        the other, ſo that theſe Maximes of Philoſophie are but dilated verities, being before contractedly contayned in the Letter, and adde not any thing to the Scriptures fulneſſe, but onely are diſplayed by the vnderſtanding facultie, as the ſpecies and formes of an obiect are by a perſpectiue glaſſe multiplyed and made more viſible.
                     3. If we preſſe them with the force and neceſſitie of our conſequence, they bid them, demand of vs, whether we cannot erre in the deducing of a Conſequence? if we ſay we cannot, then to tell vs that we oppugne a doctrine of our owne, which determineth that the Church may erre; and if wee ſay wee may, then they will them to aske vs, how wee can build an article of faith vpon a Conſequence which by our owne confeſſion is fallible. To which wee ſay, firſt, that a poſſe ad eſſe non valet argumentum, from a poſſibilitie of erring, to an actuall erring, an argument will not follow. Againe, the neceſſitie of a Conſequence depends not vpon the perſon of him which deduceth it, but vpon the intrinſecall vnion and reall affinitie betweene the termes of the Antecedent and Conſequent. But laſtly, becauſe they preſſe vs, to ſhew, how we can aſſure our ſelues that in this or that particular Conſequence we doe not erre, conſidering that there is no ſubiect wherein we do not acknowledge, that we may erre. Let me aske them againe, how any of them can aſſure themſelues that they know the meaning of the Church in any one article of faith, conſidering that there is none of them in particular (the Pope in his chaire excepted) which may not (by their owne

Tenets) miſtake a word, or miſſe-conceiue the Churches meaning. Sure if this reaſon were of force, wee ſhould for the ſame Cauſe take away all certaintie of knowledge which comes by the ſenſe, which was the error of the Academikes and Pirrhonians. For what ſenſe is there which at ſometimes by reaſon of the Medium, Organ, or Object, is not lyable to erre and be deceiued? But as Nature, which (Philoſophers ſay) is not defectiue in things neceſſarie, hath for the remedying of theſe inconueniences endowed man with reaſon, common notions and principles, whereby hee is able to iudge of the due ſite, habitude, and diſpoſition of things, ſo the God of Nature, which is alſo the God of Grace, and knowes the neceſſitie of his children, giues vnto them (beſides that portion of reaſon, common notions and principles aboue-mentioned) the ſpirit alſo of diſcretion, for the ſpirituall man iudgeth all things, 1. Cor. 2. So Saint Iohn, Theſe things haue I written vnto you, concerning them that ſeduce you, but the anointing which you haue receiued of him, teacheth you all things, 1. Ioh. 2. 26.
                     4. If the Conſequence bee ſo euident, that they cannot for ſhame denie it, then they counſell them to aske vs, where the Scripture ſaith in expreſſe termes, that whatſoeuer followeth by euident and neceſſarie conſequence from her Pages, is an article of faith. Where they hope to choake vs with an equiuocall acception of the word article. For an article of faith is ſometimes taken ſtrictly, for one of thoſe verities which ſo neerly touch the foundation of faith, that a man cannot be ſaued vnleſſe he expreſly

know and beleeue it, ſometimes largely for any Catholike truth whatſoeuer. If they take it in the former ſenſe, they fight with their owne ſhadowes, for which of our men euer ſaid, that whatſoeuer followeth from the Scriptures by euident and neceſſarie conſequence, is in ſuch manner and ſenſe an article of faith. But if they take it in the latter ſenſe, wee need not runne farre for Texts to proue that ſuch conſequences are articles of faith, and require (according to the nature of the ſubiect and euidence of the deduction) a beliefe, either explicit, or implicit of them, becauſe that concluſions, as I ſhewed before, lye hid in their principles, as a kernell in the ſhell, and that conſequences are materially in their premiſes, and being in them, are to be eſteemed part of them, and therefore he which is bound to an abſolute beliefe of the one, is bound alſo, at leaſt conditionally, that is, vpon the appearance of the euidence of the conſequence, to beleeue the other.
                     5. If wee diſpute ſyllogiſtically, they bid them tell vs, that not the Scriptures, but Ariſtotle preſcribes rules for ſyllogiſmes, and that Ariſtotles rules cannot binde the faith. As though ſyllogiſticke formes were principall cauſes of the truth of things, and not onely inſtruments, whereby the Truth which was before, and might otherwiſe by naturall Logick and the ſtrength of the common apprehenſion be perceiued, is made ſomewhat the more eaſie and apparant. For many Concluſions follow neceſſarily in regard of the matter, which are vicious in regard of the forme. Galen inuented a fourth figure

which others reiect. And therefore wee build no more vpon Ariſtotle in matters of faith, then an houſe is built vpon the Carpenters Hammer, Square or Rule, which are neither whole nor part of the building, though otherwiſe they conduce thereunto as inſtruments.
                     6. If wee ſtop their mouthes, either with manifeſt Texts of Scripture or pregnant conſequences, then they bid them demand of vs Who ſhalbe iudge? Which is a peece of Sophiſtrie beyond the Deuils,Matth. 4. 6. who being taken tardie by our Sauiour in miſſequoting places of Scripture, forgot to aske the queſtion: Who ſhalbe iudge? This cauill is ſquint-eyed, and lookes three wayes at once. If we ſay the Holy Ghost, then they vpbraid vs with flying to priuate ſpirits, and making our ſelues Iudges in our owne cauſe. If we ſay the Scriptures, they reply, that the Scriptures are not ſufficient to execute the place, being mute and wanting a voyce to declare, which (amongſt many ſenſes) is their owne; and if we ſay the Church, then they conceiue the victorie to runne on their ſide, and think we haue granted them their Concluſion. But what if we make neither the one nor the other ſitting alone, to be this Iudge, but acknowledge a Concurrency (though not equall) in all of them, and that Concurrency (though not to the enacting of the ſentence) as it is conſidered in ſe, in it ſelfe, yet to the publication of it, quoad nos, as it hath reference to vs? What then ſhall become of theſe ſequells? And ſo it is indeed. For howſoeuer we make one ſupreme Iudge in this high Court of Veritie, yet wee doe not imagine him to ſpeake

but by writing, nor that writing to bee ordinarily read and declared without an Herald. The principall Iudge, wee ſay, is God himſelfe, from whom proceedes the knowledge of all ſupernaturall truths whatſoeuer. The inſtruments, whereby hee communicates them vnto vs, are threefold; firſt, his Spirit, whereby he ſpeakes inwardly vnto vs, both enlightning vs to behold, and perſwading vs to beleeue the ſenſe and meaning of his myſteries. Yet is not this a priuate ſpirit, becauſe it reueales not ought vnto vs beſides the publicke writing, nor ordinarily without the miniſterie of the Church. For to ſpeake more clearely, a ſpirit may be termed priuate. Either

                           1. Ratione Principij, in regard of the author and efficient from whence it comes.
                           2. Ratione Subiecti, in regard of the ſubiect or perſon in which it dwells.
                           3. Ratione Medij, in regard of the meanes which it vſeth.
                        
                     
                     Now the ſpirit wherby we iudge of diuine truths, howſoeuer it may bee termed priuate, in regard of the Subiect or Perſon wherin it inhabites, hee being haply (as moſt men are) of a priuat condition; yet we allow it not to bee priuate, either in regard of the meanes which it vſeth, which are the reading of the Scriptures, publike miniſterie of the Church, Councells, Fathers, &c. or in reſpect of the Author & efficient thereof, which is the Holy Ghoſt, the common father of light and grace, at which kind of ſpirit Saint Peter ſpecially aymes, when hee ſaith, no Scripture is of priuate interpretation. 2. Pet. 1.
                     
                        The ſecond inſtrument whereby God declares his ſentence, is the Scripture; which is the only outward infallible rule whereby Controuerſies may be reſolued and decided, and is not to be accounted imperfect or vnſufficient, for this purpoſe, becauſe all men are not able to pry forth with into the meaning thereof throughout; or for that it wants vocall organs to expreſſe, which (amidſt varietie of ſenſes attributed vnto it) is his owne. For it promiſeth not to doe this, but to thoſe who are enlightned with the ſpirit, and which make right vſe of the publike meanes, as the miniſterie of the Church, reading of Authors, comparing of places, and the like; Logicians telling vs, that an inſtrument is then ſayd to be ſufficient, not when it ſerues for all vſes and in all manners whatſoeuer, but when it ſerues to ſuch an end, and in ſuch ſort applyed, as the principall efficient hath ordainedit; as a writing is then ſufficiently legeable, if thoſe which haue eyes and a will therunto, can read it, though to the blind and negligent it ſeeme otherwiſe.
                     The third inſtrument whereby God publiſheth his decrees, is the Church, and in it the Biſhops and Paſtors thereof, whether aſſembled in Councels, or otherwiſe conſidered in their ordinarie miniſterie. This holds the place of an Herald, and howſoeuer it ſtands not in equipage with the two former, yet God hath commanded vs to heare it, and promiſed that it ſhall neuer erre in fundamentall points either totally or finally;
                     So that in ſumme the totall and plenary indicature of matters of Faith, belongs to the Holy Ghoſt,

whereby the Iudge of theſe things properly taken, is he alone; the gift of his ſpirit, the Scriptures and the Church, are but partiall inſtruments of promulgation, ſeruing onely as ſeuerall trunkes and pipes, whereby his decree arriues at the eares of our vnderſtanding; yet if any ſhall compare the outward inſtruments together, the Church and the Scriptures and demand, by which of the two it is that the Holy Ghoſt ſpeakes properly; as hee is iudge of Controuerſies, and on which wee are finally to reſt for his infallible ſentence; I anſwer, not the Church, but the Scriptures. Firſt in reſpect of their dignity, becauſe the Scriptures are the immediate worke of God, dictated by his Spirit; Whereas the expoſitions of the Church proceed not immediately from God, but mediating the voice of the Scriptures. Secondly in reſpect of their certainty, for the church is ſubiect to error, the Scriptures are not. Againe the truth in regard of the Scriptures is fixt, and therefore eaſie to be there found, ſhee being alwayes lodged in the ſame bookes, but in regard of the Church it is Ambulatorie, and therefore needes more ſearch to diſcouer it there, as not being entayled either to chaire, place or perſon. Thirdly in reſpect of the order and manner of knowing them, for howſoeuer by a confuſed knowledge, the Church may bee notior Scripturis, knowen better then the Scriptures, andbefore them, yet according to a diſtinct knowledge, are the Scriptures notiores Eccleſia, knowne better and ſooner then the Church; for the true Scriptures, are knowne by their owne light, but the true Church, is not knowne but by the light of the Scriptures.
                     
                        The conceit, that the Church muſt be accompanied with infallibilitie, if to no other end, yet to make a finall end of Controuerſies vpon earth, is ridiculous; for if they ſuppoſe a finall end of Controuerſies amongſt all men, whatſoeuer, firſt, they ſuppoſe that which ſhall neuer be whileſt the Church is militant vpon earth, for the Apoſtle tells vs, that there muſt be hereſies. 1. Cor. 11. Secondly, they preſent a meanes vncompetent to compaſſe that which they deſigne, by naming the Church of Rome, to that office; both in that ſhe is a partie, and hath not as yet cleared her title to that dignitie, and in that infallibilitie in the Iudge is not ſufficient to compoſe differences in ſupernaturall matters, without grace in the hearer, which is no coyne, that comes out of the Popes treaſurie, nor hear be that growes in his Garden, but raines from heauen where and what meaſure God pleaſeth. On the other ſide, if more particularlie, they require an end of Controuerſies amongſt thoſe whom God hath elected, and that ſo farre as is neceſſarie for the ſaluation of their ſoules, it is needleſſe to attribute infallibilitie to the Church, for the ſeruing of this Cure; becauſe to them, God ſupplyes the infallible aſſurance of his truth by meanes more excellent and agreeable to the nature of his ſpirituall Kingdome, to wit, by his Wiſedome, in furniſhing them with a rule, both able to bee knowne by its notes and characters, and alſo ſufficient to decide all neceſſarie queſtions that may at any time be incident; by his Grace enabling them to ſee the truth and demonſtrating the certaintie thereof to their conſciences, and by his Prouidence raiſing vp faithfull

Paſtors in one place or other, to prepare, open and diſplay thoſe verities and deciſions to the flocke.
                     Many like cratchets to theſe, and anſwered by the ſame grounds, doe iſſue daily out of the Ieſuits warehouſe, as for example, if wee produce one place of Scripture to proue the meaning of another, they bid them call vpon vs to alleadge a third place, which ſhall ſay that this place ought to bee expounded by that, as if wee needed a Text to proue God no lyar, or that he doth not contradict himſelfe. If in diſputing vpon any ſubiect, we goe about to deſtroy their Aſſertion, they will them to preſſe vs to ſhew not onely our affirmatiues, as before, but alſo our negatiues iuſt in ſo many vowells and conſonants in the Bible, as we expreſſe them; whereas not onely conſequences drawn from thence are ſufficient for that purpoſe, but alſo this one thing, not to bee contayned in the Scriptures either directly or by conſequence, is in effect all one, as to bee no article of faith. In a word, if to theſe and the like mountebanke affronts, wee anſwer them not according to their minde, they furniſh their Schollers with premeditated ſpeeches and ſcoffes, to ſay, that they brought vs to that plunge, as to vſe theſe wordes,Vid. M. du Moulin. Ieſuite euaſions. 
                        that is to ſay, and it is ſo by conſequence, and to ſay that a Coach is alſo a conſequence, becauſe it followeth the Horſes.
                     This method of diſputing was inuented firſt byMethodo Veronica, cap. 7. 
                        Gontier a French Ieſuite; poliſht by Veronus, ſometimes one of the ſame Order; practiſed by Arnoldus the Confeſſor in moſt of his late bickerings; approued

by the Prelates of France aſſembled at Burdeaux,See the booke intituled, L'eſtabliſſement de la Congregation de la Propagation de la Foy, & de Miſſionnaires generaux de Prelats de France, pour conferer auec les Miniſters, & Preſcher aux portes de leur Temples, &c. approuee par N. S. P. le Papa & le Prelats de France. Par M. Francois Veron Predicateur de ſa M. pourles Contreuerſes. A Lion chez Claude Armand. 1624. 
                        An. 1621. as alſo at Rome and by ſundrie Vniuerſities; commended by the Pope, and the Societie newly erected at Rome by the Bull of Gregorie the fifteenth, for the Conuerſion of Heretikes, intituled, The holy congregation of the propagation of the faith; and ſo farre admired, that this Veronus, hath in imitation of that Roman ſocietie procured letters Patents for the eſtabliſhing of a French Congregation of Miſsionaries, as hee termes them, cull'd out of all Orders and Vniuerſities, who diſperſing themſelues throughout the Kingdome, ſhall after the Sermon ended, by this method alone ſo blanke the Miniſters of the Reformed ſide, that within foure or fiue yeeres he doubts not but to conuert all within that Kingdome to the Roman faith. To bee ſhort, this method hath trauailed moſt parts of Chriſtendome, being tranſlated into ſeuerall languages, and (as out-landiſh toyes cannot long want a Merchant to tranſport them hither) ſo this hath beene lately taught to ſpeake Engliſh, and applyed to the articles of our Church, as before it was to the Articles of the French reformed; wherein ſuch confidence is put, that Veronus vnder-takes to make a Cobler able thereby to put the learnedſt Miniſter of France to a non plus, though he deale ſo fauourably with him as to allow him the Geneua Bible or what tranſlation elſe, hee beſt likes, to boote. It ſeemes, a Coblers diſputations are thought good enough to beget a Colliars faith, which to effect in the cōmon people, is the Ieſuites greateſt ambition.
                     It needes not bee doubted, but that this method

may as eaſily, if not with more aduantage to vs, be retorted vpon our aduerſaries; and that it is no difficult taske to beate them with their owne weapons. But it ſhall not be amiſſe to obſerue, from theſe new inuented ſhifts of the Ieſuites, into what a ſtraight they are brought, that they dare not enter the liſts, but vpon moſt vniuſt and vnreaſonable conditions. They bid vs to demonſtrate that by ſenſible euidence and reaſon, which themſelues confeſſe cannot bee rightly apprehended without faith, which is as much as if one ſhould bid his fellow to ſee with his Noſe, or ſmell with his Eyes. They require the meaneſt of our ſide, to proue that which is not abſolutely requiſite for euery man to know. They challenge vs to ſhew, and threaten their pupils with thunder-bolts if they ſee. In a word, they are contented to venture a diſputation, prouided wee forbeare therein the vſe of Conſequences or Reaſon, as if Poperie could no longer ſubſiſt, vnleſſe the reaſonable ſoule ſhould reſigne her office, and men could bee perſwaded to turne either beaſts, madmen or fooles.
                     And hitherto haue I treated of the act of faith implyed in this article, which at the firſt appearing no bigger then a mans hand, grew at length, like Elias clowd, ſo great that it well-nigh ouer-ſhadowed2. King. 18. 44. my whole text, and I was drench'd therein, ere I could arriue at Ieſrael. But now I hope, the threatning ſtorme is ouer-paſt, and the obiect of this faith, the holy Catholike Church, like the Citie of God, diſcouers it ſelfe to your view, vpon whoſe deſcription I purpoſe (God willing) to aduenture, in that which followeth.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  Credo Eccleſiam Sanctam Catholicam. I beleeue the holy Catholike Church.
                  The ſecond Part.
                  
                     
                        SECT. I. The firſt way whereby one may know the Church to bee Catholike or Vniuerſall.
                     
                        HAuing in the former part treated of that act of Faith, which is implyed and intimated in this preſent Article, the courſe and order of the wordes, leade me vnto the obiect of that act, the Church; whoſe definitions being many, and thoſe not a little controuerſed, I ſhall content my ſelfe with that deſcription of it which is inſinuated in the

Creed, that it is a ſocietie of men profeſsing the Faith, called out of the world (for ſo doth the word Eccleſia imply) and qualified with two attributes or properties, Holineſſe and Vniuerſalitie.
                     
                     Concerning the firſt of theſe, which is Holineſſe, I purpoſe not to inſiſt long vpon it at this preſent; ſufficient it is, that it is called Holy in three reſpects. Viz.

                           1. Firſt, in reſpect of the Righteouſneſſe and Holineſſe of Chriſt imputed, which may be termed ſanctitas imputata, an imputed ſanctitie.
                           2. Secondly, in reſpect of thoſe degrees of ſanctification, wherewith it is endowed in this life, which may be termed ſanctitas inchoata, an holineſſe begun here, and conſummated in the world to come.
                           3. Thirdly, in reſpect of the rule and law by which it is directed to ſerue God with holineſſe and righteouſneſſe, all the dayes of our life, which therefore may bee termed ſanctitas imperata, an holineſſe commanded and inioyned.
                        
                     
                     The ſecond propertie of the Church, is Catholike, concerning which, two things may bee deduced out of the Creed; modus eſſendi, the manner of its ſo being, and modus cognoſcendi, the manner of knowing it to bee ſo.
                     
                        Modus eſſendi, the manner of the Church Catholikes being, cannot better bee expreſt then by the word Catholike it ſelfe. For Catholike implyes that the Chriſtian Church is no peculiar, copt and ſhut

vp within the Land of Canaan, or the Territories of Iacob; no tenure intayled to the Heires of Abraham according to the fleſh; or Leaſe expiring with the death and funerall of our Sauiour, ſuch as was the Church and Synagogue of the Iewes, but generall and vniuerſall, and that in three reſpects. Viz.

                           1. Firſt, in reſpect of place, becauſe it is diffuſed and diſperſed through all Lands and Countries, as it is written, Reuel. 5. Thou haſt redeemed vs with thy bloud, out of euery kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. Not that the Church is to be in all Prouinces of the world, ſimul & ſemel, at one and the ſame time, but as Bellarmin in his fourth booke de Eccleſia and ſeuenth chapter, gathers out of Driedo, it ſufficeth that it haue beene or hereafter bee in all Lands and Nations, at leaſt ſucceſsiuè, ſucceſſiuely one after another.
                           2. Secondly, in reſpect of the perſons, becauſe it excludes no ſort or condition of men. There is neither Iew nor Greeke, there is neither Bond nor Free, there is neither Male nor Female, for yee are all one in Chriſt Ieſus, ſaith the Apoſtle, Gal. 3.
                           3. Thirdly, in reſpect of time, becauſe it ſhall neuer ceaſe nor faile, but continue in one place or other, vntill the laſt day, according to that promiſe of our Sauiour, that hee would be with vs alwayes, euen vnto the end of the world, Matth. 28.
                        
                     
                     Thus you ſee modum eſſendi, the manner of the

Church Catholikes being, but modus cognoſcendi, the manner of knowing it, is more queſtionable; for on it depends that great queſtion of our dayes, wherein the Ieſuites ſo triumph, concerning the perpetuitie and viſibilitie of our Church in all Ages. For our better progreſſe wherein, wee are to note, that a thing may bee knowne two manner of wayes.  Viz.

                           1. The one a priori, that is, by arguments drawne from cauſes, or principles, which force an aſſent to a thing, though as yet one ſees not the truth of the ſame by experience. Thus from that principle in Philoſophie, that heauie things tend downewards to the center, I know that a plummet of lead, would fall to the center of the earth, if no thicke or groſſe body interpoſed it ſelfe, although I neuer ſaw any concluſion or practice of the fame. Thus from that principle in Diuinitie, that there is a reſurrection of the body, I beleeue that who euer lye buried in their Sepulchres, ſhall riſe againe, although mine eyes were neuer witneſſes of any ſuch reſurrection.
                           2. The other a poſteriori, that is, by arguments drawn from the effects to the cauſe, or by grounding ones knowledge and certaintie vpon the ſenſe of an experiment, as when one beleeues that the fire is hot, becauſe hee feeles it burne, or that the Sea is ſalt becauſe he taſtes it briniſh.
                        
                     
                     Both theſe haue their vſes being rightly and with

due circumſpection applyed, but they are not alwayes and in all ſubiects alike demonſtratiue, and therefore the queſtion will bee, which of them the Creed requires for the procuring of a firme beliefe and aſſent to this article of the Catholike Church.
                     
                     I muſt confeſſe, that arguments a poſteriori, that is, from teſtimonies of men, pointing out by name the Profeſſors and vpholders of any Religion in all Ages, is a great motiue and inducement to perſwade, that ſuch a Religion is Catholike, that is vniuerſall in reſpect of place, perſons, and time; and that the Church profeſſing ſuch a Religion is of the like amplitude and antiquitie. But yet this is not that modus cognoſcendi, that manner of knowing the true Church, to be Catholike, which is proper to the Creed, or by which Faith cleaues vnto it, and beleeues it, as an article of ſaluation: that manner of knowing it to be ſo, is onely a priori, by diuine principles, that is, by Gods promiſes made vnto it in the Scriptures, where wee reade, that of Chriſts Kingdome there ſhall be no end, Pſal. 2. that the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt it, Matth. 16. and that our Sauiour will continue with vs vnto the end, Math. 28. theſe are the pedigrees of Chriſts Church, by theſe it proues it ſelfe to be of an ancient ſtemme, that it had noble Progenitors: he which playes the Herald and points out the ſeuerall deſcents of her ſonnes, with their lots and portions in all Ages, he may ſomewhat illuſtrate the Church Catholike, he cannot ſtrengthen or confirme it; hee may bee a Thomas Didimus, which will not beleeue vnleſſe hee ſees, hee cannot bee any of thoſe bleſſed of
                        
                        our Sauiour, which ſee not, and yet beleeue, Ioh. 20.
                     Now that the Catholiciſme of the Church, that is, the vniuerſalitie, duration and perpetuitie thereof (ſo farre as it enters the Creed) is to bee knowne onely a priori, by the promiſes made in the Scriptures vnto it, and not a poſteriori, that is, by inſtances ſhewing the viſible Profeſſors of the ſame in all Ages, I ſhall not neede to trauaile farther then the Creed it ſelfe to make it good.
                     My firſt reaſon ſhall be drawne from the condition of the Church Catholike as it is an article of our Creed, and as we ſay, I beleeue the Catholike Church. From whence I thus argue. Whatſoeuer wee are to beleeue as an article of the Creed, the ſame muſt bee endowed with theſe foure conditions, The firſt, that the proofe of it be perfect, for otherwiſe, if it prooue but in part, it cannot ſuffice for an article of faith. The ſecond, that the ground vpon which it depends be ſome diuine and infallible principle, for otherwiſe it may create an opinion in one, but it cannot beget a faith. Thirdly, that all thoſe who are bound to beleeue it be capable of the manner of prouing it, as Gregor. de Valent. in Tho. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. punct. 7. §. 18. 
                        Valentia requires in theſe caſes. And laſtly, that it bee not the obiect of ſenſe. For Faith (ſaith the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes, chap. 11.) is the euidence of things not ſeene, and Thom. Aquin. 2•. 2•. q. 1. ſaith plainly, vt fidei obiectum ſit aliquod viſum fieri non potest, it cannot bee that the obiect of faith ſhould bee any thing ſeene. But the proofe of the vniuerſalitie of the Church which is a poſteriori, by the ſeuerall viſible Profeſſors of the ſame, firſt, is no perfect proofe, for it depends vpon the teſtimonie of Doctors

whereof in ſome ages, few haue written, and thoſe which haue written, haue not written of all points, ſo that their conſent in diuers Articles is rather charitably preſumed, than certainely knowne Secondly, it is no proofe depending vpon diuine and infallible principles, but vpon the teſtimonie and credit of men, who may erre and bee deceiued. Thirdly it is not a proofe, of which all men are capeable, for it conſiſts partly of the voluminous writings of Hiſtorians, partly of the immenſe dictates of the Fathers, partly of the perplexe and inextricable ſubtilties of the Schoole-men, to which, few haue time and meanes, all not capacitie to attaine. Laſtly, by demonſtrating the vniuerſality and perpetuitie of the Church from the viſibilitie of it, it makes the Church as Catholicke to bee the obiect of the ſenſe, and ſo by conſequence makes it to bee no Article of Faith.
                     My ſecond reaſon ſhalbe drawen from the nature of the Church Catholick in it ſelfe, and the incapability of it, to be ſubiect to arguments a poſteriori, that is, of ſenſe & viſibility; it being not properly, or if properly yet not alwaies ſnfficiently viſible for this purpoſe Forthe better vnderſtāding wherof, we muſt premiſe ſome diſtinctions touching the Church Catholicke.
                     The Catholicke Church may bee conſidered either in reſpect of its.

                           1. Matter of which it is compoſed which are men.
                           2. Forme.
                           
                        
                     
                     In reſpect of its Matter, ſo it may be taken either according to its full Latitude and extent, excluding no time, no places, nor any condition of men; or in

a limited ſenſe in reſpect of its parts, and thoſe conſidered not together, but ſeuerally, with relation to their proper times and places.
                     In reſpect of its forme, ſo likewiſe it hath ſundrie conſiderations: for the forme of it, is Either

                           1. Internall, which is the miſticall vnion, which the members thereof haue with Chriſt, and through Chriſt, one with another; which vnion is wrought by faith.
                           2. Externall, which is the vniformity, the parts haue one to another in the profeſſion of the truth, and the right adminiſtration of the Sacraments; which truth and right adminiſtration, wee ſay muſt be, if not in all points whatſoeuer, yet at leaſt in all points fundamentall and neceſſarie to ſaluation.
                        
                     
                     Now to bring this home to my argument; the Church Catholick, of theſe foure wayes that it may be conſidered, is not viſible at all three wayes, and the fourth, it is not alwayes ſo clearely viſible, as that the viſibilitie ſhould ſerue for a note whereby to come to the knowledge of the vniuerſalitie and perpetuitie of the Church. It is not viſible at all. Firſt in reſpect of its matter taken in the full Latitude thereof, excluding no times, no places nor any condition of men. In which ſenſe by the Tridentine catechiſmes owne confeſſion it is taken in the Creed. For nothing is viſible which is not preſent: I may remember times paſt, or read of men abſent, or coniecture things to come, but I can ſee onely thoſe things which are preſent. Secondly it is not viſible at all, in respect of its inward forme, which is the miſticall

vnion of the members with Chriſt, and one another wrought by faith, for this is rooted in the heart, and the heart of man God onely ſeeth. Thirdly, not in reſpect of its outward forme, which (as it enters the Creed) is not onely an outward profeſſion of a Doctrine or Diſcipline, but a profeſſion of the ſame vnder the notion of truth; and that the Church in this ſenſe is inuiſible, Valent. in Thom. diſp. 
                              •
                           . q. 1. p. 7. §. 16. 
                        Gregorie de Valentia confeſſeth in his 3. Tom. vpon Thomas, and 1. diſput. and Bellarmine in his 3. booke de Eccleſ. and 15. chap. where he ſaith, In Eccleſia aliquid videri & aliquid credi; videmus eum caelum hominum, qui eſt Eccleſia, ſed quod iſle caetus ſit ipſa vera Chriſti Eccleſia non videmus ſed credimus, That is, in the Church ſomething is beleeued, and ſomething ſeene; wee ſee that companie of men which is the Church; but that this company is the true Church, wee doe not ſee it, but beleeue it.
                     Againe, the Church conſidered in her moſt fauourable ſenſe for the Papiſts, that is, according to her matter, which are men, and that againe, in a limitted acception, not as ſhee is taken in her Latitude and extent, for the whole, but in reſpect of her parts onely, with reference to their proper times and places, yet in this ſenſe, I ſay, is not ſo cleerely viſible at all times, as to haue her viſibilitie to ſerue for a note whereby to know it to be Catholicke and vniuerſal. For, Not a ſufficiens ac propria ad dignoſcendum Eccleſiam, omnino neceſſe eſt, vt ſit omni hominum generi at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            conditioni accommodatum, it is Gregorie de Valentia's own rule in the place aboue cited, q. 1. punct. 7. §. 15. that is, that for a ſufficient and proper

note to know the Church, it is neceſſarie, that the note bee fit for all ſorts and conditions of men, and that all men bee qualified and capable to diſcerne the Church by it; But the Church euen in this ſenſe, by his owne confeſſion in the 16. §. is ſometimes ſo toſt with the flouds of error, ſchiſmes and perſecutions, that to the vnskilfull, and ſuch as cannot prudently weigh the reaſons of times and circumſtances, it is hard to bee knowne; ſo that by conſequence the Viſibilitie of it is not alwaies ſo apparant vnto all ſorts of men, as to ſerue for a note or proofe of the Church as Catholicke. To make our argument yet more pregnant, let vs but aske where the Church was in the time that the Arrian hereſie ouerſpread, and hee will tell you out of Hieron▪ cont Luciferian. 
                        Hierom, that the ſhip of it was almoſt ſunke, and out of Hilar. cont. Auxent. ſub. finem. 
                        Hilarie, that it was then non in tectis, exteriori pompa querenda; ſed potius in carceribus & ſpeluncis, not to be ſought for in buildings or outward pompe, but in Priſons and Caues. Aske Turrecremata and others, where the Church was in the paſſion of our Sauiour, and they will tell you, that it remayned only in the Virgin Marie, which they ſay, is ſignified in the Church of Rome by the putting out of all the Tapers ſaue one onely in the celebration of the paſſion. Nay Bell. lib. 3. de Eccleſia. c. 17. 
                        Bellarmine though hee oppugnes this opinion of Turrecremata's the moſt hee can, yet he is contented to concurre with Abulenſ. q. 24. prolog. in Math. 
                        Abulenſis in this, that howſoeuer the Apoſtles might beleeue, yet he thinkes that the Virgin Mary onely had fidem explicitam, an explicite beliefe of Chriſts reſurrection, without which the Apoſtle ſaith, that our faith is
                        
                        vaine, we are yet in our ſinnes, 1. Cor. 15. Now, grant that the Apoſtles beleeued as well as Marie, yet if their beliefe was but implicit, their profeſſion could not be viſible, idem eſt non eſſe & non apparere, it is all one not to bee and not to appeare in this caſe. Nay, aske Bellarmine, but how the Church ſhall be in the dayes of Antichriſt, and he will anſwer in his third booke de Rom. Pont. and ſeuenth chap. Bellar. lib. 3. de Rom. Pont. cap. 7. certum eſt Antichriſti perſecutionem fore grauiſſimam, ita vt ceſſent omnes publicae religionis caeremoniae & ſacrificia. that it is certaine the perſecution then ſhall bee ſo great, that all publike ceremonies of Religion and Sacrifices ſhall ceaſe.
                     How vniuſtly then doe the Papiſts deale with vs in this queſtion, touching modum cognoſcendi; the manner of knowing the Church to bee Catholike, that is, vniuerſall and perpetuall, by tying vs to proue it a posteriori, inſtancing who were the Profeſſors, who the Paſtors, what their Names, where they abode in all Ages, as if ignorance of a thing were a Cauſe ſufficient to make it not to be, or Gods promiſe were not a gage ſtrong enough for ſuch an incredulous generation as theirs is, vnleſſe there were Regiſters to ſhew how and in what manner he kept his word. Certainly, if God in his wiſedome had thought theſe kinde of proofes neceſſarie for his Church, hee would haue erected an Office and Officers for the purpoſe; now hee hath giuen vs indeed his Royall promiſe, that it ſhall be ſo, but no promiſe hath he giuen that there ſhall be Scribes in all Ages to commit to writing the names and perſons of thoſe by whom it came to be ſo.
                     If therefore a Papiſt ſhould in this manner queſtion me, Where was your Church before Luther,
                        
or what Profeſſors of your doctrine were there, or what aſſemblies of men profeſſing the ſame faith that you doe, euer ſince the time of our Sauiour vntill this preſent? I would thus anſwere him out of the Creed. That the Church of which I am a member was before Luther, that there were aſſemblies of men profeſſing the ſame faith that I doe, and that euer ſince the time of our Sauiour vnto this preſent, I doe beleeue with the ſame faith, and vpon the ſame grounds that I beleeue the Catholike Church (becauſe I beleeue our Church of England to be a member of the Catholike) and this, I beleeue a priori, that is, for the promiſe ſake made in the Scriptures that it ſhall bee ſo. But where our Church was before Luther, or who were the Profeſſors of it euer ſince the time of our bleſſed Sauiour vntill this preſent, is no part of my Creed. There is not a ſyllable in it which inuites me to proceed that way. Doe, I ſay, I beleeue the vniuerſalitie of Chriſts Church, and muſt my foundation be ſuch onely as can breed in me but an opinion, or naked hope? doe I begin in Faith, and with the Galathians muſt I end in the fleſh, that is, with ſenſe? Doe I build with one hand a Church Catholike, which cannot bee ſeene, and with the other muſt I draw it in a Map, or point it out to the eye? Nay, ſet the Church as Catholike aſide, and conſider it but in her parts (which conſideration of it belongs not to the Creed) yet in this ſenſe alſo is the Church at ſometimes ſo obſcured, that by our Aduerſaries owne confeſſion, none but the prudent and wiſe are able to diſcerne it. The Church, is (I confeſſe) compared in the Reuelation
                        Reuel. 12.
                        
to a woman clothed with the Sunne, in Iſaiah to aIſay 2. 2. Citie built vpon an Hill; and by the Fathers to the Moone; the Sunne, the Moone, and a Hill, are things moſt eaſie to be diſcerned; yet we know, this Sunne may be obſcured with a Clowd, an Hill may be hid with a miſt, and the Moone (as Saint Auſten in his 119. Epiſt. alluding to the Church, obſerueth) hath her wanes and eclipſes in the time of her peregrination.
                  
                  
                     
                        SECT. II. The ſecond way whereby one may know the Church to be Catholike or Vniuerſall.
                     
                        IF any ſhould miſtake me, and thinke that preſſing ſo earneſtly the preeminencie of knowing the Church to be Catholike and Vniuerſall a priori, that is, from the promiſes made vnto it in the Scriptures, we doe ſuſpect our proofs a poſteriori, from the Profeſſors of our Religion in all Ages, to be either none or weake, let them know that we want not thoſe who haue ſcored out varietie of ſufficient paths to proceed this way alſo, which howſoeuer they bee not like the teſtimonie of our Sauiour to beget a faith; yet are they like the teſtimonie of the Samaritan woman to induce a credulitie.
                     For not to tyre you with large diſcourſes, which were to exceed my limits (onely for ſatisfaction herein to the reaſonable and impartiall Hearer) let

vs take along with vs theſe few conſiderations.
                     1. The firſt, that we are to distinguiſh betweene our affirmatiues, that is, ſuch things as are purely affirmed by vs, and our negatiues, ſuch as in whole or in part we denie, betweene which there is a great difference to be made in all ſciences. For, affirmatiue propoſitions onely are the proper parts and ingredients of a diſcipline, Negatiues are admitted (ſay Logicians) not ſo much by way of Precept as of Cautell and of Commentaries to vindicate the other from miſconſtruction.
                     2. The ſecond, that ſuch affirmatiues of ours as are eſtabliſhed by our Church of England, at leaſt ſuch as concerne the foundation of faith, haue beene in all ages profeſſed by the Church of Rome it ſelfe; For explication whereof, we are to obſerue, that the Popes Arithmetick which he vſeth in calculating the articles of faith, is not ſubſtraction but addition: what wee purely affirme, the Popiſh writers for the moſt part doe affirme the ſame; the difference is, that they affirme ſomewhat more then wee doe. They denie not ſo much that our affirmations are truth, as that they ſay we affirme not all the truth, wherevpon they vſually ſtile vs in their writings Negatiuiſts. For example ſake: Wee agree on both ſides, the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith, the Bookes of the old Teſtament written in Hebrew to bee Canonicall, that we are iuſtified by Faith, that God hath made two receptacles for mens ſoules after death, Heauen and Hell, that God may bee worſhipped in ſpirit without an Image, that wee are to pray vnto God by Chriſt, that there be two Sacraments, that

Chriſt is really receaued in the Lords Supper, that Chriſt made one oblation of himſelfe vpon the Croſſe for the redemption, propitiation, and ſatisfaction for the ſinnes of the whole world. In a word, where they take the Negatiue part, as in with-holding the Cup from the Laytie, forbidding the adminiſtration of the Sacraments in the vulgar tongue and reſtrayning the marriage of Prieſts, yet euen in theſe they condeſcend vnto vs for the lawfulneſſe of the things in themſelues, and in reſpect of the Law of God, and oppoſe them onely in regard of their neceſſitie and conueniencie, and for that the Church of Rome hath otherwiſe ordayned.
                     But ſee, our affirmations content them not. To the Scriptures they adde and equalize vnwritten Traditions; To the Hebrew Canon, the Apocrypha; To Faith in the act of Iuſtification, Workes; To Heauen and Hell, Purgatorie, Limbus Patrum, and Limbus Puerorum; To the worſhip of God in ſpirit, Images; To prayer to God by Chriſt, inuocation and interceſſion of Saints; To Baptiſme and the Lords Supper, fiue other Sacraments; To the realitie of Chriſt in the Sacrament, his corporall preſence; To the ſacrifice of Chriſt vpon the Croſſe, the ſacrifice in the Maſſe; with other like; and theſe we denie.
                     3. The third, that our affirmations (by the iudgement of the Church of Rome) haue beene in all ages deemed ſufficient to ſaluation, ſo that our Negatiues take not away any doctrine, the explicit beliefe whereof is abſolutely neceſſarie.
                     
                     For firſt, in regard of knowledge, the Schoolemen

hold that much leſſe is needfull to bee explicitly beleeued then what is contayned in our affirmations. For whereas wee entertayne and embrace amongſt our affirmatiue articles, not onely the doctrine of the three Creedes, but alſo ſundrie other aſſertions as may appeare by the booke of Articles and Homilies eſtabliſhed in our Church. Albert. Mag. In 3. diſt. 25. art. 6. Bonauent. ead. diſt. art. 1. q. 3. Richard. ib. art. 4. q. 1. Durand. ead. diſt. q. 1. num. 6. 
                        Albertus Magnus on the contrarie with Bonauenture, Richardus and Durandus, thinke that ſo much onely of the Creed is neceſſarie as the Church ſolemnizeth in her holidayes; Aquin. ſum. 2. 2. q. 2. art. 7. Scotus in 3. ſent. diſt. 25. q. 2. Gabriel. ib. q. vnica. art. 2. Adrian. quodlibet. 3. 
                        Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, Gabriel Biel, and Pope Adrian the ſixth, which goe farther, thinke it needfull to beleeue but the whole Creed, and Alex. ab Hal. part. 3. q. 82. memb. 3. art. 1. 
                        Alexander ab Hales which goes fartheſt, thinkes that one need but adde to the Apoſtolicall Creed the Nicen and Athanaſian, to make a compleat beleeuer, quanquam hoc nimis durum videtur, though this ſeemes too hard an impoſition, ſaith Gregorie de Valentia in his third Tom. vponl Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 2. q. 2. punct 4. Quanquam hoc nimis durum videtur—& poſtea. Satis fuerit illorum ſubſtantiam ſimpliciter credere, ſicut continetur in ſymbolo Apoſtolorum: ita videlicet vt ſenſus verborum proprius vtcun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            intelligatur, etiam non admodum propria notitia. 
                        Thom. 1. diſp. although one wade no farther therein then the proper ſenſe, and haue no great diſtinct knowledge of the matters. Nay, Bell. lib. 4. de verbo Dei, cap. 11. Quaedam in doctrina Chriſtiana tam fidei quam morum, eſſe ſimpliciter omnibus neceſſaria ad ſalutem, qualis eſt notitia articulorum ſymboli Apoſtolici, item cognitio decem praeceptorum & nonnullorum Sacramentorum; caetera non ita neceſſaria ſunt vt ſine eorum explicita notitia & fide & profeſſione, homo ſaluari non poſſit. Et poſtea. Ea quae ſunt ſimpliciter neceſſaria Apoſtolos conſueuiſle omnibus praedicare, aliorum autem non omnia omnibus, ſed quaedam omnibus, quae nimirum omnibus vtilia erant; quaedam ſolis praelatis, &c. 
                        Bellarmine is ſo confident in this point, that he ſticks not to ſay, that the Apoſtles themſelues neuer vſed to preach openly to the people (much leſſe propounded as common articles
                        
                        of faith) other things then the articles of the Apoſtles Creed, the ten Commandements, and ſome few of the Sacraments, becauſe (ſaith he) theſe are ſimply neceſſarie and profitable for all men, the reſt beſides, ſuch as that a man may be ſaued without them.
                     
                     Secondly, for practice, they grant, that one may attayne ſaluation without the performance of ſuch duties as wee refuſe to vnder-goe; For if one beleeues no more then what is written in the Scriptures, hee beleeues (as Bellarm. ib. 
                        Bellarmine confeſſeth) as much as is neceſſarie and profitable vnto all men. If one worſhips God without an Image, they denie not, but that this worſhip is acceptable; If one pray immediatly vnto Chriſt & repeates the Lords prayer, they will not ſay that his deuotion is fruitleſſe; If one performe the beſt works he can (which wee alſo require) and ſtand not vpon the point of merit, but onely vpon the mercy of God, as we doe, Bellar. lib. 5. de Iuſtif. c. 7. Propter incertitudinem propriae iuſtitiae & periculum inanis gloriae, tutiſſimum eſt, fiduciam totam in ſola Dei miſericordia & benignitate reponere. they iudge it to bee not onely profitable, but alſo commend it as moſt ſecure. Now, what would a man require more of a Chriſtian, then to beleeue well, pray well, liue well and die well?
                     The fourth conſideration is, that thoſe points of theirs whereof we hold the Negatiue, were not receaued as articles of faith, nor the contrarie iudged hereticall by the Church of Rome for many hundred yeeres after Chriſt. For that Church could not iudge vs to be enemies of her faith, or oppugners of that foundation whereon ſhee was built: which firſt, by our Aduerſaries owne confeſſions, held Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei, cap. 11. §. Nota ſecundo. 
                        all thoſe things which the Apoſtles vſed to preach openly, and which were neceſſarie and profitable for all men, to be contayned
                        
                        in the Scriptures. 2. Which vntill the time of Bellar. lib. 1. de verbo Dei, cap. 10. §. Reſpondeo B. Auguſtinum. & §. vlt. Sixtus Senenſ. biblioth. l. 8. c. 9. Dowiſts in their Preface to the old Teſtament.
                         Saint Hierome and Auſten, had not receaued the Apocrypha bookes to be Canonicall, nor in many Ages as well after as before, wanted learned writers to oppoſe their authoritie. 3. Which Bellar. lib. 2. de verb. Dei, cap. 19. 
                        ſawe not that latine vulgar edition of the Bible, which ſhee now equalizeth with the originalls, before the time of Saint Hierome, nor 
                        Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. 
                              •
                           unct. 7. §. 43. 
                        eſtabliſhed it in ſuch manner, that men might not call the wordes of it into queſtion and doubt, vntill the Councel of Trent. 4. Which Bellar. lib. 4. de Rom. Pont. c. 2. §. vlt. 
                        made not thoſe Heretikes which denie the Pope to haue infallible iudgement, 
                        Bellar. lib. 2. de Concil. c. 13 §. deinde. & cap. 17. §. Ad hunc locum. 
                        or to bee aboue a Generall Councell. 5. Wherein Roffenſis cont. aſſert. Luth. art. 18. 
                        Purgatorie for a time was not knowne, and not for a long time after reſolued which way it concerned ſaluation, 
                        Bellar. lib. 2. de Purg. cap. 1. Valent. tom. 4. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 2. §. 8. 
                        either in regard of the perſons thereby to be purged, to wit, the damned, iuſtest, or onely the middle ſort, 
                        Harding againſt Iewels Apologie, 2. part. cap. 16 diuiſ. 2. 
                        or in regard of the ends and effects which it hath, whether to ſatisfie Gods iuſtice, and to puniſh ſinne paſt, or by correcting the ſoules of the dead in ſuch wiſe as temporall paines are wont to doe, to diminiſh and take away the affections of ſinne yet remayning. 6. Wherein Durand. Antonius, Roffenſis, apud Bellar. lib. 2. de Indulg. c. 17. §. Sed vt a primo. 
                        Popiſh Indulgences for many ages were not knowne, nor 
                        Bellar. ibid. 
                        any one inſtance giuen of the Popes diſpencing them for a thouſand yeeres after Chriſt. 7. Which Suarez ex Alano. diſp. 54. ſect. 1. Fauentinus in 3. ſent. diſp. 22. c. 6. Bellar. lib. 2. de Imagin. cap. 9. §. Nicholaus lib. 2. de cultu imaginum, cap. 4. & Bellar. cap. 8. §. Ego dico tria. 
                        worſhipped not Images, nor euer approued the Image of God to be lawfully made. 8. Wherein Bellar. lib. 1. de Sanct. beat. cap. 8. § vlt. 
                        there was no Law which inioyned the worſhipping of Saints, and 
                        Bellarm. ibid. cap. 10. 
                        whereas it is
                        
                        forbidden in the Church of Rome publickely to worſhip an vncanonized Saint, 
                        Bell. ibid. c. 9 §. dices plurimi Sancti ſunt. 
                        the firſt Pope which they euer read to haue canonized a Saint was Leo. the third who liued eight hundred yeres after our Sauiour. 9. Wherin the 
                        
                           Vide Miſſam pro defunctis. vbi haec leguntur. Libera animas omnium fidelium de poenis inferni, & de profundo lacu: libera eas de ore Leonis, ne abſorbeat eas tartarus, ne cadant in obſcurum. it is not ſaid, ne maneant in obſcuro, as if they were there alreadie, but ne cadant in obſcurum, whereas to thoſe which are in purgatorie there is no feare or danger of falling into hell, they being according to the Papiſts, ſure of their ſaluation. Bell. lib. 2. de purg. cap. 4. 
                        Church admmitted no prayer into her publicke Liturgie for the releaſe of ſoules from the paines of purgatorie, but only for their acquital & abſolution at Gods tribunal, as the formes of praier for the dead expreſt in the Popiſh Lyturgie vnto this day do ſufficiently teſtify. 10. Wherein Bell. lib. 1. de cleric. cap. 18. §. At Beatus Thomas. & §. Non eſſe autem iure, &c. 
                        the marriage of Prieſts was held not to be forbidden, iure diuino, by the Law of God, but was allowed and permitted to bee practiſed. 11. Bell. lib. 2. de ſacrament. cap. 24 & Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. q. 6. p. 2. Wherein, the number of ſeuen Sacraments was not by any writer once mentioned, but where they are purpoſely handled by the Fathers, there are mentioned but two, Baptiſme, and the Lords Supper. 12. Scotus. Vid. Bell. lib. 3. de Euchariſt. c. 23. Wherein Tranſubſtantiation was neither named, nor made an article of Faith, vntill the Councell of Laterane. 13. P. Lomb. ſent. lib. 4. c. 12. & Aquin. 3. part. q. 83. art. 1. Which a thouſand yeares after Chriſt and more defined the ſacrifice in the Euchariſt, to bee onely a memoriall and repreſentation of our Sauiours ſacrifice vpon the Croſſe. 14. Which adminiſtred the Cup to the Laitie. 15. Which The Latine tongue was then vulgar. See alſo Hardings anſwer to Iewels articles. art. 3. diuiſ. 28. 
                        celebrated diuine ſeruice in the vulgar tongue which the people vnderſtood. 16. And laſtly, Wherein Valent. ſup. 
                        the Prieſts receaued not the Eucharist alone, but together with the people.
                     
                     The fift conſideration is, that if wee were for the firſt ages after our Sauiour in poſſeſsion as well of our
                        m Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 44. Albaſp. obſeruat. lib. 1. cap. 14.
                        
                        Negatiues as of our Affirmatiues, it concernes our aduerſaries to ſhew when they diſpoſſeſſed vs, and what preſcription they haue againſt vs, for by their owne law, Vid. Gloſſ. in 8. reg. iuris in fine 6. they which at the firſt are no heretickes in their beliefe, are preſumed to be none, vntill they can bee conuinced to bee ſuch, ſemel bonus ſemper praeſumitur eſſe bonus. Now becauſe it is a neceſſarie condition required by the Ieſuites to an Article of faith, that it be lawfully propounded by the Church and it is not fully reſolued amongſt our Aduerſaries themſelues, when the Church openeth her mouth to define and propound but in a generall Councell, we require of them Valent in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 24. Quaerimus enim quando Apoſtolica doctrina adulterari caeperit non per eos errores, quos fine controuerſia ſub initium Eccleſiae ſerpere caepiſſe, ſed per eam doctrinam quam hodie Romana Eccleſia profitetur; ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            id quidem tantum priuata vnius aut paucorum opinione, ſed authoritate & decretoſummorum Pontificum, & communi eius caetus conſenſu, qui vera ante Chriſti Eccleſia fuiſſet, qui
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            proinde, deficiens communiter a vera fidei doctrina, vera etiam eſſe Chriſti Eccleſia deſierit. in anſwer to Greg. de Valentia's own challenge, to ſhew when thoſe doctrines of theirs which wee denie, were in ſuch manner ratified and confirmed, and when to hold the contrarie, became damnable and hereticall? And this wee challenge them that they doe according to the lawes preſcribed by themſelues, whereof the firſt is, that the Councells alleadged by them be generall; for particular (by their owne conſents) may erre; the ſecond that thoſe generall bee receaued for lawfull, and not either reiected as was the Conſtantinopolitan againſt Photius, and the ſecond Nicen which eſtabliſhed Images, (this by that of Franckford; the other by the Lateran vnder Pope Iohn. Anno Dom. 879.) or be doubtfull, for as Bell. lib. 2. de Concil. auctorit. c. vlt. §. reſpondeo. 2. 
                        Bellarmine ſaith of the Pope that dubius Papa habetur pro non Papa, a doubtfull Pope is held for no Pope, ſo wee may by the ſame reaſon ſay of Councells, that doubtfull ones are

held for none; The third (which is Bell. lib. 2. de Concil. cap. 12. Atin Concilijs maxima pars actorum ad fidem non pertinet. Non enim ſunt de fide diſputationes quae praemittuntur, neque rationes quae adduntur, neque ea quae ad explicandum & illuſtrandum adferuntur, ſed tantum ipſa nuda decreta, & ea non omnia, ſed tantum quae proponuntur tanquam de fide—quando autem decretum proponatur tanquam de fide, facile cognoſcitur ex verbis Concilij, ſemper enim dicere ſolent, ſe explicare fidem Catholicam, vel haereticos habendos qui contrarium ſentiunt—quando autem nihil horum dicunt, non eſt certum rem eſſe de fide 
                        Bellarmines own rule) that neither ſuch diſputations as are premitted, nor ſuch reaſons as are added, nor ſuch things as are brought for explication and illuſtration ſake, but onely the naked decrees themſelues bee counted de fide, of faith, and not all thoſe neither, but ſuch onely as are propounded tanquam de fide, as it were of faith, as when they ſay that they explaine the Catholicke faith, or that they are to be counted for Heretickes which thinke the contrarie, or that they pronounce an anathema, and exclude ſuch from the Church as thinke the contrarie. For when they vſe none of theſe phraſes, it is not certaine (ſaith hee) that it is a matter of faith which they propound. This if they do it will ſoone appeare that the Church of Rome for a 1000 yeres after our Sauior, profeſſed no other Faith nor publiſhed any other beliefe in points fundamentall, either Negatiue or Affirmatiue then wee doe.
                     The fift, that after a thouſand and ſome few yeares more were expired (Tranſubſtantiation and Adoration of the Hoſt, with other dregs of Antichriſt being eſtabliſhed) though we cannot ſay that the Church of Rome was from thenceforth abſolutely our Church, yet we may boldly ſay, that our Church was from that time, vntill Luther both within the Romane Church and without it For the clearer demonſtration whereof, wee are to note, that our Church had in thoſe dayes a twofold ſubſiſtencie, the one ſeparate from the Church of Rome, the other mixt and conioyned with it.
                     
                        Separate, ſo it was in the About the yeare 1160. 
                        Albigences and Waldenſes, a people, who ſo ſoone as the Church of Rome had interpreted her ſelfe touching ſundrie of thoſe

maine points of difference betweene vs, and that a man could no longer communicate with her in the publicke worſhip of God, by reaſon of ſome Idolatrous rites and cuſtomes which ſhe had eſtabliſhed, aroſe in France, Sauoy, and the places neere adioyning, and profeſſed the ſame ſubſtantiall Negatiues and Affirmatiues which wee doe, in a ſtate ſeparate from the Church of Rome, hauing Paſtors and Congregations apart to themſelues, euen vnto this day. From theſe deſcended the Wicklefists in England, and the Huſsites in Germanie, and others in other Countries, who mauger the furie of fire and ſword maintayned the ſame doctrine that they did. And if any be deſirous to be more particularly informed touching what they held and taught, becauſe they are out of malice (as Haillan. Hiſt. Gallican. l. 10. Thuan. hiſt. ſui temp. lib. 6. ſome Popiſh writers more ingenious do teſtifie) branded with new and vnheard of opinions, (which their confeſſions, Catechiſmes and other writings to be ſeen at this preſent, do diſclayme) as were alſo the Chriſtians in the Primitiue Church by the Pagans, and wee in like manner by the Romaniſts, let the teſtimonies of their Aduerſaries themſelues which are ſtrong (
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                         as one ſpake once of Porphyryes) and admit no contradiction, cleare them. For points of doctrine therefore Reiner. cont. Waldenſes. cap. 3. 
                        Reynerius an inquiſitor againſt them, and one that liued three hundred yeeres agone, will tell you, that they beleeued all things well of God, and all the articles of which are contained in the Creed, onely the Church of Rome, they hated and blaſphemed. 
                        Seyſellus aduerſus errores & Sanctan Waidenſiū
                         
                        Claudius Seyſellus Arch-biſhop of Turin in Piedmont, who died more then an hundred yeres ſince, and (being their neighbour

laboured moſt carefully both to informe himſelfe concerning their poſitions, and alſo to confute them) layes no more to their charge then what Alphonſus a Caſtro, Prateolus, Cardinall Bellarmine, Gregorie de Valentia, Gaulterus, and other of the Roman Pale doe in their writings acknowledge, viz. that they denied.
                     
                        1. The inuocation of Saints. Bell. de cultu. ſanct. lib. 3. cap. 7.
                        2. The placing of Images in Churches or worſhipping of them. Bell. de reliq. ſanct. lib. 2. cap. 6.
                        3. Confirmation to bee a Sacrament. Caſtro. v. confirmatio.
                        
                        4. Auricular confeſſion. Caſtro. v. confeſsio.
                        
                        5. Popiſh Indulgences. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 7. q. 20. p. 2.
                        6. Purgatorie. Valent. in Thom. tom. 4. diſp. 11. q. 1. §. 6. Bell. lib. 1. de purg. cap. 2.
                        7. Maſſes for the dead. Prat. v. Waldenſes.
                        
                        8. Merits. Caſtro. v. ieiunium. Gaulterus in Cronolog. ad an. 1200.
                        9. Orders of begging Friers. Caſtro. v. Monachatus.
                        
                        10. Extreame vnction to bee a Sacrament. Caſtro. v. extrema vnctio.
                        
                        11. Exorciſmes in Baptiſme. Caſtro. v. exorciſmus Gault. cron. loc. citat.
                        
                        12. The conſecrating of Oyle, Salt, Franckincence, Boughes, &c. Caſtro. v. benedictio.
                        
                        13. Tranſubſtantiation. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Eucharist. cap. 2. Valent. tom. 4. in Thom. diſp. 6. quaeſt. 3. punct. 1. 6.
                        
                           14. The Popes ſupremacie, Bellar. in Praefat. ad lib. de Rom. Pont.
                        
                        15. Vnwritten Traditions to be the rule of faith. Seiſſel. p. 4. with many others of like nature.
                     
                     For Diſcipline I cannot tell what the neceſſitie of the times might force them to practiſe, this wee are taught by Sanders, haereſ. 150. and by Gaulterius in his Chronologie, ad an. 1200. (both Romaniſts) that they held three Orders to bee in the Church, viz. of Deacons, Prieſts, and Biſhops, nay, the Huſsites which deſcended from them, did ſo highly eſteeme of theſe Orders, that as Bellar. lib. 1. de Sacram. ca. 26. Valent. in Thom. tom. 4. diſp. 6. q. 11. p. 1. 
                        Bellarmine and Gregorie de Valentia doe acknowledge, they receiued none into the Office of Paſtors, but ſuch as were ordayned by Biſhops.
                     The ſtate of the Church mixt and conioyn'd with the Church of Rome it ſelfe, conſiſted of thoſe, who making no viſible ſeparation from the Roman profeſſion, as not perceiuing the myſterie of iniquitie which wrought in it, did yet miſlike the groſſer errors, which at this day ſhee maintayneth, and deſired a reformation.
                     For there may bee a Church, which in reſpect of her chiefe Prelates, and a predominant faction therein, may bee falſe and Antichriſtian, yet may contayne ſome members of the true Church within her Pale, who though they refuſe not to communicate with her; nay more, are infected with ſome ſmaller errors of the time, yet ſwallow not downe all vntruths without difference, but keepe ſtill the foundation of faith intire and vnſhaken. Thus it was with the Church of the Iewes at the comming

of our Sauiour. They which fate in Moſes chaire, were the Scribes and the Phariſies, who peruerted the doctrine of the Law, and were the profeſt enemies of our Sauiour, yet many there were, who though they communicated with them in the outward Sacraments and diſcipline of the Church, yet were the flock of another fold, and like a few Oliues at the end of a twig, after the ſhaking of the tree, claue to the right ſtocke, and wayted for the redemption of Iſrael by Chriſt. And thus doubtleſſe it was with ſome, which being outwardly of the Church of Rome, wee may iuſtly notwithſtanding challenge to our ſelues.
                     1. For firſt, there was baptiſme, which admitted them to the rights and priuiledges of our Church, for they were baptiſed vnto Chriſts Truth, and not the Popes errors.
                     
                        Secondly, 
                        
                           In the ordination of Popiſh Biſhops, it is ſaid. Interrogamus te, ſl omnē prudentiam tuam quantum tua capax eſt natura diuinae Scripturae ſenſibus accōmodare volueris? Vis ea quae ex diuinis Scripturis intelligis, plebem cui ordinandus es, & verbis docere & exemplis? Accipe Euangelia, vade & praedica populo tibi commiſſo. There was true & lawfull ordination, wherein their Paſtors receiued commiſſion, and did promiſe to teach the people, not the Popes legends, but out of the holy Scriptures, and to intend wholly to the ſenſe thereof. So that both Paſtor and flock, were ours by admiſſion, promiſe and ingagement, theirs by abuſe and practiſe; for howſoeuer the Prieſt at the baptiſing, or the Biſhop at the ordination, had another meaning, yet the wordes wherewith they baptiſed and ordayned being the wordes of Chriſt, are to be taken in Chriſts meaning, inaſmuch as hee which receiueth a thing from another, is to receiue it according to the intention of the principall Giuer, and not the inſtrumentall giuer. Hee which conferres Baptiſme and Orders as the

                        principall Donor is Chriſt, the Biſhop or Paſtor conferres them onely as his inſtruments.
                     
                     
                        Thirdly, There were ſufficient meanes of Calling beſides, to ſupply the Paſtors negligence and default, as first, profitable parcells of Gods Word read in the Church, and the whole bodie of the Scriptures at hand, which though it were in Latine, yet many might vnderſtand it, and this our Sauiour pointed at, when hee brings in Abraham in the Parable, thus ſpeaking to the rich man touching his brethren, habent Moſen & Prophetas, they haue Moſes and the Prophets. Secondly, The Writings and Commentaries of the Fathers, to whoſe interpretations their Concil. Trident. Seſſ. 2. Councells binde them to adhere, and out of whom diuers of the Papiſts both ancient and moderne, doe confeſſe (as you haue heard) that many of the chiefe articles of Poperie were not for a long time brought into the Church, nor beleeued. Thirdly, Schoolemen and others of their owne ſide, which taught publikely in their Vniuerſities, our very doctrine (not, I confeſſe ſo entirely as they ſhould) but ſome in one point, others in another, whereby there was both pregnant meanes to know the truth, and ſtrong reaſons to thinke at leaſt the doctrines ſo controuerted, and diuerſly reſolued, to be in the Popiſh ſenſe at moſt no article of faith.
                     
                        Laſtly, there were no Councells generally receaued by all, and not excepted at by ſome, which ſo expreſly deliuered the grounds and Tenets of Poperie as now they are, vntill the Councell of Trent.
                     So then who can denie, that they were ours by Calling, ours by Ordination, by inſtitution and

admiſſion ours, and why ſhould any doubt, but that ſome were by practice and obedience ours; ſurely, God which called Iob amongſt the Heathen, and the Queene of the South by the bare report of Solomon, would not ſuffer this Calling to be ſtil in vaine; the Ordination to be wholly vnprofitable; or that Admiſſion in baptiſme to be alwayes fruſtrate; that is, to be the ſauour of death vnto death, and in none the ſauour of life vnto life. For if ſheepe in a paſture, where venemous herbes are mixt with wholſome, can by the inſtinct of nature make choiſe of that which is proper for them, and abſtaine from the contrarie; what maruaile is it, if the flocke of Chriſt, who know the voyce of the true Shepheard from the voyce of ſtrangers, ſhould by the guidance of Gods aſſiſting Spirit doe the ſame. Who can denie that God hath his Temple where Antichriſt hath his Throne, ſeeing, 2. Theſſ. 2. Reuel. 18. 4. Antichriſt (as the Apoſtle tells vs) is to ſit in it? or that ſome of Gods people may bee in Babylon, ſeeing ſuch are warned by the Spirit to come out of her: and it were in vaine to command a man to depart a place if he were not there.
                     Now, if any ſhall thinke theſe motiues and conſiderations of ours, eſpecially touching the laſt ſixe hundred yeeres, not to be altogether ſo exact as the Papiſts require, who challenge vs to produce the names of ſuch viſible Proteſtants in all ages, as profeſſed the ſame entire doctrine in all reſpects, that we doe; I anſwere, first, that it is not our hold that the Church neuer erreth or diſcordeth from it ſelfe in minoribus, in matters of leſſe moment, and therefore

it is ſufficient for vs to ſhew who profeſſed our faith entirely, in majoribus, that is, ſuch points as of themſelues are fundamentall. Secondly, we ſay, that whereas wee finde a twofold ſtate of the Church in the Reuel. 20. 2. Apocalypſe: the one before the looſing of Satan, whileſt the old Dragon was ſhut vp in the bottomleſſe pit for a thouſand yeeres: the other after his looſing, when the Deuill was to be let free to goe and deceiue the Nations, not in one pettie Hamlet, but in the foure quarters of the earth, that is, (as Saint Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 8. & 9. Vid. Bellar. lib. 3. de Rom. Pont. c. 7. 
                        Auſten expounds it) vnder the reigne and tyrannie of Antichriſt; We are not bound to giue ſo ſtrict a reckoning and account of our Profeſſors, vnder the ſecond ſtate of the Church, as vnder the firſt. The reaſon is, becauſe the Church in her firſt eſtate was glorious to behold, appearing like a Reuel. 12. 1. Woman clothed with the Sunne. But in the latter ſhee was to be vnder the thraldome of Antichriſt, and our Aduerſaries themſelues tell vs, that then wee are not to enquire for viſible Profeſſors of the true faith, or for the publike exerciſe of Religion, ſo Suarez lib. 5. cont. ſect. Angl. cap. 21. Bellar. lib. 3. de Rom. Pont. c. 7. 
                        Suarez, Bellarmine, and others. In a word, then was the time that the Church was to flee into the wilderneſſe, as was foretold, Reuel. 12. Now, to expect multitudesx Reuel. 12. 14. of people, frequent cities, pompous ſplendor, affluence of foode and prouiſion in a wilderneſſe, were extreame madneſſe; this were to ſuppoſe a wilderneſſe to be no wilderneſſe. In Deſerts there may be aſſemblies of men, but they are rare; there may be foode, but we know it is but little, and ſuch happily as is but abſolutely neceſſarie for the life of man; and there may be buildings & edifices, but through

the thickets of trees, and ſhades of leaues hardly to bee diſcerned. And ſo did it fare with the Church vnder the tyrannie of Antichriſt. There were ſome alwayes of it, but few; there were aſſemblies, but not ſo euident to the eye of the world; and there was the foode of the Word and Sacraments, but not ſo plentifull, nor euery where ſo pure as before times.
                     But who would thinke that the Ieſuites were all this while but in ieſt, and that they are conſcious to themſelues, that the taske which they require to bee performed on our part, is not feſable on their owne. For let mee but queſtion them from their owne grounds; whether the entire articles of faith, which the Church of Rome now holds, are found mentioned by Writers in all ages? The Cardinall and others of the Ieſuites ingeniouſly confeſſe they were not, and namely Indulgences, the Churches treaſurie, the Popes canonizing of Saints, &c. onely they anſwer, that it followes not, that they were not beleeued becauſe they are not mentioned: Bee it ſo; but if their articles of faith be not mentioned, how will they make it appeare by the teſtimonies of writers in all ages (as they vndertake to doe) that ſuch Tenets were from the time of the bleſſed Apoſtles held without interruption. Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei, cap. 9. §. Quarta regula. 
                        Bellarmine therefore anſweres, that the concurrent teſtimonies of ſome Writers of greateſt note, affirming ſuch a Doctrine to haue beene profeſſed & beleeued by the Church in all ages, none gaine-ſaying it, will ſerue the turne. But here, beſides that they ſtand not to their firſt bargaine, which was to produce the teſtimonies of Writers in all ages; I demand of what ages they

meane that their writers ſhall bee, to whoſe concurrent iudgement they will adhere; if of the primatiue Church, we accept the offer, but this will little aduantage them: for neither are many points of difference betweene vs and them mentioned by thoſe writers, as aboue was ſpecified, much leſſe affirmed to bee Apoſtolicall Traditions: neither are thoſe which are mentioned, allowed of in that ſenſe which they deliuer. If the writers of the after Church, and namely the Schoolemen, let them heare Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 46. Solum eſt in eo diſcrimen, quod ſi quid vniuerſi patres de religione tradunt concorditer, id ſtatim, tanquā dogma cōmune doctorum omnium, qui varijs aetatibus vixerunt, recipitur, quoniam illud etiam ſcholaſtici doctores (ſaltem pro maiore parte) recipiunt, vt qui in materia fidei atque religionis ſanctos patres duces ſequuntur. At non viciſſim quicquid ſcholaſtici doctores concorditer tradunt, id exiſtimandum eſt Eccleſiae alios doctores omnes, qui varijs aetatibus vixerunt, tradidiſſe. Multa enim ſcholaſtici ad doctrinam patrum explicatius addiderunt. 
                        Gregorie de Valentia's owne cenſure concerning them. Whatſoeuer all the Fathers (ſaith hee) doe vniformely deliuer, that is to bee held for the opinion of the Doctors of all times, becauſe the Schoolemen doe follow the holy Fathers as their guides; But not on the contrarie, whatſoeuer the Schoolemen doe deliuer vniformely, is to bee thought to haue beene beleeued by the Doctors in all ages; becauſe the Schoolemen haue added many things more explicatly to the doctrine of the Fathers. Seeing therefore, neither ancient writers will ſerue their turne, no latter may be admitted, I demand by what other authoritie they hope now to make good their bragge? By what (doe the Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei, cap. 9. 5. Quinta regula. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 44. Ieſuites anſwere) but by the teſtimonie of the Church, and chiefly the preſent, affirming ſuch a doctrine to haue beene vniuerſally beleeued in all ages. And this indeed is their laſt refuge, whereby it may plainely appeare, that after they haue ſo lowdly dared vs to ſhew the perpetuitie of our Church in all ages, a posteriori, by producing the names of our ſeuerall Profeſſors,

they can bee contented quietly to relinquiſh that title themſelues, and to flie to the teſtimonie of the Church, which being with them the foundation and principle of their faith, is not properly to argue a poſteriori, but a priori, the difference betweene our arguing in that kinde and theirs, being but this, that we proceed deſcending downwards from the Scriptures, they aſcending vpwards from the preſent Church. But I aske now, will the Churches teſtimonie in this caſe ſerue their turnes, to proue, that whatſoeuer is held at this preſent as an article of faith in the Roman Conſiſtorie, was alwayes ſo beleeued in the Church. No, doe Bellar. lib. 1. de verbo Dei, cap 10. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. diſp. 1. q. 1. p. 6. 
                        Bellarmine, Valentia, and other Ieſuites informe vs: for ſome points (ſay they) were not heretofore defined by the Church (in which to erre was then no hereſie) which now are; and Thomas tells vs that the Pope may make a new Creed: But wee aske then, how their articles of faith were held in all ages? They reply, that theſe new additions of theirs, though they were not as then made articles of faith, nor beleeued by the Fathers explicitly, yet were they implicitly beleeued. But this plungeth them then into another gulfe, for if implicitly onely, then the profeſſion thereof was not viſible; for an implicit beliefe is like ſeed buried in the ground, and cannot ſerue for any of thoſe proofes, whereby the viſibilitie of the Church which is in queſtion, may be tried. But haply (will ſome ſay) thoſe points which in former times were not mentioned or not expreſly beleeued, or not defined, are but matters of leſſe moment, and ſuch as the preſent Church of Rome makes not to

be fundamentall. No, doe the Ieſuites anſwer; for they are euen ſuch as are by the Tridentine and other Generall Councells, commanded vnder paine of an A
                           •
                        athema to bee beleeued, and to denie the which is by their Conſtitutions made damnable hereſie.
                     Thus, whatſoeuer they pretend, they finde no harbour, but in their preſent Church, and that like the Sirtes too, troubleſome and tempeſtious. For our parts, God hath affoorded vs a quiet Hauen where in to anchor, the holy Scriptures, which teach vs, that if we cannot diſcerne the Church Catholike, fide oculorum, with the faith of our eyes, and ſay videmus, wee ſee it: wee ſhould yet apprehend it, oculis fidei, with the eyes of our faith, and ſay, credimus, we beleeue it.
                     
                        
                           Credo Eccleſiam Catholicam.
                        
                        I beleeue the Catholike Church.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Vnde Zizania? THE ORIGINALL AND PROGRESSE of Hereſie.
                        
                           Handled and applyed before his late MAIESTIE at THEOBALDS. An. Dom. 1624.
                        By EDWARD CHALONER, Dr. in Diuinitie, and Principall of ALBAN Hall in OXFORD.
                        
                        LONDON Printed by William Stansby.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     Ʋnde Zizania? The Originall and Progreſſe of HERESIE.
                  
                     MATTH. 13. 27.
                     So the Seruants of the Houſholder came and ſaid vnto him, Sir, Didſt not thou ſowe good Seed in thy field? From whence then hath it Tares?
                  
                  
                     THe Progeny of Hereſies, begotten by the Prince of darkeneſſe, and conceiued in the conclaue of Hell, cannot be ſeene by mortall eyes, but in aenigmate, in a riddle or Parable, and therefore moſt fitly in a Parable, is heere ſet forth, the originall and progeſſe of them. Firſt, You haue their Antecedent, to wit, the ſowing of good Seed before them. For, howſoeuer Hereſies may be antiqua, ancient; yet they are not prima, the firſt and moſt ancient, and therefore is Chriſt the

Huſbandman, firſt preſented in the Narration, as ſeminans, ſowing good Seed in his field, before the Enemie is produced reſeminans, reſowing the ſame Acres with vnprofitable graine. Secondly, their Efficient or Authour, the Deuill, who is pointed out by two remarkable properties, his malice, in that he is tearmed inimicus, the Enemy, and his ſubtiltie, which appeared by thoſe aduantages which he took in ſowing. The first was the opportunitie of the time, for he wrought not his miſchiefe in the face of the Sunne, whileſt the Seruants of the Huſbandman might beare him witneſſe, but in the dead of night; not whileſt the Huſbandman himſelfe ſlept; for he which keepeth Iſrael, neither ſlumbreth nor ſleepeth, but, Cum dormirent homines (ſaith the Text) whileſt men ſlept, that is, whileſt the Paſtors and ouerſeers of the flock, thoſe to whom the Maſter had let out his Vineyard, were ſupine and negligent in their charge. The ſecond, was the nature of the graine which hee ſowed, ſympathiſing and according with the good Seed in the manner and likeneſſe of growth, that is, Hereſies bearing the Image and Superſcription of Truth: Hee tooke not therefore Acornes, or Maſt, or Kernels, or Fruit-ſtones, but Tares; nor ſet them with their ſtalke or bulke, but buried them in the Seed, that they might appeare with a Copie of old-age, being not eſpied till they had taken roote, and then diſplaying themſelues gradatim, by little and little. The third, was the conueniencie of the place for ſuch a purpoſe, beeing free from ſuſpition (among the Wheate) and the laſt his hypocriticall couering of his action, abijt, hee

went away, id eſt latuit (ſaith an Interpreter) he lay hid vnder the faire penthouſe of zeale and ſeeming deuotion. For had either his venome ſpawn'd in any other ſoyle then where the Huſbandman had beſtowed his Wheate, or had he beene ſpied trauerſing the field in his proper ſhape and complexion, the ſeruants of the Houſholder could not haue bin ſo ſurprized with admiration; ſo ſoone as the firſt bud had ſaluted the light, they would haue ſaid, behold Tares, behold the Enemy: now that the field had beene manured and cultiuated with Gods Huſbandrie, the earth made to trauell with the fruits of his Garner, and the Enemies footings vndiſcerned, theſe ſecond ſeedes muſt ſpring vp, thoſe ſproutes become to blade, that blade bring forth fruit, ere the ſeruants will beleeue the 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      or quod, as Logicians ſpeake, that they are Tares, and yet for the 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      or propter quod, that is, the Authour and Sower of them, they are ſtill ignorant, they come to the Houſholder and ſay vnto him, Sir, Didſt not thou ſowe good Seed in thy field, from whence then hath it Tares?
                  
                  The caſe being thus put to the Huſbandman by way of queſtion or probleme, and the Seruants like Schollers in the Mathematickes requiring a ſenſible demonſtration of the ſame, my Text may bee not vnfitly deuided into theſe two parts, datum & quaeſitum.  Viz.

                        1. Firſt, Datum, the thing giuen or granted, Sir, Didſt not thou ſowe good ſeed in thy field? For Interrogatiues in holy Writ are oftentimes equiualent to affirmations

and aſſertions, and not notes of doubt or dubitation.
                        2. Secondly, Quaeſitum, the thing demanded, from whence then hath it Tares?
                        
                     
                  
                  The firſt is heere, and hath bin by all good Chriſtians euer granted, and therefore ſhall not by me be diſputed; Far be it from any to queſtion the Seed of the good Huſbandman, or to ſuſpect his Graine. Bellarmine & Becanus two Ieſuits, would faine lay the aſperſion vpon vs; the one, that we teach directly, the other that we affirme by conſequence, God to be the Authour of Sin, and ſo to faſten the Tares vpon his ſleeue. But let them know that we receiue this, datum, this granted Propoſition, that God euer ſowes good Seed in his field, with no more ſcruple then did theſe Seruants. Our Controuerſie is onely the ſame that theirs was, touching the Quaeſitum, the thing demanded, from whence the Tares are. And heere wee that are Seruants of the Houſholder are no more exempted from Cauils, then his field from adulterate Graine. The Deuill hath ſcattered his Seed amongſt the Wheate, the World beholds it not onely in the blade, but alſo bearing fruit, & yet the Seruants of the Enemie denie that it is Tares, vnleſſe we can ſhew vnde, from whence they are? This is the Riddle wherewith the Antichriſtian Sphinxes doe aſſault vs. But alas, how is the Text peruerted, the Scene altered? ſerui non Patrisfamilias, ſed inimici, the Seruants, not of the Houſholder, but of the Enemy, of him which is conſcious to his owne act, veniunt & dicunt, they come and ſay; and to whom doe they ſay? non illi, not to the

                     Oedipus that can reſolue them, the Huſbandman, but nobis, to vs, dormientibus, vs that ſlept, they aske vs the queſtion, they require of vs to diſſolue the knot; Name the Hereſie (ſay they) whereof wee cannot record the Brochers, deſcribe the place, date the timeBellar. l. 4. de Eccleſ. cap. 5. of its Natiuitie? Could Arius, or Neſtorius, or Macedonius, play their prizes vnſpyed by our Centinels? Could they, or any other Hereticke euer ſcape the Eyes and Eares of our Intelligencers? Thus they inſult before the Victory. They indeed which are of the Enemies Councell, may be priuie to his Plots: wee that are of the Houſholders retinue, may decerne the Tares, and yet not know the ſowing, and we may ſay without preiudice either to our cauſe or skill with theſe men, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     From whence hath it Tares?
                  
                  But the ground hereof will yet better appeare, if wee compare the Enemies carriage in this Parable with his wiles and legerdemayne at other times. All creatures which inhabit this Globe of Earth are ſubiect to a viciſſitude of Light and Darkneſſe, Day and Night, and to the neceſſary actions thereof, waking and ſleeping. That which properly in this kind belongs to man conſidered in his Naturalls, the ſame by a certaine ſymmetry and proportion is found alſo in his Intellectualls, that waking in the one, he may be ſaid ſometimes to ſleep in the other.Gen. 2. This aduantage the Deuill tooke in his firſt Maſterpiece, ſowing the Seeds of originall tranſgreſſion in the faireſt of Gods fields, our Mother Eue. For the
                        Ʋerſ. 
                           •
                        . man being abſent and deficient in his watch, the Enemy aſſaulted the woman (as heere in this Parable)

in a manner vnſeene, appearing not in the colours of an Enemy, but of the Serpent, who whileſt Adam the common Citizen of the Earth continued in his integrity, was a Domeſticke creature and parcell of his Family. And it is worth our noting, how in the whole Story, God conceales the Deuils name, becauſe the Deuill euer in ſuch caſes conceales his nature. In this diſguiſe therefore, tendring matter of argument and diſcourſe vnto the woman, he ſcattered a ſeed ſo ſmall at the firſt, that it exceeded not a graine of Muſter-ſeed, onely of queſtion and doubt, Yea, hath God ſaid, yee ſhall not eat of euery tree of the Garden? Who would haue thought a naked queſtion could harbour ſo much poyſon in its bowels? yet ſo dangerous is it to entertaine a queſtion of Gods peremptory Iniunctions, that this alone in the next reply, brought forth the blade, which was incredulitie, and imboldned the Deuill to giue God the lye, ſaying, Yee ſhall not dye. This blade at lengthVerſ. 4. ſhot vp ſo high, that the Prince of the Ayre doth now therein neſtle himſelfe, and yeilded that bitter fruit, And ſhee did eat, and gaue vnto her Husband,
                     Verſ. 6. 
                     who did eate.
                  
                  Thus hee ſowed the Seedes of Hereſie in the Church of the Iewes at the comming of our Sauiour. The Prophets which had ſucceſſiuely tended the flocke of Iſrael, were now aſleepe in their Sepulchres, and the watchmen which remayned, ſlumbred vpon their Couches of carnall and temporall proiects, dreaming of an earthly Meſsias, and Kingdomes of this World; when loe, the Enemie ſhrowding himſelfe in the frock of men venerable

for their profeſſion, [Scribes and Phariſes] ſeaſoned with the leauen of ſeeming deuotion (long Prayers and Hypocriſie) remarkable for their induſtry, in compaſſing two vaſt Elements Sea and Land to gaine one Proſelite, inſtilled thoſe Errours which at the firſt vnſeene did in a while ſend forth an ominous blade, and that blade a worſe fruit, obſeruing ſtill the ſame rule of progreſſion, that if the Maſters were one, their Proſelites ſhould bee two fold more children of Hell then themſelues, Matth. 23. And to bee briefe, thus is the Enemy propheſied to ſow the Seedes of thoſe great defections and fallings away from the truth towards the latter day, when the whole world almoſt was to ſleepe, being intoxicated with the wine of the Whore of Babylon: What part thereof wherein he expounds not this Parable with his act, and wherein thoſe ſtratagems of deluding men, ſo ſlumbring with counterfeit deuotion, appearing truths, and inſenſible growthes lye not buried? Would you vnderſtand the kinde of doctrine which hee ſhould inſinuate? know, that it was not a profeſt oppoſition of the Truth, but a ſecret vndermining of it; and therefore, both by Saint Paul and alſo in the Reuelation it is called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      a Myſterie2. Theſſ. 2. 7. Reuel. 17. 5. Reuel. 13. 18. which none but the wiſe and hee which hath vnderſtanding can penetrate; Would you take a view of the Actors? Imagine not that you ſee the faces of Neroes or Diocleſians, but what wee reade in Daniel of Antiochus the type of Antichriſt, that he ſhould
                     Dan. 11. 21. 
                     get the Kindome by flatteries, the ſame in holy Writ is affirmed of Antichriſt himſelfe and his Complices. The Teachers which in the last and perillous
                     
                     times muſt ariſe (ſaith Saint Paul) are men hauing the forme of godlineſſe, but denying the power thereof, 2. Tim. 3. The Beast in the Reuelation is deſcribed with two hornes like the Lambe, but withall hauing the voice of a Dragon, Chap. 13. The woman which ſits vpon many waters is an Whore, and inticeth with dalliances like another Dalilah; and with a Cup of abomination makes drunke the Inhabitants of the earth, Chap. 17. Her Army are Locuſts, whoſe faces are as the faces of men, whoſe haire as the haire of women, but looke either within, and then ſee teeth as the teeth of Lions, or behinde, and behold there tayles like vnto the tayles of Scorpions, Chap. 9. Laſtly would you ſee the manner how his poiſonous doctrine is to gayne vpon the Church? Then as before you beheld not the faces of Nero's, ſo neither muſt you here expect the marches of Iehu's. Away with that fond imagination of Bellarmine and otherBellar. l. 3. de Rom. Pont. c. 8. 
                     Romaniſts, who imagine that Antichriſt, muſt defer his warre vpon the Church vntill the end of the World, and that he muſt diſpatch all his conqueſts, and finiſh his reigne within the ſhort ſpace of three yeeres and an halfe. No; Saint Iohn tells vs that Antichriſt was alreadie come, and Saint Paul, that in his dayes the miſterie of iniquitie did alreadie worke, but how? not that the ſeruants of the houſholder could take notice of it, for that, hee that did let, would let (ſaith he) vntill he were taken away, and then (and not till then) ſhould that wicked one be reuealed. 2. Theſ. 2. For as it is true in morallitie, that nemo repentè fit peſsimus, no man at the firſt puſh becomes extreamly bad, ſo the Apoſtle ſaith, it ſhall fare with theſe

Seducers, they ſhall not renounce the truth at once, but decline from the ſinceritie of it by degrees, growing (as the Text hath it) worſe and worſe, deceiuing and being deceiued. 2. Tim. 3. 13. What therefore is obſerued, touching the methodicall diſpoſition of the ſeuen Churches in the Reuelation (though it cannot be typically or prophetically applied (as ſome haue fondly imagined, to any Churches in particular)Beda. Lyra. Gloſſ. ordin. Alphonſus Conrad. in Apoc. the Rhem. vpon the 1. Re. yet the Rōaniſts (who by theſe parts vnderſtand the whole) may obſerue the ſame, in the ſeueral ſtates and conditions of the Church vniuerſall. If Epheſus the firſt and mother Church of leſſer Aſia, leaue her firſt loue, chap. 2. verſe 4. this defect of loue in Smyrna, the ſecond Church, begets counterfeit profeſſors, them, which ſay they are Iewes and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan, v. 9. Smyrnas counterfeits in Pergamus the third Church, proue Balaams, and caſt a ſtumbling blocke to thoſe of the couenant, euen the Orthodoxe beleeuers, pointed out by the Children of Iſrael. v. 14. Now what is but a ſtumbling blocke in Pergamus, the third Church, procures a tolleration for Ieſabell to preach it in Theatira the fourth, v. 20. and loe, what in Theatira the fourth is preached, and as it were ſowed, the ſame ſprings vp in Sardis the fifth, and choakes a great part of the good corne, and the precipe to the Angell (that is, the Biſhop thereof) is, ſtrengthen the things which remaine, that are ready to dye. chap. 3. verſe 2.
                  Whereby wee may note the difference betweene the particular hereſies of Arius, Nestorius, and the like, whoſe Authors and beginners, the Papiſts brag that they can aſſigne, and this generall defection or

falling away vnder Antichriſt, of which they challenge vs to nominate the time, and Authors. For first, thoſe backſlidings were of them, of whom S. Iohn ſaith, they went out from vs, but they were not of
                     2. Iohn. 2. 19. 
                     vs, and therefore making a rent and ſeparation from the Church, were the more remarkeable, this of Antichriſt (who is to ſit in the Temple of God) is to be of2. Theſ. 4. thoſe who were of vs, and went not out from vs, and therefore making no viſible rent from the Church, muſt needes be the leſſe noted. Secondly, thoſe being but of ſome few, left Sentinels enough behinde to eye them; this was to be vniuerſall, of the Sentinels and Watchmen themſelues, euen of the ſtarres which the Dragon was to pul down from heauen with his tayle; and if the Watchmen themſelues ſleepe, who ſhall diſcouer the approach of the enemie? Thirdly thoſe made open inuaſion vpon the truth, and oppugned the bulwarkes of Faith with hoſtile furie, as Arius the diuinitie of Chriſt, Macedonius the diuinitie of the Holy Ghoſt and the like; this is a claudeſtine conſpiracie, and oppoſeth of the faith, not directly, but obliquely, not formally, but virtually, not in expreſſe termes, but by conſequences, and therefore vntill the trumpets ſounded the alarum, and the thunders in the Reuelation gaue warning, few ſufpected it. Laſtly, thoſe were like the gourd of Ionas,
                     Jon. 
                           •
                        . 10. 
                     which ſprang vp in a night; this was like the tares, firſt but a ſeede, then a blade, and laſtly a fruit; and therefore approching by vnſenſible degrees, was the leſſe obſerued and diſcouered.
                  And to apply theſe things more home to the Church of Rome, let any ſpeake whether the tower

of this ſecond Babell mounted not by the ſame ſteps and aſcents vnto the battlements? How many things at the firſt were but ſtumbling blockes, that in time became ſtaires to lift Ieſabel into the Pulpit? how many poſitions in the infancie of the Goſpell vnknowne, that after a while were diſputed, then ſided, and at length ratified and confirmed? What opinions that at firſt were but dogmata ſcholae, tenents of the ſcholes, that in their riper age were made dogmata Eccleſiae, Conſtitutions of the Church, & laſtly dogmata fidei, Articles of faith? What errors, but Pigmies in their birth, that became grand hereſies and ſonnes of Anak in their grouth? So that wee may truly ſay of the maſter builders, which vpon a foundation happily of gold of ſiluer, layed rowes of ſtone or bricke, and their prentiſes which thereon aduanced a ſecond ſtorie of ſlime or rubbiſh, as Vincentius Lyrinenſis
                     Vincent. Liren cont. haereſes. did of the Donatiſts, building their hereſie vpon the authoritie of Cyprian. O maruailous change of things, the authors of the opinions are iudged Catholickes, but the followers thereof are Heretickes; the maſters are pardoned, but the ſchollers or learners are condemned; the writers of the bookes ſhall without doubt be the Children of the Kingdome, but Hell ſhall be the place for the abettors and maintainers thereof. And truly it is an obſeruation no leſſe iudicious then true of Albaſpinus, Biſhop of Orleans, that ſcarce any error
                     Albaſpin. de veteribus Eccleſiae ritibus. lib. 1. cap. 9. 
                     hath crept into the Church which tooke not its originall and ſourſe from the ancient approued Diſcipline of the Church, not that the inſtitution was bad, but that the application is now amiſſe, the ſeruants of the Houſholder made the lawes, but the ſeruants of

the enemie added the gloſſe. Hearken what Ferus a Friar ſaith vpon the eighth of Iudges, ſpeaking of Gedeon. There was (ſaith he) a double ſinne in Gedeon,
                     
                        Fer. Annot. in. Jud. c. 8. Colon. 1571. Duplex. igitur peccatum eius fuit, & quod Ephod contra verbum Dei fecit, & quod ipſius abuſum videns, non iterum aboleuit. Quis autem non videt ſimilia in Eccleſia contingere? Quam multa inſtituerunt ſancti bona intentione, quae tamen nunc videmus partim in abuſum, partim in ſuperſtitionem verti? Exemplo ſint feſta, ceremoniae, imagines, miſſ
                           •
                        , monaſteria, &c. Nihil horum ea intentione inſtitutum fuit qua nunc habentur, &c. & tamen Gedeones noſtri tacent, non abſolent abuſus non auferunt ſuperſtitiones. 
                     both in that he made an Ephod contrary to the Word of God, and in that ſeeing the abuſe thereof he tooke it not away. Now who ſees not, that the like hapneth in the Church? how many things did the Saints ordaine with a good intent, which wee ſee at this day changed, partly by abuſe and partly by ſuperſtition? The feaſts, Ceremonies, Images, Monaſteries and the like, none of them were inſtituted in that ſort at the first, as now they are vſed, and yet wee Gedeons hold our peace, they take not away the abuſe, they take not away the ſuperſtition.
                  
                  For if wee take a reuiew of what was anciently practiſed in the Primitiue Church, we ſhall find that the Diſcipline thereof had the ſame ſcope touching the ſoule, which Phyſicke hath for the bodie, and may accordingly bee diuided into that which is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      that is, tending to the preſeruation of health, and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      which aymes at the reſtoring of health, the one conducing to the preuenting, the other to the remoouing of Diſeaſes. Now, as there bee in a Chriſtian man three principall vertues, from whence as from ſo many vitall parts, all graces in man doe flow, to wit, Faith, Hope, and Charitie, ſo this parcell of Church Diſcipline which concerned the preſeruation of health, was imployed in preſcribing ſuch Cordials and Antidotes, as were behoofefull to preſerue, fortifie, or increaſe ſome one of theſe.
                  For the benefit of Faith, in reſpect of knowledge, and to ſeaſon it with a true ſenſe and apprehenſion

of diuine matters, the Church did apply diuers inſtruments.
                  Firſt Bookes, and thoſe principally the holy Scriptures, compriſing ſuch writings onely as wee ſtile by the name of Canonicall. To them the Iewes of the diſperſion, called Helleniſts, added in their Greeke tranſlations the Apocrypha bookes, as profitable, partly for their matters ſake, partly for the ſupply of the hiſtorie of the Bible. Now the Greeke and Latine Church receiuing their tranſlations of the old Teſtament, not of the Iewes inhabiting Iudea (who neuer mixt the Apocrypha with the other) but of thoſe of the diſperſion, and being loath to diſtaſte them to whom they were beholding for their paines, were in the beginning contented onely not to ſeuer them from the Canonicall Bookes in binding, howſoeuer they did in authoritie; afterwards they began to cite them in their Sermons & Works, though not as diuine, yet as venerable and familiar writings, then permitted them to be read (as Athanaſius
                     Athanaſ
                           •
                        in Synopſi. affirmes) to the Catechumeniſts, in length of time, to the Congregation, and in the end, cuſtome giuing them credit; they were doubtfully in the Florentine, but more palpably in the Tridentine
                     Concil. Florent. in decret. ſup. vn. Iacob. & Armenian. Trident. Concil. ſeſſ. 2. Councell canonized with the ſtile of Canonicall, and made equall in authoritie to the other.
                  Secondly, Tranſlations; for bookes in an vnknowne language are like Trumpets giuing an vncertaine ſound. And therefore, no ſooner was the Goſpell preacht, but the Scriptures had their tranſlations. The vniuerſall Church by cuſtome, eſtabliſht none, becauſe none could be of vniuerſall vſe.

Yet amidſt ſuch varietie as was then extant, that which paſſeth vnder the name of the Septuagint, found beſt entertainment in the Greeke Church, and a tranſlation made out of the ſame into Latine, by an vncertaine Authour, found ſomewhat the like in the Latine. The chiefe cauſe whereof ſeemes to beHieron. praefat. in lib. Iob. this, that for a long time there wanted in the Weſt, thoſe who being skilled in the Hebrew could ſupply their wants from thence with a better. This Latine tranſlation was afterwards partly mended, partlyBellar. lib. 2. de verbo Dei, c. 9. patched with fragments and phraſes pickt out of Hierome; winning authoritie in the Weſterne Church by two meanes, Cuſtome and Ignorance of the Originalls, and at length in the Councell of Trent made authenticall, and by two Popes, Sixtus
                     Concil. Trident. ſeſſ. 2. Bellar. lib. 2. de verbo Dei, c. 2. §. Dices. Sixtus Senenſ. lib. vlt. cap. vlt. 
                     Quintus, and Clement the eighth, confirmed by two contrarie Editions, with the ſoleciſmes of the Tranſlators, and errors of the Tranſcribers.
                  
                     Ceremonies were the third inſtrument; whereby, as by certaine outward ſignes and characters, the Church would imprint in the mindes of ignorant people, the vſe and effects of the Sacraments. Theſe at the firſt were performed by expreſſions rather verball then reall, as Exhortations, Prayers, Interrogations, and ſuch like, as we vſe in baptiſme. But after awhile, to theſe verball and audible ceremonies, reall and viſible were added, and that without any bad meaning or intention of their firſt founders; but ſee how Tares in the end diſplayed themſelues amongſt the Wheat. For what were at the firſt but few, by Saint Auſtens time were ſo multiplyed, that in his 119. Epiſt. hee complayneth of

their burden, and now are ſo encreaſed, that they are more then can bee borne; what were then butBellar. lib. 2. de Sacram. cap. 31 §. Quinta. things acceſſorie, and helps to the worſhip of God, are now become parts of the worſhip of God and meritorious; what were then but ſignes, and had onely vſum ſignificandi, a vſe to ſignifie, are nowBellarm. ibid. §. Secunda, & §. Tertia. become cauſes, and haue vſum efficiendi, a vſe to produce ſupernaturall effects.
                  From theſe Ceremonies, in proceſſe of time, abuſed and miſ-vnderſtood, many groſſe errors had their originall. For to begin with Baptiſme, it borrowing a ceremonie from Exorciſing, which in thoſe dayes was a gift in the Church of caſting out Deuils by adjuration, it ſignified thereby (not that men before Baptiſme are poſſeſſed with the Deuill) but firſt, what they are by Nature, that is, childrenAug. de Nupt. & Concupiſc. cap. 29. & Epiſt. 105. ad Sixtum. Socrat. hiſtor. Eccleſiaſt. lib. 5 cap. 21. Ioſeph. Vicecomes de antiquis baptiſmi ritib. lib. 1. cap. 19. & 20. Hieron. dialog. lib. 3. aduerſ. Pelag. in fine. Auguſt. lib. 2. de Nupt. & Concupiſc. cap. 18. Item, libris quaruor, ad Bonifacium, & ſex libris contra Iulian, &c. of wrath, and ſeruants of the Deuill; and ſecondly, what wee are by Grace (whereof Baptiſme is a Sacrament) that is, freed from the bondage of Sathan, and made Co-heires of the Kingdome of heauen. But howſoeuer, Baptiſme was not held for a long time ſo abſolutely neceſſarie to ſaluation, that ſetting contempt or wilfull negligence aſide in the partie which dies vnbaptized, a man might not bee ſaued without it, witneſſe the cuſtom of the church, which was to haue but one or two times in the yeer at the moſt (to wit, Eaſter & Whitſontide) aſſigned for the ſame, yet this exorciſing at length began to worke ſo farre with ſome, eſpecially after that diuers of the Fathers ſpake hyperbolically of baptiſme in eagerneſſe againſt Pelagius the Heretike, who taking away originall ſinne, tooke alſo away

with it by conſequence the neceſſitie of baptiſme, that what was at the firſt held neceſſarie, neceſsitate
                     Bellar. lib. 1. de Baptiſm. cap. 4. 
                     precepti, by the neceſſitie of a precept, was made to be neceſſarie, neceſsitate medij, by the neceſſitie of a meanes; and in concluſion, the Schoolemen hauing taken a more diſtinct ſuruey of Hell, then wasBellar. lib. 2. de Purgat. cap. 6. done afore-time, aſſigned lodgings in the third ſtorie for children which die without baptiſme, wherin they award them poenam damni, paine of loſſe, though not poenam ſenſus, paine of ſenſe, affirmingBellar. lib. 1. de Baptiſm. cap. 4. farther this paine to be eternall.
                  As it fared with Baptiſme, ſo did it with the Euchariſt; For what was Tranſubſtantiation therein at the firſt, but non ens, a thing neither proueable by the Scriptures, as many of the learnedſt RomaniſtsBiel in Can. Miſſae. lect. 40. Cajetan. in 3. Quaeſt. 72. art. 1. Fauentin▪ in 4. ſent. diſp. 45. diſt. 11. c 3. Camaracenſ. & Scot. apud Bellar. lib. 3. de Sacram. Euchariſt. c. 23. Scotus apud Bellar. ibid. Vid. Auguſt. in de Catechizandis rudibus, c. 9. doe confeſſe, nor (as ſome of them doe alſo grant) receiued for diuers hundred yeeres into the articles of Chriſtian faith. The Fathers indeed acknowledged a change of the Bread and Wine, but it was a change not of their ſubſtance, but of their vſe, for of common elements, they become Sacraments. This change of their vſe by occaſion of Altars and other ceremonies which crept in, as alſo by reaſon of the figuratiue ſpeeches of the Ancients, vttered partly imprint a liuely apprehenſion of the things exhibited, and partly to breed a reuerend opinion of the Sacraments, as contayning in them ſo great myſteries, produced in the end a doubt of the change of the ſubſtance, but what kinde of change it was, was ſooner defined then vnderſtood. For Berengarius was forced in his abiuration, to acknowledge a ſenſuall change, wherein the body of

Chriſt is touched by the hands, and broken by theDe conſecrat. diſt. 2. Can. Ego Berengarius. Bellar. l. 1. de Euchariſt. c. 2. §. Quinta Gloſſ. ad Can. Ego Berengar. Bell. de Imag. ſanct. l. 2. c. 22. §. Secundo. Lomb. l. 4. ſent. diſt. 11. A. Scot. 4. ſent. diſt. 11. q. 6. Cajet. 3. part. q. 75 art. 6. Soto. 4. ſent. d. 9. q. 2. Marginiſt. Scoti. Theor. 1. & 2. Durād. 4. ſent. d. 11. q. 3. Suarez Metaphyſ. diſp. 31. §. 6. Fonſec. Metaph. l. 4. c. 2 q. 4. & lib. 5. c. 8. q. 5. Goffred. quolibet. 8. q. 16. Mirandul. in Apolog. q 9. Henric. quolib. 9. q. 9. & quolib. 11 q. 4. Fab. Fauent. in 4. ſent. diſp. 16. c. 6. Thoma & Thomiſtae volunt tranſubſtantiationem eſſe ad ſubſtantiam, & per ipſam accipientem eſſe, quae dicitur tranſubſtantiatio productiua. Tho. 3. part. q. 75. art. 4. teeth of the Receauer, which the new Romaniſts doe diſclaime, and the gloſſe tells vs, that vnleſſe we cautelouſly vnderſtand his wordes, we ſhall fall into a worſe hereſie then that wherein Berengarius himſelfe was, whereas there are no exacter formes of ſpeaking in matters of faith (ſaith Bellarmine) then thoſe which they vſe that abjure hereſie. Peter Lombard, the father of the Schoolemen, though he acknowledgeth a change of the Bread and Wine, yet what kinde of change it is, whether formall or ſubſtantiall, or of any other kinde, he profeſſed he was not able to define; much leſſe could hee call it Tranſubſtantiation, which terme in his dayes was not coyned. Many of the ancient Schoolemen which ſucceeded him, being loth (as it ſeemes) to quit all the truth at once, held onely a partiall change, that is, either of the matter without the forme, which opinion by ſome is attributed to Scotus, or of the forme without the matter, as Aegidius and Durand, or of the matter and forme without the ſubſiſtencie (which the Ieſuites in their Metaphyſicks make not to differ really from the eſſence) as Goffred, and after him Picus Mirandula; or laſtly, of the ſpecificall nature without the indiuiduall, as Henricus. Thomas Aquinas, the firſt that ſet Poperie in ioynt, and to whom the preſent Church of Rome owes for many Tenets, held a totall change, and added withall, that this change is conuerſio productiua, a conuerſion whereby one thing is produced of the other; but the Ieſuites, though they hold the change to bee totall, yet they ſay, it is not conuerſio productiua,
                     
a conuerſion wherby one thing is made of the other, but only conuerſio adductiua, a conuerſion wherebyBell. l. 3. de Euchariſt. c. 18. §. Ex his colligimus conuerſionem panis in corpus Domini, non eſſe productiuam, nec cōſeruatiuam, ſed adductiuam. one thing is brought into the place of the other, and ſo inſtead of Tranſubstantiation, which was confirmed in the Lateran Councell, they haue inuented in reſpect of the Bread and Wine a Deſubſtantiation, or Annihilation, and in reſpect of Chriſts body a Tranſlocation.
                  
                  Ceremonies and the exorbitant Phraſes of Rhetoricians hauing brought Tranſubſtantion into the World, their Infant turned Midwife to the Mother, and deliuered her of two other Monſters, adoration and the Sacrifice of the Maſſe, though her trauell of this later ſeemes to haue beene both hard and tedious, for as the Maſter of the Sentences, and alſo Aquinas
                     P. Lomb. ſent. l. 4. diſt. 12. g. Thom. 3. part. q. 83. art. 1. long after him defined it, the proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the liuing and the dead, was not then receiued, but onely, the commemoratiue and Euchariſticall which we acknowledge.
                  To leaue other fruit of the ſame tree vntaſted; by the ſame wicket of Ceremonies, crept Images into the Church. For Ceremonies which at the firſt were no more then repreſentations of accidents, and ſymbola virtutum, deſcriptions and pictures of vertues, became afterwards to bee repreſentations ofBellar. l. 2. de imag. c. 9. Sanderus l. 2. de cultu imag. c. 4 Fauentin. in 3. ſent. c. 6. Suarez ex Alano. diſp. 54. §. 1. Euſeb. l. 7. hiſt. c. 14. ſubſtances, and imagines perſonarum, Images of perſons. Howſoeuer it was, theſe perſonall repreſentations in their birth, were more modeſt, being onely of Chriſts humanitie, or of the Saints, and thoſe in priuate houſes, or prophane places, not in publike Churches. But after three hundred yeares, the cuſtome which (Euſebius ſaith) ſprang from Gentiliſme,
                     
                     of erecting Images in honour of thoſe whome
                     Epiphan. Epiſt. ad Iohan. Epiſ. Hieroſo. tom. 2 
                     men eſteemed Sauiours, brought them to find entrance (though not without oppoſition) into ſome Churches, but to this end onely, as hauing an Hiſtoricall vſe to recall to minde the memory of things paſt. About ſixe hundred yeares after Chriſt, beſides the Hiſtoricall vſe to informe the vnderſtanding, they acquired alſo a Rhetoricall vſe to ſtirre vpGreg. l. 7. Ep. 53. ad Secundinum, in fine. Bel. l. 2. de imagin. c. 12. Septima Synodus definiuit, imagines eſſe venerandas, non quidem cultu latriae, ſed honore illo, quo etiam proſequimur ſacras literas &c. Vid. Bell. l. 2. de imagin. ſanct. cap. 20. Alex. 3. part. q. 30. art. vlt. Durand. l. 3. ſent. diſt. 9. q. 2. Alphonſus a Caſtro, verbo, Imag. Thom. 3. part. q 25. art. 3. Caiet ibid. Bonauent. Carthuſ. Ailman. Capreolus in 3. ſent. diſt. 9. Bell. l. 2. de imagin. c. 20. 2
                           •
                        
                      deuotion, and Gregory the Great, though hee miſliked worſhipping of them, yet he allowed worſhipping before them. This worſhipping before them in the ſecond Nicen Councel gained them the honour, though not of adoration, yet of veneration, and this veneration in the end by Thomas Aquinas and others came to be interpreted adoration, but with this difference, that ſome ſpake more doubtfully, teaching the Image not to be worſhipped in it ſelfe, but onely the perſon before, or by the Image, as Alex. de Hales, Durand and Alphonſus à Caſtro. Others more bluntly, that the Image is to bee worſhipped in it ſelfe, and that with the ſame worſhip that the perſon is which it repreſents, as Thomas Aquinas, Bonauenture, Caietan, Carthuſianus, Ailman and Capreolus. But the Ieſuits walking the middle way, haue inuented an Idolatry more ſublimated and refined, ſaying that the Image is not to be worſhipped with the ſame worſhip that the perſon himſelfe is which it figures, vnderſtanding by the ſame, the ſame for its owne ſake, but yet it may and ought to bee (ſay they) with the ſame for the perſons ſake which it repreſents; with the ſame, though not of it ſelfe, yet by accident; though not properly, yet improperly;
                     
though not perfectly, yet imperfectly; though not directly, yet reductiuely; though not vniuocally, yet anologically; the one ſending his Schollers to Hell by Sunſhine, the other through a miſt of diſtinctions.
                  Now as the Primatiue Church was ſtudious to benefit and aduance faith in the point of knowledge, ſo was it no leſſe ſolicitous to arme and fortifie it againſt the battery of temptations. Hence it was, that during the heate of perſecutions, the cuſtome of the Chriſtians was, daily to receiue the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as a ſouereigne Antidote againſt the feare of death. But the perſecutions being ended, and the peoples deuotion (as in proſperitie it comes to paſſe) ſomewhat abated, this daily communicating was retayned onely by the Clergie, not that the Laity might not receiue with them de iure, of right, but, that they did it not de facto, in deed. Now, becauſe there were not in all places ſtore of Clergie to communicate together, as in priuate Pariſh Churches, Hermitages and the like, for a while the Prieſts in thoſe places, (imitating theSocrat. l. 5. 
                           •
                        . 21 
                     Alexandrian cuſtome) reade onely the Prayers and Goſpels of the Communion, and receiued not, but afterwards fearing to be defrauded of their Offerings (if they read onely and not receiued) they beganne to receiue alone, teaching that this action of theirs being performed in the name of others, was applyed and as beneficiall vnto them as if they did it themſelues; and hence grew priuate Maſſes in the Church of Rome, wherein the Prieſt communicates or excommunicates rather without the people.
                  The ſecond Chriſtian vertue which the Primitiue

Church laboured, by her beſt Medicines to ſupport and preſerue, was Hope, which reflects vpon the future bliſſe, and the ioyes of the World to come. For excitement whereunto, two cuſtomes were entertayned; the one pointing at that happineſſe which the Saints enioy immediatly after their departure hence; the other, at the fulneſſe of glory which they ſhall participate at the end and coſummation of the World.
                  That which pointed at the ioy and bliſſe which the Saints enioy immediatly after their departure hence, conſiſted partly in thankeſgiuings vnto God for the glory beſtowed vpon them, partly in other remembrances, to excite and ſtirre vp men from conſideration of their reward, to bee imitators of their Vertues. For deeper impreſſion whereof, there were wont to be yeerely Solemnities at their Sepulchres, Commemorations of their names, and Orations made in their prayſes. Now it being the cuſtome of them which fell in perſecution, to implore the Prayers of Martyrs in Priſon for them: Saint Cyprian
                     Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 3. l 3. Ep. 18. vpon ſuppoſition that Saints departed hence doe pray for the particular behoofe of thoſe whom they know they left behind them, did deſire ſome Martyrs and others, not after, but before their deaths, that if they preuented him and went before him into their Maſters preſence that then they would not forget to remember him vnto God. This ſoliciting of Martyrs before their deaths, brought in the next Age a cuſtome to call vpon them after their deaths, and this calling vpon them after it, howſoeuer it may bee accounted rather amongſt the ſtraines of
                     
                     Rhetoricke (being done in their Aniuerſarie Declamations) then the Aphoriſmes of Faith, yet by Gregory the Greates time, it weaued Prayers into the Lyturgie, that God would heare their Interceſſions; but afterwards when the Glaſſe of the Trinity was perfected, wherein the Schoolemen conceiue the Saints to ſee whatſoeuer is done vpon earth, then theſe Prayers to God to heare the Interceſsions of the Saints, were changed into Prayers, to the Saints, to heare our Interceſsions thēſelues, which is the practiſe of the preſent Church of Rome, and came in (ſaithBell. l. 1. de ſanctor. beatitud. c. 8. 
                     Bellar.) conſuetudine non lege, by a cuſtome not a law.
                  The other Cuſtome that aymed at the fulneſſe of glory which the Saints ſhall enioy at the end and conſummation of the World, was performed by Prayers for their glorious Reſurrection, and their publike acquittall in the laſt Day, the one being an exemplification of the Petition, Thy Kingdome come, the other of that which followes after it, Thy will be done. For the greater ſolemnitie whereof, Oblations at Funerals and ſometimes yeerely, by the friends of the deceaſed were made, not (as ſome Popiſh Writers doe conceiue) of the Euchariſt, but (as Albaſpinus notes) of common Bread or other things,Albaſpin. de vet. Eccleſ. ritibus, l. 1 c. 10. of which the Congregation eating and communicating, acknowledged the deceaſed by that action (as a ſigne of Communion) to bee co-members with them of the ſame myſticall Bodie the Church, and intereſted in the Common Prayers touching the laſt day. The which produced ſundry opinions amongſtSixt. Senenſ. bibliothec. li. 6. annot. 345. the Ancients; for Iuſtin Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Romanus, Lactantius and others were from

hence of opinion, that no particular iudgement paſſeth vpon the Saints vntil the laſt day; but the church following, being loth as it ſeemes to put off this particular iudgement wholly vntill then, and yet not willing to determine, that it ſhould be giuen immediately vpon the paſſage hence, but allowing an indefiniteVid. officium pro defunctis, & Bell. lib. 2. de purg. cap. 5. Offic. de funct. ibid. Libera domine animas omnium defunctorum de ore Leonis, de profundo lacu, ne abſorbeat eas tartarus, ne cadant in obſcurum, he ſaith not, ne maneant in obſcuro, as if they were there alreadie, but ne cadant in obſcurum, of which feare they who are preſumed to be in purgatorie are by the Ieſuites owne confeſſions, altogether freed▪
                      time for the ſame, did apply the Churches prayers and well-wiſhes, (beſides their former reference to the finall iudgement) to this interim alſo alotted for the particular; in the which they thought they might accompanie them to Gods Tribunall, and pray for their deliuerance from hell, and the iawes of the Lyon. At laſt the doctrine of purgatorie, which (as I ſhall now declare) for a long time paſſed as an vncertaine or particular opinion amongſt priuate men, getting ſway, the ſelfe ſame prayers were interpreted neither of a generall, nor of the particular iudgement, but of the iayle deliuery of ſoules out of purgatorie, and ſo eſtabliſhed in the Florentine Councell celebrated. An. 1438.
                  Another opinion which the oblations and prayers for the publicke acquittall of the dead wrought amongſt ſome of the ancients, was, that (ſeeing few dyed which by the bountie of their friends enioyed not that honour more or leſſe) all men, good and bad were either at the generall Iudgement, or before, to bee purged by fire, the payne whereof, if need were ſhould by theſe prayers of the liuing be either diminiſhed or taken away. And hence it is that purgatorie got entrance into the Church, which being at the firſt like the vnknowne land at the South of America called terra del fogo, was by Origen vpon miſconstruction

of the prayers aforeſaid, and an ouerweening opinion of aduancing the mercie of God, tranſlated out of their Academie of Plato into the Schooles of Chriſtians. Long it was ere this miſhapen Monſter could bee brought into any probable forme. For Origen who firſt embraced it, taught that the Deuills themſelues ſhould be ſaued by it. OthersVid. Auguſt. de ciuitate Dei. lib. 21. cap. 17. & 23. cap. 18. & 24. cap. 19. &. 25. cap. 20. &. 25. cap. 25. & 26. cap. 22. &. 27. to correct that extremitie, ſaid, not the Deuills, but yet all men. A third, not all men, but all Chriſtians and ſuch as are baptiſed. A fourth, not all Chriſtians nor all ſuch as are baptiſed, yet all ſuch as haue beene once in their liues true beleeuers. A fift, not all ſuch as haue beene once in their liues true beleeuers, but yet all ſuch as perſeuere in the Orthodoxe faith vntill their death. A ſixth, not all that perſeuere in the Orthodoxe faith vntill their death, but yet all ſuch as perſeuering doe giue almes; for theſe (ſay they) how great ſinners ſoeuer they bee otherwiſe, ſhall haue iudgement with mercie. A ſeauenth, not all that ſhew mercie, but yet all that haue Chriſt for their foundation, that is, allBell. lib. 2. de that dye in the ſtate of grace, which opinion ispurg. cap. 1. Harding. cont. Apollogiam Iuelli. cap. 16. Diuiſ. 2. Bell. lib. 1. de purg. cap. vlt. §. reſpondet. attributed vnto Saint Ambroſe, Hierome, Rupertus, and others. Saint Auſten who complaines that his age was full of preſumptions, being not able to reſiſt the ſtreame of theſe ouerflowing errors, thought yet to vſe the ſame policie touching purgatorie, which he did in other points, as prayer for the dead inuocation of Saints, and the like, that is, either to moderate it, or make it doubtfull, thinking by degrees to make it incredible. Sometimes therefore he ſeemes to allow it, but yet by the Papiſts owne consession

vnder this prouiſo, that if any ſuch place ſhould bee, yet it is vncertaine what end or effect it hath, whether to ſatisfie Gods Iustice for the ſinne paſt, or whether to diminiſh (as temporall paynes vſe to doe) the euill affections of ſin ſtill remaining. Againe ſometimesAug. Enchirid. cap. 67. Item de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 26. Hypognoſt. l. 5. Bell. lib. 2. de purg. cap. 1. hee denyes the thing it ſelfe, ſometimes hee doubts of it. Nor is it yet agreed amongſt the Papiſts either for the fire, or the place, or the time of it; only thus farre they ſeeme at length to concurre, that ſoules doe therein ſatisfie both for veniall ſinnes, and for the guilt of puniſhment due vnto mortall ſins, when the guilt of the ſinne it ſelfe is remitted and forgiuen; which, how contrarie both to reaſon and the ancient purgatorie of the Fathers it is, I leaue to the iudicious to conſider. It was firſt confirmed in the Florentine Councell aboue mentioned.
                  Charitie ſucceedeth, for the maintenance and encreaſe whereof, they vſed the beſt policie they could to plant Vnitie and Concord both in the Church Vniuerſall, and alſo in particular Churches, that ſodiſt. 99. cap. 1. Vbi primates erant ſeculi, ac primaiu diciaria poteſtas—ipſis quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in ciuitatibus vellocis noſtros patriarchas, &c. Berterius, diatrib. 2. cap. 12. Septem ſunt in oriente. & diat. 1. cap. 3 Occidens omnis 6. habet. if poſſibly they could, all ſchiſmes and contentions amongſt Chriſtians, might be remoued, & the bond of peace might bee kept inuiolable.
                  For the preſeruation hereof in the Church vniuerſall, it was thought good, that according to the ſecular diuiſion of the Empire, the Church ſhould be diuided into certaine Dioceſſes, whereof there were at the firſt (by Berterius account) thirteene in number, who vnder the names of Patriarchs and Biſhops of the firſt Seas, ſhould ioyne in care and counſell for the good of the Chriſtian Commonwealth. Amongſt theſe, three were (in regard of

the Cities wherein they reſided) more eminent thenHegeſippus de excid. vrb. Hieroſolim. l. 3. cap. 3. the reſt, and began to encroach vpon the others iuriſdiction, to wit, Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, to which in the ſecond generall Councel was added for the ſame cauſe, Conſtantinople and afterwards Ieruſalem, though this laſt had indeed vntill the fift generall Councell, but a title without ſubſtance as being ſubiect to Caeſaria, his Metropolitan and in laſt reſort vnto Antioch. Now becauſe all things ſhould be done in order, it was thought fit that the Pope, becauſe hee was Biſhop of Rome, the imperiall Citie ſhould haue the precedencie, though notConcil. gen. 5. Vid. Cyprian. epiſt▪ 55. & 68. edit. Pamel. Item Aenaeum. Silui. ep. 288. of authoritie ſuper reliquos, ouer the reſt, yet of place, inter reliquos, amongſt the reſt. This precedencie of place wan him in time a precedencie in power, but it was at the firſt but poteſtas honoraria, a kinde of courteſie authoritie, not long after it came to be claymed, as ordinaria, as an ordinarie power and ſo was confirmed in the Florentine Councell. Laſtly, this ordinarie power bare ſway awhile, becauſe the Pope was great in generall Councells, but now ſince the laſt Lateran Councell, vnder Leo theBell. lib. 2. de Concil. cap. 17. tenth, the Ieſuites will haue it to beare ſway, by another title; becauſe the Pope is great ouer generall Councells, which addes a farther degree to his greatneſſe, that whereas hee was heretofore heard de facto in deed, for that he was iudged Orthodoxe, hee now challengeth to be beleeued de iure, of right, becauſe hee cannot be hereticall.
                  For the preſeruation of vnitie and concord in particular Churches, there was a kinde of Communion amongſt the Ancients, which they celebrated

by Eulogies, that is, by Bread, not conſecrated forAlbaſpin. de vet. Eccleſ. rit. lib. 1. cap. 8. the vſe of the Sacrament, but otherwiſe bleſſed by the Biſhop, the which howſoeuer it was not at the beginning exported forth of the Church where it was offered, yet afterwards it came to bee ſent vpon ſolemne feſtiualls from the Mother Church vnto the Pariſhes and Villages thereto belonging, by communicating whereof (as by a liuely ſymboll) the fellowſhip and communion betweene all the faithfull of the ſame Dioceſſe was repreſented, and the people acknowledged themſelues to compoſe the ſame body of Chriſt together. Now, ſome being poſſeſt (as Albaſpinus obſerues) with a religiousAlb. ibid. conceit of this ceremonie, began to deale in like manner with the Euchariſt, as may bee gathered out of the fourteenth Canon of the Laodicean Councell, where the practice thereof is expreſly forbidden. But partly the cuſtome which ſome particulars, in the time of perſecution (eſpecially Hermites (who ſeldome had the opportunitie of receauing) tooke vp, of carrying part of the Sacrament home with them, to partake thereof when they pleaſed, and partly the charitie which in ſome places was ſhewed in like manner to the ſick, bringingEuſeb. hiſt. lib. 6. cap. 36. vnto them the remaynder of the Bread and Wine, in token of their Communion with the reſt, preuayled ſo farre at length with the Roman Church, that what was then but voluntarie, and ſprang from priuate deuotion, is now made neceſſarie, and enioyned by publike injunction; and what then was vſed ſacramentally and for a ſigne of Communion, is now ordayned for other vſes, as circumgeſtation, adoration, and the like.
                  
                     Thus hauing giuen a taſte of ſome principall errors in Poperie, which ſprang from that part of Church diſcipline, which conſiſted in the conſeruation of the ſoules health; it followes that ſomething ſhould bee ſaid of that which belonged to the reſtoring of the ſame in ſuch as had impaired it by their falls. This part conſiſted in two principall ingredients, Corraſiues, and Lenitiues. The Corraſiues were ſuch medicines as were applyed to thoſe that fell, for purging out of the old corruption, and keeping of others from the like infection, the which was performed, partly by confeſſions, and partly other ſatisfactions.
                  Confeſſions, were nothing elſe at the firſt, but publike recognitions, for publike ſcandalls; which being found vſefull to Penitents, made Origen andOrigen. homil. 2. in Pſal. 37. others to perſwade men to doe the like to their Miniſters for priuate offences, to the end that making knowne their griefes, they might haue plaiſters for their wounds. But theſe publike confeſſions through the abating of zeale and auoyding of ſhame, being turned into priuate, ſome began to confound the one priuate confeſſion, which was impoſed by Church diſcipline, with the other which was voluntarie, and ſo in time, of Conſilium Eccleſiaſticorum, an aduice of Church-men, it became Praeceptum Eccleſiae, the precept of the Church; and this againe, which beforetime was onely a Confeſſion of ſinnes, quoad ſubſtantiam, for their ſubſtance, was byConcil. Lateran. ſub. Innocent. 3. cap. 21. the Lateran Councell vnder Innocent the third, farther clog'd with an Inquiſition of ſinnes, etiam quoad circumſtantias, euen together with all their particular circumſtances.
                  
                     Satisfactions which properly come vnder the Law of Church Diſcipline, were certaine outward remonſtrances of ſorrow and repentance, wherewith for the tryall of Penitents and example of others, the Primitiue Church did exerciſe thoſe that fell, before they reſtored them to the ſame ſtate of Communion wherein aforetimes they did ſtand. Diuers of the Fathers, that they might breed a willingneſſe in men to vndergoe them, ſpake ſomewhat Hyperbolically in their commendations, ſaying, that offences were thereby redeemed, purged, and expiated, which being vnderſtood (as the Maſter of the Sentences expounds them) not of purgationsP. Lomb. ſent. l. 4. d. 18. I. from the offence as it is an offence to God, or from the puniſhment due to ſinne (both which are oppoſed vnto Iuſtification) but onely of the macula, or ſpot (which the Schoolemen making to conſiſt in an habituall prauity is oppoſed chiefly to Sanctification) can little aduantage the Popiſh cauſe. For who doubts, but that Repentance and Sorrow, though they are not meritorious cauſes, yet are instrumentall, whereby grace takes her ſpeedier effect in diminiſhing the euill affections and vaine deſires
                        Guil Duobus modis ſumitur remiſſio peccatorum, Primo, pro non imputatione eorum, ſecundo pro abolitione macularum ipſorum. Dionyſ. Carthuſ. in 4. ſent. diſt, 16. q. 2. which dwel in vs? But the anciēt rites of Satisfaction degenerating with the Times, & the Schoolmen, beginning to cōfound Iuſtification with Sanctification, (Firſt, by adding the purgation of the macula, or ſpot vnto that which is truly termed Iuſtification, as a Species of it, & afterwards forgetting to diſtinguiſh them at all) another kind of Satisfaction ſucceeded in the formers place, differing from it, Firſt, in the matter, as building vpon Workes of Supererogation,

                     viz. Pilgrimages, Whippings, Vowes with the like. Secondly, in the end, being not impoſed to ſatisfie the Church in caſe of ſcandall, but to tranſact with God vpon termes of Iuſtice. Thirdly, in the time, not being now performed before abſolution (as formerly was vſed) but after it. Laſtly, in the obiect being not ſo much for ſinne in it ſelfe, as for temporall puniſhment due vnto it, when the offence is remitted.
                  The Lenetiues which the Church applied to ſuch as ſhe perceiued to be truly contrite and ſorrowfull for their ſinnes committed, reſided chiefly in abſolutions which were exerciſed either in foro conſcientiae, in the Court of the Conſcience, whereby the penitent was certified of his reconciliation to God, or in foro Eccleſiae, in the Court of the Church, whereby they who had giuen publike offence by their fall, were reconciled vnto the Congregation.
                  For the firſt of theſe, as the Church neuer denied the benefit of it to thoſe who rightly deſire it, ſo the Popiſh neceſſity and other poſitions concerning it, are but doctrines of a new Edition. For moſtLomb. 3. ſent. diſt. 18. Occam in 4. ſent. q. 8. & 9. ad 1. arg. Scoti. Alex. de Hales, Sum. part. 4. q. 21. membr. 1. Thom. in 4. ſent. diſt. 18. Richardus, apud Dion. Carthuſ. in 4. ſent. diſt 18. q. 3. Bonauent. ib. of the ancient Schoolmen held the abſolution to be but either declaratiue, as Peter Lombard, Occam, Alexander de Hales, or at moſt but diſpoſitiue, whereby faith is ingenerated in the minds of the hearers, by the which they are made capeable of remiſſion, as Thomas Aquinas, and Richardus, to whom Bonauenture may be added, who ſaith, that the power of the Keyes extends it ſelfe to the remiſſion of the fault by way of deprecation, not by way of imparting it. The Councell of Trent ſends a banne after

them, which deny the Prieſts to haue that power of remittting ſinnes which the Church vnderſtands them to haue, but was ſo wiſe in the meane time, as to conceale what the Churches meaning ſhould be, yet if we would know by the Ieſuits, what it is at this preſent, they will you, that the Prieſts doe abſolue from ſinne, not by declaring or preaching, but by extingiſhing and diſſoluing it; as blowing doth the fire, or the wind doth the clouds, that is by a true and Phyſicall efficiency, ſo Bellarmine, Suarez,
                     Bell. de poenit. lib. 3. c. 2. Suar. 3. d. 9. §. 2. Tollet. Com. Luc. 5. annot. 41 Concil. Elib. Can. 1. 36. 22. Nicen. Can. 11, 12. 
                     Tollet, &c.
                  
                  The ſecond ſort of Lenetiues, conſiſted in relaxations, or releaſements from Eccleſiaſticall Cenſures. For whereas, during the heat of perſecutions, the ſeuerity of Church Diſcipline was ſuch, that for ſome offences, ten yeeres, for ſome the whole life after was adiudged to the doing of penance; the ſatisfaction notwithſtanding, which ſome gaue the Church by outward ſignes of penitency, and requeſtsAlbaſpin. 1. 1. cap. 20. of Martyrs in Priſon for them, cauſed the Biſhops to releaſe them either of all or of part of thoſe yeares wherein they ſtood bound to vndergoe their penance, and theſe were the Indulgences of thoſe dayes. But the times growing more looſe and licentious, and withall the eſteeme held of Church Cenſures diminiſhing, the Cleargie was ſaine to remit much of their rigour; and to change publike penances into priuate, or other good workes, and ſo to bring in that which wee call commutations. Now theſe alſo in the end beeing ſlighted, the Biſhops who had let goe and quitted the true reines, tooke hold by the falſe, and taught, that whatſoeuer a man

omits to performe of his commutations in this life, the ſame he ſhall pay full dearly in Purgatory, in the the World to come; which brought an eager and freſh deſire in men to procure with all coſt and charges, Pardons for the neglect thereof; and becauſe ſome caſes were reſerued to the Popes owne power of diſpenſing (euery man beeing deſirous to haue a plenary or full pardon) they began to neglect other Biſhops, and eſtabliſhed the Pope (by that meanes) in the ſole right of granting Indulgences, which being at the firſt, but abſolutions in the Conſiſtory of the Church, and that for the liuing onely, became a thouſand yeares and more after Chriſt, to be abſolutions in the Chancery of Heauen, and that alſo for the dead.
                  By theſe few examples it may appeare, how from the miſconſtruction and wreſted Interpretations of Primitiue Diſcipline, the bodie of Popery is deſcended, and withall the degrees whereby it ſprang vp to this ſtature which now it hath, to the end that the Deuils policie being ript vp, our ignorance of the firſt Founders of Romiſh Cockle, may ſeeme as pardonable, as was this of the Seruants in my Text of the Sower of Tares: and withall that our Aduerſaries may not think vs ſo ſtupid as to know nothing, though wee bee not ſo skilfull as they require, to know euery thing. The baſterdly brood of a common Strumpet may haue his reputed father knowne, though not his naturall, and there may be Acts and Records to ſhew by whom it was legitimated, though not authentike Regiſters, by whom it was begotten; and ſo can we ſhew, when, by whom, and in which of

the Popes Markets or Councels theſe Tares were firſt allowed and ſold for good Wheate, though we be not ſo cunning in the blacke Art, as to know the Deuill or his Diſciples name that ſowed them; wee know them as the Seruants did in facto eſſe, being ſhot vp and bearing fruit, though we may bee ignorant for their fieri, by what euill Genius they were planted, or vnder what malignant Planet they took root; for what ſhall wee ſay? doth a thing deſiſt to be what it is, becauſe the time and originall of it is not knowne? Old-age, is it not old-age, becauſe the houre or day wherein it beginnes cannot be giuen? Doth a Conſumption ceaſe to bee a Conſumption, becauſe the moment when one fals into it cannot be aſſigned? Is not the ſhadow of the Diall towardes night remoued from the place it poſſeſſed at noone, becauſe the mouing of it cannot bee diſcerned? Are no Cuſtomes of force, becauſe the Authours and Commencers of them be not written? Or may any conclude againſt the Apoſtle, that he erred in ſaying the myſtery of iniquity did already work, becauſe he teacheth2. Theſſ. 2. 7, 8. in the ſame place, that the wicked man was not then reuealed? But how ſhould we hope to diſcouer fully the practices of Satan and the proceedings of Antichriſt, which is de regno tenebrarum, of the Kingdome of darknes, when as our Sauiour tels vs, that the Kingdome of God, which is regnum lucis, the Kingdome of light, is as if a man ſhould caſt ſeed into the ground, and ſhould ſleepe, and riſe night and day, yet ſhould the Seed ſpring and grow vp, hee knoweth not how? Marke 4. 27. That which SaintAug. Epiſt. 29. ad Hieronymum. 
                     Auſten therefore in his 29. Epiſtle hath touching

the propagation of originall ſinne, may teach vs what vſe to make of the births and propagations of Hereſies, that when a certaine man had fallen into a pit wherein was much water readie to choake him, another paſsing by that way, and wondring at the chance, ſaid, how felleſt thou in, the poore man being in more need of reliefe than diſcourſe, anſweres, cogita quomodo hinc me liberes, non quomodo huc ceciderim quaeras, it is but a ſuperfluous queſtion to aske how I fell in, thinke rather I beſeech thee, by what meanes thou mayſt helpe mee out. The Seruants in my Text, propounded the like queſtion (as you ſee) when they demanded, From whence the Tares are? But what anſwere did the Houſholder ſhape them? Did he name the Author, or deſcribe him (as the Ieſuites require of vs) by indiuiduall differences, ſaying, Such an one hath done it? No, onely in generall, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      an Enemy, or as Beza renders it, inimicus quiſpiam, ſome Enemy hath done it; as who would ſay; it concernes you rather to vſe all poſſible diligence you can to roote them vp, and to looke vpon that which is before, then with too thriftleſſe expence of time, tolooke at that which is behind, and to ſtudie vnde, From whence they are.
                  Nor doth it any whit impugne our induſtry imployed this way, that the Seruants asking the Huſbandman, if they ſhould gather them vp, he anſwered, Nay, leaſt whileſt you gather vp the Tares, you root
                     
                        Ʋerſe 29. 
                     vp the wheate with them; for he ſaith not, ne cohibeatis, you may not reſtraine them, nor doth hee ſay, ne diſpergatis, you may not diſperſe them (for as

                     Chryſoſtome vpon this place notes, The Conuenticles of Heretickes are to bee diſſolued) but ne colligatis, you may not gather them vp at once; ne colligetis, you may not binde them in bundles. There are in this Parable two ſorts of Taskers mentioned; Operarij ad meſſem, Labourers to prepare the Harueſt, and Operarij meſsis, Labourers of the Harueſt. The former are wee, who in this Parable are called Seruants; the later are the Angels, which are here termed reapers.
                     
                        Ʋerſe 27. Verſe, 30. & 39. To vs, the Seruants, he ſaith now, Plantate, rigate, amputate, Plant, water, prune, for preſeruation. At the Harueſt, he will ſay, non nobis (as Saint Auſten notes) ſed meſſoribus, not vnto vs, but to the reapers, colligite ad iudicium, gather together vnto iudgement, colligate in faſciculis ad ſupplicium, bind in bundles vnto puniſhment, but congregate in horreum ad praemium, gather the wheat into my barne, for the reward; which God of his infinite mercy grant vnto vs, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, to whom with the Father and holy Spirit, one Eſſence and three Perſons, be rendred all prayſe, honour and glory, might, maieſty and dominion, now and for euermore.
                  Amen.
                  FINIS.
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   