
      
         
            
            
            THE PASSION OF CHRIST, and the Benefits thereby.
            BY Bartholomew Chamberlaine, Doctor in Diuinitie.
            
               1 IOHN 1. 7.
               The bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, the Sonne of God, purgeth vs from all ſinne.
            
            
               LONDON: Printed for Thomas Pauier. 1613.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE PASSION of Chriſt, and the benefits thereby.
            
               HEBR. 9. 28.
               Chriſt was once offered to take away the the ſinnes of many: and vnto them that looke for him, ſhall he appeare the ſecond time, without ſinne, vnto ſaluation.
            
            
               
                  THis Scripture, found in the ninth to the Hebrewes, written by Saint Paul (as ſome thinke) but ſprung from the Holy-Ghoſt, as the Catholike Church beleeueth, plaine in words, certaine in ſenſe, ſhort in reading, containeth two neceſſarie, notable and large points. The firſt is, the offering of

Chriſt, and wherefore he was offered, in theſe words; Chriſt was once offered, to take away the ſinnes of many. The other, the comming of Chriſt: vnto whom, and wherefore he ſhall come, in the ſecond Branch, 
                     Ʋnto them that looke for him ſhall hee appeare the ſecond time, without ſinne, vnto ſaluation. The firſt is for me, being the doctrine of Chriſt crucified, which onely is to be preached: for the time alſo, being the Paſſion weeke, wherin eſpecially it is to be meditated, and for the moſt Noble and Honourable Audience, being Chriſtians, which ſeeke ſaluation by Chriſt crucified, & no where elſe: and therefore contenting my ſelfe with the firſt part at this preſent, by Gods grace and your Honourable permiſſion, I am to handle the Paſſion of CHRIST, briefely, to auoid tediouſneſſe: plainly, to edifie all: truely, out of the Scriptures: and, I hope, comfortably, both to you, and my ſelfe; in this order: Firſt, I will touch the things which went before his Croſſe, not all, but ſome: Secondly, what hee ſuffered on the Croſſe, and what chanced about the time of his Paſſion:

thirdly, what good wee haue by Chriſts Paſſion, and how wee ſhould meditate thereon. That the Treatiſe may be to the glory of God, I beſeech you let vs ioyne in heartie prayer vnto God.
               O Almightie, &c.
            
            
               THe bloudy and bitter Paſſion of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, God and man, in the ſixe and twentith, and ſeauen and twentith Chapters of S. Mathew, is largely and comfortably diſcourſed. How he was betraied by Iudas with a kiſſe, accuſed of the Iewes, condemned vnder Pontius Pilate, and crucified betweene two Malefactors; his Soule being troubled; his Heart grieued; and his Body tormented with the nayling of his bleſſed Hands and Feet, with the piercing of his gracious Side, vvith the ſhedding of his moſt glorious and precious Bloud. So the Sonne of God, the Lord of Glory, the Prince of Peace, was entreated of miſerable Miſcreants. So hee, which knew no ſinne, was made a ſacrifice for our ſinne. Now if the Vaile

of the Temple did rend aſunder from the toppe to the bottome; if the Graues did open, & the bodies of Saints (which ſlept) aroſe; if the Earth did tremble and the ſtones claue aſunder when this vvas done; how can it be but that we ſhould be moued when this is preached? Our Hearts may tremble to thinke of it, ſo may our Tongues to ſpeake of it, yet we may reioyce in Chriſt crucified, that by the vertue of his Paſſion our ranſome is payed, our wounds healed, ſatiſfaction for our ſinne made; Death conquered, Sathan ſubdued, Hell ouercome, Sinne killed, God pacified, and wee to him reconciled.
               And now to begin with thoſe things which went before his Croſſe: may wee not thinke his ſuffering was exceeding great, when he ſweat bloud? and that did Chriſt in mount Oliues, being in an Agonie, kneeling downe deuoutely, and praying moſt earneſtly. It is an vſuall thing for a man in anguiſh to ſweat; but to ſweate bloud, and to ſweate it in ſuch abundance, that euen drops like bloud ſhould trickle from his Body vpon the

Ground, this is not an vſuall thing; this was a ſtrange thing; this was proper onely to Chriſt; this declared griefe vnſpeakable, paine intollerable. And did Chriſt ſhed drops of bloud for our ſins, & cannot wee ſhed one teare for the ſame? O that my Head were a Well of water, and my Eyes a Fountaine of teares, that I might bewaile the vnthankfulneſſe of the world!
               The matter which hee had in hand, was waightie; the worke which hee had to accompliſh, was great; the conflict, ſtrong; the enemies, mighty; their aſſaults many. The Worke was mans Redemption; the Conflict was with Sinne, with Death, with Sathan, with Hell, with the Law, and with the wrath of GOD. And would not thoſe enemies, ſo many in number, ſo mightie in power, ſo terrible to behold, make a man to feare, to tremble, and to ſweate? If Chriſt had beene meere man, he could not haue encountred with them: but being God and man, did encounter with them all, ouercame them all, lead them captiue all, and hath triumphed ouer them all, though

it coſt him drops of bloud, with ſtrong crying and teares. What ſay I drops of bloud? it coſt him more, that which was deareſt vnto him, his life, before he could bring vnder ſo mightie enemies as man had, and accompliſh ſo painfull a worke as Redemption is, and pacifie ſo great a perſon as is the moſt high, almightie and euer-liuing God. O man, remember the drops of bloud which CHRIST did ſhed for thy ſake, for thy ſinne, for thy ſoule, and for thy ſaluation: loue him for it; thanke him for it; ſerue him for it all the dayes of thy life. And thus much for the ſuffering of Chriſt in Mount Oliues.
               Secondly, wee may conceiue his ſuffering was exceeding great, when being ſorrowfull and grieuouſly troubled, hee ſaid: My Soule is heauy euen vnto death. When hee fell on his Face, and prayed thrice: O my Father, if it be poſſible, let this Cup paſſe from mee; meaning his bitter Paſſion: not that he was vnwilling to take it (for, in all things he ſubmitted himſelfe to his heauenly Father) but thoſe earneſt ſpeeches declared the

heauy burden of ſinne, which lighted on him, the painefull griefe which hee endured, the grieuous paine which he ſuffered, the great torments, and terrours which hee ſuſtained for our ſakes. The ſoule of Chriſt was from heauen heauenly, neuer beſpotted with any vncleanneſſe, but pure without corruption notwithſtanding it was heauie, and touched with the feare of death, in conſideration of our ſinne, which had deſerued death, with an infinite number of miſeries beſide, all which lighted vpon that innocent Lambe; (which neuer diſpleaſed God, nor offended man) that by his ſtripes wee might be healed. And what an hell thinke we was Chriſt in, when he prayed thriſe moſt feruently, to haue that bitter Cuppe paſſe from him? No doubt hee felt the waight of ſinne, the Wrath of God againſt it, the Iuſtice of God requiring puniſhment for it, the power of the Law pronouncing condemnation to it, the force of Death, the tyranny of Sathan, the torments of Hell, which no tongue can expreſſe, nor heart conceiue. And this made Chriſt to ſay

in anguiſh of Spirit: My Soule is very heauie euen vnto the death. And to pray three times; O my Father, if it be poſſible, let this cup paſſe from me: yet to ſhew that therefore hee came into the world, and that he was content to dye, hee ſubmitted his will to Gods, ſaying; Neuertheleſſe, not as I will, but as thou wilt.
               
               Thirdly, he was betrayed by one of his owne, Iudas by name; a Iudas in hart, a Iudas in tongue, a Iudas in deed, came to him with a Iudas kiſſe, ſaying; Haile Maſter, and betrayed Chriſt. O beaſtly traiterous Beaſt, to betray thy Maſter, and that vnder colour of friendſhip with a kiſſe. I ſay, to betray thy Maſter, whom thou waſt bound to defend, and oughteſt to haue loued. It was too much for any Barbarian to haue done: but for thee which didſt call him Maſter, vvhich didſt beare his Bagge, which didſt ſit at his Table, which waſt conuerſant vvith him, to doe it, was a Iudas tricke, indeede, too-too traiterous, ſhamefull and beaſtly. But what will not the deſire of money doe? What will you giue me (ſaid IVDAS) and I will deliuer him vnto you?
                  
I will deliuer him vnto you: but firſt I muſt know what you will giue me. Iudas tooke part with the Iewes, Iudas betraied Chriſt, Iudas damned himſelfe, and all for what will you giue me? But what did his money him good, when he had loſt Chriſt, loſt Heauen, loſt his Soule, and damned himſelfe? But was this the end of this? When Iudas ſaw he was condemned, he repented himſelfe, he brought againe the thirtie pieces of ſiluer to the chiefe Prieſts and Elders, he ſaid, I haue ſinned, betraying the innocent bloud: he caſt downe the ſiluer pieces in the temple, he departed, and went and hanged himſelfe. Hanging was the end of Iudas: a fit end for ſuch a traitor: but that is not all, he hangs in hell perpetually for it, and he is ſerued as he deſerued, moſt iuſtly: for bloud will haue bloud. But did Iudas repent? ſo is the text, He repented, and he ſaid; I haue ſinned, betraying the innocent bloud. He did not repent truely, for then hee would not haue hanged himſelfe. The word Repentance was in his mouth, but the thing vvas not in his heart: within him was a tormenting

conſcience, which did accuſe, iudge, and condemne him, which did ſet before his eyes, the haynouſneſſe of his fact, the grieuouſneſſe of GODS Wrath, Iudgement without mercy, Hell-fire without redemption: This deſperate minde made him to depart from the companie, to take an halter, and hang himſelfe. See the force of Conſcience in Iudas: Mala conſcientia delictorum noſtrorum teſtis, iudex, tortor, carcer, accuſat, iudicat, condemnat. An euill conſcience is a witneſſe, a Iudge, a tormentor, a priſon of our ſinnes; it doth accuſe, iudge, and condemne.
               What thing more grieuous, then day and night to carry about ſuch a witneſſe, Iudge, Tormenter, and priſon? Omnia poteſt homo fugere praeter cor ſuum: Nam quocunque vadit, conſcientia eum non derelinquit. A man may auoide all things but his owne heart; for whither-ſoeuer hee goeth, it goeth with him, either to excuſe or accuſe, which are the effects of conſcience. The teſtimonie of a good conſcience is a precious iewell, and (as Salcmon ſaith) a continuall feaſt, becauſe it

maketh a man alwayes merry. The putting away of a good conſcience cauſeth ſhipwracke of faith, as in Himenaeus and Alexander. Happy, therefore is he which can truly ſay with that elect veſſel S. Paul, Herein I endeuour my ſelfe to haue alway a cleare conſcience towards God, and towards men: for if our heart condemne vs, GOD is greater then our heart, and knoweth all things; but if our heart condemne vs not, then haue wee boldneſſe towards him, and whatſoeuer we aske in faith we receiue of him. A ſicke conſcience can no Phyſitian in the world cure, but that heauenly Phyſitian Chriſt Ieſu: to him therefore let vs reſort with all humilitie.
               But to Iudas againe: What will you giue me, and I will deliuer him vnto you? The deſire of money is the roote of all miſchiefe. They which are poyſoned with it doe erre from the Faith. They pierce themſelues through with many ſorrowes: they fall into temptations, into ſnares, into many fooliſh and noiſome luſts which drowne men in perdition and deſtruction. But men of God muſt flie thoſe things and follow after righteouſneſſe,

godlineſſe, faith, loue, patience, meekeneſſe, laying hold of eternall life, whereunto they are called. By the end of Iudas let Seruants take heede that they betray not their Maiſters: for treaſon and rebellion moſt commonly haue a ſhamefull end; ſuch is Gods iuſt iudgement. Let Maſters alſo beware, that they truſt not euery ſeruant too farre, no not though he be of his houſhold, and pretend good-will, and ſeeme truſty; euen ſo did Iudas, yet was hee in truth, but a ſeemer, a diſſembler, a traitor. For, as there is no griefe to that of the minde, no loſſe to that of life, no feare to that of deſtruction; ſo is there no enemie to a diſſembling friend, no treacherie to that which one of a mans owne may practiſe.
               Here is Iudas for an example: one of Chriſts Apoſtles, and of his houſhold (as I may ſay) one that asked, Maſter, is it I? one that kiſſed him, and ſeemed as truſty as any the reſt: yet for all that he was but a Iudas, a halter, a cloaker, a diſſembler, a traitor. All is not honie that is ſweet, neither is all gold that gliſters; ſo is not

euery one a true ſeruant that ſaith, Maſter. Iudas was a double fellow, hee had one queſtion to Chriſt, another to the Iewes: to Chriſt, Maſter, is it I? but to the Iewes, what will you giue me, and I will deliuer him vnto you? This queſtion of Iudas for the firſt part is very rife in the world at theſe dayes: I will doe you a pleaſure, but what wil you giue me for my paines? I will lend you a ſumme, but what will you giue me for intereſt? I will let you a piece of land, but what will you giue me for a good fine? Hee that will giue moſt ſhall haue it: ſo all is, what will you giue me, and little without what will you giue me. But let them vſe it as long as they will, it is but Iudas his queſtion; Chriſtian charitie asketh no ſuch queſtion, and yet is ready to pleaſure and to lend. And thus much for the treacherie of Iudas.
               
               I will omit, for breuities ſake, many circumſtances, as that all his Diſciples forſooke him, and fled like cowards when they ſaw ſwords and ſtaues againſt him; that Caiaphas the hie prieſt accuſed him of blaſphemy, that the people ſpat on him, and ſmote him with rods, that

                  Peter denied him with a lie, with an othe, with a curſe. I come to Pontius Pilate the Gouernour. This man though hee knew well, that for enuy they had deliuered him, though his Wife ſent vnto him vpon the Iudgement ſeate, to haue nothing to doe with that iuſt man, though hee found no cauſe of death in him; yet like a naughty man, and timerous Iudge, he let goe an arrant Theefe, Barrabas, and deliuered Ieſus to be crucified, & then before the multitude tooke water and waſhed his hands, ſaying; I am innocent of the bloud of that iuſt man. He confeſſed him a iuſt man: why then did he giue ſentence on him? He ſaid he was innocent of his bloud, and yet did conſent to ſhed it. No, no, Pilate was guiltie of Chriſts death, and could not ſhift himſelfe of it by taking water and waſhing his hands. What a matter was this, Barrabas to be preferred before Chriſt? a murtherer let goe and an innocent perſon ſcourged? But ſee enuie: they enuied Chriſts vertues. Inuidia eſt virtutis comes. If Pilate had beene a good man, finding no cauſe of death in Chriſt, hee

would haue ſtoode with him to death, & not for feare, or any other carnal reſpect haue condemned him. After the ſouldiers tooke him in the common hal, firſt they ſtripped him, then they put about him a robe of ſcarlet, on his head they ſet a crowne of thornes in his right hand they put a reede before him, they bowed their knees, in mockage, ſaying, Auc rex Iudaeorum: Afterward they ſpit on him, and with a reed ſmote him on the head. Thus when they had mocked him, they tooke the rode from him, and put his owne rayment on him, and led him away to be crucified. What villany was this? Chriſt being God could haue ſtaid their fury, yea, haue ſtriken them ſtarke dead with a word: but hee would not for our ſakes. If thoſe ſouldiers had knowne what they did, with whom they dealt, whoſe ſonne he was, from whence he came, and whither hee would, what power he had, they would haue ſtaied themſelues: but being full of ignorance, they did what they did. For had they knowne, they would not haue crucified the Lord of glory. But yet ignorance excuſed not.

For ignorance in thoſe which would not vnderſtand, without doubt is a ſinne: Ignorance in thoſe which could not vnderſtand, is a puniſhment for ſin: neither is excuſable; both are damnable. We haue heard what Chriſt ſuffered before hee came to his croſſe, that he ſweat drops of bloud in mount Oliues, that being ſorrowfull he prayed earneſtly to haue that bitter cuppe paſſe from him, that he was betraied by Iudas with a kiſſe, that hee was forſaken of all his Diſciples, that he was accuſed by Caiaphas for a blaſphemer, that he was denied by Peter thrice, that hee was condemned vnder Pontius Pilate.
               
               It followeth that I ſpeake of his ſuffering on the croſſe. Chriſt being on the croſſe ſuffered reproch of the paſſers by, of the Prieſtes, Scribes, and Phariſes, and of the Theeues. The paſſers by wagging their heades, reuiled him, ſaying: Thou that deſtroyedſt the temple of God, and buildedſt it in three dayes; if thou be the Son of God, come down from the croſſe. Likewiſe the Prieſts, Scribes, Elders, and Phariſes mocked him, ſaying, He ſaued

others, but himſelfe can he not ſaue: if hee be the King of Iſrael, let him come downe from the croſſe, and wee will beleeue him. The theeues alſo doth at the firſt, caſt the ſame thing in his teeth. Chriſt indeede ſaid: deſtroy this Temple, and in three dayes I will raiſe it vp againe. The Iewes miſtooke him: they meant that great temple in Hieruſalem, which had beene a building fortie and ſixe yeeres: but he meant the Temple of his body, that after they had deſtroyed, mangled, and killed it, he would raiſe it from death the third day, as in truth he did. Now if they had vnderſtoode him, they would neuer haue mocked him with that ſaying: but ſeeing him to riſe againe, haue confeſſed him to be the Son of God. The wicked Prieſts, Scribes and Phariſes mocked him ſaying: hee ſaued others, but he cannot ſaue himſelfe: If he be the King of Iſrael, let him come downe from the croſſe, and we will beleeue him. Chriſt indeed ſaued others, all, that beleeued in him, from the guilt of ſinne, from eternall death, from the tiranny of Sathan, from the curſe of the law, from the wrath

of God. Himſelfe alſo he ſaued, in that he got the victory, and roſe againe the third day: but theſe blinde prieſts, Scribes and Phariſes, vnderſtoode not this, and therefore they mocked him with it.
               Moreouer, Chriſt could haue come downe from the croſſe if he would, but he knew it not to be expedient. He would not yeeld to their fancies, if he had come down, they would haue beleeued him neuer a whit the ſooner: ſome would haue ſaid he did it for feare of death: ſome to ſhew what he could doe: ſome for one reſpect, ſome for an other. And therefore CHRIST knowing this, yeelded not vnto them, but went forward with the worke he had in hand, which was by his croſſe to appeaſe the wrath of God, to ſatisfie his iuſtice, to make him fauorable vnto ſinners, by offering a full and perfect ſacrifice once for all: and therefore he is a prieſt, not according to the order of Aaron, which by imperfection did need a ſucceſsiue, but according to the order of Melchiſedec, and that for euer.
               To proceede: from the ſixt houre to the ninth, there was darknes ouer all the

land, for the Sunne was darkned. About the ninth houre Ieſus cried with aloude voice, Ely, Ely, lamaſabacthany. My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken mee? Behold the Paſſion of Chriſt. He cried, with aloude voice he cried, vnto heauen he cried, as one forlorne he cried: My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me? No tongue can expreſſe, nor heart conceiue the pangs, the paines, the puniſhment which he ſuffered. For the time the paines of the damned, the torments of hell fell vpon him, which wee for our ſinnes had deſerued, and ſhould haue ſuffered for euer and euer in hell, had not he ſo ſuffered on the croſſe. What terror was this to behold, man in his fall, God in his wrath, ſinne in his deſert, the law in his curſe, the diuell in his tyranny, hell in his torments? What terrour was this? God in his wrath is a conſuming fire: man in his fall is a loſt caſt-away: ſinne in his deſert is a damnable thing: the law in his curſe is a heauy thunderbolt: the diuell in his rage is very terrible: hell in his torments is intolerable. And what a terrour was this? Theſe things Chriſt

did behold, nay did ſuffer, and the paine did make him crie aloude: My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me? not that God forſooke Chriſt at any time: but this ſpeech declared that conflict, that terrour, that torment, vvhich no creature beſide could haue endured. For it coſt more to redeeme ſoules, ſo that a man muſt let that alone for euer. Then moſt true is that article of our Creede: He deſcended into hell, for the time he ſuffered the paines of hell, together with the extreame ſhame, as the victory of ſorrowes, whileſt being held in the graue vntill the third day, he lay as it were oppreſſed of death. The vertue of his paſſion reacheth downe to hell, to redeeme mankinde from the paines of hell which hee had deſerued, to ouerthrow Sathan the prince of hell, to diſſolue his workes which are ſinne, and death, to deliuer mankinde which are vnder his ſubiection, to purchaſe for him Gods fauour, forgiuenes of ſinnes, and eternall life. Chriſt on the croſſe offered vp his ſoule and body a ſacrifice to ſaue our ſoules and bodies. On the croſſe hee ſuffered

in ſoule and body to make ſatisfaction for our ſinnes committed in ſoule and body. And the ſuffering in both was ſo great, that he cried aloude, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me? In that he ſaid, my God, with a repetition, hee aſſured himſelfe ſtill of his fauour, of his protection, and of deliuerance: by that ſpeech he deſpaired not, but expreſſed the greateſt ſorrow, the heauieſt paine that could be endured, for the redemption of mankinde. We haue heard what a notable ſacrifice Chriſt offered on the croſſe, not the bloud of goates or calues, but his owne bloud to purge our conſciences from dead workes to ſerue the liuing God. This is that ſacrifice which was figured by the Paſchall Lambe, by the braſen ſerpent lifted vp in the vvilderneſſe, by the whole burnt ſacrifice, by the peace offering. A remembrance of this ſacrifice, is our cōmunion of bread and wine, the one repreſenting Chriſts bodie rent, the other his bloud ſhed for our ſinnes. This is that ſacrifice whereby Abel, Noe, Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, all the faithful Patriarchs and Prophets,

all the beleeuing perſons from the beginning were ſaued. For, Chriſt is the Lambe, ſlaine from the beginning of the world. Slaine in the figure, in the purpoſe of God, in the vertue of his paſſion from the beginning of the world. Then is Chriſt ſlaine to euery one, vvhen hee beleeueth him ſlaine. Ieſus Chriſt yeſterday and to day, the ſame for euer. From the beginning of the world to his aſcenſion that is yeſterday, from his aſcenſion to the common reſurrection, that is to day, from the common reſurrection for euer he is one. Therefore one faith, one religion, one kinde of Sacraments in ſubſtance, one way to heauen from the beginning, one ſpirituall meate & drink. Our fathers did all eate the ſame ſpirituall meate vvhich vve eate, and drinke the ſame ſpirituall drink which we drink. They dranke of the Rocke which followed them, and the rocke was Chriſt. For though they did eate Manna, and dranke water out of the rocke, yet the faithfull ſpiritually did feede on Chriſt: becauſe that viſible meate they vnderſtood ſpiritually; they hungred after it ſpiritually,

they did taſte it ſpiritually, that vvith it they might be ſatisfied ſpiritually. And Bertramus ſaith, that our fathers did eate the ſelfe-ſame ſpirituall meate which we eate: becauſe one and the ſame Chriſt fed the people in the wilderneſſe with his fleſh, and refreſhed them with his bloud, and now feedeth the faithfull in the Church with the bread of his bodie, and refreſheth them with the vvater of his bloud. But what is it to eate the fleſh of Chriſt? It is to reſt vpon him vvith a ſure truſt, by his grace ſpirit, preſence, to be fed, nouriſhed, ſuſteined to eternall life Or as Chriſt himſelfe ſaith: He that eateth my fleſh, and drinketh my bloud, abideth in mee, and I in him. To eate the fleſh of Chriſt, and drinke his blood, is to abide in Chriſt, and to haue Chriſt abiding in vs. And therefore S. Auguſtine ſaith, hee that abides not in Chriſt, and in whom Chriſt abideth not, eateth not ſpiritually the fleſh of Chriſt, although viſibly and carnally he preſſeth with his teeth the Sacrament of the body and bloud of Chriſt: but rather eateth the ſacrament of ſo great a thing to

his condemnation. Whereby it may appeare that we at this day preach the ſelfe ſame Goſpell which was in the beginning of the vvorld, that is, vvee preach Chriſt crucified, which was opened to our firſt father in paradiſe, renewed to Abraham, and all the Patriarchs, figured by all the ſacrifices of the Law, witneſſed by the Prophets, pointed vnto by Iohn Baptiſt, preached by Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe, and deliuered by his Apoſtles. And therefore it is moſt true, ancient, catholike and apoſtolike.
               Now to the things vvhich hapned about the time of his paſſion: the graues did open: the dead bodies which ſlept aroſe: the vaile of the temple did rent in twaine from the top to the bottome: the earth did tremble: the ſtones did cleaue aſunder. Theſe things declared that a notable perſon ſuffered, yet the Iewes were not touched. Theſe vnſenſible creatures were moued, yet the Iewes hearts were hardned. The Centurion, when hee ſaw what was done, glorified God, ſaying: Of a ſuretie this man was iuſt. The ſouldiers that watched him,

when they ſaw the earth quake, and the things that were done, feared greatly, ſaying: Truely this was the Son of God. A confeſsion to the glory of God, to the comfort of themſelues, to the prouing of a Sauiour, and to the terror of the Iewes. This man whom yee haue contemned, whom ye haue condemned, whom yee haue reuiled, whom yee haue ſcourged, whom ye haue crucified, truely was the Sonne of God. The renting of the Temple, the quaking of the earth, the cleauing of the ſtones, the opening of the graues, the riſing of the dead, doe proue, that truely he was the Sonne of God, and without all doubt a iuſt man. A iuſt man indeed: For in his heart was neuer euil thoght; out of his mouth neuer proceeded euill word; with his body he neuer wrought ill deede: but in heart hee was alwaies tender and louing, in word gentle and meeke, in dealing iuſt and vpright. Yet was he accuſed, condemned, and put to a moſt ſhamefull death, the death of the croſſe, as a moſt notorious malefactour. And all this was done to worke the worke of mans redemption.
               
                  Here come in certaine queſtions. The firſt is, whether Chriſt could haue deliuered himſelfe from their hands. The anſwere is, he could. For he is God omnipotent: but he did not, that the ſcriptures might be fulfilled, that our redemption might be made, that our ſaluation might be accompliſhed. The ſecond queſtion is, whether the Iewes were to be excuſed, ſeeing it was the good will of GOD that CHRIST ſhould die. The anſwere is, in no wiſe: Becauſe they did it of ignorance, enuie and malice. And whereas good came thereby to mankind, that was to be aſcribed to Gods goodneſſe, which did turne their ſinne to a good end: Deus tam bonus eſt, vt ex malis eliciat bona. God is ſo good that he turnes euill to good. The third queſtion is, whether all they are damned which put Chriſt to death? I dare not ſo ſay, ſeeing Chriſt prayed for them: Father forgiue them, they know not what they doe. But this I ſay, whoſoeuer of them died, not beleeuing that perſon to be the Sonne of God, the onely Mediator betwixt God and Man, the onely redeemer, and purchaſer

of forgiuenes of ſinnes, the onely high prieſt of good things to come, whoſoeuer I ſay departed out of this faith, is damned for euer and euer.
               I Proceede to the benefits, which we inioy by Chriſt his paſſion, which are in number many, in feeling comfortable, in eſtimation moſt precious. The firſt is purgation of ſinnes. Thrice happy is he that hath it, moſt miſerable are they which haue it not. The penitent ſinner of a troubled ſpirit, of a broken and contrite heart, forſaking his owne waies, and renouncing his owne imagination, promiſing amendment, and purpoſing the fruits of repentance, confeſsing his own miſerie, and appealing to the mercies of God in the merits of Chriſt, haue their ſinnes, though as red as ſcarlet, yet waſhed in his moſt precious, gracious, and glorious bloud. For if the bloud of buls, and goates, and the aſhes of a heiffer, ſprinckling them that are vncleane, ſanctifieth as touching the purifying of the fleſh: how much more ſhall the bloud of Chriſt, which through the eternall

ſpirit offred himſelfe without ſpot to God, purge your conſcience from dead workes, to ſerue the liuing God? And to this end are we deliuered from all our enemies, Sathan, ſinne, and death, that we ſhould ſerue Chriſt our deliuerer, & that without feare, in holines and righteouſneſſe all the daies of our life.
               The 2. benefit is, remiſsion of ſinnes. Bleſſed is the man whoſe ſinnes are forgiuen, couered, and not imputed. Sinne is in the childe of God, but it reigneth not. Sinne is in the elect, but it is couered. Sin is in the heires of ſaluation, but it is not imputed, becauſe it is forgiuen: as the Arke was couered with a golden ſheet called the propitiatorie: ſo Chriſt is the propitiation of our ſinnes, by whom we haue redemption through his bloud, euen forgiuenes of ſinnes. For the bloud of Chriſt crieth remiſſion of ſinnes in the hearts of the godly.
               The 3. benefit of Chriſts paſſion is, deliuerance from the curſe of the lawe. The law accuſeth, Chriſt excuſeth. The law terrifieth, Chriſt comforteth. The law curſeth, Chriſt bleſſeth. Chriſt hath

redeemed vs from the curſe of the law being made a curſe for vs. For it is written, Curſed is euery one that hangeth on the tree: that the bleſſing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through faith; that we might receiue the adoption of ſons. For though we be blacke by nature, yet are we white by grace: though blacke in Adam, yet white in Chriſt: though blacke by merite yet vvhite by mercie. For Chriſt is the end of the law for righteouſnes to euery one that beleeueth. They then which in a liuely faith apprehend Chriſt crucified, and riſen again, haue what the law requireth, that is, perfect obedience performed of Chriſt imputed to them.
               The 4. benefit by Chriſts paſsion is, freedome from damnation. For what deſtruction can come to them which are ingraffed into Chriſt the author of ſaluation? How can the ſecond death take hold on them that haue their part in the firſt reſurrection, and are in Chriſt the life it ſelfe? the Deuill cannot pluck them away finall from God, which are written in the booke of life, and redeemed by the

blood of the Lambe. Hell cannot terrifie them which patiently looke for an inheritance in heauen. There is no damnation (ſaith the Apoſtle) to them which are in Chriſt, which walke not after the fleſh, but after the ſpirit. We are in Chriſt by election before the world was made: We are called to Chriſt by the word after the world was made: We are iuſtified by a liuely faith, the obedience of the Son of God being imputed to vs: We are ſanctified through the ſpirit, our ſoules being purified in obeying the truth: We walke not after the fleſh, when we reſiſt couetous cogitations, ambitious deſires, voluptuous thoughts, enuious conceits, malitious purpoſes, and whatſoeuer els corruption of old Adam: We walke after the ſpirit, when we embrace loue, follow peace and holines, ſhew long-ſuffering, gentlenes, meeknes, temperance: crucifying the fleſh with the affections and luſts.
               The fift benefit by Chriſts paſsion, is, that the wrath of God is pacified. For as they which obey not the Son, ſhall not ſee life, but the wrath of God abideth on

them: ſo they which beleeue in the Son haue euerlaſting life reſerued in heauen for them, which are kept by the power of God, through faith to ſaluation. This is my beloued Sonne, in whom I am well pleaſed, heare him. A voice from heauen, after Ieſus was baptized, the heauens being open vnto him, and the ſpirit of GOD deſcending like a Doue, and lighting on him. This borne of the Virgin Mary is my naturall, & beloued Son, coequall to me, and coeternall, and conſubſtantiall with me, in whom, euen for his owne ſake I am well pleaſed with all my elect children, my diſpleaſure being as farre from them, as the Eaſt from the Weſt, and my fauour vpon them euen for my Chriſt, for whoſe ſake I pardon all their offences, and their ſinnes, and iniquities will remember no more, but will put my lawes in their mindes, and write them in their hearts, and will be their God, and they ſhall be my people.
               The ſixt benefit by CHRIST his paſſion, is victorie ouer Sathan. For where ſinne is purged, remitted, and not imputed, vvhere the malediction

of the Law is abrogated, where the ſecond death is aboliſhed, where the wrath of God is pacified: there the Deuill hath naught. For Chriſt, through death, deſtroyed him which had the power of death, that is, the Deuill, that he might deliuer all them which for feare of death were al their life time ſubiect to bondage. Wherefore, though Sathan be yet ſuffred to tempt the children of God, yet hee ſhall neuer plucke them away from the ſtate of ſaluation: becauſe God is faithfull, and will not ſuffer his to be tempted aboue their ſtrength: but ſhall in the middes of temptation make a way that they may be able to beare it. Beſide theſe ſingular benefites by Chriſt his paſsion, wee haue by the ſame peace of conſcience, which paſſeth all vnderſtanding, acceſſe to grace by the mediation of Chriſt, and after this life euerlaſting, to behold the bleſſed and glorious Trinitie, in glorie, Maieſtie, and eternitie.
               Now to the meditation of Chriſt his paſsion, which we ſhall conſider fruitfully, if wee marke how fowle a thing ſinne is, how grieuous to the conſcience, how

diſpleaſant to God, what puniſhment it deſerued, whoſe death it procured, and ſo repent for the ſame.
               Secondly, if wee behold the paſsing loue of God in ſending his Sonne to redeeme vs, & the ſingular loue of Chriſt, in laying downe his life for vs, and ſo be thankfull to both for the ſame. If God had redeemed mankinde by any other meanes, as by ſiluer or gold, or by force of armes, or any of his Angels, the benefit had been the leſſe: but he did it by the death of his holy and deare Sonne. A benefit of all benefits the greateſt, and neuer to be thought on without thankfulneſſe. And in truth no Angel could be an attonement-maker betweene God & man, becauſe they communicate nature neither with God nor man: but Chriſt Ieſus doth with both. For hee is God in nature, and man in nature: and ſo a friend to both God and man, and therefore a moſt fit perſon to make peace betweene God and man.
               Thirdly, we ſhal meditate on the paſſion of Chriſt aright, if after his example we forgiue our enemies when they offend

vs, if we loue them though they hate vs, if we pray for them, though they curſe vs, after the example of Chriſt, which forgaue vs when wee treſpaſſed againſt him, which ſo loued vs, that he died for vs when we were his enemies & ſinners.
               Fourthly, we ſhall meditate on the paſſion of Chriſt aright, if we mortifie our members, which are vpon the earth, if we crucifie the fleſh with the affections, that is, by putting off the old man, which is corrupt through deceiueable luſts, and putting on the new man, which after God is created vnto righteouſnes and true holineſſe, if we walke honeſtly; as in the day time, not in gluttony and drunkennes, but in ſobrietie, neither in chambering and wantonneſſe, but in chaſtitie, neither in ſtrife and enuying, but in charitie: if wee put on the Lord Ieſus, and make no prouiſion for the fleſh, to fulfill the luſts of it. We may haue an honeſt care of our bodies, which is to feed them ſoberly, to cloth them decently, to exerciſe them moderately: but ſo to prouide for the fleſh as to fulfill the luſts thereof ſo to pamper it as to make it ouer-rule

the ſpirit, this is to forget Chriſts paſſion, to ſeeke to crucifie him againe, to ſerue our enemie, from which to redeem vs Chriſt died, to deſtroy that (as much as in him is) vvhich Chriſt ſo deerely bought.
               Laſtly, we ſhal meditate on the paſsion of Chriſt aright, if wee ſtedfaſtly beleeue by it to be ſaued, and liue and die in true repentance for our ſinnes, which made a diuiſion betweene God and vs, vvhich brought the Sonne of God from heauen into the vaile of miſery, which cauſed the death of Ieſus Chriſt. The conſideration of this ought to make our hearts to bleede, to flye from ſinne, as from a biting ſerpent, to renounce the diuell with his workes, as we promiſed in baptiſme, to be contrite, which is the firſt branch of true repentance, to crie for mercie, which is the ſecond, to truſt in Chriſt the mediator, which is the third, to endeuour with a purpoſe to ſerue the liuing GOD, which is the laſt. Then tho our ſins were as crimſon, they ſhall be made as vvhite as ſnow: though they were red as ſcarlet, they ſhall be as wool. For the bloud

of Ieſus Chriſt the Son of God, purgeth the penitent from all ſinne. Then God will be on our right hand for euer. Then ſhall the Realme flouriſh, as now, ſo for euer with peace, plenty, the preaching of the Goſpell, with many other godly bleſſings, to the glorie of God, the comfort of vs, and terrour of the enemie.
               Let vs be thankefull to Almightie God for preſeruing vs hitherto, giuing vs peace, when others haue had the contrarie: plentie, when others haue ſuffered ſcarſity: the preaching of the word, which others haue lacked: vnder the gouernement of a moſt gracious King, whom we are bound, as the Lords annointed, to loue ſincerely, to reuerence dutifully, to obey heartily, to pray for zealouſly and continually, becauſe God hath vſed his Maieſtie as a meane to conuey ouer vnto vs his mercies) that he may liue to the comming of Chriſt, to giue vp to him his princely crowne, to receiue of him a crown of glory for euer, in the kingdom of glorie, where is light and no darknes, life, and no dying, peace and no diſcord; where is mirth without mourning, fauor

without miſliking, knowledge vvithout ignorance, where is holines & no ſinne, vprightnes and no hypocriſie, truth and no falſehood, perfection and no infirmitie; where are ioyes which eye hath not ſeene, neither eare hath heard, neither hath entred into the heart of man, which the Lord hath prepared for them that loue him, in the company of godly Saints, in the ſight of heauenly Angels, in the preſence of Ieſus, the Mediator of the new Teſtament. To vvhom with the Father and the Holy Ghoſt, be all honour and glorie for euer and euer.
               Amen. (⸪)
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   