
      
         
            
            
            A TRVE Relation AND IOVRNALL, OF THE MANNER OF THE ARRIVALL, and Magnificent Entertainment, giuen to the High and Mighty Prince CHARLES, Prince of GREAT BRITAINE, by the King of Spaine in his Court at MADRID.
            LONDON, Printed by IOHN HAVILAND for WILLIAM BARRET. M. DC. XXIII.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
               ON Friday, being the ninth of March, Stilo veteri, about eight of the clocke in the euening, the Prince, and the Lord Marquesse of Buckingham, being all alone with the Postillion (as they had rid post together, three daies before) arriued at Madrid, and conueighed themselues with such secrecie into the house of the Earle of Bristoll, his Maiesties Embassador extraordinary to the King of Spaine, that for that night, they were hardly knowne by any, but they could not be long concealed. For early vpon the next day being Saturday, there grew a whispering amongst many, as if

the Marquesse were come, but not a word of the Prince. The same morning the Conde de Gondomar, was aduertised priuatly of the arriuall, not onely of the Lord Marquesse, but of the Prince also, and so hee went instantly to the Earle of Bristowes house. After hee had done reuerence to his Highnesse, and had passed an houre in his presence, and in discourse with his Highnesse, and those Lords, it was desired that hee would giue the King his Mastor notice of the arriual of the Marquesse; but that he should say nothing of the Prince at that time: at least not in any such sort, as that they might take knowledge of his being there. The Conde de Gondomar vndertooke it, and carried the newes thereof to the Conde de Oliuares, who is that Kings great Fauorite: and indeed a Person, who for his noble conditions and choise parts, doth well deserue the large portion which the King his Master affordeth him of his

estimation and affection: Hee conueighed what he knew to his Maiesty, and then withall sent to the Marquesse, desiring earnestly that hee would giue him leaue to goe instantly and visit him. But the Marquesse excused himselfe, & did expressely refuse it through his desire of concealing the Prince; and so they resolued vpon another meeting place for the afternoone, which fell out to bee the Parke. The Conde therefore sent a Coach to the Lord Marquesse, and his Lordship tooke with him the Conde de Gondomar, the Earle of Bristoll, and Sir Walter Aston, his Maiesties ordinary Ambassador in that Court. The Conde de Oliuares was already expecting the Lord Marquesse, and at length they met, and spent more then an houre together, in great expressions of contentment and ioy. After this, the Conde conducted the Lord Marquesse, and all that Company into the Court, and so vp to the King by a priuate way. At which

time, the Lord Marquesse deliuered the King our Soueraignes Letters to the King of Spaine, and so much passed betweene them, as serued to disclose that the Prince was come, and at the Earle of Bristowes house, wherewith the King was extremely taken, and much transported with ioy. His Maiesty sent a hearty salutation to the Prince by the Lord Marquesse, wherewith his Lordship returned to his Highnesse, being extraordinarily satisfied, both with that Kings Princely courtesie, and his many noble parts otherwise. The Conde de Oliuares conducted the Lord Marquesse home, & pressing euen beyond his Commission (for he was not yet to take knowledge of the Princes arriuall) to kisse his Highnesse hand, hee saw him, and spake with him. The Prince receiued him nobly, and like the Prince he is, and was very earnest with him, to put on his hat; but the Conde would by no meanes doe it; although hee bee a Graunde of

               Spaine, and may therefore bee couered before his owne King.
            During this visit, the Marquesse desired the Conde, that he would oblige the Prince by getting him a speedy sight of the Infanta his Mistresse; wherein hee promised to doe his best endeuor, though it were in Lent, which hee said was a time of extraordinary recollection and reseruation, and so they parted for the present, being all in great contentment one with another.
            In conformity to the Princes desire, his Maiesty (being that night acquainted with it by the Conde) laid aside the consideration of the time, and instantly resolued to giue his Highnesse all satisfaction. And so he went abroad the next day, at the houre appointed, which was about three a clocke in the afternoone, and to the Prado being the certaine place agreed vpon

betweene them, his Maiesty conducting with him his Queene, his Sister the Infanta, the Infantes Don Carlos, & the Cardinall Don Fernando, his brethren; the Conde de Oliuares, and the Conde de Gondomar, following him with much of the Nobility of that Court, both of Ladies and Lords. The Prince on the other side went disguised in the Duke of Cea's Coach, and was attended in the same Coach by the Lord Marquesse, the Earle of Bristoll, the Conde de Gondomar, and Sir Walter Aston. And so both the King and the Prince made diuers turnes and returnes in their seuerall Coaches, and in seuerall parts of the Towne and Prado (which is a place of recreation) where the Nobility is often wont to take the aire; and euery one of them saw each other in a cleare light, not being able to abstaine from saluting mutually with the hat as they passed by, though they had agreed to take no

kind of notice of one another; and this was all they did for that time. The King and all that royall Company returned by night by a world of Torchlight, which made a most glorious shew.
            Immediatly after this, his Maiesty not being content with those single sights of the Prince, sent the Conde de Oliuares, to pray him that they might meet, and embrace, and speake together before they slept. The Prince accepted of the occasion, but there rose a difference betweene them about the manner. For the King did much presse the Prince that he would accept of a visit frō himselfe in the Earle of Bristolls house, and really his Highnes had much adoe to refuse it, but yet he would by no meanes admit therof. On the other side, the Prince did offer to goe visit his Maiesty in his Palace, but the King considering that that must needs be to the Princes disaduantage,

because he had no Equipage, his Maiesty refused expressely, & it grew to be agreed betweene them, that it should be in the aforesaid Prado, and in the euening of the same Sunday when it might be darke. Whereupon the Conde de Oliuares said pleasantly, that he would by no meanes consent that his Master should meet him, and especially by night, but vpon euen termes; that the Prince was a great man at armes, and that euen in the ciuill way hee was strong in Ambassadors and Secretaries, whereas the King was in effect alone, that therefore he desired that the Prince would lend him the Marquesse, and that he might carry him to the Court, and so he might come to that meeting with the King and him, as a Spaniard, and not the Princes seruant for that time. The Prince gaue leaue, with much content, that he should goe, and so he went, and the King brought him and the Conde de
               
               Oliuares to the Prado. Now the King being first arriued, sent a priuate message to the Prince, to let him know that he expected his Highnesse. Thereupon the Prince made much haste, being attended by the Conde de Gondomar, the Earle of Bristoll, Sir Walter Aston, and Sir Francis Cottington his Highnesse Secretary.
            When they were vpon the point of meeting, they all alighted out of their Coaches, and the King embraced the Prince, and made incomparable professions of his loue and affection, and of the streight obligation which the King our Soueraigne and his Highnesse had cast vpon him, by that maine act of confidence and fauour.
            Then his Maiestie tooke the Prince into his Coach, and made him perforce goe in first, and sit vpon his right hand, and so they continued some good time in great sweetnesse of conuersation,

the Earle of Bristoll interpreting betweene them. At the parting, the King lighted out of his Coach, with the Prince; and vsed much endeuour to haue conducted the Prince to his Coach; but the Prince would by no meanes suffer it, and so they parted in the mid-way.
            On Munday the tenth of March, his Highnesse was made acquainted, by the Conde de Oliuares, and the Conde de Gondomar, whom the King had sent to visit him, that the King was that morning going in deuotion to a Monastery called the Merçed; and that he would passe the streets on horsebacke. When his Highnesse shewed some willingnesse to be a spectator thereof, the Conde de Oliuares carried him to a conuenient place, where he had a full view of all. That euening, his Highnesse went into the fields by the Riuer side, to take the aire. And the Conde de Oliuares, and the

               Conde de Monterey, went againe to visit him from the King, and they two waited on him in discourse, aboue an houre.
            On Tuesday his Maiesty sent againe to see how his Highnesse did; and withall to let him know, that he could not but acknowledge the good seruice, which the Conde de Gondomar had done him, in printing such a Character of his sincere affection, in the heart of the King of great Britaine, and of his Highnesse; as that they should thinke fit to put such a pretious treasure into his hands, as his Highnesse was. And that therefore he could not suffer any subiect of his to be vnaduanced, whom he found so well accepted by the King of Great Britame, and his Highnesse. For which cause he was resolued to make him of his Counsell of State, though hee accounted him indeed as an English man. Nay rather that for that respect

he would admit him, to the end that both the King of Great Britaine, and his Highnesse, might be more confident of his proceedings; and made priuy to the most inward passages. But the King withall, sent his Highnes word, that he desired him to giue the first notice of it to the Conde, and receiue his thankes. The Prince sent him the newes thereof by Master Secretary Cottington; the Conde came to cast himselfe at the Princes feet, for so high an honour and fauour, and so being addressed by his Highnesse to the Court, was instantly sworne.
            In the afternoone of that day, the Prince hauing intimated a desire to see the King, was conducted and attended by the Conde de Oliuares, towards the Palace, through a backe way. But before he could arriue there, hee was prevented by the King. Who being attended by the Marquesse of Carpio alone,

went downe in priuate manner, thorow a Garden to meet his Highnesse. Where after they had saluted one another with a manner of curtesie, which indeed was Princely, the King by the force of his fauour, put him still first into his Coach, and seated him on the right hand, and then entred himselfe, and sate by him; the Lord Marquesse, and the Conde de Oliuares, sitting at the other end of the Coach, and the Earle of Bristow in one of the sides, and the Marquesse of Carpio in the other. Thus they went towards a house of pleasure, belonging to the King, neere Madrid, called the Casa del Campo. Where after they had spent about an houre, the King making extraordinary great professions of his affection to the King our Soueraigne, and the Prince:
               
it was found before they were aware, that his Maiesty had brought his Highnesse a mile and a halfe on his way homewards; and indeed almost to the Earle of Bristolls house. The Prince would faine haue attended the King backe towards the Palace, but he would not suffer him.
            His Highnesse did then make a little turne another way, and before hee could get to the Earle of Bristolls, the Conde de Oliuares (hauing already left the King) was ready there to attend his Highnesse. Shortly after, the Duke of Infantado, Mayordomo Mayor to the King, did by speciall commandment from his Maiestie (for without order from the King, none as yet did visit the Prince) repaire vnto his Highnesse, to kisse his hands, and offered him his vttermost seruice,

with great reuerence, in whatsoeuer hee should bee pleased to command.
            On the two next daies being Wednesday and Thursday, there was not much done, of particular and externall note. The mornings were spent by his Highnesse in giuing order for his owne priuate affaires; and the afternoones, for the most part, in recreating himselfe abroad in the fields; the Earle of Bristoll waiting on him with his hawkes.
            Onely vpon the Thursday night after supper, there were sent to his Highnesse to entertaine the time, choice persons both of men and women, selected out of foure companies of Comedians, who danced seuerall kindes of dances before him, and spent about two houres therein, the Condes of Monterey and

               Gondomar, being present.
            On Friday being the foureteenth, his Highnesse stirred not abroad all the morning; but first sent Master Secretary Cottington, and afterward the Earle of Bristoll, to the Conde de Oliuares: and it should seeme to haue beene not onely about matter of complement, but for some particular businesse. After dinner the Condes de Monterey and Gondomar, went to his Highnesse, and conducted him againe to the Casa del Campo, where hee found the King, and with his Maiesty the Infantes Don Carlos, and Don Fernando the Cardinall, his brothers; whom his Highnesse had not seene before that time. They saluted, embraced, and striued mutually to kisse the hands of each other; after which they all tooke horse together, and entertained themselues

a good while in beholding sundry men, which were disposed there on foot, of purpose to shoot at such kindes of game, as they found in the place. And so there were Hares started, Partridges sprung, and other fowle put vp to wing: they killed of all sorts as they went, either running or flying by them. Vpon the end of which pastime, the King (notwithstanding all the resistance which was in the Princes power to make) brought him againe on his way homeward, to the same place whither hee had accompanied him on the Tuesday night before; The Condes de Monterey, and Gondomar, attending his Highnesse to the Earle of Bristolls house.
            Vpon this Friday, (for a further expression of the great ioy which that King had conceiued at the arriuall

of his Highnesse, and for his presence in that place) his Maiesty commanded, that a generall pardon of all offences should instantly be proclaimed and published, and that all the Prisoners who were restrained within the whole Kingdome or continent of Spaine, should be released; reseruing onely the rights and interests of third persons, as in the case of Debts and Appeales for murder and the like. By vertue of which pardon and Proclamation some hundreds of Prisoners in Madrid, were then freed, and all the Prisons emptied; diuers offenders who had taken Sanctuary in Churches, and retired to the Ambassadors houses (which are highly priuiledged in that Court) hauing notice thereof before, did by way of anticipation dispose of themselues into the hands of Iustice; and so

made a purchase of their liberty by their imprisonment.
            Instant order was also giuen, that all the English which were suruiuing in the Gallies, and who had beene condemned to that seruitude, during life, for committing of Piracy, and many other mortall crimes, should bee released without delay. And this Grace which his Maiesty manifested in contemplation of the Prince, hath strangely encreased the generall applause wherewith he is receiued and obserued in that Court by all.
            Saturday being the fifteenth, was spent at home by his Highnesse in priuate manner, in regard of the solemne entry hee was to make the next day, which was designed by the King, to be performed with the same magnificence and splendour, as is vsed at the Coronation of the

               Kings of Spaine. Onely a little before dinner, the Conde de Monterey went to the Prince, and told his Highnesse that the King had sent two horses thither, and desired him to make choise, vpon which he would be pleased to ride the day following, for that the King would ride vpon the horse which hee should leaue. Whereupon his Highnesse passed out into a Garden, not farre from the Earle of Bristols house, where, like himselfe, hee tooke paines and pleasure to try them both; to the end that if there were a difference, hee might take the lesse excellent to himselfe, and returne the other to the King.
            On Sunday, being the sixteenth, when it was already well towards noone, there went foure Councellours of State, Don Augustine Mexia, the Marquesse De Montes Claros, Don
               
               Fernando Giron, and the Conde de Condomar, to waite vpon the Prince at the Earle of Bristols house, and to attend his Highnesse to a famous Monastery, called Saint Ieronimo, neere Madrid; from whence the Kings of Spaine are wont to goe when they make their solemne entry into that towne; and where the King hath a Quarter reserued for the honour and entertainment of his owne royall Person. There was his Highnesse feasted priuatly at dinner by his Maiesties appointment, but yet as by the Conde de Gondomar, who hath the keeping of that Quarter in the said Monastery. The afternoone till foure of the clocke, was spent by his Highnesse, in giuing audience to the Inquisidor Generall, and to the seuerall Bodies of Counsels, which doe all reside in that Court, and did all present themselues to the

               Prince, excepting onely the Councell of State, which neuer maketh any visit in Corps, but all the rest did performe that duty of obseruance, namely the Councell Royall of Castilia, the Councell Royall of Aragon, the Councell of Portugall, the Councell of Italy, the Councell of Military Orders, the Councell of the Indies, the Councell of the Treasury, and the Councell of the Exchequer.
            
            The Corregidor, and the Regidores of Madrid, which are the persons who haue the gouernment of that Towne, did also desire audience of the Prince; for they all had beene commanded by the King to present themselues humbly before his Highnesse. And here it is to be obserued once for all, that all the Subiects of that Kingdome, who had occasion to wait vpon the Prince, did striue

with as much earnestnesse as good manners would permit, to haue actually kissed his Highnesse hands. But the Prince was resolute in not accepting that humble token of their loue, as conceiuing it to be fitter betweene the naturall subiects and their Soueraigne.
            But about foure in the afternoone of that Sunday, the King went to see the Prince, whom his Highnesse receiued at the gate below. They made no very long stay there when once the complements were ended, but all things being put in order for his Highnesse entry, they disposed themselues to be going. And whereas the King with his Nobility came in Coaches thither, the whole Court did then mount on horsebacke, after the example of his Maiesty and the Prince. The King did still put the Prince into a necessity of taking

the right hand, and so they passed towards the Palace.
            But as soone as they entred vpon the liberties of Madrid, they were expected and attended by foure and twenty Regidores of the towne, who had there a large Canopie of rich Tissue, and it belonged to them by office to carry it ouer the King. They were all apparelled in rich cloth of Tissue, lined with crimson cloth of gold. The King tooke the Prince vnder the Canopie, and kept him still on his right hand. Before them went the Courts and Ministers of Iustice, then the Grandes and all the other principall Nobles of that Court in colours and great brauery, and they were attended by their followers in seuerall Liueries, which were very rich. Next after the King and Prince went the Lord Marquesse of Buckingham, and the Conde
               
               de Oliuares, executing the places of Masters of the Horse to them both, the Conde giuing the right hand to the Lord Marquesse; and either of them had a Horse of State, as the ensigne of the place he held.
            The Canopy which was to be the fee of the Conde de Oliuares, as Master of the Horse to the King, was presented afterward by the Towne to the Lord Marquesse, with all other fees belonging to that office, because he serued that day as Master of the Horse to the Prince, in whose honor the action was performed. Then proceeded the Earle of Bristoll betweene the eldest Councellour of State, and one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber; and Sir Walter Aston after him, accompanied in like manner; the rest both of the Counsaile of State, and of the Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber following them.

After whom went that goodly Guard which is called de los Archeros, who were brauely clad and arraied.
            In the ways as the triumph passed, all the streets were adorned, in some places with rich hangings, in others with curious pictures, and heere and there certaine scaffolds were sprinckled, whereupon the bodies of those Councells sat to see, which formerly had beene with the Prince to doe him reuerence. And in other streets of the same passage diuers representations were made of the best Comedians dancers, and men of musicke, to giue contentment to that Royall Paire, as they passed by.
            As soone as the King and Prince were arriued and had lighted at the Palace, there was great pressing betweene them two for the hindmost place; but in fine they went hand in hand, or rather indeed imbracing

mutually their bodies with one anothers armes, all the while as they were going vp towards the Queenes side, to whom the King was already conducting the Prince. The Queene though shee were in a very large roome, would by no meanes expect the Prince vnder her State; but went downe to within two paces of the very doore to meet his Highnesse; and then conducted him to her cloth of State; where there were set three equall chaires, the Queenes in the middle, with the Prince on her right hand, and the King on the left. The roome was as richly furnished as may well bee imagined: but the chiefe riches thereof consisted in that liuing Tapistry of Ladies and Noblemens Children, called Menines, which stood and garnished all the roome round about close by the walles.
            
               
The King from hence conueighed the Prince to the quarter assigned him, and the Queene would needs accompany him to the doore of the same great roome, bowing very low vnto him at the parting, in such manner as well expressed the value her Maiestie set vpon his person, and the honour shee desired to doe him.
            The King in the meane time, was vpon his way to the Princes Quarter; which was all very sumptuously furnished, and at the entrance thereof stood the Infantes Dou Carlos, and the Cardinall Don Ferdinando his brothers; so they all three conducted the Prince into his bedchamber, where the King tooke his leaue for that time. Onely there, his Maiestie was content to take the hand of the Prince, because his Highnesse, was now as in his owne proper home.

And although the Prince was euen importunatly bent to attend the King backe to his owne Quarter, yet the King would by no meanes suffer that he should returne any further than to make one only step out of his owne lodgings.
            The Prince had not beene there an houre before the Queene sent the Conde de Benauente, who is her Mayor domo Mayor, with sumptuous and curious Presents to his Highnesse; namely, a faire great Basen of massie gold, borne by two men, and a curious imbrodered Night-gowne laid double in it. Besides, her Maiesty sent him 2. great Truncks bound with bands of pure gold, and thick strucke with nailes of gold, & locks and keyes of the same. The couerings and linings whereof are of Amber leather, & the Trunks full of seuerall delicacies of curious Linnen and Perfumes. Besides

these Trunks, shee sent him a faire rich Deske, euery drawer wherof was full of rarities. The Countesse of Oliuares sent also a noble present to the Lord Marquesse of Buckingham.
            
            Fireworkes were made, and Torches set in all the Windowes of Madrid for three nights together, hauing been so commanded by Proclamation. And it is strange to heare with what acclamations and benedictions the voice of the people doth attend the Prince, whensoeuer hee is discerned to be abroad, crying, Viua el Principe de Galles, Viua el Principe de Galles. The King hath also commanded that his Highnesse bee attended by all Officers and serued in all points as himselfe is. All they who wait vpon the Princes person, are in the rancke or qualitie of Lords. The King hath sent him halfe his

owne Guard. Hee hath assigned to his Highnesse for the Mayor domo Mayor, or high Steward of his House, the Conde de Monterey, who is brother in law to the Conde de Oliuares, President of Italy, of the Councell of State, and a Graunde of Spaine. Hee hath giuen him besides two other Mayor Domos to serue him, namely, the Conde de Gondomar, and the Conde de la Puebla. And as for the Conde de Monterey, his Maiesty hauing obserued the diligent affection which he daily carried to the Princes seruice, did bestow a gilt Key vpon him in contemplation thereof, whereby hee was ipso facto made a Gentleman of tho Kings Chamber, and it was done the rather, for that so hee should bee the better able to comply with his new place of Mayor domo Mayor.
            
            The King did also send two gilt Keyes to his Highnesse, desiring him

to bestow them vpon what English he would, to the end that his Palace might be all open vnto them: whereupon his Highnesse gaue one of them to the Lord Marquesse of Buckingham, and the other to the Earle of Bristoll.
            
            His Maiesty hath moreouer imposed vpon diuers Councellors of State, that some one of them shall daily attend in the Princes Quarter by turnes, to vnderstand his pleasure from time to time, and that foure Grandes, namely, the Admirall of Castile, the Duke of Cea, the Marquesse of Velada, and the Duke of Yjar be euer at hand, to court, accompany and attend the Prince whithersoeuer his Highnesse shall be pleased to goe.
            The next day after the Prince was conducted to the Palace, all the Counsailes came to wait vpon his Highnesse, and to let him know that they had receiued expresse order

from the King their Master, to performe and obey all consultaes and commands, which should come from his Highnesse, were it for the disposing of any offices, Encomienda's, or any other prouisions of Grace, which should happen to fall, during the residence of his Highnesse in that Court, and that as exactly, as if the King himselfe should command any such thing vnder his hand.
            There are also said to bee other great Triumphs in preparation, and Letters Mandatory sent to the principall Nobility of Aragon, that they come and giue attendance at the Court, vpon the Princes pleasure; because they haue the reputation to be excellent men at Armes. And that the Court may appeare in greater lustre and glory, the King hath suspended for so long as his Highnesse shall be there, the Edict which his

               Maiestie lately had caused to be proclaimed, for the restraint of all excesse in point of apparell.
            His Maiestie hath also beene pleased to take particular care that the Lord Marquesse of Buckingham be well lodged in the Palace, in a Quarter of his owne, neere adioyning to the Prince, and hath commanded him to be serued with a full and plentifull Diet, and to be also nobly attended; besides many other such demonstrations of grace and fauour from that King, with so particular and great respects from the Grandes and all the Nobles of that Court, as the like perhaps hath not beene seene imparted to any stranger, meerely a subiect.
            This is the substance of that which passed at Madrid concerning the reception of the Prince, from the seuenth of March (which was the

day of his arriuall in that Court) till the eighteenth of the same Moneth. But that which may put a good full point to this Relation; and withall, fill the hearts of all the King our Soueraignes obedient and loyall Subiects, with much comfort, is, to know that the last messenger which came from his Highnesse, left him in as prosperous and perfect health, as euer hee had beene knowne to enioy; and whereas vertue when it is soundly practised at home, shewes faire abroad; the Comportment of his Highnesse in the place where now hee is, hath made such a prospect vpon his Noble and Princely parts, in all respects, as may well giue vs cause to reioyce and to render humble thankes vnto Almighty God for the same.
            FINIS.
         
      
   