
      
         
            
            
            THE GARDEN of Prudence. Wherein is contained, A patheticall
Discourse, and godly meditation, most brieflie touching the vanities of the
world, the calamities of hell, and the felicities of heauen. You shal also find
planted in the same, diuers sweet and pleasant Flowers, most necessarie and
comfortable both for body and soule.
            Printed at London, by Richard Iohnes, at the signe of the Rose
& Crown next aboue S. Andrewes Church in Holborne. 1595.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right HonoRABLE, THE MOST VERTVous and renowmed Lady,
Anne, Countesse of Warwick, B. C. wisheth in this life all prosperity, and in
the life to come sempiternall felicity in the blessed kingdome of God.
            
               AS amongst all humane things (right Honorable and most renowmed
Lady) vertue & learning are most excellent, euen so (in mine opinion) the
daintiest Diamond set in the purest golde of this world is not any way
cōparable to the worthy graces which spring of either of them. Wherfore,
hauing made trial of the most honorable affection & godlie zeale you beare
to them both, and knowing how wonderfullie and laudablie the rare flowers of
the same, deck and adorne you on euery side, I thought good by your singular 
 and most splendent vertues therunto moued and perswaded, so much
to imbolden my self as humbly to beseech your honor, to vouchsafe the
patronizing of this slender pamphlet; and to take vpon you the keeping of this
litle sweete Garden, that neither the wilde Boare destroy it, neither carping
Knights, or any of Momus wightes deuoure it, but that it may haue free
passage (by your Honourable assistance) amongst all godly Christians. And they
viewing the same, maye the easier see the abhominable vices, and vaine vanities
of this lothsome Laborinth, and the better perceiue the most miserable
calamities and endlesse tortures and torments of hel, that fierie lake and
kingdom of Satan. And also beholding the vnspeakeable felicities & most
gladsome ioyes of heauē, may so run their course in this life, that they may
eschue the vanities of the one, and after death escape the dangers of the
other, & with the holy Angels & saints of God eternally enioy all happy
and most comfortable felicities in the blessed kingdom of heauen. The premises
therefore dulie considered, and my good meaning discreetly pondered, I doubt
not but that you will according  to your accustomed curtesie
towards all men, pardon my presumption, and of your woonted zeale to godlines,
accept of my triuiall trauell which in my idle houres I bestowed herein, and
thinke me ra
                  •
               her vnable then any
way vnwilling to discharge my duetie, whereof as I ought, so I haue bene euer
most carefull, and pleasing God) will during life, so remaine. Thus referring
my labours to your godlie censure, I beseech the Almighty to graunt you,
whilest you liue in this troublesome soile, most prosperous health, and perfect
strength of body to gods glorie, and your hearts desire, and after this life
ended, most happy arriual vnto the blessed hauen of eternall felicities, and
that your soule may there with the holie Angels and Saints of God, for euer
haue the pefect fruition of all ioyes.
            
               Your Honours most humble in alll duty to
  command▪ 
                  Bartholmew Chappell.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader, health and peace in Iesus Christ.
            
               
                  XErxes, that mightie Monarch and Emperour of the
Persians, (gentle Reader) beholding from an high the hugenesse of his Armie,
which was in strength inuincible, in qualitie diuerse, in number infinite,
and in euerie degree surmounting all that euer were before or since, yea
couering the whole face of the earth: in whose courage, force, &

                  •
               ight, he reposed the strength of
his kingdome the safegard of his person, and the glorie of his Empire, could
not but gush out most bitter teares, con
               
                  •
               idering that of all the woonderfull multitude that he saw, after one
hundred yeares there should not a man be left. And shall not we that be
Christians at least wise in name, viewing from the depth of our conceits, our
selues, our pompe, our honour, our glorie, our magnificencie and renowne, our 
 wealth, our substance, our beautie our friendes, our strength, our
great possessiont, and territories, our knowledge, our witte, our brauerie and
politique dealinges, wherein we repose all our felicitie and happines, be
nothing mooued with due consideration, that this world and all things therin
contained, are but fickle and vaine, and that our bodies,

                  •
               e they neuer so faire, be they
neuer so high, be they neuer so strong & valiant, can not escape the dart
of death, but must be resolued to earth, wherof they were framed, and know not
when, how soone or how suddenly, for this is the indgment of all flesh, thou
shalt die the death, and the couenant of the graue is not reuealed to any, for
our life appeare
                  •
                as a bubble of
water, and suddenly passeth, it vanisheth into the ayre, as smoke, it slideth
as a ship, that s
                  •
               yleth with a full
winde, or as a bird swift of flight, yea swifter then an arrow, mightilie
shott
                  •
                out of a strong bowe: for as
soone as wee are borne, foorthwith we decay, our first entrance into this life,
is our first step to death, and draweth vs towards an end, shewing nothing,
but the frailtie and ficklenesse of our estate the weaknesse and wickednes of
our flesh, whose impietie dayly draweth vs from vertue to vice, from carefulnes
to carelesnes from the chaire of godly studie, to the cradle of 
vaine securitie: but the rewarde hereof is nothing but death and damnation in
vtter darkenesse for euer, where our drinke shall be turned to sharpe
vinigr
                  •
               , and our bread to bitter
gall: Wherefore view and with al diligence marke (most curteous reader) the
sweet and comfortable flowers which thou shalt finde to adorne this little
Garden, and regarde not the slender workmanship of the vnskilfull Gardener,
but weigh in the ballance of thy deep discretion the singular vertues, and
most diuine operations both of the plants, hearbs and flowers inserted in the
same, for so maist thou eschue the vaine vanities of this wicked world, so
shalt thou escape the miserable calamities of that fyerie lake, the kingdome
of Satan, and finallie, most happily attaine the ioyfull felicitie of most
gladsome Paradice in the blessed kingdome of God. Thus desiring

                  •
               nelie thy loue for my labours, I
bid thee hartily farewell.
            
               Thine in the Lord. B. C.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the Vanities of the WORLD.
            VVHat wilfull rage? what furious fit?
            what madnesse pearste the worldes braine?
            To serue in thrall, once for to sit,
            in Chayre of pompe, that is so vaine:
            Whose glittering glee is deckt with woe,
            whose fickle weale we all do see:
            As flitting streame from thee doth goe,
            and can no time remaine with thee.
            For all thy pleasures sorrowes bring,
            all thy delights most bitter paine:
            All thy conceiptes turne thee a ring,
            wherein to run: but all in vaine:
            For when thou doest thy selfe assure,
            that thou doest sit in state most strong,
            When thou doest thinke still to endure,
            then suddenlie thou liest along.
            When thou in Center of thy blisse,
            with Salomon hast thee enthroand:
            
                When ioy and peace thou doest possesse,
            when Croesus wealth to thee is bound:
            When all things els that world can yeeld,
            at thy command and becke do stand:
            Then commeth Death like Mars in field,
            and pluckes thy life into his hand.
            Thy landes, thy rentes, thy wife most graue,
            thy daughters clad with Venus hoe:
            Thy sonnes ado
                  •
               n'd
with vertues braue,
            thou art compeld to bid adue.
            Thy houses high, thy castles strong,
            thy gardens square in each degree:
            Thy pleasant courts and towres long,
            all to forsake thou forst must be.
            Thy lambes, thy goates, thy fatlings all,
            which feed themselues in pastutes green
            Thine Oxen eke within thy stall.
            thou wilt then wish hadst neuer seen.
            Thy horses which in stable stand,
            and praunce most stately in their kind:
            Thine oxen eke that plow thy land,
            thou art full loath to leaue behind:
            Thy Deere which raunge thy forrest wilde,
            and brouse on boughes, in winter cold:
            And such as rome abroad the field,
            doe please thee well, though thou bee old.
            
                Thy tender youths and seruants graue,
            which on thee wayt in comely glee:
            No longer with thee must thou haue,
            but leaue them al, thus must it be.
            Thy brothers kind, and sisters deare,
            thy kindred all that lou'd thee best:
            Hereafter may not keepe thee here,
            but trudge thou must among the rest.
            Contemne therefore all worldlie wealth,
            and craue no more then may su
                  •
               fise:
            So God wil blesse thy soule with health,
            which stil shal dure without surmise.
            But if with want thou be opprest,
            if pinched eke with pouertie,
            Let all by sufferance be redrest,
            when it shal please our God on hie,
            For Iob by patience wan great praise,
            cruel Pharaoh could not Dauid daunt,
            By patient hope they both had ease,
            and al their foes could not once vaunt,
            Or say, loe here we haue preuaild,
            loe here is he, whom we subdude:
            But Peacocke like they al were quaild,
            and forste to flie in sort most rude.
            Let these examples mooue thy hart,
            al woes, al paines for to endure:
            
                For heauens blisse without great smart,
            none can atchieue, I thee assure.
            All crosses who so doth imbrace,
            all miseries who doeth sustaine:
            Adorn'd is hee with diuine grace,
            with Angels eke shall he remaine.
            But he that liueth wantonlie,
            he wicked Mammon that doth loue,
            He that desires to climbe on hie,
            forgetting God that sits aboue.
            And he whose mind is pu
                  •
               t with pride,
            whose heart with malice great doth swell:
            With Lucifer still shal abide,
            and with the Furies must hee dwell.
            Wherefore O man, O wretched wight,
            this wicked vale seek thou to scorn:
            Thy latter end haue still in sight.
            least soule and corpes be both forlorne,
            For what can it thee ought auaile,What can it
  auaile thee to win althe world & loose thine owne soule,
            
            if all the world thou doe possesse?
            Sith grie
                  •
               ly graue is
thy reraile,
            where worms thee gnaw without redres
            Yet worse then that doth it remaine,
            when Spirits thy silly soule shall rent:
            In fiery flame, with hellish paine,
            Which neuer staies, nor will be spent.
            
                In dungion deepe when thou shalt lie,
            a place from God, that's farthest cast:
            Where damned soules both houle and crie,
            where fiery chaines doe hold them fast.
            Wherefore with Salomon I crie,
            O sonne remember thou thine end:
            Then wilt thou wicked sinne defie,
            then wilt thou neuer God offend.
            Now sith tha
                  •
                we
compassed be,
            with dreadfull death on euery side:
            And that the same all creatures see,
            what of vs all shall now betide.
            May not we call this wretched life,This life is
  a miserable vale
            
            a vale whose corne is bitter woe:
            The crop whereof we reape with strife
            in age, which lustie yeares did sowe.
            The worms which vexe our minds be cares
            most griping griefe our bodie presse:
            And sicknesse takes vs in his snares,
            whereof we hardly get redresse.
            Our bodies are a cursed ground,
            our skin is like to withered hay:
            Our humours weake and watrish found,
            which filthie wormes shall suck away.
            Behold now, marke you what we are,
            Behold, but dust and brittle glasse:
            
                Behold, a streame that fals like starre,
            behold a wind that soone doth passe,
            Behold, here are we turnde and cast,
            Behold, we often times do change,
            Behold, from piller to the post,
            both to and fro are forst to range.
            The sands in sea, the grasse we see,The sandes
  o
                     •
                   the sea & the grasse of the
  field are sooner numbred then our woes.
            
            in 
                  •
               ertile lands and
fields most faire,
            With all the starres may reckoned be,
            that glister in the healthsome aire:
            Much sooner, I doe tel thee right,
            then al the woes and pinching paine,
            Which stil on men doe fal and light,
            that in this loathsome vale remaine.
            Amongst mankind was neuer one,
            that euer here on earth did dwel,
            Of miseries that taste had none,
            or once could say, all things run wel:
            Although he were in glorious state,
            although he liu'd in high degree,
            Yet forst was he to blame his fate,No man was
  euer happie in this life.
            
            and say, I see it wil not be.
            But if both poore and indigent,
            thou be, and canst not wealth attaine:
            Thy life thy breath thou doest repent,
            and stil in sorrowe doest remaine.
            
                If that a suckling babe thou be,
            but euen now if thou were borne:
            Thy life is death, we all do see,
            thou art a silly wretch forlorne.
            And when a t
                  •
               nder
childe thou art,
            thine age is chiefest spring of woe:
            Ten thousand griefs oppresse thy heart,All
  estates 
                     •
                   this world most
  miserable
            
            and stil on euery side they floe.
            If that by yeares thou be a man,
            most great mishaps on thee will fall.
            And dangers will sare now and than,
            cast thee and thine int'wofull thrall.
            When crooked age comes stealing ou,
            then haue we lost all worldly blisse,
            With pinching paine and sicknesse strong,
            then all our bodie troubled is,
            If that a wedded man thou bee,
            then art thou tide to blocke of paine:
            Then art thou bound, which once wert fre
            and so for ay thou must remaine.
            If thou a single life doest lead,
            then sunke thou art in all annoyes,
            And drownd in grie
                  •
               e,
although indeed
            thou thinkst to swim in sea of ioyes.
            Although thy bodie thou adorne,
            with glittering gold and pearle bright.
            
                Yet is thy mind with care forlorne,
            because in sorrowes thou art pight.
            What life thou wilt, do thou prosesse,
            of want and woe thou shalt haue store:
            Be what thou wilt thy cares to cease,
            thy dolors yet are as before.
            Vnconstant is the state of man,
            his life as brittle as the clay:
            And is compared to a spanne,
            for in short time it fades away.
            It to a bubble likened is,
                  
                     ••
                  e frailty 
                     •
                  t
  this life,
            
            which to our sight appeareth hie:
            And in the time thou canst say this,
            flat with the water doeth it lie.
            The man that late in wealth did flowe,
            in pouerty is now, and thrall,
            And is constrain'd to lie full lowe,
            vvhich lately vvas the prince of all.
            Whom God in mercie hath extold,
            and set in golden chaire of blisse:
            Death plucketh downe in sort most bolde,
            and vnto him least partiall is.
            He liues to day quite void of paine,
            no griefe hath he nor yrksome care,
            Passing the time in pleasures vaine,
            vvith iolitie and daintie fare.
            
                To morrow dead and turnde to dust,
            to morrow put in mournfull tombe:
            And to the earth his corpes he must
            commit: till dolefull day of dombe.
            Such is the state which we enioy,
            such is the end all doth betide:
            That in this vale of all annoy,
            mongst mortall men doe once abide.
            Though Nestar's yeares we can attaine,
            though thousand ages yet we haue:
            The wormes to feed we must be faine,The
  certenty of death,
            
            and fill we must the gaping graue.
            Not Hercules, not Sampson strong,
            not Pompey stout, nor Caesar braue,
            But forced were to lie along,
            and take the blow which Death them gaue.
            Not Cato that in wit did flow,
            not Salomon that did excell
            All mortall wights from high to lowe,
            in wisedoms court that bare the bell,
            The tyranny of death could daunt,
            or make his griesly face to blush:
            For he doth boast, yea brag and vaunt,
            and holds our force not worth a rush▪
            
            Behold rich Croesus with his wealth,
            could not the dart of death defend:
            
                Behold, great Monarks want their health,
            and all do trudge with death in end.
            He spareth none, he taketh all,
            both yong and old of each degree:
            Both rich and poore both free and thrall,
            he paies to eu'ry one his fee.
            
               The Calamities of hell.
               HE throwes the wicked headlong down
               to Lymbo lake, where is no rest:
               Where damned soules look grim, & frown,
               and are with endlesse paine opprest.
               This is the place that darkened is,
               this is the place of bitter paine:
               This is the place void of all blisse,
               this is the place where deuils raigne.
               This is the place of chillest cold,
               this is the place of endlesse fire:
               Whose forces great none can vnfold,
               both tongue and pen though he do tire.
               If monsters fell thou wouldest see,
               which in this place make their abode:
               Thy hart then daunted so would be,
               that none thy feare could then vnlode.
               If to thine eares their hellish sound,
               should once be brought I thee assure▪
               
               
                   Thy sences all it would confound.
               but oh, none can the same endure:
               These grie
                     •
                  ly ghosts
  such tortures haue,
               such pinching paine doth them oppresse
               That some reliefe still doe they craue,
               but neuer can they get redresse.
               They weep, they 
                     •
                  ry,
  they wring their hands
               their m
                     •
                  series they
  doe bewaile:
               They gnash their teeth in wofull bandes,
               this is the gaine of their retaile.
               They roare like Lyons in their dens,The noise
 of damned soules,
               
               like dogges they howle in kennels staide,
               Like filthy Swine they lie in fennes,
               and thus all reprobates are paid.
               Their filthy place no tongue can tel,
               no pen can wel the same descrie.
               The stincke is such where they doe dwel,The
 lothsomnes of hell,
               
               that all it slaies that passe thereby.
               Their entrie is of chillest y
                     •
                  e,
               their doores and gates of fiery brasse,
               Their house more hote then Etna thrice,
               thats full of fire, and euer was.
               Their walke on fierie serpents is,
               which plucke the marrow from the bone
               So is their comfort and their blisse,
               to mourne, to weep, & make great mone
               
                   O wretched soule, what is thy state,
               vvhat shall at last become of thee?
               Of greater griefe who can delate,
               what greater woe or paine can be?
               Yet worse there is I tell thee plaine,
               thy body must to iudgement rise:
               And with thy soule it must sustaine
               more torments then can heart deuise:The
 tor
                     
                        •
                     ents of
 
                        •
                     ody and
 
                        •
                     oule toge
                     
                        •
                     her.
               
               Because in earth both did offend,
               because the lawes of God they brake
               Together, therefore without end
               must both be drownd in fiery lake▪
               
               All sinners would this day eschue,
               all sinners wish their perill past:
               All sinners hearts the same must rue,
               all sinners must it find at last:
               Behold it commeth now with speed,
                     
                        •
                     okens of the seconde
 
                        •
                     omming
 
                        •
                     f the lord
               
               behold the sun that shined bright,
               Is darkened ouer all in deed,
               Behold all things appeare as night.
               Behold the starres as withered leaues,
               in windie Autumne down do fall;
               Behold the Moone God eke bereaues,
               of light and shining brightnesse all.
               Behold the hearts of men doe faint,
               behold, their wits are scant their owne:
               
                   Behold, with feare they make complaint,
               be hold, with griping griefe they grone.
               Behold their faces are but pale,
               behold, their bodies vveakened be:
               Behold, their doubt of endlesse thralle,
               behold their flesh consumes we see.
               Behold, what griefe doth men oppresse,
               behold, they cast their heads on hie:
               But to lament, they can no lesse,
               marke vvell, all men doe seeme to die.
               Marke how both trees and branches all,
               doe sweat foorth blood against their kind:
               Marke, all things are opprest with thrall,
               marke nothing hath a quiet mind.
               The roaring sea doth fret and fume,
               her waues she flings aboue the land:
               She shewes all things are out of tune,
               she cries, Gods day is nigh at hand:
               The earth of late hath shakt her selfe,
               as wearie of her sinfull burne:
               Which is our selues, with worldly pelfe,
               but oh! thereby we are forlorne.
               Of late she svvallowed in her gulfe,
               twelue thousand out of London towne:The last gret plague in London,
               
               By sudden plague like rauening Wolfe,
               yet are our hearts not once pluckt down.
               
                   Her wrath yet is not it appeasde,
               our friends from vs she taketh still:
               Our sinnes so much haue God displeasd,
               that she reuenge doth vse, and will.
               Her fruits also she doth detaine,
               and hath done fourtie moneths and moe:
               Yet few of vs in heart complaine,
               nor for our sinnes are prickt wit woe.
               The skies also with misty cloudes,
               are ouer cast and gush out teares:
               Whereby the earth hath had grat flouds,The
 hardnes of our 
                        •
                     eares.
               
               and with their noise haue fild our eares,
               The blustering windes doe puffe and blowe,
               they sob, they sigh in raging sort:
               They force high tres to lie ful lowe,
               they tempests stir in euerie port.
               They range with furie East and West,
               from North to South they also run,
               They know not where to take their rest,
               But beat the aire, as Cannon gun.
               The stoutest hearts their faces hide,
               both rich and poore are much dismaid:
               No flesh Gods iudgment can abide,
               but seek where they may find some aid.
               All liuing things for help doe crie,
               both sauadge beasts and birds also.
               
                   The wormes which in the earth do lie,
               do wish for legges with speed to goe,
               The earth doth quake and mountaines all,
               both hearbs and roots their vertues lose,
               Great toures long flat downe do fall,
               and odours sweet do leaue the Rose.
               Dame Nature in her furie strong,
               receiues a curse and gins to quaile,
               Her forces all do lie along,
               whereby all things their vertues faile.
               The Angels all,The Angels wait the comming of
 the 
                        ••
                     rd, with Saints most
  blest,
               the Cherub and the Seraphin,
               All sinners that haue life possest,
               both quick and dead that earst haue bin.
               Assembled are, and dreadfully,
               with terrour great our Lord expect:
               And waite his comming from on hie,
               for then each thing shall be perfect.
               Behold both heauen and earth doe bow,
               behold thev downe and prostrate fall:
               Behold Iehouah commeth now,
               all flesh before him for to call.
               In glorie commeth he and state,
               his trumpets through the earth do sound▪
               
               All sinners suddenly t'awake,
               in cuery coast that may be found.
               
                   In aire most fiery flouds appeare,
               vvherein he comes most gloriously:
               Which sight the mountaines great do feare,
               and melt down flat, vvhich were on hie.
               The seas eke tremble at his sight,
               and dried are, most strange to see:
               Whose waues did seeme in sand most bright
               but now bare sandes there onely bee:
               The craggie rockes are turnde to dust,
               his furious wrath none can abide,
               God stil will fauour all the iust,
               but sinners seeke themselues to hide:
               Ocursed soule how art thou vext?
               how art thou chok'd with wofull care?
               Hovv doest thou quake when as the text,
               of sinne doth vvill thee to beware.
               When all these dreadfull sights appeare,
               before thine eyes, and are at hand:
               Hovv doth thine heart then shake and feare,
               hovv doest thou care to flie the land:
               Thy body novv doth rise also,
               like gri
                     •
                  sly ghost
  from out the graue,
               And in the same thy soule must goe.
               and with the same due paines must haue.
               Before thee sits a Iudge seuere,The Lord
 sitteth in iudgment,
               
               vvhose vvrathfull rage thou must abide▪
               
               
                   Behind thee Sprites they soule to teare,
               accusers eke on euery side.
               Aboue thee hangs a dread
                     •
                  ull sword,
               to cut thy body to the pot:
               Which is of God the mighty word,
               but woe to thee that hath this lot.
               Below the fierie pot doth stand,
               which filled is with boiling lead:
               And will consume both heart and hand,
               and euery limme from foot to head.
               Most filthy brimstone is the fewel,
               th
                     •
                  t makes the lead
  like burning fire:
               Of wicked men this is the iewell,
               of damned soules the perfect hire.The reward
 for the wicked.
               
               Yet worse then this remaines behind,
               their hope is past of all redresse:
               For dying still thems
                     •
                  lues they find,
               yet liue they must a time endlesse.
               Behold, thou canst no mercy win,
               behold thy foes haue thee beset:
               Behold, thy soule condemnd for sin,
               in St
                        •
                     gian
  lake must pay thy debt.
               O dolefull doome, of sinne the meed,
               O wretched soule, that doest repent:
               But too too late, thus doe we read,
               for time of grace is past and spent.
               
                   Wherefore in vaine, thou now doest crie,
               with Diues that is vext in hell:
               Thy birth, thy life thou doest defy,
               because with deuils thou must dwell.
               Which raue with rage, which firebrāds cast,
               which rome, which run, still in their kind,
               Which only fiery trumpets blast,
               this is the ioy which sinners finde.
            
            
               Of the felicities of heauen.
               BVt come, beholde the ioyfull place,
               behold the comfort of the same:
               Behold, where Saints, and soules of grace,
               all ioy possesse, quite void of blame.
               Behold, who can conceiue in heart,
               beholde, what tongue can els expresse:
               What pen can well discrie in part,
               the woondrous ioyes of heauen blesse,
               Where Angels bright with Christ do raign
               where honours hie doe flourish still,The
 comfort of the Godly.
               
               Where darknesse all is banisht cleane,
               where all things haue their wished will,
               Where heat nor cold do once oppresse,
               where thirst and hunger haue no place:
               Where paine and sorrow alwaies cease,
               where loue and peace haue all their grace.
               
                   Where heauinesse is turned to ioy,
               where all conceipts do comfort bring,
               Where nothing is that breeds annoy,
               where perfect blisse doeth alwaies spring.
               O caitiffe wight this place behold,
               which doth surmount the reach of thought
               Whose gates are fram'd of finest gold,
               whose wals of diamōds clear are wrought.
               Behold the citie, where it standes,
               whose pauements are of pearle fine,
               Whose springs brings comfort to all lands,
               for stil they run with oile and wine.
               There all things bath in ioyful blesse.
               There milke and honie doe abound:
               There all men haue chiefe happinesse,
               there musick hath her sweetest sound:
               The lambe of God is there inthroand,
               in chaire of state shining most bright:
               Which all the wicked doth confound,
               and brings the godly to his light.
               The light is such, as would obscure,
               both Sunne and Moon, if they were there:
               And so for euer will endure,
               most happie he that is his heire:
               There flowes a pleasant siluer streame,
               wherein the life of man doth run.
               
                   Which glittereth as faire Tytans
  beame,
               yea much more bright then is the Sunne.
               There growes a tree on either side,
               which sauing health and comfort brings:
               Whereby in peace we alwaies bide,
               and from the same all mercie springs.
               The 
                     •
                  ap thereof doth
  iustice nurse,
               the leaues as reliques left behind:
               Do stil maintaine each Christians purse,
               whose soules in fine our Lord doth find.
               The blos
                     •
                  oms of the
  same doe cease
               all worldlie strife, euen in one houre:
               The seeds thereof bring heauens blesse,
               the fruits do showe Gods mighty power▪
               
               No time can well consume the barke,
               it stronger is, then time can wast,
               The substance eke appeares so sta
                     •
                  ke,
               that death it doth subdue at last.
            
            
               The Song of the Angels, and of all the Saintes of God.
               A Famous Quire there is also,
               whose godly songs do sound most sweet,
               Sanctus, Sanctus, and Lans Deo,
               thus in their harmony they meet.
               
                   The 
                     •
                  ingers Angels, are most bright,
               the Cherub and the Seraphin:
               The holy Saints are eke in sight,
               and all consent in well tuning.
               Most happie he yea ten times blest,
               amongst these Saints that beares a part:
               In heauens high sure is his rest,
               and hath all ioy plac'd in his heart,
               There is also a pleas
                     •
                  nt field,
               wherein all vertues flourish still,
               Their humblenesse, which oft doth yeeld
               and patience that gets good will.
               Fideli
                     •
                  y there eke
  doth raigne,
               with her is ioin'd Dame Prudence graue,
               Good gouernment for to maintaine,
               whereby at last good rest we haue.
               There Sapience sage, with Modesty,
               there faithfull Loue doth come in place:
               There Friendship deare with curtesie,
               which fauour wins without disgrace.
               There Probity her selfe doth stay,
               a vertue rare I you assure▪
               
               There Piety remaines alway,
               which bringeth blisle which will endure▪
               
               There Summum bonum shal we find,
               the strongest Anchor of our hope:
               
                   There chiefest treasures for mankinde,
               there of all blisse the only scope,
               This summum bonum is the well,
               whence godly vertues al doe spring,
               Wherin each faithfull seeks to dwell,
               and there with gladsome ioy to sing:
               O Fountaine cleare! O blessed spring,
               whereby all vertues flourish still:
               Most happie he in euerie thing,
               that vertue loues and euer will.
               By vertue honours here we haue,
               By vertue, faithfull hearts we win:
               By vertue cleane we are and braue,
               by vertue purg'd of all our sinne:
               Wherefore lets all with might and maine,
               Embrace the course of Vertues lore:
               That we in blisse with Christ may raigne,
               where vertues spring for euermore.
               O famous place that doth excell,
               that doth al earthly blisse surmount:
               Where Saints and Angels only dwel,
               whose pleasant ioies no man can count.
               Each saint is higher in his place,
               and brighter also in our sight:
               Then Sun or Moon, whose glittering grace
               our eyes refuse, they are so bright.
               
                   What glory there, where glory is▪
               
               and doth in highest state abound:
               Thrise happy hee that can see this,
               most blessed they that haue it found.
               Here Patriarkes and Prophets all,
               here godlie martyrs weare the crowne:
               Here Virgins pure are freed from thrall,
               here sacred Saints haue all renowne.
               Here sences all are fullie fed.
               with their delights in highest degree:
               1. Here musick seeks to fill thy head,
               with sound as sweet, as sweet may be.
               2. Most fragrant smels here eke abound,
               to please thy nostrels in their kind:
               3. Here tastes most sweet are also found,
               to please thy palate: yet behind
               4. Surpassing sightes here are also,
               as obiectes for thy Christall eies:
               5. More perfect feeling then we know,
               here eke remaines by destinies.
               O glorious God that hast assign'd,
               these pleasures all, vs to content!
               Inspire our hearts, that thou maist find
               our soules with thee still to consent.
               What greater ioyes can be exprest,
               what sweeter blisse, what pleasure more:
               
                   Can be conceiu'd in humaine breast,
               then here haue bene rehearst before,
               Yet more then all is ouer
                     •
                  ast,
               which one is all I dare well say:
               For fa
                     •
                  e to face we
  shall at 
                     ••
                  st,
               Our Sauiour sweet, see night and day,
               And ioy in him with perfect bl
                     •
                  sse:
               and liue with him, that death hath s
                     •
                  aine,
               In loue and peace which are endlesse
               and neuer toucht with woe or paine,
               No goo
                     •
                   can be but
  there is found:
               no good without him is possest:
               All best delights do there abound,
               each fight doth yeeld a perfect rest.
               The Angels there most glorious are,
               then humaine eyes can well behold:
               More bright they shine then any star,
               and still Gods mercies they vnfold:
                     
                        •
                     he An
                     
                        •
                     els shew 
                        •
                     he mercies
 
                        •
                     f God,
               
               What place more stately can there be,
               for greatest Princes to enioy:
               Then follow heires with him to be,
               that grants all blisse without annoy,
               Behold the time, which once hath bin,
               behold the time, which present is:
               Behold also each future thing,
               most plaine are there with God in blisse.
               
                   O knowledge deep, O heauenly light,
               O sence most cleare, that so can reach,
               That so can bring all things in sight,
               and so all saints and Angels teach,
               O blessed state, where malice sleepes,
               no one is here of base degree:
               O glorious Lord, that Princes keeps,
               his loyall seruants for to be!
               O seat of ioy! O s
                     •
                  e
  of blisse!
               O happie house of all ple
                     •
                  sures!
               O state which neuer doth amisse,
               O blessed place, which so endures!
               O place which yeeldeth all contents,
               O place which neuer wracke sustaines!
               O place which need ne lands, ne rents!
               O place which still in blisse remaines!
               O woondrous place of all the best!
               O place which endlesse comfort brings!
               O place of ioy and quiet rest!
               O place whence chiefest goodnes springs!
               O place, the nurse of loue and peace!
               O place the fountaine of all faith!
               O place where strife and discord cease!
               O onlie place of life and breath!
               O glorious Lord that there doth raigne!
               and only giuer of all blisse.
               
                   O happy we, if we maintaine,
               and keepe his lawes in righteousnesse:
               O happie we, to whome the light,
               and knowledge of his word is brought▪
               
               O happie we, that liue in sight,
               of such a Lord in word and thought.
               O happie all that doe imbrace
               this famous Lord in word and deed:
               For they shal comfort get, and grace,
               and on his Manna shall they feed.
               O Manna sent from God aboue!
               O, Manna sweet that bringeth blisse!
               O onlie food of godlie loue,
               that mends all things that are amisse.
               O heauenly iewell of all the best!
               O pearle passing glittering gold!
               Wherein all Christian soules do rest,
               and with all ioy the same behold.
               No difference there of persons is,
               Each one doth liue in like degree:
               Each one possesseth heauens blisse,
               all face to face our Lord do see,
               O man to thee now must I call,
               the end where first I did begin,
               That ioyes, that blisse, that paine and thrall.
               
                   may keep thy soule and mind from sin.
               Thy heart will melt on them to thinke,
               if any grace in thee remaine,
               And from all filthy sinfull sinke,
               thy heart and hand thou wilt refraine.
               Vaine pleasure all, then wilt thou scorne,
               when heauens blisse thou doest behold:
               For they with damned spirits are torne,
               that make a treasure of their golde.
               When grie
                     •
                  ly death
  doth the assault,
               it is too late for to amend:
               Wherefore in time confesse thy fault,
               and God to please see thou intend.
               For when this li
                     •
                  e
  is gone and past,There is no remedy for sinne after
 death.
               
               there is no cure for any sinne:
               Then as we are, so shall we last,
               in ioy, or paine as we begin.
               Wherefore thy life see so thou frame,
               that it may please our Sauiour sweet:
               And alwayes praise his holy name,
               then thou in blisse shalt Angels meet.
               And with them euer shalt thou be,
               all peace, all ioy, with them shalt haue,
               Surpassing pleasures stil shalt see,
               and nothing euer need to craue.
               
                   Which blessed place none can possesse,The end of 
                        〈…〉
                      the
 first entrāce to eternall blisse
               
               till from this finfull life they goe:
               None to the same can haue accesse,
               vnlesse in godlinesse they flowe.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            A PRAIER TO ESCHVE worldly vanities.
            
               FOr asmuch (O bountifull Iesus and most sweete sauiour of
mankind) the frailtie of our corrupted flesh is still more ready to yeelde to
the vain allurements of this wicked world, and fond fancies of this wretched
vale, then to the sweet and comfortable perswasions of thy constant worde
reuealed in the holy Gospell, the food of our soules, the bread of our liues,
and the strength of our saluation: I most humblie beseech thee, euen in the
bowels of thy tender mercies, to turne thy fauourable countenance towards me,
& so poure in me the dewe of thy heauenly grace, that I may euen hate and
eschewe the vaine inuentions and fonde pleasures of this loathsome laberynth,
& walk in the waies of the godly, according to thy holy lawes &
cō
               mandements. Be thou (O merciful God) my  strong castell and
refuge, against the wicked assaults, and most filthy temptations of Satan, and
all his hellish hoste; for they secret
                  •
               ly dig pits for my soule, and seeke continuallie to entrappe the
same in the snares of eternall damnation, and leaue nothing vnattempted that
may worke my most miserable destruction. Wherefore, o most sweet and tender
Father, so mortify old Adam in my fond affections, that despising the
vncertainty & frailtie of this momentaneous life, I may not delight my
self in the ioyes of any earthly pleasures, or looke for any comfort of this
present life, but withdrawe my mind and soule from things of fickle stay,
& to fix my hart to solace and delights, vpon the hope of beholding the
maiestie and beautie of they glorie, wherein ioy shal be ful, and nothing
wanting for euer. Graunt, O blessed God and most merciful Father, that art the
mighty monark of heauen and earth, and onely giuer of all goodnesse, that my
soule may as a Doue speedily flie vnto the sweete bosome of thy deare sonne,
and there with him receiue the happie rest, which he by shedding of his
preeious bloud hath purchased and prepared  for the same, to
whome with the father and the holie Ghost be all glorie, praise▪ dominion
and power for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer to escape the calamities of hell.
            
               BEholding with the eies of my heart, O blessed Lord, the cruell
tormentes, and dreadful terrors of the pit of hel, which thou hast appointed
to be a iust guerdon for sin, and a fit punishment for such as forsake thee,
and daylie seeke by infidelity to dishonour thee; and knowing that if thou
shouldest deale with me according to thy iustice, I should receiue nothing but
death and damnanation; I here prostrating my selfe before thy diuine Maiestie,
most humbly beseech thee of thy gracious fauour to caste downe the eyes of
Mercie vpon me, to pardon my sinnes, to forgiue mine offences, and to renew
thy holy Spirite in mee, that I may so passe my time in this life, that through
thy grace & fauor, I may neuer wāder in the most  filthy
streetes of eternall death and destruction, but for euer escape the daungerous
and stinking gulfe of hellish calam
                  •
               ties, and damnation, Consider (O Lord) consider I beseech thee, the
weaknesse and frailty of my sinful flesh, and according to the multitude of thy
mercies receiue my soule into thy fauour, and put all my wickednes out of thy
remembrance. Cleanse me, O sweet Sauiour, and so shall I be cleansed, and made
whiter than the snowe in thy sight. Strengthen me, O God, strēgthen me, that
the gates of hel preuail not against me; neither let Satan, death or hell euer
haue power to triumph ouer me, but let mee that am thine, be thine stil, and be
thou mine. Grant this, O most victorious & triumphant Lord, for thy tender
mercies sake, and for thy deare sonnes sake, our onlie mediatour and Aduocate,
Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer to attaine heauenly feliciti
                  •
               s.
            THis worlde (O Lord) is a dungion of darknes, a mountaine of
miserable martyrdoms, a lewd laberinth of loathsom lusts,  a
canckred course of choking calamities, a place of all vanities, quite void of
all vertues. Wherfore, make me strong, O sweet Sauior, to walke vpright in this
wretched wildernes, and arme me blessed Lord with thy holy armour: let me
haue, O tender Father, thy righteousnesse for my breast-plate, a liuely faith
in thee for my target, a firm hope of thy mercies, for my helmet; and the true
knowledge of thy word for my banner; so that I may be strong against all the
fond allurements, vaine fancies, and most wicked assaultes of the world, the
flesh and deuill, the mortall enemies both of my body and soule; and after the
ende of this fraile life, I may participate with thee and thy holie Angels, the
perfect ioyes of heauenly felicities in eternall life, but feeling the heauie
burthen of my sinne, and calling to memorie the grieuous punishment which thou
hast often time laid vpon sinne, as when thou diddest send fire vpon
Sodom, and Gomorrha for sinne, when thou diddest cast foorth
Adam out of Paradice for sinne, when thou diddest harden the heart of Pharaoh
for sin, when thou diddest cast Lucifer foorth out of heauen into vtter darknes
for  sin; yea, when thou didst persecute Salomon in
himself & his posterity, with Dauid thy own seruant, and many
others to our example, & al for shameful sin. O Christ most mercifull, I
beseech thee, that art the lamb of God, and takest away the sins of the world,
to blot out al mine iniquiti
                  •
               s,
which I cōfesse O Lord to be more then al theirs; & let not mine offences
be witnesses against me in the great day, for then I know that both death and
euerlasting damnation shal be my reward: Wherefore I beseech thee, O most
mighty God, and mercifull Father, that the pittifull passion of thy deare son,
may be a sufficient ransom for al my sins, & a ful satisfaction for all
mine offences. Grant me, O Lord, thy holy spirite, & of thy louing kindnes
turne thy fauourable countenāce towards me, that I may for euer in all my
thoughts, words and deeds, praise & glorifie thy holy name, & after
this life attaine the felicities and ioyes of thy blessed kingdome, and there
with thee to raigne eternallly. To whome with the father, the son, and the
holy Ghost, be all honour and glorie, world without end. Amen▪
            
         
         
            
            Sweet and comfortable Flowers for soule and body.
            
               Auarice.
               
                  THe chariote of Auarice is carried vppon foure wheeles of
  vices, which are, Faint courage, Inhumanitie, contempt of God, and
  forgetfulnesse of death.
               The two horses that drawe the same,Ba
                        •
                     nard are Rauine, and
  Niggardship: to them both is but one Carter, which is, a desire to haue; the
  whip which the carter vseth, hath two cords and they are, a greedy mind to get,
  and a fearful heart to forgoe.
               As hell and perdition are neuer filled, euen so the minde of a
  couetous person is neuer contented.Salomon,
               
               Riches hastily gotten shall soone diminish, but that which by
  honest trauel is by litle and litle gathered, shal dayly increase, and
  continue long.
               
                   He that maketh hast to bee rich, and beareth
  enuie to others, litle knoweth how soon pinching necessitie shall summon him to
  the base court of pouertie.
               Endlesse woe is the rewarde of him, that greedily doth gather to
  maintaine his house, that his nest may stand on high, and thinketh to escape
  the great strok of vengeance.
               The couetous person neuer taketh rest, for in this life his mind
  is vexed, and his soule shall euer burne in the fiery lake of eternall
  perdition.
               O with what difficulty shall they that are in loue with mony
  enter into the kingdome of heauen! Verily I say vnto you, more easie is it for
  a Cammell to passe through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter
  into the kingdome of heauen.
               Such as be rich, or couet much wealth, sal no doubt into most
  wicked temptations, and are taken in the s
                     •
                  ares of the deuill, yea by greedy and vnlawfull desires are drowned
  in the stinking gulfe of sempiternall death & damnation.
               Pouerty lacketh many things,Seneca.
  couetousnes al things: the niggard
  
                     •
                  o no man is good, 
                  
                     •
                  ut to himselfe worst.
               Money is a seruant and drudge to a wise man, but to a foole a
  Ladie and Mistresse.
               Inordinate desire of riches and rule,Salust. is the onlie fountaine whence springeth all
  mischiefe, for couetous appetite subuerteth credit, honestie, humility,
  clemencie, patience, & benignitie, with all other vertues.
               Riches to a wicked man are instruments of mischiefe.
               As the fire euer desireth more fewell, that it may consume it,
  euen so a man that is couetous craueth more welth, that he may hoord it, the
  fire to his comfort, because it is therby maintained, but the man to his
  misery, bebecause he is thereby damned.
               Riches to the vertuous and godly that vse them wel, are a token
  of the sweet mercies & fauour of God, but to the wicked that abuse them, a
  perfect signe of their reprobation, & losse of Gods loue towards them.
            
            
               Ambition.
               THe Deuill did fall only because he wold rather be a prince,
  then a subiect.
               An aspiring mind neuer inioyeth quietnes.
               
                   He that desireth to be aboue others, often times
  falleth; and is set with the lowest.
               Such as are infected with ambition, & are desirous of
  honour, must be enforced to possesse such treasures only as are vnspotted, and
  cleane from all mischiefe, which may not of any enemy be corrupted, of any
  friend misliked, nor of any man slandered.
               All such as exalt themselues shall surely be daunted and set
  low.
               Who so liueth in authority, let him weigh in the vpright
  ballāce of his clear conscience in what sort he came vnto it,
                     
                        ••
                     egori
                        •
                     . and comming wel vnto it, how
  he ought to liue wel in it, & to the end he may gouern wisely, let him cal
  to remembrance his owne infirmity.
               Rule & authority are fit only for men that are both wise and
  vertuous, for the wicked stil seek to destroy, and not to maintaine godly and
  ciuil gouernment.
               Ambition is a lurking plague,Barnard a
  secret poison, a subtil mischief, the mother of hypocrisie, the forger of
  deceit, the nurse of enuie, the w
                     •
                  lspring of vices, the moth of deuotion; the blinder of Arts, making
  diseases of remedies, and sicknes of salues.
               
                   Ambition breaketh the league of godly society,
  pincheth the purse, stirreth strife, daunteth vertues, and layeth her selfe
  open to all vice and wickednes.
               The ambitious man so litle regardeth his dutie, that he wisheth
  the death of his own father to enioy promotion, yea seketh the subuersion of
  a whole kingdom in hope once to sit in the chaire of pompe.
            
            
               Abstinence.
               ABstinence is the curer of many maladies in the bodie, a due
  corrector of filthy lustes of the flesh and a ready directer of the soule to
  sempiternal felicity.
               By Abstinence thy purse is saued,Gregorie. thy body preserued, & thy soule blessed,
  better is a man patient then strong, for he that can rule his affections is a
  great conquerour.
               They that abstaine from vice, glorify God and preserue their
  soules to eternall blisse.
               Nature is content with a li
                     •
                  le,Seneca. and he that oppresseth her with
  excesse hurteth himself, and displeaseth God.
               They that drink wine in youth, double the flame of carnal
  desire.Salomon.
               
               Keep thine eies from vaine sights, least it  be
  caried from thine eies to thine heart.
               Let not thy conceipt imbrace the image of lust, for thereby thy
  heart is stirred to vaine follie.
               Yeeld not to the motions of the flesh, for it poysoneth thy
  soule, and bringeth thy bodie to a miserable end.
            
            
               Aduersitie.
               HIde thy misfortune,Salomon. that
  thine enemie reioyce not at thy fall.
               As the Potters vessels are tried in the furnace, euen so good
  men are known in aduersitie.
               Vertuous men finde some solace in greatest sorrowes.Seneca▪
                  
               
               In al thine aduersities remember these th
                     •
                  e things: hard things may bee mollified, straite things
  may be loosed, and heauie thinges by custome are made little or nothing
  troublesome, to such as beare them hansomly.
               Trouble is cause of patience, patience maketh proofe,Paule proofe bringeth hope, and hope is neuer rebuked.
               Coales being in the fire doe burne & consume,Augustine. but the gold is tryed, the one is turned 
   to ashes, and the other is fined: the forge is the world, good
  men are the gold, aduersities the fire, and God the workman.
               Dispaire not in aduersitie, for he that caste thee downe, can
  raise thee vp againe,
               As our sinnes prouoke the wrath of God whereby we are forced to
  sustaine all calamities, so repentance with amendment of life, restore vs to
  our former prosperities.
               I iudge him most miserable that neuer knew miserie:Seneca for good men are tried like fi
                     ••
                   gold, but the wicked are left like dy
                     •
                  tie drosle.
               By many tribulations wee shall enter into the kingdome of
  heauen, but hee that hath not taken vp his crosse and followed Christ, shall
  not inherite the kingdome of Christ.
               Afflictions and crosses are as necessarie for the soule as warme
  cloathes and dainty fare for the bodie.Paul
                        •
                     .
               
               My childe neglect not the punishment of God, because it bringeth
  thy soule to all eternitie
               Blessed is he that patiently taketh that corrections which God
  layeth vpon him.Salamon
               
               Aduersities cause good men to be better,  make
  wicked men worse.
               He that neuer felt aduersitie is not worthy of prosperitie.
               It is better to suffer aduersity in this life, & hereafter
  to enioy eternall life, then here once to seeme to be blessed, and hereafter to
  be euer cursed.
               Troubles in this life being patiently taken encrease solace to
  life eternall, but being stubburnlie borne, and taken as a wrong at the hands
  of the Almightie, bring all heauinesse and sorrow to eternall death.
            
            
               Almes deede.
               ALmes deliuereth thee from sin,Dauid
  and from death, and will not suffer thy soule to enter into darknesse.
               Blessed is he that considereth the poore and needie,Salamon. for the Lorde wil deliuer him in the day of
  trouble.
               He that stoppeth his eares at the crie of the poore, he shall
  crie, and God wil not hear him
               He that vseth alms, offereth sacrifice to the Lord.
               Charitie is not perfect, when crauing  exhorteth
  it.
               Perfect compassion is to preuent the hungrie, before the begger
  desire.
               The Almes of the hart is much better then the Almes of the
  bodie, for God loueth a chear
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  l giuer.
               As the fiery lake is prouided for the niggard,Salomo
                        •
                     
                   euen so
  the ioyes of heauen are prepared for such as delight in charitable giuing.
               The Almes of charity without worldly substance sufficeth, but
  that which is corporallie giuen without a mercifull heart is not sufficient
  but worse then nothing.
               He that vseth Almes doeth offer sacrisice to the Lord,
                     
                        •••
                     lesiast
               
               Charity is not perfect when crauing exhorteth it.
            
            
               Accusation.
               HE that accuseth not the wicked, is condemned with him.Augustin
                        •
                     
                  
               
               It is better that an euill man bee accused, then to be suffered
  to go vnpunished.Idem,
               
               The wicked accuse no man because they would goe free.
            
            
               Arrogancie.
               PRide is the mother of many mischiefes,Augustine▪
                   
                   for it nourisheth theft, it
  maintaineth adultery, it bringeth foorth disdaine, and causeth men to forget
  God.
               Pride breedeth idlenesse, prouoketh lust, and leaueth the soule
  in the filthy puddle of eternall damnation.
               The congregation of proud men shall neuer prosper.
               He is an arrogant person, and still counted most dissolute, that
  setteth litle by that which good men deeme of him.
               An arrogant man heareth not the wholsome counsell of such as
  are graue, wise and vertuous.
            
            
               Apparell.
               THe apparell, laughter, and gate of a man do shew to the world
  what hee is. Vertuous conditons are the only braue & laudable ornamentes
  that can set foorth anie Christian.
               She is not well apparelled that is not wel manered.
               Shee that painteth her face with materiall collours, putteth out
  the true picture of god.
               Foule maners are worse then dyrtie apparell,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   but faire
  conditions surpasse vestures of gold.
               
                   As too much sluttishnesse, and exquisite nicenes
  are detestable vices, so a decent comlinesse is a laudable vertue.
            
            
               Babbling.
               IN much babbling lacketh no sinne,Salomon, but hee is wise that can temper his language.
               A babbling enemie shall lesse annoie thee, then he that is
  secret.
               One thing often times spoken troubleth the hearer.Aristotle,
               
               So talk with men, as if God did hear thee & so talke with
  God, as if men did hear thee.
            
            
               Battell.
               WArre ought only to be taken in hand that peace may ensue.
               Such as are oppressed, are forced to vse warre for their owne
  defence.
               
                  Octauian the Emperour was woont to say, that warre
  should not bee stirred without surety,Salus
                        •
                     
                   that the gaine should be more
  then the charges.
               Victorie resteth not only in a great armie, for the strength of
  battell commeth from heauen.
               
                   Sobernesse in a Captaine is no lesse commendable
  then strength and hardinesse.
               A carefull souldier is neuer idle, but alwayes busied in his
  attemptes.
            
            
               Boasting.
               LEt a stranger commend thee, & not thine owne lips.
               Nothing doth more diminish a mans commendation,Solom
                        •
                     n then
  much vaunting the successe of his actes.
            
            
               Benificence.
               BEnefite the godlie and thou shalt find recompenee,Augustine. & if they cannot requite thee, yet God will
  remember thee.
               Those benefits are most thankfull, which a man findeth readie
  and are bestowed with out tarrying,Seneca. but onely
  the shame fastnesse of him that shall take them.
            
            
               Charitie.
               CHarity is patient and gentle, and enuyeth no man▪ 
                   If I had faith, in so much, as that I could carie away
  mountaines,Paule yet were I nothing if I lacked
  Charitie.
               If I should distribute all my goods & giue them to the
  poore; and although I gaue my body to be burned, hauing no charitie, it nothing
  auaileth me.
               Charitie doeth nothing amisse, it is not puffed with prid, it is
  not ambitious, she seketh not her profit, she is not mooued, shee thinketh no
  euill, shee reioyceth not in miss chiefe, she suffereth all thinges, shee
  ioyeth in trueth, shee beleeueth all thinges, shee hopeth wel of al things,
  Charitie neuer fayleth.
            
            
               Chastitie.
               CHastitie is the beauty of the soule,Augustin
                        •
                     
                   or of
  the Kings daughter that is abroad.
               Chastity without Charitie is like a Lamp without oyle.
               Where necessity is laide vnto Chastity, where authoritie is
  giuen to Lechery, there vertue is put to exile.
               The absence of women, causeth chastitie amongst men.
               
                   A chaste eie sheweth an honest mind.
            
            
               Constancie.
               COnstancie doth surelie perform the thing determined.
               He that is constant,
  
                     •
                  eeleth neither trouble nor
  heauinesse.
               Constancie keepeth and still preserueth things well gotten, but
  goodes euill gotten neuer continue long.
            
            
               Carnall Appetite.
               CArnall appetie leaueth behind her more cause of repentance,
  then of remēbrance. 
                     ••
                  lthy lust wil
  haue no affinitie with vertue.
               The fleshlie mind is neuer satisfied.
               A carnall woman euer wisheth without contentment.
               Carnall appetite dulleth the wit, dimmeth the eies, letteth good
  counsell, spoileth the mind, and with vertue wil haue no medling.
               Heshly lust consumeth the body, and damneth the soule.
            
            
               Confession
               COnfession is the only remedy for sinne.
                     
                        •
                     ugustine, The vengeance of God
  ceaseth, where  mans confession timely preuenteth.
               Confession is the life of a sinner, the glorie of good men, to
  all offenders necessary, and not inconuenient to the godly.
               Confession is the confounder of vices, the cleanser of
  soules,Augustine. the restorer of vertues, the
  vanquisher of deuils: what will you more? It stoppeth hels mouth, and setteth
  wide open the gates of Parad
                     •
                  ce▪
               
            
            
               Discorde.
               IF they which make peace,Hierome. bee
  called the children of God, without doubt the disturbors of peace be the
  children of Satan.
               Discord is the root of all confusion,
                     
                        •
                     regorie, & the spring of
  desolation.
               Discord is an enemy to nature, and a shorte
                     •
                  er of the life of man.
               They that sustaine one part of the citie,Cicero & neglect the other, lowe the wicked seedes of
  sedition and discord.
               By concord small thinges are made great, but by discord the most
  greatest are brought to nothing.
               Warre is soone made, but not quickly discussed, for he is not
  sure to finish it,Salust, that  first
  toke in hand to begin it.
            
            
               Dignitie.
               HE is most honourable that disdaineth to erue, or be subiect to
  vices.
               True Nobility consisteth no
                     •
                   of great patrimonies and rich possessions, but of godlie &
  vertuous actions.
               If thou wilt esteem a man truly, & know him plainly, viewe
  him naked, and let him lay aside authority, possessions and other fortunes:
  finallie respect not his bodie, but behold his soule, then shalt thou see what
  he is of himselfe, and what he hath of others
            
            
               Dolours.
               THere is no sorrowe, but the length of time doth diminish, &
  make more easie. As a mo
                     •
                  h
  consumeth a garment,Salomon euen so heauinesse
  hurteth the heart of man.
               It is to be considered in all griefe and heauinesse, that
  nothing bee done vnaduisedlie, nothing rashlie, nothing fearful
                     •
                  ie, nothing desperatly, nothing
  wretchedlie, or any thing foolishly.
               Ouer much sorrowe breaketh the heart,  and killeth
  the bodie.
               Sorrowes bring solace to the godlie,Augustine, but they vtterly ouerthrow & daunt the
  wicked Sorrowes are most necessary to all sinners for they bring amendement of
  life.
            
            
               Doctrine.
               DOctrine is an ornament to the rich and Noble,Solomen but to men without wealth, a happie refuge and
  succour.
               As faire legges bee in vaine to a Cripple, so vnseemely is
  Doctrine in the mouthes of fooles.
               Learning is a treasure which water cannot drown, fire burn,
  theeues steale, nor dice lose.
               As learning in good men is the armour of vertue,Seneca so in wicked and corrupted persons it is a spurre to
  doe mishciefe.
               We teach our children liberall Sciences, no because these
  Sciences may giue any vertue, but because they make the minde apt to receiue
  vertue.
               As the right vse of learning adorneth the soule,Hieronim▪
                   euen so the abuse therof spoyleth both bodie
  and soule.
            
            
               
               Diet.
               IN diuers meates is occasion of sicknes,Galen and greedy feeding is a token of choller. When the
  sicknesse is in his force, then sparest diet is best.
               V
                     •
                  cleane bodies, and
  they which be not well p
                     •
                  rged of
  supe
                     •
                  fluous humours,Hipocrat the more you nourish them, the more you hinder
  them.
               Ouermuch euacuation or ouer much filling of the body is
  dangerous, for too much of any thing is enemie to Nature.
               To him that is fallen into a distemperance in heate or
  colde,Galen it is expedient to giue him things of
  contrary qualities.
               Stomackes in winter and spring time bee hottest,Hipocrat, and sleep then is longest, wherefore in those
  times, meat should be taken in greatest aboundance.
               You must not only remember that contrarie thinges be cured by
  their contraries, but also consider in euery contrarie the true dose and
  quantitie.
               V
                     •
                  e moderate
  exercise, for so shalt thou  helpe Nature.
               Ouer much ease maketh Nature feeble, that shee cannot resolue
  that which by Ar
                     •
                  e was not
  purged.
            
            
               Drunkenness
                     •
                  .
               DRunkennes maketh men seem as beasts,
  
                     •
                  o
                     •
                   it depriueth them of reason, and stirreth them to all
  filthinesse.
               The drunken man shall neuer be rich.
               The Drunkard conso
                     •
                  ndeth Nature, loseth both grace and honour, & runneth headlong
  into 
                     •
                  uerlasting damnation.
            
            
               E
                     •
                  uie.
               THe enuious man pineth to see the prosperity of his
  neighbour.
               Enuie seeketh dayly to subuert the state of the god
                     •
                  ie.
               Enuie is blind, & can doe nothing but dispraise vertue.
               Enuie is an excremēt of Satan, which poisoneth the hearts of
  all such as once touch it.
               Enuie cannot endure the vertuous, but seketh their
  confusion.
               The enuious man wisheth wel to no man, but worst to himselfe,
  for his filthy conceites  drowne his soule in the filthy puddle of
  eternall damnation.
            
            
               Faith.
               AS the bodies is dead, wherein is no spirit, euen so that faith
  is dead which bringeth foorth no good workes.
               By faith wee see God, by faith we beleeue in God, and by faith
  wee haue our saluation from God.
               A liuely faith is the badge of a perfect christian.
               Let all godly beleeuers, endeuour to excell in good workes.
               True Faith confirmeth thy wordes with workes.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Not the hearers of the Law, be righteous in the sight of God,
  but the doers of the lawe shall be iustified.
               The Faith of a Chtistian is ioyned with charity,Augustine and without Charity is the Faith of the
  Deuill.
            
            
               Flattery.
               TAle bearers,Hierome. rioters,
  glozers, & flatterers ar more to be abādoned thē opē enemies.
               Better is the stroke of a faithfull friend, then the false
  kisses of them that flatter thee.
               
                   The best natures soonest beleeue, and by
  flattering persons are soonest destroyed.
            
            
               God.
               IN the hart of man be many deuises,Salomon▪
                   but the will of God neuer altereth.
               They that fear God wil beleeue his word and such as loue him
  will keepe his commandementes.
               The eyes of God are more bright then the Sunne, for he seeth the
  secretes of the hart and searcheth the raines.
            
            
               G
                     •
                  ace.
               GRace is giuen for three causes, that the
  
                     •
                  aw be fulfilled, that nature be
  restored, and that we by sin be not subdued.Augustine.
               
               By grace we are freed from the bondage,Barnard, of sinne.
               Grace bringeth vs to the hauen of eternall happinesse.
               Without the grace of God no flesh can be saued.
            
            
               Humility.
               hVmblenes banisheth pride, winneth loue, and bringeth vs into
  the fauour of God.Augustine.
               
               
                   As pride pride is the roote of all destruction,
  so humility is the welspring of etern
                     •
                  ll blisse.
               Pride cast Lucifer into the gulfe of damnation,Barnard but by humilitie we shal attaine saluation.
               Suffer not pride to rule thy witte, for then will it spoile thy
  sences.
               God hateth the proud, but the humble hee exalteth.
            
            
               Honour.
               HOnours ouer great,
                     
                        •
                     lutarch wherein is pride, or
  ouer much statelines, be suddēly thrown downe like high trees in a great
  
                     •
                  empest.
               Honour-nourisheth cunning,
                     
                        •
                     ully, and with praise mens wits
  be kindled to studie.
            
            
               Ignorance.
               IGnorance excuseth not sinne.
               The onlie enemy to knowledge is Ignorance.
               By Ignorance al absurdities are nourished.
               Ignoraunce is the image of blindnesse,
                     
                        •
                     gustine the mother of errours,
  and the Nurse of all follie.
            
            
               
               Ingratitude.
               EVill shall neuer depart from the house o
                     •
                   him that rendreth an euil turn for a good.Sal
                        •
                     mon,
               
               He that doth all things well cannot bee vnkinde.Seneca.
               
               The hope of a person vnthankfull shall relent like winter yce,
  & vanish away, as a sudden floud.
            
            
               Idlenesse.
               IDlenesse weakneth, strength, but exercise encreseth the
  same.
               As ruste consumeth yron,Seneca▪
                  
  euen so idlenesse wearieth strength.
               Idlenesse without learning is death, & the graue of a quicke
  man.Hieronim,
               
               Idlenesse bringeth beggerie, and causeth men with hatred to fall
  into miserie.
               Idlenesse teacheeth all vnhappinesse.
               Where Idlenesse beareth
  
                     •
                  way, all vertues decay.
            
            
               Loue.
               LOue couer
                     •
                  th the
  multitude of sinnes.Salomon, Loue pleaseth God, and
  winneth the  hearts of men.
            
            
               Liberality.
               LIberality consisteth not in the quantity of the thing that is
  giuen,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                   but the manner of the giuer, for he giueth
  according to his abilititie and substance.
               He giueth late, that giueth not till hee bee asked.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Liberalitie is the only meanes,Plutarch for a prince to aduaunce his honour, and to keepe
  the faithfull heartes of his true subiectes.
               As the Adamant draweth yron, so liberalitie winneth the hearts
  of men.
            
            
               Lechery.
               LEcherie is an enemie to God, and subuerteth all good
  vertues.A
                        •
                     gustine.
               
               He that delighteth in Lecherie, wearieth his body, consumeth his
  abilitie, and damneth his soule.
               If we consider the excellent work of God in vs, wee shall
  easilie perceiue how foule & filthie a thing it is to be resolued in
  lecherie, and to liue wantonlie.
               Lecherie hasteneth olde age, and withereth the bodie.
            
            
               
               Malice.
               BY malice a man slayeth his owne soule: Malice hurteth them most
  that doe retaine it.
               Malice is compassed with no limmites of reason.
            
            
               Nobiliti
                     •
                  .
               THe chiefest Nobility before god is, to excell in all
  vertues.Hieroni
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               True Nobilitity scorneth to do seruice to sin
               He that boasteth of his ancestors,Chrisosto
                        •
                     
                  
  declareth himselfe not worthy of praise.
               
                  Iphicrates a valiant Captaine,Salust. but the sonne of a shoomaker, being there with
  imbrayded of Hermodius a Noble man borne, answered in this wise: My
  blood beginneth at me & thy blood of Generosity endeth in thee. The onlie
  welspring of true honor is vertue.Osoriu
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
            
            
               Obedience.
               IT is a generall decree made by mankind to be obedient to
  kinges,Augustine, howe much more vnto god, which
  gouerneth all creatures.
               Better is obedience then Sacrifice.
               If thou wilt be wise,Salomo
                        •
                     
                   be thou euer obedience 
   for it is written, desirest thou wisdome, then keep the
  commandements, and God wil giue her vnto thee.
               The contempt of superiours is the original fountaine of
  mischiefe in euery publik weale.Barnard,
               
               That country is euer wel gouerned, where people wel know how to
  obey.
               Faithfull obedience in subiectes, maketh louing and kinde hearts
  in Princes.
            
            
               Patience.
               BY patience Iob ouercame his woonderous miseries,Ambrose, and afterward enioyed all wished prosperities.
               He that patiently suffereth the troubles & crosses of this
  life,Augustine. shal after be endued with al
  felicitie.
               Patience comforteth the heart, quieteth the minde, and best
  pleaseth God.
               Most happy is he, whō no misery troubleth Patience causeth much
  peace, and breedeth quietnesse twixt man and wife.
            
            
               Pouertie.
               BEtter is a little in the feare of God,Solom
                        •
                     n then
  great treasures with a troubled Spirit.
               The patience of poore men shall surelie  bee
  rewarded.
               The life of man is not in aboundaunce of wealth, great riches,
  and high pompe, but in vertue and faith, for he is onely rich, that to Godward
  is rich.
               Be poore in spirit so shalt thou see God, so shalt thou praise
  God,Augustine, when thou doest good, so shalt thou
  lay the fault vpon thy self when thou doest euill.
               Pouertie plucketh downe the hearts of the proud, and often times
  bringeth them home to God.
               He that liueth after his owne opinion wil neuer be rich: but God
  will blesse him that with his riches praiseth the Lorde in doing almes,Barnard and maintaining vertue & godlinesse.
            
            
               Prayer.
               VVIth fasting corporall passions are to be cured,Hieronim, with praier the pestilence of mans mind is to be
  healed.
               Thy prayer is thy speech vnto God, when thou readest, God
  talketh with thee, & when thou prayest, thou talkest with God.
               By prayer the Niniuits were preserued.
               By prayer Ionas was deliuered out of the Whales
  bellie.
               
                   Earnest and feruent prayer doeth oftentimes
  pacifie the wrath of God.
               The froward nature of men is by humble pe
                     •
                  ition and prayer rectified.
            
            
               Prosperitie.
               THe worlde is more dangerous laughing then lowring.
               Liue so in prosperity, as though thou shouldest fall into
  misery.
               Let not prosperitie make thee proud, least God for saking thee,
  thou be pluckt into the narrow straites of pinching necessity.A
                        •
                     gustine
               
               When God suffereth euill men to haue great prosperity, thē his
  indignation is much more grieuous.
               If thou haddest the wisedome of Salomon,
                  Hieronim, the beautie of Absalon, the strengh of
  Sampson the long life of Enoch, the riches of
  Croesus, the power of Octauia
                        •
                     , what can al this auail thee? when finally thy body is giuen
  to wormes, thy soule vnto deuils to be with the rich man in paine
  euerlasting.
               Perfect prosperitie is the vse of vertue.Aristotle,
               
            
            
               Promise.
               AL honest promises are to be performed,
                     
                        •
                     ully, but these are not to be
  kept which are either  compelled by feare, or By craft
  deceiued.
               O the shameful confession of fraud, and the common mischief of
  man:Senec
                        •
                     
                   more credit is giuen to mens signets, then to their
  soules.
               The honesty of men consisteth in the true performance of their
  promises.
            
            
               Quietnesse.
               THe paeient man enioyeth most quietnes,plutarch, and a quiet mind keepeth the body in
  temperance.
               It is better to liue with a little quietly, then with aboundance
  troublesomlie.
               Quietnes maketh a merrie heart,Seneca,
  and a fat bodie.
            
            
               Remembrance.
               IT is good to remēber our faultes, that we may first repent vs
  of them,plato, and then specdil
                     •
                   amend them.
               There is nothing more cōfortable to the heart of man, then the
  remēbrance of sorrows past, in prosperitie present.
                     
                        •
                     ully
               
            
            
               Reason.
               Nothing in a man is better then reason, for by that hee goeth
  before beastes,
                     
                        •
                     ully and followeth the gods.
               
                   A perfect reason is that good, which properly
  belongeth to man, all other thinges are to him common with beasts: For if he
  bee strong, so is the Lyon: if faire, so is the Peacocke: if swift, so is the
  horse.
               Reason maketh a man full of felicity: Man by reason killeth the
  wilde Boare, stayeth, yea slayeth the light footed Stagge.
               By reason one man gouerneth another, for the subiect by reason
  is brought to obey the Prince, & the Prince with clemēcie through reason
  ruleth the subiect and long raigneth ouer them.
            
            
               Riches.
               RIches make place for losse, for such as possesse much, must
  loose much.
               Not Riches, but good deeds shall deliuer
                     •
                  a man from damnation.Salomo
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Riches are the 
                     •
                  ause
  of sin,Paul
                        •
                     
                   and sin of death. Riches draw men to hurt
                     •
                  ull desires, an
                     •
                   drown their soules in the gulfe of perdition▪
               
            
            
               Sapience.
               THe roote of wisedome is to feare God,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   and the branches thereof be
  of long life, The ardent desire of wisedome bringeth a man to the euerlasting
  kingdome.
               
                   A wise heart will abstaine from euill deeds, and
  he shal prosper in the works of iustice:
               The thoughtes of a wise man can not bee depraued.
               A wise man is neuer troubled with the tempests of
  heauinesse.
               Wisdome excelleth strength, & the prudent person, is
  preferred before the puissant.
               Wisedome is the Nurse of peace, and the mother of all other
  vertues.
            
            
               Sicknesse.
               SIcknesse patientlie taken,Augustine.
  is a perfect token of the loue and fauour of God, for therby we see our
  frailtie and weaknes, and also the omnipotent power of the highest.
               Sicknesse causeth great men to remember God, and poore men to
  acknowledge their offences.
               Sicknesse is more necessarie then meat for by the one the body
  onelie is maintained, but by the other both body & soule are cōforted.
            
            
               Silence.
               SIlence to follie is great wisdome:
               Vse few words and much wit:Pithag.
               
               Offende rather in silence then in babbling.
               Silence hurteth none, but many words are  hated of
  all men.
               An euil man is soner vanquished by silence then with
  answers,Chrisostom and malice sooner stirred with
  words then reformed.
               A man which cannot keep silence, is like a citie whose gates
  stand wide open, wherein the aduuersarie entreth at his pleasure.
            
            
               Tru
                     •
                  th.
               MAnie wordes commonly scatter trueth to nothing.H
                        •
                     eronim.
               
               Truth seeketh not corners.D
                        •
                     uid
               
               All the wayes of God are mercy & truth. Time trieth trueth,
  & trueth pleaseth God. Let thy tongue
  
                     •
                  ee ignorant of lying and
  swearing,Hierome. and so well see thou loue trueth,
  that what soeuer thou speakest, thinke that thou swearest the same.
               Trueth surmounteth all earthly things, for God himself is very
  trueth.Augustine
               
               Trueth floweth from God, as from the only fountaine of the
  same.
               Trueth cannot hide it self, for it shineth in darknesse, and
  banisheth the dimme cloudes of ignorance.
               As Satan is the father of lies,Barnard
  so is God the authour of trueth.
               
                   Truth flourisheth amongst the godly, but all such
  as beare lying lips are banished from that societie.
               Let all thy talke be mixed with modestie and trueth.
            
            
               Vertue.
               V
                     •
                  rtue is godlie
  inclination of the minde to eschew euill,plato, and
  imbrace godlinesse.
               Vertue is to restraine anger,Paule to
  mittigate desire, and to refraine carnal pleasures.
               The fruits of the Spirite are, charitie, chastitie, humilitie,
  ioyfulnesse, peace, patience,Chrysost,
  bountifulnesse, goodnesse, long sufferance, saith, temperance, continence and
  meeknes.
               Vertue adorneth thy minde, decketh thy thy soule,
                     
                        •
                     ully and
  winneth loue to thy 
                     •
                  ody.
               Vertue is euer one, with most deep roo
                     •
                  s perfectly planted, and can with no
  violent means be destroyed.
               It beseemeth vertue to be free from dread, and subiect to no
  seruitude.
               Vertue cannot serue,Aristotle, because
  she is free.
            
            
               Virginitie.
               VIrginity flourisheth as the greene lawrel and can by no
  tempestuous blastes of aduersitie be quailed.Cyptian
               
               
                   Virginitie is sister of Angels, vanquisher of
  lustes, Princesse of Vertue, and possessour of all good things.
               Virginity be
                     ••
                  tifieth
  the body,Augustine preserueth strength, and leadeth
  the soule to eternall happinesse.
               The woman vnmaried, & the Maiden vncorrupted,Paule. thinke on thinges pertaining to God, to the intent
  to bee holy in bodie and soule.
               The seruants of Virginitie,A
                        •
                     brose, are sobrietie, modesty,
  continencie, silence, and lenitie.
               Virginitie scorneth Pride, banisheth malice, daunteth
  enui
                     •
                  , & imbraceth all
  vertues.
               Virginitie is the garland of al Vertues,Cyprian the garden of comfort, and the court of all praise:
  For there is no godlie motion, but she affecteth, no flower of comfort but
  shee possesseth, no earthlie praise, but she deserueth.
            
            
               Witte.
               A Wise man doth all things by counsell,Salomen. & a foole soone discouereth his follie.
               Wit consisteth in the knowledge of things good and euill.
                     
                        •
                     ully.
               
               Seperate them from thee that do craftilie  flatter
  thee, and imbrace them with kindnes that faithfullie loue thee,Socrates. least ill men haue most profite by thee.
               The help of god is not onely gotten with wishing, and praying,
  but by vigilant studie, diligent executing,Salust and
  wise counselling, all things come to passe.
               Preuent as a wise man the daungers that may fall vpon thee.plato,
               
               A wise man foreseeth future mishaps, and suffereth none to
  afflict him.
               A wise man winneth wealth,Democrit,
  both to comfort himselfe, and his posteritie, but a foole looseth his
  patrimony, and can get nothing.
               Witte refuseth hastines & wrath,Socrates, because they be enemies of counsel.
               Wit gouerneth affections, and putteth all vices to flight.
               Wit is the gift of God,Salomon, and
  the brightnes thereof banisheth all the darke cloudes of ignorance.
               Wit adorneth her self with th the sweet & pleasant flowers
  of all vertues,Salust, she refraineth from sin, and
  imbraceth all godlines, she prepareth vs to hansomnes, and teacheth vs to
  eschue the filthy way of beastlinesse.
               
                   Witte is the mother of patience, the daughter of
  wisedome, the sister or modesty and temperance, and the care
                     •
                  ull Nurse of well doing.Ambrose,
               
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   