
      
         
            
            
            A RELATION OF THE NOW PRESENT WARRES, BETWEENE the Illuſtrious L. CHARLES EMANVEL, D. of Sauoy, Piedmont, &c. and the L. CARDINAL of Mantua, D. of Montferrat; ſeconded by the King of SPAINE.
            
               The Emperors Decree, and the Duke of SAVOY his Letter to the Emperor, wherein the whole occaſion of the Warres is briefly declared.
            Tranſlated out of the Latin COPIE.
            
            LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be ſold at his ſhop vnder Saint Auguſtines Gate. 1615.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            CHARLES EMANVEL DVKE OF SAVOY, TO HIS IMPERIALL MAIESTIE.
            
               THESE my Letters ſhall perhaps come to your Maieſtie later, then the matter required, your Maieſtie deſired, and my ſelfe purpoſed. But it is not alwayes in our power to ſatisfie to our deſires, when wee liſt, and buſineſſes falling out daily doe often force vs to deferre that, whereunto we haue a propenſion and will. For as I was purpoſing with my ſelfe to open the ſtate of my buſineſſes to your Maieſtie, and not onely

to take counſell, but alſo to implore your clemency and equitie in this my new controuerſie with the King of Spaine; an Imperiall Decree, whereof here followeth the copie, was ſent me by the Prince of Caſtillion.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        THE DECREE OF HIS IMPERIALL MAIESTIE, concerning the preſent Warres in SAVOY, &c.
                        WHereas notice hath beene giuen to his ſacred Imperiall Maieſtie, our moſt gracious Lord, by a true relation and authenticall record, that the Imperiall Decree concerning the diſmiſsing and caſhiering of the Souldiers, and the remouing of all other things, which might hurt the Prouince of Montferrat, or in any ſort trouble the peace and tranquillitie of Italie, giuen againſt the moſt illuſtrious

Lord, Charles Emanuel, Duke of Saucy, Piedmont, &c. hath vpon the eight day of Iuly, in the yeere of our Lord 1614. beene duly and lawfully proclaimed and publiſhed, inſomuch that the Tenor and Contents thereof are fully come to the knowledge of the ſaid Duke, of whoſe obedience to which neuertheleſſe, there is not as yet any due aſſurance come, either to his ſaid Maieſtie, or his Imperiall Deputie: Therefore his Imperiall Maieſtie doth againe ſeriouſly & ſeuerely ordaine to the ſaid Duke, preſently and without any further exceptions or delayes, to ſatisfie throughly, and in all points to the ſaid Decree; to withdraw and caſhiere, aſſoone as poſsible may be, all his Troups, without endamaging any body; to abſtaine from henceforth from all actions

of hoſtilitie againſt the Lord Cardinall of Mantua, Duke of Montferrat, and his Dominions, or againſt any man elſe; and a moneth after the ſignification hereof (which time is prefixed vnto him for all terme and prorogation) to ſhew fully in the Imperiall Court, to haue ſufficiently and throughly ſatisfied to the ſaid Decree and this Imperiall ſentence, and that vpon paine (if he neglect to doe it within the ſaid time) to be declared allyable now as then, and then as now, to the penaltie contayned in the ſaid Decree, and that it ſhall be proceeded againſt him more ſharply.
                        
                           Decreed by the Emperour the 24. of December, in the yeere of our Lord 1614.
                            
                           Subſcribed, Barvitius Chauncellor.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
            Wherefore hauing receiued the ſaid Decree, I could not but be much mooued at it, when I ſaw it was done againſt the orders of Law, againſt the ordinances of our Predeceſſors, and againſt cōmon cuſtome, in a thing of ſuch weight, wherein a Duke of Sauoy, Prince of the ſacred Empire, and perpetuall Vicary in Italie, was to be brandmarked with the ſhamefull note of the Imperiall Ban, vnleſſe he would diſmiſſe the Troups by him gathered; ſpecially when I obſerued that the date thereof ſhewed no certaine place, and that it wanted the ſubſcription of the Imperiall hand.
            But what is this, how grieuous is it to reade, and harſh to heare, that being ignorant of your former Decrees, and of all your ſignifications and threatnings, I ſhould be ſo ſeuerely checked as diſobedient to the Imperiall iniunctions; & that being bound to repreſſe the Gouernour of Millane, who theſe many moneths, with his great Troups of armed men, hath troubled the peaceable State of Italie, and attempted not only to inuade, but alſo to ſpoile vtterly the Frontiers of my Dominions, you (as though you

were ignorant of what is knowne to all the World) ſhould wincke at his too bold attempts, and out of your abſolute Authoritie, command me, who doe nothing elſe but moſt iuſtly challenge my owne right alone to lay downe the Armes, which I haue taken vp for the preſeruation of mine owne Dominions?
            What meaneth this, I pray you, to diſmiſſe my Troups againſt any man elſe ſoeuer they ſhould be intended, but onely (if thereby the Gouernor of Millane be vnderſtood) to take from mee all meanes of defence in a moſt iuſt cauſe, which are not only granted by humane Lawes, but by diuine alſo, to defraude me of the hope I haue in your Iuſtice, in this dangerous eſtate of my affaires, and willingly to arme the hand of mine enemie for the deſtruction of my ſelfe and my Countrey? All which (moſt inuincible Caeſar) ſhould I confeſſe, haue wounded my minde more deepely, if this cogitation of mine had not applyed ſome remedy vnto it, viz. that this Decree hath either beene made, your Maieſtie being ignorant of it, or is ſlipt from your hands

through the deceit and fraud of ſome crafty and wicked men, to which it cannot haue been hard to deceiue your Maieſtie, being ignorant of the ſubtill fallacie of this buſineſſe.
            Wherefore, I thinke, I ſhall doe well and fitly, briefly to ſhew your Maieſtie the ſtate of this controuerſie, repeating the ſame from the very beginning, that knowing the equitie of the matter, you may fully and abſolutely iudge, not of my cauſe, but of yours.
            What mooued me firſt to take Armes againſt the Duke of Mantua, your Maieſtie may eaſily haue knowne, both by the publiſhing of my Writings, and by the generall ſpeech of all the World; neither do I thinke you are ignorant of my readineſſe, in fulfilling the deſires, both of your Maieſtie, and the King of Spaine, by my ſurrendring, at your onely nodde, thoſe Townes that by right belong to me, and which I had taken by force, in the Prouince of Montferrat. At which time, may it pleaſe you, but to call to minde, what great and diuers matters the Gouernour of Millane promiſed, though but

with a wauering faith. For hauing begun to ſatisfie on my ſide, and my mind expecting ſome performance of his promiſes, he, without ſhame, hath broken his faith, which hee had obliged before ſo many witneſſes, denying, for the moſt part, his ſaid promiſes, lingering and delaying in thoſe, which hee can by no meanes denie, without ſhewing himſelfe willing to fulfill any thing. And not contented with that, hee hath not feared to enioyne me two things, in the King of Spaines name: Firſt, that I ſhould diſmiſſe two thouſand Swiſsers, or thereabout, which I had been long a getting for the defence of my State, and which had been long bound vnto me, through their ſtipend they haue receiued, though in regard of their ſmall number, they could giue no iuſt ſuſpicion, ſpecially to his Royall Maieſtie. Secondly, that I ſhould not deferre to ioyne by marriage, the Infant my Daughter, heretofore Ducheſſe of Mantua, with the now Duke of Mantua; promiſing that then he would procure, that my controuerſies, with the Duke of Mantua, ſhould be handled, which at that time could not be.
            
               To which demaunds (as being againſt all reaſon) I let him vnderſtand, both by letters, and by my Ambaſſadours, I could not ſatisfie, vnleſſe the controuerſies were firſt ended.
            And thus thinking to haue ſufficiently anſwered the Kings will, the Gouernour of Millane found out a new tricke, to wit; that it would be a thing pleaſing vnto him, that the matter ſhould not be decided by Armes, but that the controuerſies ſhould be ended by friendly meanes; and therfore deſired I ſhould ſend certaine Deputies to Millane, which meeting with as many of the Duke of Mantua, ſhould, in my name, handle and compound all the buſineſſe.
            Wherefore hauing thought good to yeeld thereunto, not only to auoid the note of obſtinacie, but alſo to ſhew to the world by a moſt ſure teſtimony, how much I did loue both mine owne quiet, and the publike Peace of all Italy; I ſent to Millane three men skilfull in the Law; who hauing remained there a long time, to put an end to the controuerſie propounded often, and at diuers times, ſeuerall Articles, though with damage

to my right, and much inferior to the goodneſſe of my cauſe.
            But what did heere the Gouernour, that man (forſooth) ſo deſirous to keepe peace, and ſo conſtant in his faith? Hee cauſed a great Armie, both of Horſe and Foote, ſecretly to be gathered, and enrowled in the Dukedome of Millane, and the Countries thereunto adioyning, and commanded my men to depart, without effecting any thing, and to tell me, that there was order come from the King, forbidding the handling of the compoſition of the controuerſies, before I had diſcharged all my Troupes, and accompliſhed the marriage of my Daughter; yea, that he was inioyned by the King to haue a care, not onely to incline mee to thoſe things hee commanded, but alſo to conſtraine and force mee to the ſame by Armes.
            Vpon this ſo ſharpe and ſeuere Declaration, what counſell I tooke, and what I did, not only my publiſhed writings may teſtifie, but alſo the Reuerend Lord Sauellus, Nuntius of our moſt holy Father, comming not long after, can be a moſt ſufficient witneſſe;

who, hauing inuited mee to the laying downe of Armes, (though it were requiſite, the ſame ſhould bee done by the mightier firſt) found me not only not vnwilling, but moſt readie thereunto; contented only with this condition, that I did deſire the Gouernour of Millane ſhould obliege his Faith to our moſt gracious Lord, the moſt Chriſtian King, and the Illuſtrious Commonwealth of 
                  Ʋenice, that hee ſhould hereafter attempt nothing againſt my Dominions, and diſmiſſe his Army raiſed againſt me.
            Hereupon, hee ſaid flatly, hee would doe none of all this, and ſhewing himſelfe more ready for the deſtruction of my Countrey, then deſirous of the peace of Italy, he entred at the ſame time with a great Army into the Prouince of Vercelles, and ſpoiled, ouerthrew, and burnt in a moſt pittifull maner, ſome Townes of the ſame.
            Wherefore, that I might procure ſome eaſe to my diſtreſſed Prouince, and diuerſe ſome whither elſe the moſt vehement and impetuous furie of the enemies, I led my Troupes to Nouarre, a Towne of the State

of Millane, where I ſhewed euidently, that I wanted no opportunitie to reuenge the iniuries done vnto mee. I could haue taken that Towne, I may ſay, with no difficultie at all, as being guarded by an vnſufficient Gariſon, and might alſo haue brought, if I had had the will, the whole ſtate of Millane into vtter danger; but that his Catholike Maieſtie might ſee my loue to publike peace, and my reſpect to him, I did not only ſpare to ſatisfie to my griefe, but forbad alſo at my depart by a moſt ſtrict Edict, that none of my men ſhould, in any ſort, endamage the People or Lands belonging to the ſaid Towne.
            What ſhall I ſay more? when I was at 
                  Ʋercelles, the Popes Nuncius, the moſt reuerend Sauellus, and the moſt illuſtrious Marques of Rambouillet, Ambaſſadour of the moſt Chriſtian King, to preſerue the publike Peace of Italie, and mine, hauing propounded certaine Articles of agreemēt, I (though little aduantageous to me) aſſented thereunto, and ſigned them with mine owne hand. Whereupon they hoping, that without any doubt, the Gouernour would

likewiſe approue and ſigne the ſame, and iudging that for my part I had ſatisfied to the ſame, and that no further thing was wanting in that buſineſſe, the peace was proclaimed by their owne mouth, as being already confirmed; but the vnlookt for euent deceiued, as in other matters, ſo in this, not onely their expectation, but their aſſured truſt: for the Gouernour refuſed to ſigne, and the King himſelfe, neglecting the anſwere, which we lookt for in few dayes, ſent word ſecretly to the Gouernour, that hee ſhould ſuddenly oppreſſe mee, being vnready, and miſtruſting nothing leſſe, and enter with all ſpeede into my Dominions, continuing the Warre vndertaken againſt me with all vehemency.
            Thus I make no doubt, but that it had beene already done with my eſtate, if thoſe Letters, whereof I haue cauſed a Copie to bee ſent to your Maieſtie, being diuinely come into my hands, as I may iuſtly beleeue, had not giuen mee aſſurance of the whole buſineſſe. Wherefore, who can iuſtly finde fault with me, if being ſtirred vp by ſo frequent a breach of faith, I haue recourſe

to Armes againſt my moſt hateful enemies, for the welfare of my ſelfe, my children, and my countrey; for the defence of my honor, and for the liberty and dignity of Italie, yea and of the holy Empire?
            How vnworthy a thing of your Maieſtie, how ſhamefull ſhould it be, if the Empire of Italie, which is committed to the Emperour, as he is King of the Romanes, ſhould be ſaid by all the World, to haue onely, during your Raigne, beene tranſlated, vnder a colour and falſe ſhaddow of Religion and publike Peace, to the Kingdome of Spaine, which acknowledgeth to hold of you the Dukedome of Millane, Sicily and Naples of the Pope?
            What ſhall we thinke the world will ſay, when it ſhall heare that the attempts of the Spaniards haue proceeded ſo farre vnpuniſhed, as not onely to fright with threatnings, but alſo to dare to aſſault with armed hand, and to draw to an vnwilling warre a Duke of Sauoy, moſt renowned through his Predeceſſours, and moſt famous through his affinitie and alliance of bloud with moſt Kings of Europe, a Prince of the holy Empire,

and perpetuall Vicary in Italie, drawing his off-ſpring from the Saxonian ſtocke, hauing held large & ample Dominions in Italie long before the Spaniards had any footing in the ſame, challenging his owne by a moſt iuſt right, & attempting nothing at all againſt them?
            Moreouer, with what minde, doe wee thinke, ſhall the Germane Princes of the Empire giue hearing to Fame, when ſhee ſhall tell them, that they contend that the Citie of Aſty and Countie thereof, which I haue acknowledged to hold of the holy Empire by my Edict, ſet vp in a place neere the ſaid Citie, while I was in the ſame, accompanied with the Ambaſſadors of diuers Princes, belongeth vnto them, as if, by my taking Armes againſt him, I had forfeited the ſame, which ſhould be now fallen and adioyned to his Dominions, and publiſh that the Subiects and Vaſſals of the ſaid Countrey, are freed from the Allegeance they haue ſworne to the Duke of Sauoy? For certainly thoſe great Princes could not but be much moued at the tidings of ſuch a thing, which by an Act of mine, publiſhed

in the publike places of the Dukedome of Millane, hath appeared to be idle and vaine, and which we know of a certaine, that the Magiſtrates of Millane themſelues ha
                  •
               e thought to be friuolous and ridiculous.
            What will they ſay, when they ſhall heare at the ſame time, that the Marques of Sainct Croſſe vpon the coaſt of Genua, hauing craued the help of the Citie, hath with a mighty Nauie ſeyzed vpon my vnarmed Towns of Vnelia, Macer, and Petra-Lata, which the moſt Illuſtrious Duke Emanuel my Father, hauing bought of the Lords thereof, had ſubiected to the power of the holy Empire, and in the Inueſtiture cauſed the ſame to be named, together with his other Dominions, which are yet at this day detayned by him? I doubt much, they will confirme therewith the opinion they haue of the Spaniards too greedie deſire of getting.
            Hence your Maieſtie may coniecture, to what end I haue cauſed certaine ſmall Townes belonging to the Empire, and ſeated within the bowels of my Dominions, to be ſeyzed vpon, which hath beene onely to ſaue them from being taken and ſpoyled

by the Spaniards, and the better and with leſſe danger, to defend my poſſeſſions from their attempts: For I haue thought, the occupation of thoſe places to belong to him, who hath promiſed by a publike Act, all being pacified, to reſtore the ſame vnto your Maieſtie, and to one that is called perpetual Vicary of the Empire, the onely Prince of the ſame now left in Italie, & Vaſſall of your Maieſtie; by whom your ſacred Perſon cō
               ming downe into the ſaid Countrey, either to take the Imperiall Crowne, or for any other cauſe, ſhall be accompanied and honored: For ſhall wee thinke, that the King of Spaine, who playeth the Emperour in Italie, will follow after your pompe? May we ſuppoſe, that the Common-wealth of 
                  Ʋenice, that of Genua, or the Duke of Florence, will by duty celebrate your cōming with their companie? Nay, they doe boaſt to be freed from the Empire.
            What of the Duke of Mantua himſelfe? Who is ignorant that he dependeth onely, and altogether vpon the King of Spaine, obſerueth his nods, hath committed himſelfe to his protection, and hath vowed himſelfe

and all hee hath very ſtrictly to his ſeruice?
            And the other Princes, What? Are they not almoſt all ſubiect to the See of Rome, and do they not al receiue their Dignitie of the ſame? I am then reſerued alone for the Splendor and Dignitie of your Maieſtie, who acknowledge my ſelfe a Germane Prince, and my Poſſeſſions, and of my Predeceſſors, to haue proceeded from the liberalitie of the Emperours; and ſhall the Spaniards, with the knowledge of your Maieſtie, dare to aſſault, and warre againſt me? Shall the Title of King of the Romanes, which you beare, reſtrained within the moſt ſtrict limits of my Poſſeſſions, be ſuffered to bee violated and cut off, in the perſon of your Subiect and Vaſſall? Shall your Maieſtie iudge it to bee fit, that a man, whom you ought to helpe and defend with all your forces, yea, againſt thoſe of your owne Nation, if neede required, ſhould not onely bee ſuffered to bee oppreſſed by the Armes of the Spaniards, and vnworthily vſed like a ſlaue by the Gouernour of Millane, but alſo eſteemed worthy

to be puniſhed by the ſeuere Proclamation of an Imperiall Ban? What ſo grieuous, and ſo hainous a thing ſhould haue moued the Spaniards to take Armes againſt my Countrey, and your Maieſtie, to decree an Imperiall Edict againſt me? Is it becauſe, the King bidding mee to lay downe my Armes, I haue not preſently obeyed? But whence haue the Kings of Spaine this new Authoritie ouer the Princes of the Empire? Whence this altogether new power? By what ſigne can they proue the ſame? Truly, ſeeing the King doth not acknowledge the voluntarie obſeruance, which hee hath receiued from the Princes of Italy, and chiefly from my ſelfe, not out of dutie, or as due, but out of good will, and of our alliance of bloud, he deſerueth with good right, to haue the ſame no more yeelded vnto him heereafter.
            Beſides, after I had promiſed to the Illuſtrious Ambaſſadours, to lay downe my Armes, why did he not, as I requeſted, free me from the feare and danger I ſtood in, leſt hee would attempt ſome thing againſt me? Was it, becauſe I had entred with armed

hand into the Dukedome of Millane? But he firſt had not onely inuaded my Dominions, but alſo by his Souldiers wickedly raged in the ſame. But what hurt, what damage can hee ſhew I haue done to his? I haue things inow to ſhew moſt vilely committed by his men, as ſpoyling of houſes, whole Heards carryed away, and Townes burnt.
            Is it, becauſe I haue reſtored the golden Fleece? But if the Spaniards bee wiſe, they will rather attribute this to my reſpect to the King, becauſe I durſt not defend my ſelfe by Armes againſt him, afore I had ſent back the Coller of the Order; deeming it an vnfit thing, if being a Knight of the Kings Order, I ſhould with the ſame fight againſt his Armes, though in defence of mine owne.
            Or laſtly, is it, becauſe the Spaniſh Ambaſſadours wife, after the depart of her huſband, hath been ill dealt withall, which was not ſuffered to goe out of Turin, before ſhe had payed whatſoeuer ſhee owed in the Towne for daily houſhold prouiſions? But how fooliſh and ridiculous a thing is it, to

taxe me with what hath beene done altogether without my knowledge, whileſt I was in the Campe at 
                  Ʋercelles? For if I had been preſent, I would haue payed the ſaid debts with mine owne money.
            Wherein did the Magiſtrate offend? Should they haue denyed Iuſtice, to ſuch as demanded their owne by order of Law? How often did they admoniſh that Lady, after a friendly manner, to giue ſatisfaction to thoſe poore men, and to remoue that ſhame from her ſelfe? But ſhee refuſing to pay, they were at laſt conſtrained againſt their will, to grant a Sequeſtration of ſome ſmall houſhold ſtuffe of hers, which not long after they releaſed. But grant we that they offended in ſome thing, in that buſineſſe; muſt Armes be taken vp therefore? Muſt a ſmall iniurie bee reuenged with ſo much eagerneſſe? Muſt the Duke therefore be ſet in the Ban of the Empire? There was more reaſon, that a laying downe of Armes ſhould haue beene enioyned to the Spaniards, which had taken them vp without any cauſe, onely vnder a falſe colour of the publike Peace. It was vpon them, that the thunder-bolt of the Ban was to be throwne, not

on me, whom ſo many times breaking their faith, they haue deceiued, whoſe ſubiects they haue gone about to draw from their ſworne allegeance, whoſe Dominions they had entred & occupied by maine ſtrength.
            I haue taken vp Armes; I doe not denie it: but I was thereunto conſtrained. I haue inuaded the Dukedome of Millane, but being firſt prouoked. But what haue done thoſe moſt glorious Dukes my Predeceſſours? Haue they not for the ſpace of almoſt ſixe hundred yeeres made warres in Italie? What poſſeſſions haue they brought vnder their authority by Armes? How many of their Neighbour Princes haue they conſtrained to do homage vnto them? And yet we ſhall not find, that euer any Emperor did check them with the Imperiall Ban.
            Shall I be then the onely Duke of Sauoy amongſt ſo many, whom the Prince of Caſtillion (a Miniſter not ſo much of your Maieſtie, as of the King of Spaine, of whom hee hath receiued the golden Fleece, and an yeerely entertainement) ſhall haue accuſed by his ſaid Edict? Will hee not bluſh for ſhame, to bring againſt me the ſentence of the Imperiall Ban, by him receiued (as I ſuppoſe)

from the Gouernour of Millane? For I will neuer bee perſwaded to beleeue, that ſuch a Decree, dated at no place, vnſigned by the Imperiall hand, as was requiſite, ſhould haue proceeded from your Maieſtie, rather will I euer conſtantly affirme it, either altogether falſe, or at the leaſt gotten by ſtealth from your Maieſties Miniſters by the Gouernour of Millane.
            
            Thus then being the matter, nothing elſe ſeemeth to remaine, but that the equitie of my cauſe being knowne, I ſhould requeſt your Maieſtie out of your ſupreme authoritie, of which, as of an Oracle, not my ſelfe onely, but all the world beſides, doth depend, to declare the ſaid Edict granted againſt me (ſince it was made without the knowledge and conſent of your Maieſtie) to be void, & of no worth, to make knowne to all the world my innocencie, and ſeuerely to puniſh thoſe Miniſters of yours that haue ſubſcribed therevnto.
            It will bee your Maieſties part likewiſe, out of your full power, to command the King of Spaine, as Duke of Millane, and conſequently Vaſſall of the Empire, to diſmiſſe with all ſpeede, the Troupes he hath leuyed

without any cauſe, for to harme me, to confirme with his owne hand the Articles of Peace, to which I haue already ſubſcribed, and to free all Italy, troubled with the gingling of the Spaniſh Armes, from further feare, as likewiſe to check and chaſtiſe, as he deſerueth, the Gouernour of Millane, who with a madde and furious mind, carrieth the fire-brand of warres in his hands, only to ſatisfie his greedy deſire of money, filling with his whiſpering the Kings eares with many falſe things againſt me. And ſo doing, I hope your Maieſtie will, with more glorie, maintayne your owne, and the holy Empires authority in Italie, which otherwiſe will be transferred to the Spaniard.
            As for mine owne part, your Maieſtie ſhall euer finde me moſt ready, not only to lay down the Armes which I haue taken vp for mine owne ſafetie, but alſo (after the example of my fore-fathers) to hazard all I haue, & mine owne life at your only nodde. In the meane time, hoping to haue your ſingular and fauourable clemency and equity, in theſe my hard controuerſies againſt the Spaniards, I will earneſtly pray God, the only giuer of all things, long to preſerue your Maieſty in full proſperity.
            
         
      
   