
      
         
            
            
            The kinges Edict
or decree vpon the pacification
of the troubles of his
Realme, made the .xxiij. of
March .1568. Conteyning alſo
the confirmation of another
like Edict, of the .xix. day of
March .1562.
            THE Copie whereof is alſo
added, the better to ſatiſfie the
Readers.
            
               And alſo certayn requeſtes, made
by the Proteſtants, with the Kings
anſweres therevnto. All nowe
tranſlated out of French.
The .19. of Aprill .1568.
            
            
               Imprinted by William Seres.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
               The Kinges Edict vpon
the peace making of the troubles
of hys Realme. Made the .xxiii.
day of March, 1568. Conteyning
alſo the confirmation of an
other like Edict of the .xix
day of March.
1562.
               
                  
                     
                        CHARLES by
the grace of God
King of Fraunce.
                  To all them that
ſhall ſée theſe preſent
letters, gréeting.
               
               Conſidering
the great harmes
and calamities chaūced, by the great troubles
and warres, wherwithall our realme
hath bene of late, and is yet at this preſent
much afflicted: and foreſéeing the deſolation
whiche might hereafter happen, if by
the grace and mercy of our Lord God, the
ſayde troubles were not ſpéedily pacified:

Wherefore to make an ende thereof, and
to remedie the afflictions that doe procéede
by them: lykewiſe to reſtore and cauſe
our ſubiectes to liue in peace, reſt, vnitie,
and concorde, as it hath bene alwayes
our intention.
               We let you vnderſtande, that after we
haue thervpon taken the aduiſe and counſell
of the Quene our right déere and right
honourable Ladie and mother. And of our
right déere and right welbeloued brethren
the Duke of Anjou oure Lieutenant generall.
And Duke Alenſon, Princes of
our blood, and others great and notable
perſonages of our priuye Counſaile; By
their aduice and counſayle for the cauſes
and reaſons aforeſayde, and others good
and great conſiderations therevnto vs
mouing. We haue, in confirming againe
(ſo muche as néede ſhoulde be) oure Edict
of peace making of the .xix. of March. 1562.
to be obſerued in all and euery his points,
and articles, as fullye as if they were from
worde to word here tranſcribed, annexed,
ſayd, declared, enacted, and ordeined. We
doe ſay, declare, euact, and ordeyne, we wil

and our pleaſure is, as foloweth.
               
                  TO wéet, that all thoſe of the Religion 
pretended reformed, ſhall enioy purely
& ſimply the ſaid Edict of peace making,
and that it ſhall bée executed in all poynts
and articles, according to his firſt forme
and content. Taking away frō the ſame
all reſtraints, modifications, declarations,
and interpretations, the which haue béene
made ſince the daye and date of the ſame,
vntill the daye of the proclayming of theſe
preſents.
               
                  AND as touching the Lordes and 
Gentlemen, which are of the condition or
eſtate, of thoſe which maye haue preaching
in their houſes, according to the ſaid Edict
of peace making, in aſſuring vs not to doe
any thing preiudiciall or hurtfull to oure
ſeruice, vnder pretence and color of the ſaid
preachings, and ſhall not abuſe the ſame:
wée do take away all reſtrayntes aſwell
for their own parts, as for others that wil
goe vnto the ſaid preachings.
               
                  MOREOVER, the Lordes and 
Gentlemen of the Countie of Prouence,
being of the aforeſayde condition or eſtate,

ſhall enioy the benefite of the ſayde Edict,
and cauſe preaching in theyr houſes, as
thoſe of the other prouinces being of the
aboue ſaide ſort and condition: and neuertheleſſe,
as for the ſaide Countie, and Stewardſhip
of the ſaid Prouence, there ſhall
none other place but that of Merindoll.
               
               
                  
                  THAT euery one of the ſayd Religion,
ſhall returne and ſhall be preſerued,
mainteyned, and kept vnder our protection
in all their goodes, honours, eſtates,
charges, offices, & dignities, of what qualitie
ſoeuer they be. Notwithſtanding all
Edicts, letters patentes, decrées, confiſcatiōs,
proceedings, iudgements, & ſentences
againſt them, aſwell liuing as dead, giuen
& made ſince the beginning of this laſt inſurrection,
& execution thereof, as well for
the matters of Religion, the reiſing & ſolde
or wages of ſtraungers, the gatherings of
money, enrolmentes of men, the voiages
and ambaſſades into ſtraunge countries,
and within this our Realme, before and
during the laſt troubles, by the commaundement
of our Coſin the Prince of Conde,

as alſo for the armes taken for that occaſion,
& for all that is happened thereof: The
which we declare voide and of none effect,
ſo that notwithſtanding, neyther they nor
theyr children, heyres and others hauing
cauſe, ſhould be any thing impeached or
let, from the enioying of their ſayd goodes
and honours, nor that they ſhould be boūd
to take of vs, any other prouiſo or warrant
then theſe our preſent letters, by the which
we do put their perſones in full libertie,
diſcharging them of al takings of townes,
bearing of armes, aſſemblies, ſeaſures and
taking of our money and treaſures, eſtabliſhmentes
of iuſtice amongſt them, and
iudgementes, and executions therof.
               
                  AND to the end there ſhould bee no
doubt of the right meaning and intention 
of oure Coſin the Prince of Conde, we
haue ſayde and declared, and doe ſay and
declare, that we do holde and repute the
ſame our ſaid Coſin, for our good kinſman,
faythfull ſubiect, and ſeruant as alſo we do
account all the Lords, Knightes, Gentlemen,
and all others inhabiting the Cities
and townes, cōmunalties, boroughes and

other places of our ſayde realme country &
obedience ye which haue folowed, ſuccored,
and accōpanied him, in this preſent warre,
and during theſe tumultes, in what place
ſoeuer it be of this our ſaid realme, for our
good and faithfull ſubiects, and ſeruants.
               
                  AND our ſaide Coſin ſhall remaine
acquited & diſcharged, as by theſe preſents
ſigned wyth our owne hand, we do acquit
and diſcharge him, of all ſuch money as
hath bene by him or by his commanndement
and order, leuied, and taken in oure
recepts generall & perticuler, vnto whatſoeuer
ſummes the ſame may amount:
And in like maner of ſuch ſummes as hath
béene (as it is ſaid) by him or by his order
alſo rayſed and taken of the communaltie,
Cities, townes, paye mayſters, rentes,
and reuenues of Churches, and other by
hym beſtowed in the occaſion of this preſent
warre: ſo that neither he, nor his, nor
they that haue béene appointed by him for
the gathering of the ſaid mony, the which,
and lykewiſe thoſe which haue furniſhed
and giuen it, ſhall remaine acquited and
diſcharged, and the which, we do acquite

and diſcharge, neuer to be in any wiſe examined
or called to any account, preſently
nor in time to come, nor alſo for ye coyning
of mony, melting or caſting of Artillarie,
making of Gunpowders & ſaltpeters, fortifiyng
of townes, demoliments made for
the ſayd fortifications, by the commaundement
of the ſame our ſaid Coſin, in all the
townes of our Realm, and country of our
obedience: and generally of al other demoliments
and ruines, ſo that there ſhall be
no pretence made for any recōpence therefore
in time to come, wherof the bodies and
inhabitants of the ſame ſhall remaine in
like maner diſcharged, & we do diſcharge
them therefore by theſe preſents.
               
                  AND further, there ſhall none of 
our ſubiects complaine nor commence any
action for any fruits, reuenues, arrierages
of rents, money or other moueables, which
they mought pretend to haue bene taken
and borne away from them, nor of any other
domages or hurtes, done ſince the beginning
of theſe troubles, vnto the day of
ye proclaiming of theſe preſents, made in ye
two campes and armies: which ſhalbe for

the behalfe of the Parliament of Parys,
thrée dayes after the date of theſe ſaid preſents,
and for the behalfe of the other parliaments,
eight dayes after the date of theſe
ſaid preſents: within which time, it ſhall
be cōmaunded with all diligence, vnto our
gouernors and Lieutenaunts generall, to
cauſe it to be forthwith proclamed and obſerued,
euery one, in al the places of his gouernement,
where it ſhal appertain, without
tarying the proclaminges of the ſayde
Courts: to the ende that no man mought
pretend cauſe of ignorance, and that more
redily all wayes of hoſtility, ſpoylings and
demoliments, of the one part & the other,
mought ceaſſe. Declaring now forthwith,
that all demoliments, ſpoyles, takings and
rauiſhings of goodes, moueables, & other
actes of hoſtilitie, which ſhall be done after
the ſaid tyme, are ſubiect to reſtitution and
reparation.
               
                  
                  WE do alſo commaund our Courts of
parliaments, yt ſo ſone as they ſhal receiue
the ſaid edict, they ſhall (leauing all other
buſineſſe apart) cauſe ye ſame our edict to be
proclaymed & regiſtred in our ſayd courts,

according to the forme and tenor thereof:
and to our atturneis generall conſideredly
to require and purſue the proclayming
thereof, without any refuſall, protracting
of time, nor tarying for any further bydding
or commaundement from vs, for (as
it is ſayd) to make a redy ende vnto all enimities,
rancors and hoſtilities.
               
                  WE meane further that the towne and 
reſort of the Prouoſty (or Mayralty) & Viconty
of Paris ſhould be & remain exempted
from all exercyſe of the ſayd Relygion,
according to the contents of the ſayd edict
of pacification, which remayneth in his
firſt force and vertue.
               
                  AND we will in like maner, that after 
the proclayming of theſe ſayde preſents
made in our court of parliament of Paris,
and in the two campes, thoſe of the ſaid religiō,
ſhould diſarme thēſelues forthwith,
and ſhould ſeperate their forces, to retyre
themſelues home, and that the Cities,
townes and places, occupied with men of
warre, ſhould be preſently reſtored and ſet
in their firſt eſtate and trafique, with all
their artillaries & munitions which ſhall

be in nature, as alſo the houſes of ſeuerall
perſons which haue bene in likewiſe occupied,
ſhould be with diligence reſtored, vnto
whom they ſhall apperteyne: and all
priſoners, whether it be of warre, or for
the matter of Religion, ſhall be in lyke
maner ſet agayne in libertye, of their perſonnes
and goodes, without paying any
raunſome.
               
                  
                  AND to the ende that hereafter, all
occaſions of troubles, tumults & ſeditions
may ceaſſe, and the better to reconcile and
vnite the intentions and willes of our ſaid
ſubiectes, the one towards the other, and
with this vnion, the more eaſily to maintaine
the obedience which they all doe owe
vs, we haue ordeyned and doe ordeyne, we
meane, will and oure pleaſure is, that all
iniuries and offences, which the iniquity of
the tyme, and the occaſions which haue
thereof happened, mought haue cauſed to
haue ſprong amongſt our ſayde ſubiectes,
and all other things paſſed, and cauſed, by
theſe preſent tumults, ſhal remaine quenched,
as dead, buried, and not happened.
Right expreſſely and moſt earneſtly vpon

paine of death, forbidding all our ſaide ſubiectes,
of what ſoeuer eſtate & qualitie they
may be, that they do forbeare iniuriyng or
prouoking the one ye other, in reproching
that which is paſt, nor to diſpute, argue,
quarell, conteſt nor braule togither of any
matter, neyther to outrage and offend in
déed nor worde, but to contain & ſtay themſelues,
and to lyue peaceablie together, as
brethren, friends and felow-citizens: vpon
pain vnto thoſe, which may offend, & which
ſhall be cauſe & moouers of the iniurie and
offence which ſhould happen, to be in the
place and forthwith, and without any other
forme of proceſſe, puniſhed according
to the rigour of our preſent ordinance.
               
                  AND to cauſe all ſcruple and doubt to 
ceaſſe, our ſaid ſubiects ſhall depart & leaue
all aſſotiations and gatherings, the which
they haue within & without this Realme,
and ſhal not make from henceforth any taking
vp of money, enrolmentes of men,
congregations nor other aſſemblies, then
thoſe which are permitted by this preſent
Edict: which we doe forbid them and commaund
alſo vpon pain to be rigorouſly puniſhed,

and as contemners and breakers
of our commaundments and orders.
               
                  
                  FVRTHER right expreſſely & ſtraitly
charging them, & vpon the like paines,
not to trouble, moleſt, nor diſquiet the Eccleſiaſticall
in the celebration of the diuine
ſeruice, the inioying and perceyuing
of the fruits and reuenues of their benefices,
tithes and all other rightes and duties
which do appertaine vnto them: ſo yt none
of the ſaid religion may vſe, take or retaine
any Temple or Church of the ſaid Eccleſiaſtickes,
which we do meane ſhould be preſently
remitted in their Churches, houſes,
goods, tythes, poſſeſſions and reuenues, to
enioy and vſe them euen as they did before
theſe tumults, to vſe and continue the ſeruice
diuine & accuſtomed by them in their
ſaid Churches, without any maner of moleſtation,
impechment or diſturbance.
               
                  
                  WE will, do ordein and our pleaſure is,
that the contents hereaboue, and alſo our
ſaide firſt Edict of pacification wherevnto
theſe preſents are referred, & are to cōfirme

the ſame, ſhould be inuiolately entertained
kept and obſerued, ouer all and euerie the
places of our realme, vnto the time that it
maye pleaſe God to giue vs the grace that
our ſubiectes maye be revnited in one ſelfe
religion.
               
                  AND alſo we doe commaund oure beloued
& faithfull, the kéepers of our courtes 
of parliaments, chambers of our accounts,
Courtes of our helpes, Baylifes, Stewardes,
and others our Iuſticers and officers
to whome it may appertaine, or their
Lieutenants, that this oure preſent Edict
and decrée, they ſhould cauſe to be red, publiſhed,
and regiſtred in their Courtes and
iuriſdictions, and the ſame to entertaine,
and cauſe to entertained, kept and obſerued
inuiolably from point to point, and to
whom it may appertaine, to enioy and vſe
fully and peaceably the contents thereof,
ceaſſing & cauſing to be ceaſſed all impechments,
troubles and lets to the contrary.
For ſuche is our pleaſure.
               In witneſſe
wherof we haue ſigned theſe preſents with
our hande, and haue cauſed our ſeale to be
ſet thervnto. 

Giuen at Paris 
                     the .xxiij. day

of Marche, the yeare of our Lorde GOD
1568. and the eight yeare of our reigne.
                  

And ſo ſigned.
CHARLES.
                  And there vnder,
                  By the King in his Counſaile.
Signed. ROBERTET.
And ſealed vpon a double labell with
yelow Wax.
            
            
               Red, publiſhed and regiſtred, requiring and
hearing the ſame the kings attorney generall, at
Paris in Parliament the .xxvij. day of March, the
yeare. 1568.
               Signed,
DV TILLET.
               
            
            
               
               The Extract of the
Priuilege.
               BY the Kinges ſpeciall priuilege giuen at Paris,
the .xxvi. day of Marche. 1568. ſigned by the
king in his Counſell: ROBERTET and ſealed
with the great ſeale of the ſaide Lorde, in yelow
Wax vpon a ſingle labell: confirming the Letters
Patents giuen by the ſaide Lord at Saint Germane
in Lay, the viij. of October. M.D.lxi. Signed by
the king, the Lord Chauncelour preſent, De Laubeſpine,
ſealed as aboue and verified in the
Court of Parliament at Paris, the .xviij. day of Februarie
in the ſaide yeare: it is permitted vnto
Robert Stephanus his ordinarie printer to
print or cauſe to be imprinted, to ſell and to depute
this preſent Edict of late, for the pacyfying of the
troubles of this kingdom: ſo that none other Librarie
nor Imprinter may print them, nor cauſe to be
imprinted without his permiſſion & conſent, within
three Monethes after his ſayd imprinting thereof,
vpon paine, for ſuch as ſhall offend therein
to confiſcate and forfait all that which
they may haue imprinted, and
to fine at pleaſure.
            
         
         
            
               
               
               An Edict or decree and
declaration, made by the king
Charles, the ninth of that name, vpon
the peace making of the troubles
of Fraunce, the
xix. day of March
1562.
               Printed at Paris by Robert Stephanus
the kinges printer. 1562.
               
                  With Priuiledge of the ſayd king.
               
               
                  
                     
                        CHARLES by the grace
of God king of Fraunce,
                  vnto all thoſe that ſhall ſée
theſe preſents, gréeting.
               
               Euery man hath ſéene and
knowē how it hath pleaſed
the Lord God, within theſe fewe yeares, to
ſuffer yt this our Realme, ſhould be afflicted
and werſed with many troubles, ſeditions
and tumultes amongſt our ſubiectes, ſtyrred
and raiſed by the diuerſity of opinions,
and ſcruple of their conſciences for ye matter
of Religion. For remedie whereof,
and that this fire ſhoulde not kindle further,

there hath bene heretofore made, diuers
aſſemblies and conuocations, of the
moſt great and notable perſonages of our
kingdome, and by their good counſayle and
aduiſe, ſet forth manye Edictes and ordinances,
according to the behoofe and neede
which was offered: thinking therby to preuent
the euill, and to go before the inconuenience
hanging therevpon.
               
                  Neuertheleſſe the malice of theſe dayes
hath willed, and the Lorde alſo hath by his
iudgement vnknowen (prouoked as we
muſt nedes beleue, with our offences and
ſinnes) left the bridle vnto the ſayde tumults.
In ſuch wiſe, as men haue armed
themſelues, ſo farre forth, as there is come
thereof infinite murders, vengeaunces,
robberies, forcing and pillage of townes,
the ruyne of temples & Churches, battels
giuen, and ſo many other euilles, calamities,
and deſolations committed and exerciſed
in dyuers places, that this euill continuing,
and ſeing alredy ſo many ſtraungers
in our ſayde Realme, knowing alſo
the preparatiues made for the bringing in
of more, the euident ruyne of the ſame to

be incuitable: Conſidering alſo the great
and vnreparable loſſe, which (to our great
grief) we haue had, ſince the beginning of
theſe tumults, of ſo many Princes, Lords,
Knightes of our order, great Capitaynes
and men of warre: which is next vnto the
hand of God, the true ſuſteyner, pillar, defence,
and protection of this our Crowne,
and an argument vnto our neighbours,
which ſhoulde be of an yll will, to pearce
and inuade vs, as we haue béen and are
threatned thereof.
               
               Which by vs conſidered, ſerching al poſſible
remedies (how be it that thankes be
to God our forces be great, and that in apparance,
we want no men:) Seing neuertheleſſe,
that all the euill, and inconuenience
which commeth of this warre, turneth
to the decay and hurt of our Realme,
and hauing erperimēted to our great loſſe,
ſuch remedie to be neither fit nor conuenient
(the ſickneſſe being hidden within the
bowelles and mindes of our people.) We
haue thought that the beſt and moſt profitable,
which we might applie therevnto,
was (as a Prince moſt chriſtian, whereof

we beare the name) to haue recourſe, to the
infinite grace and goodneſſe of our Lorde,
and with his good helpe, to finde the meanes
to pacify by our gentleneſſe, the ſharpneſſe
of the ſickeneſſe: In calling againe &
reconciling, the willes of our ſaid ſubiects,
to an vnion, & to the acknowleging, which
they all owe vnto our obedience, to the honour
of God, welth, helth, and conſeruation
of this our Realme: In prouidinge
ſuch meanes as may reteyne and content
our ſayd Subiectes: hoping that the time,
the fruit of a good, holy, frée, and generall
or nationall counſell, and the vertue of our
ripe age, nere comming, led and directed by
the hand and grace of our Lorde, (who of
his goodneſſe hath alwayes had care and
garde of this Crowne) ſhall bring hereafter
the certeyne and true eſtabliſhing (vnto
his honour and glory) reſt and tranquilitye
to our ſayde people and ſubiectes.
               Whervpon we haue well willed, to take
the good & prudent councell, of the Queene
our right dere and right honourable Lady
and mother, of our right dere and right
welbeloued Coſins the Cardnal of Bourbon,
                  
Prince of Conde, Duke of Mountpenſier,
& Prince of the Roche-ſur-Yon,
Princes of our blood. Alſo of our right dere
and right welbeloued Coſines, the Cardnall
of Guyſe, Duke of Aumale, Duke of
Mountmorency Cunſtable, Pairs of
Fraunce, Duke of Eſtamps, Marſhalles
of Briſſack, and of Bordillon, Lordes of
Andilot, of Sanſack, of Sipierre, and others
good and great perſonages, of oure
priuie counſell: whiche all haue béene of
the aduice, and founde it reaſonable for
the common wealth of this our Realme, to
make and ordeyne that which foloweth.
               We giue to vnderſtande, that we according
to their good counſell, and for the cauſes,
reaſons and conſiderations aboueſaid,
and others good and weightie therevnto
mouing vs, haue ſayde, declared, conſtituted
and ordeyned, doe ſaye, declare, conſtitute
and ordeyne, we will and our pleaſure
is. That from henceforth, all Gentlemen,
which are Barons, Chaſtelains, high Iuſticers,
and Lords holding ful fee of Hawbert
and euerie one of them maye lyue in
their houſes, (wherein they ſhall dwell)

in libertie of their conſciences and exerciſe
of the Religion, the which they doe call reformed,
with their familie and ſubiectes,
which fréely and without anye conſtraint
would be thereat. And the other Gentlemē
hauing ſée, alſo in their houſes, for them
and their families only. So that they dwell
not in the Townes, Boroughes and Villages
of the Lords, high Iuſticers, beſides
our ſelf. In which caſe they may not vſe in
the ſaid places, any exerciſe of the ſayd Religion,
except it be by permiſſion & licence
of their ſaid Lords, high Iuſticers, & none
otherwiſe.
               That in euerie Baylywick, Stewardſhip
and Gouernement, holding place of a
Baylywick, as Peronne, Montdidier
Roy, and Rochelle, and others of like nature,
reſorting barely and without anye
meanes in oure Courts of Parliaments.
We ſhall ordeine, at the requeſt of thoſe of
the Religion, a Towne, in the Suberbes
whereof, the exerciſe of the ſayde Religion
may be vſed, of all thoſe of the reſort which
would goe vnto it, and none otherwiſe nor
elſe where.
               
                  
And neuertheleſſe, euerie one may lyue
and dwel ouer al, in his houſe fréely, without
being examined or moleſted, forced or
conſtrained for the matter of hys cōſcience.
That in all the townes, wherein the ſayde
Religion was vnto the .vij. of this preſent
moneth of March exerciſed, beſides the other
townes which ſhall be (as it is ſaide)
perticularly named of ye ſayd Baylywicks
and Stewardſhips: The ſayde exerciſe
ſhall be continued in one or two places
within the ſayde Towne, ſuch one or both
as by vs ſhall be ordeyned.
               Prouided that thoſe of the ſayde religion
ſhall not vſe or take, or reteyne any Temple,
or Church of the Eccleſiaſticall ſort:
which we doe meane to be nowe remitted
in their Churches, houſes, goodes, poſſeſſions
and reuenues, to enioy and vſe them,
ſo fully as they did before theſe tumultes.
To vſe and continue the ſeruice diuine and
accuſtomed by them, in their ſayde Churches,
without anye maner of moleſtation,
impechment or let: nor alſo that they may
chalenge any recompence for the ruines &
hurtes, which haue béene done therevnto.
               
                  
We meane alſo that the Towne and
reſort of the Preuoſtie, or Marialtie and
Vicountie of Paris, ſhall be and remaine
exempted, of al exerciſe of the ſaide Religion.
And that notwithſtanding thoſe which
haue their houſes within the ſaide Towne
and reſort, maye returne into their ſayde
houſes, and enioye their ſayde goods peaceably:
without being forced or conſtrained,
examined or moleſted for the time paſt, nor
for to come, for ye matter of their conſcience.
All Townes ſhall be remitted and ſet in
their firſt eſtate and frée traffique, and all
ſtraungers put and ſent out of this oure
Realme, the ſooneſt that it may be done.
               And to make the willes of our ſayd ſubiectes
the more contented and ſatiſfied, we
doe ordeine, will, and alſo our pleaſure is,
that euery one of them returne and be conſerued,
maintained and kept vnder oure
protection, in all his goods, honors, eſtates,
charges and offices, of what qualitie they
may be: Notwithſtanding all decrées, ſeaſures,
procéedings, iudgements, arreſtes,
and ſentences giuen againſt them, ſithens
the death of the late king Henry, our right

honorable Lorde and father (of laudable
memorie) and the execution of them: as
well for the matter of Religion, voyages
and iourneis made, within and without
this kingdom, by commaundement of our
ſaide Coſin the Prince of Conde, as for the
armes taken for this occaſion & that which
hath followed thereof: the which we haue
declared and doe declare voide and of none
effect. So that by their meanes, they nor
their children, heires & hauing cauſe, be in
any thing impeched or let, from the enioying
of their ſaide goodes and honors, nor
that they ſhould be bounde to take, obteine
nor procure of vs, anye other prouiſo or
warrant then theſe preſents, by the which
we doe put their perſons and goodes in full
libertie.
               And to the ende it ſhould not be doubted
of the ſinceritie and right intention of oure
ſayde Coſin the Prince of Conde, we haue
ſayde and declared, doe ſaye and declare,
that we doe repute the ſame our ſayde Coſin,
for our good kinſman, faithfull ſubiect
and ſeruaunt: as alſo we doe account all
the Lordes, Knightes, Gentlemen and others,

dwelling in the Cities, Townes,
Cominalties, Boroughes and other places
of oure Realme and Countrie, vnder
our obedience, which hath followed, ſuccoured,
holpen and accompanied him, in
this preſent warre, and during the ſayde
tumultes in any part and place whatſoeuer
of our ſayde Realme, for our good and
lawfull ſubiectes and ſeruauntes: beleuing
and eſtéeming, that the ſame which
hath bene done heretofore by our ſayd ſubiectes,
aſwell for the matter of armes, as
the ſtabliſhing of the iuſtice ſet amongſt
them, iudgement and executions thereof,
hath bene done, to a good ende and entention,
and for our ſeruice.
               We doe ordeyne alſo, we will and our
pleaſure is, that our ſayd Coſin the prince
of Conde, doe remayne acquited and by
theſe preſentes, ſigned with our hande, we
do acquite him, of all the money which
haue béene by him and his commaundement
and order taken and raiſed in our receipts
and of our treaſures vnto whatſoeuer
ſomme they may amount.
               And likewiſe that he ſhould remaine diſcharged

of thoſe which haue béen (as it is
ſayde) by him and his order alſo taken
and rayſed of the cominaltie, Cities, townes,
paymaſters, rents, reuenues of Churches,
and other, by him employed for the
occaſion of the preſent warres: ſo that he
nor his, nor thoſe which haue bene by him
cōmitted, to take vp ye ſaid money (ye which
ſort) & in like maner thoſe which haue furniſhed
& deliuered it to them, ſhall remain
acquited & diſcharged therfore, & ſhal not be
in any wiſe, examined or called to any accompt,
for the time preſent or herafter: nor
alſo for the coyning of money, melting or
caſting of artillarie, making of Gunpowders
& ſaltpeters, fortifications of townes,
ruines & demoliments made for ye ſayd fortifications,
by cōmaundement of the ſame
our ſayd Coſin the Prince of Conde, in all
Townes of this our Realme, and Countreis
of our obedience, whereof the bodyes
and Inhabitaunts of the ſayde townes,
ſhall remaine alſo diſcharged by theſe
ſayd preſentes. That all priſoners whether
it be for the warre, or for the matter of
religion, ſhalbe conſideredly and duely ſet
at liberty, of their perſons and goodes, with

out paying any raunſome, excepting robbers,
felons, theues, and murderers, which
ſhall not be comprehended in theſe ſayd
preſents.
               And for that we do ſingularly deſier, that
all the occaſions of theſe troubles, tumults
and ſedicions may ceaſſe, to reconcile and
vnite the mindes and willes of our ſayd
ſubiects the one toward the other, and the
more eaſier by this vnion, to maynteyn the
obedience which the one part and the other
doth owe vs, we haue ordeyned and do ordeyne,
intend, will, and our pleaſure is.
That al iniuries & offēces, which ye iniquity
of ye tyme, & occaſions which haue thereby
happened, might haue cauſed to ſpring
among our ſayd ſubiects, & all other things
paſſed and cauſed, by theſe tumultes, ſhall
remaine quenched, as dead, buried and not
chaunced: defending right ſtraightly, vpon
paine of death, vnto all our ſayd ſubiects, of
whatſoeuer eſtate and qualitie they may
be of, that they doe not endeuour themſelues,
to vexe nor prouoke the one the other,
by iniurious woordes, in reproching that
which is paſſed, nor to diſpute, quarell nor
conteſt and brawle togither, of the matter

of religion, offend nor outrage or wrong
by worde or deede, but to conteyne and refrayne
themſelues, and to lyue peaceably
togither, as brethren, friendes, fellow citezens
and neighbours, vpon paine, for them
which ſhall offend, and which ſhalbe cauſe
and motion of the vexation, iniury and offence,
which ſhould happen, to be vpon
the place forthwith, and without any other
forme of proceſſe executed, according to the
rigor of our preſent ordinance.
               In conſideration alſo whereof, and of
the contents here before, and to cauſe all
ſcruple and doubt to ceaſſe, oure ſaide ſubiectes
ſhall depart and deuide themſelues
and ſhall forbeare al maner of aſſociatiōs,
and gatherings together, which they haue
within and without this Realme, and ſhal
not from henceforth, make anye takings
vp of money, enrolings of men, congregations,
nor aſſemblies, other then is aboueſaide,
and without armes. Which we doe
alſo prohibit and forbid them vpon payne
to be rigorouſly puniſhed, and as contempters
and breakers of oure ordinances and
commaundements.
               We doe further commaunde by theſe

ſelfe ſame preſents, vnto oure beloued and
faythfull, ſuche as kepe oure Courtes of
Parliaments, Chambers of our accounts,
Courts of our helps, Bailiues, Stewards
and other oure Iuſticers, and officers to
whome it maye appertaine, or vnto their
wieutenants, that they doe cauſe this our
preſent declaration and ordinaunce, to be
red, publiſhed & regiſtred, in their Courts
and iuriſdictions, and the ſame to interteyne
and cauſe to be interteyned kept and
obſerued inuiolably from point to point,
and they to whome it ſhall appertaine to
enioye and vſe, fully and peaceably, the
content thereof. Ceaſſing and cauſing to
ceaſſe all troubles impechments and letts
to the contrarie. For ſuche is our pleaſure.
               In witneſſe whereof, we haue cauſed our
Seale to be ſet to theſe preſents. 
Yeuen at
Amboiſe 
                     the .xix. day of Marche in the yere
of our Lorde God. 1562. and in the thirde
yere of our reigne.
                  
Signed
CHARLES.
And there vnder,
By the King in his Counſaile.
Signed ROBERTET.
                  
And ſealed in yelowe Wax wyth a
duble labell of Parchement appending.
            
            
               Red, publiſhed and regiſtred, in the hearing
of the kings Attorney generall, in the preſence of
the right mighty princes and Lords, the Cardinall
of Borbon, the Duke of Montpenſeir, thervnto
ſpecially ſent, by our Lorde the moſt chriſtian
king. In the Parliament of Paris, the .xxvij. day of
the month of March, in the yere of our Lord. 1562.
               Signed
DV TILLET.
               
            
            
               In like maner red, publiſhed and regiſtred, in
the hearing of the kinges Attorney generall, in the
Chamber of his accountes, the yeare and daie aboueſayde.
               Signed
FORMAGET.
               
            
            
               Red, publiſhed and regiſtred in the
Courtes of helpes, hearing and conſenting
the kings Attorney generall.
               Signed
LE SVEVR.
               
            
            
               Red, proclaymed and publiſhed, with
ſounde of Trumpet, and publique proclamation,
in the accuſtomed places of
the Citie of Paris, by the Kings maieſties
Heralts, aſſiſting and being preſent
the Lorde Lieutenant ciuile and

others, the Thurſedaye the .xxvij. of
May. 1563.
            
            
               The extract of the Kings Priuilege.
               BY the kings Maieſties ſpecyall Priuilege, Yeuen
at the Campe neere Orleance the .xxv. day
of Marche. 1562. ſigned by the King in his counſaile,
by the Laubeſpine and ſealed with the
great ſeale of the ſaid King in yelow Wax, vpon a
ſingle labell confirmatiue of the Letters patents of
the ſayde Lord, Yeuen before at Saint Iermane in
Lay, the .viij. of October. 1561. ſigned by the
King, the Lorde Chaunceler being preſent, and
Laubeſpine, ſealed as aboue & verified in the
Court of Parliament at Paris the .xviij. day of February
in the ſayde yeare. It is permitted to Robart
Stephanus his Printer, to imprint or cauſe
to be imprinted, ſolde and to depute this preſent Edict
of late made for the peace making of the troubles
of this Realme. So that no other Printers
whatſoeuer, may print the ſame, or cauſe to be imprinted,
without licence, permiſſion and conſent
for three monethes after this his impreſſion, vpon
paine vnto the offenders, to confiſcate and forfeit all
that which they may haue imprinted, and to fine
at pleaſure.
            
         
         
            
            ¶Certaine Articles of the
requeſtes made, in the behalfe of the
Protestants, vnto the King, with his
Maiesties Aunſweres
therevnto.
            ¶The ſame was deliuered ye .4. day of March
.M.D.lxviij. by the Lords ye Chaſtillon, Count
of the Rochfoucault, & of Bouchauanes deputies
of the right noble Prince of Conde,
Lordes, gentilmen and others of the religion
pretēded reformed, which in treating of peace
haue required to be preſented to the King, to
haue therevpon expreſſe and ſpecial anſwers,
and prouident remedies. And to ſerue vnto
thoſe aboueſaid of the religion pretended reformed,
in all places, and euerywhere as nede
ſhall be, to the ende, that vpon the Execution
of the Edict of peace making, there ſhoulde
nothing be left in doubt of his Maieſties intention,
and that the Gouernours, Lieuetenants,
Generalles of Prouinces, Courts of
Parliament, and other Iudges, ſhoulde not
be ignorant of euery one of the ſayd Articles,
preſented to his Maieſtie. After they haue
bene by him ſeene in his counſell, it was aunſwered
according as it ſhalbe hereafter ſayd.
            
               
               The firſt Article
               
                  HIs Maieſty may conſider,
if it maye pleaſe his
highneſſe, that here before
his ſubiects haue ſuſtained
great troubles & charges,
in ſuyng for the chaunge of
the vnméet places which were giuen them
againſt the Edict, whereby they could find
no fruit for the comfort of his Subiectes,
wherefore it may pleaſe his Maieſtie himſelf,
to ordeyn ſuch places, as may be more
commodious in the Suburbes of Cities,
and Townes, according to the Edict.
               
                  The Aunſweres made by the Kinges
Counſaile. And firſt to the

                        •
                     foreſayde Article.
                  Gyuing the king to vnderſtand the
places which they pretend vnmeete,
and requiring to be chaunged, his maieſtie
wyll prouyde for them accordingly.
               
            
            
               
               The ſecond Article.
               Becauſe thoſe of the ſayde Religion,
do deſire chiefly, that the Edict which ſhal
be, whereof dependeth the common welth
and helth, may be ſincerely obſerued, they
haue moſt humbly beſought his Maieſtie,
as yet they do, that after the proclayming
thereof, the Princes and Lords of his coū
                  ſaile,
officers of hys Crowne, and gouernours
of his Prouinces, doe promiſe and
ſweare, by his commaundement and aucthoritie,
and in his owne handes, to continue
the execution and intertainement
thereof, euery one in his charge, not thereby
paragoning or comparing any one to
the greatneſſe of his Maieſtie, but bicauſe
they haue experimented that the example
in forbering of the great, ſhall doe muche
harme in the matter, and therefore to refraine
them, & binde them further by their
ſayd promiſſes and othe.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
                  The king after the proclayming of
the Edict, ſhall cauſe the princes and

Lordes of his counſaile, officers of his
crowne, and Gouernours of Prouinces,
to put their othe into his hands, to obſerue
and continue the execution and
entertainment of the ſaide Edict, euery
one for his owne reſpect or part, and in
his charge.
               
            
            
               The third Article.
               They beſéeche further, that the ſame
which ſhall be done, may be purely and ſincerely
obſerued, without making hereafter
any declaration, or interpretation thervppon,
and that theſe wordes may be added:
(Vnto the tyme that God may giue vs the
grace, that our ſubiectes may be revnited
and brought into one religiō.) Not vnderſtanding
(as they ſay) by this article, that
the ſayd revniting, and bringing into one,
may come vnto them from elſe where then
from the grace of God, and of the benefite
and goodneſſe of the kinges Maieſtie.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
                  The King doth graunt them that
theſe wordes ſhall be added. (Vnto the

tyme that God may giue vs the grace,
that our ſubiects maye be revnited into
one religion.)
               
            
            
               The fourth Article.
               Which Maieſtie they do ſupplie moſt
humblie, ſeing that the ſame doth promiſe
to cauſe to be adminiſtred vnto them, good
and ſincere iuſtice, that it may be permitted
vnto them for this effect, to haue recourſe
to put requeſtes vnto his ſaid maieſtie,
when as there maye be done vnto
them any wrong and oppreſſions.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
                  The king graunteth, & will alwayes
thinke it good, that they ſhall put vnto
him their requeſtes and griefes, wherevpon
he will cauſe to bee adminiſtred
vnto them good and ſincere iuſtice.
               
            
            
               The fift Article.
               As touching the conferences of the
Miniſters, they doe require, that ſéeing the
ſame is but for the kéeping and containing
of the Miniſters and others in their dutie,

and to rule the doctrine and diſcipline
of their religion, wherein there is contayned
no iuriſdiction, that it may pleaſe the
King, for that they are neceſſarie exerciſes,
and the which (as they doe pretende) are
permitted by his Edictes, to graunt the
ſame vnto them. And to cauſe ſuch letters
to be ſet forth & diſpatched in ſuch formes,
as they may be aſſured in that behalfe.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
                  The king doth graunt it them, always
prouided, that when they will vſe their
ſayde conferences, they ſhall aduertiſe
the Gouernour of the Cuntrie, or hys
Lieutenant in his abſence, who ſhall
commit ſome perſon to be there, to the
end there ſhould be traycted of none other
things, then of the doctrine, and
diſcipline of the religion.
               
            
            
               The .vj. Article.
               And for ſchooles they doe require that
the children may be publikely and openlye
inſtructed & taught, and priuatelye in perticuler
houſes.
               
                  
                  The Aunſwere.
                  The King graunteth and permitteth
to inſtruct their children, in the places
appointed in the Baylywikes, and ſtewardſhips
for the exerciſe of the ſayd
religion, and in like maner in the other
Cities, Townes and places, in the which
the exerciſe of their Religion was the
vij. of March. 1562. and hath been alwayes
continued. And in lyke maner,
that euery one of them may cauſe their
children to be taught in their houſes.
               
            
            
               The .vij. Article.
               Shewing alſo, that the little obedience
which ſome officers haue giuen vnto
the Kings Edicts, and the boldneſſe wherof
they haue vſed, and further hereafter
will vſe, toward thoſe of the religion, if it
would not pleaſe him to prouide them of
preſent remedy, & that to this end, it wold
pleaſe him to ordein in euery parliament,
a Chamber made and gathered, of thoſe
which ſhall finde themſelfe moſt quiet and
leaſt offended, vnto which only, it ſhal priuately,

but to al others appertain, for ſuch
time as it ſhall pleaſe his Maieſtie to ordeyne
for the knowledge of the matter of
religion, & the obſeruations of the Edicts
of peace, in which chamber, all thoſe of the
ſayd religion may (when they ſéeme good)
cauſe to be ſent all their proceſſe and matters
depending in the ſayd Courts.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
                  The king can not make any alteration
in the eſtate and order eſtabliſhed
in the lawes, but he wyll prouyde to
cauſe it to be adminiſtred with ſuch ſinceritie
& equalitie, to all his ſubiects
indifferently, that euery man ſhall haue
iuſtice.
               
            
            
               The .viij. Article.
               They haue alſo declared, bicauſe that
thoſe which are out of the reſorte of the
Court of Parliament of Paris, cannot
haue aſſured acceſſe, nor withdrawing vnto
their houſes, before that the Edict be
publiſhed at the Parliaments, in the ſeats
& reſortes of the which they are dwelling:

that it would pleaſe his Maieſtie, to ordein
a certaine time to make the ſayd Proclamation,
and the meanes whereby they
may ſafelye retire them ſelues vnto their
houſes, & there to lay downe their armes.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
                  It ſhall be commaunded and enioyned,
vnto the parliaments, to publiſh
the Edict foorthwith, which ſhall bee
promptly, by a man ſpecially ſent, and
to the kings Attorneyes and Generals
to procure and require, the ſayde publication,
& neuertheleſſe in this meane
time, it ſhall bee ordeyned vnto them,
and eſpecially vnto the Gouernours of
Cuntries, to prouide and bee with all
their power, helping that thoſe of the
ſayde Religion, may retire themſelues
ſafelye into their houſes. And there to
remaine in all ſafety, and to leaue them
in the peaceable enioying of all their
goods, although the ſaid Edict were not
yet publiſhed.
               
            
            
               
               The .ix. Article.
               They do require that it would pleaſe
the King, that his Emologation, comprobation
and allowing for the authoritie of
the ſayd Edict, may be wihout a ſecret regiſter,
and that the Kings Attorney be
conſenting therevnto.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
                  Agreed, & his Maieſtie meaneth that
all the anſweres hereaboue made, vpon
euerie one of the ſaid Articles, ſhall be
hereafter obſerued and kept, ouer al his
Realme, by all his Gouernors, Lieutenants,
Generals, Courtes of Parliament,
& other Iudges, hauing to thys
ende, ſigned them with his hande, and
cauſed his Secretary of eſtate by name,
to counterſigne them, and doeth commaunde
that a copie of the Articles, be
put into the handes of the ſaide Lorde
Cardinall of Chaſtillon, Count of the
Rochefoucault, & of Bouchauanes, to
vſe it at their neede.
               
            
            
               Giuen the .xxiij.
day of March. 1568.
               
Signed 
Charles.
And therevnder,
ſigned, Fizes.
            
            
         
      
   