
      
         
            
            
            A moſt true report of the myraculous mouing and ſinking of a plot of ground, about nine Acres, at VVeſtram in Kent, which began the 18. of December, and ſo continued till the 29. of the ſame moneth. 1596.
            The true figure of the foreſaid plot of ground, conteining nine Acres.
            
            From A. to A. ſignifieth the carrying way at the North end, which is ſunke in one place 100. foote, and in an other place 65. foote.
            From D. to C. ſignifieth two pittes of Alders, which are driuen vp to the toppe of a Hill 4. perches a peece.
            From B. to B. ſignifieth the olde foote path, which is driuen from F. to E. 8. perches.
            E. ſignifieth a hole ſuncke in the plain ground thirtie foote.
            From H. to H. ſignifieth a ſtanding Hedge of 28. perches long, which is remoued 7. pearches out 
                  •
               his place.
         
         
            
            The names of certaine of thoſe which were eye witneſſes for the teſtimoniall of the truth hereof, vnder their handes.
            
               Richard Boſtocke Eſquire, Iuſtice of peace.
               Iames Auſten Gentleman.
               Iohn Studley, Vicor of Weſtram.
               Wil. Holton Phiſitian.
               Iohn Gainsford Gent.
               Eraſmus Gainsford Gen.
               Gyles Gainsford Gen.
               Iohn Dawling the elder, Gen.
               Iohn Dawling the yonger, Gen.
               Richard Reynold
               William Reinold Gen.
               William Holmeden Gen.
               Iohn Larmoth Gen.
               Thomas Chapman Gen.
               William Cam Gen.
               Robert Lighe yeoman.
               Iohn Chapman of Cockam, yeoman.
               Richard Welles yeoman.
               Thomas Tollor yeoman.
               Giles Browne yeoman.
               Thomas Stacy yeoman.
               Richard Stidowle yeoman.
               Raphe Stacy yeoman.
               Thom. Chapman of Holdfaſt, yeoman.
               Iohn Conſtable yeoman.
               Iohn Chapman of Shots, yeoman.
               Iohn Stone yeoman.
            
         
         
            
            
               To the right Honourable my ſingular good Lady and Miſtreſſe, the Lady Margaret, Barroneſſe Dacre of the South, Iohn Chapman your poore ſeruaunt, wisheth much increaſe of honor in this world, and eternall ioy and felicitie in the world to come.
            
            
               
                  RIght Honorable, my ſingular good Ladie and Miſtreſſe,
            
            whereas I find that ingratitude and forgetfulneſſe of due reuerence to be performed of ſeruants toward Maiſters & Miſtreſſes, is among all ſorts moſt odious; as contrariwiſe, diligence to pleaſe, and reuerent dutifulneſſe toward their ſayd Maiſters, &c. is in them a thing moſt laudable: as among many other, we reade of one Mucronius, ſeruant afore time to a poore Artiſan named Hargabus, who being afterward called to be a Senator, did ſtill for euer yeeld ſuch reuerēce vnto his ſaid old poore Maiſter, as thereby he did not onely giue cauſe of great ioy, to Hargabus, but it was eſteemed in him a great praiſe and increaſe of honour, to be ſo dutiful to him that had brought him vp. In regard whereof, I your Ladiſhips ſeruant, being deſirous to make knowne to the world the obedient dutie & ſeruiceable minde that I beare to your honor, haue thoght good (for want of better opportunitie, to preſent

your Ladiſhip with the education of the plotting and publiſhing of this miraculous worke of God, touching the ſtraunge mouing of certaine ground, at VVeſtram in Kent, whereof, I with diuers others, haue bin witneſſes. Humbly beſeeching your good Ladiſhip, to accept this as a poore new yeares gift, at the handes of him, who prayeth vnto God that your honourable Ladiſhip may enioy many happy new yeares: and is, and alway will be ready and diligent to pleaſe your Ladiſhip to the vttermoſt of his power.
            
               Your Ladiſhips faithfull and obedient ſeruant. Iohn Chapman.
               
            
         
         
            
            An admonition to the Chriſtian Reader.
            
               AS it is moſt euident to them that are of the houſhold of faith, that in the beginning our moſt gracious God did by his mightie power create and faſhion the whole frames of the heauens aboue, and all things elſe on earth beneath: ſo alſo it is no leſſe manifeſt, but yt by his wonderfull and vnſearchable prouidence hée doth from time to time, preſerue and kéepe, gouern & guide, alter and change, and euery way diſpoſe thereof according to his owne good will and pleaſure, and as it ſéemeth beſt to himſelfe for the glory of his bleſſed name, and the good of his choſen children: deare to him in Chriſt Ieſus, to whom therfore be praiſe & glory now and euermore, Amen. Theſe things (I ſay) are moſt apparant vnto men: And yet notwithſtanding the bright eye of his Almightie maieſty continually pearcing into our hearts, and ſounding déeply the vnſéene ſecrets of mens deceitfull thoughts, doth by his diuine wiſedome ſée and perceiue, that many there bee who haue their continuall conuerſation among his children, and do ſometimes ſucke the fatte of the earth more plentifully then they doo, who yet lyke vnto bruite beaſtes, deſtitute of reaſonable ſoules, can goe no further in contemplation of ſpirituall matters then their bodily ſences, common vnto beaſtes, which doe leade and direct them: And therefore theſe carnall men (as the Apoſtle tearmeth them) haue as he ſaith, no taſte nor ſence, of diuine matters, nor any perceiuing of thoſe things that do appertaine vnto God: yea there bee ſome of them ſo farre from hauing any reuerent eſtimation and religious féeling of his gratious maieſtie,

and eſpecially from acknowledging of his fatherly goodnes and watchful prouidence, ſuſtaining thē and theirs in their dayly neceſſitie of life and liuing, as that vnto themſelues, and in their owne hearts they ſaye plainlye (and that the Lorde himſelfe doth knowe) that there is no God at all.
            This damnable impietie, although it doo deſerue, as a moſt blaſphemous contempt of the ſacred deitie, to be no waies tollerated, but to be moſt ſharply cenſured, and rigorouſly puniſhed, either with the fearefull fier that fell vpon Sodom, or the ſuddayne gaping of the ground that ſwalowed vp Corah, or the ſwarming lice & vermin which did féede vpon the fleſh of that preſumptuous Herod, and deuoured his loathſome carkeſſe aliue, yet ſuch is the great patience and long ſuffering of the Lorde, as that hée doth vouchſafe to forbeare, to execute his ſharpe iuſtice vpon the ſame for a time, and in the meane while (as one pittying this naturall blindneſſe) doth moſt bountifully (as it were) put foorth his glorious hand, and therein doth holde out ſuch lampes of light as maye clearely ſhine vnto vs, and be (as the ſtarre to the wiſemen was at Chriſt his byrth) ſufficient guides to leade vs out of this groſſe darkneſſe of error and ignorance, and bring vs to finde him where he is, if we applye our ſelues as they did to followe the courſe and footing of ye ſame going before vs, euen here vppon the earth: For ſéeing we be thus hardly tyed vnto our outward ſences, and ſo ſtrongly preſſed down with the heauy ſway therof, as that we cannot paſſe higher then the reache of them: and ſo reſting thereupon, become altogither vnapt to mount a loft, and aſcend by fayth to diſcerne him ſitting aboue in the height of the heauens, in his inuiſible maieſtie, he doth not yet leaue vs héere, and forſake vs ſo: but to the intent our dead and benummed conſciences might euen by theſe our naturall ſences be ſufficiently conuinced in this point, and further our humaine dulneſſe (if it may be) ſtirred vp, to haue ſome more liuely féeling, forcible perceyuerance, and effectuall conſideration of that

ſupreme eſſence, who is God all ſufficient, vnto all, and in whom we liue, moue, and haue our béeing, he doth therfore vouchſafe, to diſcend in ſome ſorte vnto vs, and offereth héere vpon earth, vnto our eies a ſencible teſtimony of his moſt certaine béeing, and of his mightie power diſcernable by his ſtraunge workes, daily doone in our ſight, farre aboue the common courſe of nature, and beyond the pollicie and ſtrength of man: And to the intent we maye vnderſtand ſo much of them, he doth in doing them, cal vnto vs by his prophet, willing vs to looke vpon them, and to cōſider them reuerently, while he ſaith, Come and behold the workes of God, for he is terrible in his dooings toward the ſonnes of men: For if they were in déede well wayed as they ought to be, & duly conſidered one with an other: the order and courſe of them one way, and the varyetie and alteration of them an other way, is ſuch, as may eaſily induce and perſwade vs to know and beléeue, cofeſſe and ſay, veryly there is a God that ruleth the earth: And among ſundry other his workes that may be of this force, he commendeth vnto vs in place where ſome eſpecially, namely theſe (that as the prophet ſaith,) One while he turneth running riuers into a wilderneſſe, and the ſprings of waters into dry groūd, and conuerteth fruitful land into barrainneſſe, for the ſinnes of them that do dwell thereon. An other while he turneth the wilderneſſe into pooles of water: And a dry land into water ſprings. Whereto we may adde, that ſometime hée hurleth downe hilles, and maketh them to become lowe vallies, and withall exalteth the lowe vallies, and maketh them to become high hilles: Which extraordinary effects when they come to paſſe, they are not to be altogither neglected, nor attributed, as the maner of ſome is to doo, vnto blind chaūce, caſualtie, and fortune, or elſe to the only force of naturall cauſes meaſurable by philoſophicall reaſon: but as it appeareth by the holy prophet, they are to be eſtéemed as matters of eſpeciall marke, and woorthie to bee regarded as héedefull d
                  •
               cuments, which haue their firſt originall and beginning of their motion, proceeding from the great fountaine of Gods diuine prouidence, not working

idlely therein, but tending vnto ſome eſpecial end and purpoſe: and chiefely this, that men beholding and ſéeing the ſame, ſhould therupon take occaſion as it appeareth by Dauid, with trembling and feare to thinke vpon that mightie maieſtie, who is the firſt cauſe and cauſer thereof, and then to reuerence his holineſſe, who reigning triumphantly in heauen aboue, doth yet by theſe his workes on earth, ſhew himſelfe terrible vnto the ſonnes of men, and thereby cauſeth them to remēber him perforce, that ſo one good thought in them, may as fier encreaſing fier, beget an other, before all be quite quenched. This then (as it ſéemeth) being the purpoſe and counſaile of the holy Ghoſt, by ſuch his workes to ſtirre vp in vs a more ſtrong and fruitfull impreſſion of the great deitie▪ we néede not now trauaile farre to ſéeke out ſome preſidents thereof, in ſtraunge countries for the ſatiſfying of our ſelues by the teſtimony of our owne eyes: for loe, the Lord doth now at this inſtant in ſome ſort preſent the ſame vnto vs at home in our own natiue country, and that in diuerſe places by common report, but eſpecially in one place more aboundantly then els where, as may ſufficiently appeare by this diſcourſe inſuing, faithfully ſette downe by them who are very 
                  〈◊〉
                perſons, and doo teſtifie that which they themſelues 
                  〈◊〉
                know to be true.
         
      
      
         
            
            A moſt ſtraunge and true report of certaine ground, containing nine acres and vpward, which was ſuncke, remoued, and carried out of his place, eight perches, vvith the trees ſtanding therevpon, at Cockam hill, in the pariſh of Weſtram in Kent, about fifteen miles diſtant from London.
            
               IN the pariſh of Weſtram in Kent, about a myle from the Towne Southward, not far from the Eaſt ſide of a certaine great and common high way, called Cockam Hill, leading from London towardes Buckhurſt, & other partes of Suſſex, about that coaſt lyeth a certaine Farme poſſeſſed by one maiſter Robert Heath, an honeſt Gentleman, dwelli
                  •
               g at Sanderſted in Surry, and preſently tenanted by one Giles Browne an honeſt yeoman. Among ſundry parcels of ground belonging thereto, in the midſt of that Farme are two cloſes lying togither, ſauing that they bee ſeparated with a ſtanding hedge, of Hollies, Aſhes, Hazels, Willowes and Alders growing theron: the ſcituation of which, and namely of the vpper cloſe, till the 18. day of December laſt paſt, was after this ſort. The vpper face of it lay ſomewhat adant, and vpon the ſhoote of an hill, but not ſo much, but that a bowle being caſt vp againſt the hill might eaſily haue layen & ſetled without tumbling backe againe perforce: otherwiſe it was reaſonably leuell for the moſt part: for it hath bene vſually mowed, and within theſe fiue yeares hath bene ſowed thrée times with thrée ſundry kindes of graine: firſt with wheate, ſecondly with Barly, and thirdly with Oates: A little aboue the North ende thereof, lying ſomewhat higher then the reſt, harde

adioyning to the foote of a very high and ſtéep hil, there was a certaine carrying way for Carte and Waine, to the Tennaunts vſe, and beneath that, towarde the middeſt of it, a foote path did croſſe to the cloſe: Betwéene the ſayd carrying way, and the ſayd foote path, were two ſtanding pittes, the one being about ſixe foote déepe of water and more, the other twelue foote at the leaſt, and about foure perches ouer in bredth, hauing ſundry tuffes of Alders and ſome Aſſhes growing in the bottomes of them: the ground on the ſouth ſide of the ſayd pittes, laye mounted higher then the vpper face of the water, about tenne foote.
            Againe, from the great high hill lying at the vpper part of the grounde whereof wee ſpake before, two very little gozels paſſed downe along Southward through the cloſe, theyr water Courſes being diuided aſunder at the vpper end, about the carrying way, twelue perches, and about the middeſt twentie eight perches: All which earth of the ſaid cloſes within the ſayd gozelles, and about an Acre more in bredth one way, and eighty perches in length another way, beganne the ſayd eightéene day of December to alter and chaunge forme and faſhion, and that very diuerſly from day to day, for the ſpace of eleuen dayes togither, after this maner.
            Firſt on the ſayd 18. day, the ſayd Tennant Giles Browne going in the morning toward that Cart way, with purpoſe to paſſe along it, to a barne ſtanding beyond it, when hee came to that part of it which laye about the head of the gozelles, he foūd it for xij. pearches lōg to be ſunk there down right ſixe foote and a halfe déepe, by meaſure taken by himſelfe and other. The next morning being the ninetéenth day, hée comming thither againe, found it to be ſunke ſixtéene foote more then it was the day before. The third morning being the twentieth day, hée came againe, and then found it to be ſuncke about eightie foote more at the leaſt. And then from that day forwarde, that great trench of ground lying partly in theſe two cloſes, and partly in ſūdry other, containing frō the carying way ſouthward in length (as is before ſaid) about eightie perches, and in bredth in

ſome place twentie eight and where it was narroweſt xii. pearches, began with the hedges and trées thereon to looſe it ſelf wholy from the reſt of the ground lying round about it, and withal to moue, ſlide, and ſhoote ſouthward, not with any ſuddaine ſhot, but créeping by little, and little, ſo as the motion and ſtirring thereof was not diſcerned nor perceyued, by thē that were preſently ſtanding vpon it and working about it, but only by the ſundrie effects that followed, as the cracking of the rootes of trées, the bruſhing of boughes, the noiſe of the hedge-wood breaking, the gaping of the ground, and the riuing of the earth aſunder, the falling of the torne furrowes and huge trenches after it, ſome foure foote déepe, ſome ſixe and ſome ſeauen and more, whereby there were made in it at the leaſt not ſo fewe as eleuen thouſand furrows, riffes, cracks, and clefts in diuerſe places héere and there. This mouing and carying of the ground ſouthward continewing ſtil both by day and night for the ſpace of eleuen dayes togither, ſliding a ſlant, ſometimes as it was noted, fouretéene handfulls by meaſure, in one houre and a halfe did wonderfully alter and chaunge the whole face of that land: for in ſome places thereof, the hinder ground comming faſter forwarde (as it ſhoulde appeare) then the former grounde did giue waye vnto it, cauſed it to ſwell vppe in rounde hillocks like vnto graues, the gréene turfe remayning ſtill whole and vnbroken aboue: In other places the hinder grounde came ſo violently, as that it did not only teare the greene turfe aboue, but alſo did riſe and lift vp it ſelfe, and did rolle and tumble euer the other as it were waues or ſurges and ſo ſtayed as ſtanding buts, and at the laſt the whole plotte was ſo touſed, torne and rent, and withall the gréene turfe ſo tattered and turned vp ſide downe, as that there is ſcant ſo much as one pearch togither of al this ground left whole with the graſſe vpon it vncrackt.
            The ground of the two water pits euen from the very muddy bottoms whole, with a great rocke of ſtone vnder the ſame are not onlye remoued out of theyr places

and carried forward toward the South, at the leaſt foure perches a péece, with their tuffes of Alders ſtill ſtanding vpon them, but withall, they are mounted vp aloft, and become hilles, ſtanding yet to be ſéene with their ſedge, flags, and blacke mudde vpon the toppe of them ſtill, higher then the vpper face of the water is now (which they haue forſaken) by at the leaſt nine foote: and into ye place from which they are remoued and ryſen, other ground which lay higher before, is deſcended and come downe, receiuing the water lying now vpon it, as it did before vpon the other.
            Moreouer, in one place of the plaine fielde, there is a great Hole made by ſinking of the earth, to the depthe of thirtie foote at the leaſt, being in breadth in ſome place, two perches ouer, and in length, fiue or ſixe perches.
            Likewiſe there is a hedge of 30. perches long▪ remoued and carryed Southward, with his trées and all, ſeuen perches at the leaſt: And of theſe trées ſome do ſtill ſtand, and grow vpright, and ſome are quite ouerthrowne, couered and buried, with the folding of the earth running vpon them, and almoſt both the endes of the ſayd hedge are ſunke and couered wholy with the earth: the Eaſt end of it foure perches long, the Weſt end fiue perches long.
            Many other alterations there be of trées that be ſunke and remoued out of their places, ſome fiue perches, ſome ſixe: as namely, one Holly trée is driuen ſeuen perches out of his place, and yet it ſtandeth vpright ſtill, and a great Alder is torne roote and all cut of the grounde, and carryed from his place foure perches, and there it lyeth, the top turned downe to the ground.
            Beſide this, there was one péece of ground of halfe an Acre, which in times paſt did lye vp ſhooting in betwéene the two fieldes: this peece now, with an hedge row of trées ſtanding vppon it, is ſlipped quite away Southward, from betwéene thoſe two cloſes: and they two before ſeuered, are now come togither & ioyned as one, and in their comming, are tumbled ouer a ſommer hedge, & withall two other hedges, and a ſhawe of hazell trées, and buſhes, which did ſeuer them, are now driuen togither on heapes at the Southend.
            
               Sundry other ſinkings there be in diuers places, one of ſixtie fiue foote, an other of forty ſeuen foote, an other of thirtie foure foote.
            By meanes of all which cofuſion, it is come to paſſe, that where the higheſt hilles were héeretofore, there the deepeſt Dales 
                  •
               ée now. And where the loweſt Dales were then, now the ground lyeth mounted hieſt.
            The footepath ſpoken of before, is now caryed out of ſquare eight pearches at the leaſt, the lower end of this ground is caryed ſouthward in bredth thrée pearches ouer into two medowes, whereof one is in the poſſeſſion of an other man called Thomas Toller.
            
            Finally the whole meaſure and content of this breaking grounde, was at leaſt nine acres ſeauen day workes and foure perches, on the twentie ninth day of December whē this figure and meaſure of it was taken, as here ye ſée it ſet downe: And ſince that time it cracketh and cleaueth daily more and more on all ſides round about it.
            Among other things touching this matter, this alſo is eſpecially to bee conſidered, that whereas by the great aboundaunce of water, and continuall rayne which haue fallen ſo many monethes togither of late, ſundrye great bowrnes, and violent ſtreames haue broken out in many places of this land, and at the leaſt ſeauen ſuch within xii. miles of this place euery way, the leaſt whereof is able to driue a corne Mill, where ſeldome or neuer any ſuch haue bin before, and that this ground lyeth (as we haue ſaide) vnder a high hill that might occaſion ſome ſuch iſſue, yet there hath no extraordinary courſe of water broken out vppon it, nor neere vnto it by a mile any way, neither haue the ſmall ſprings thereof, during all this wet weather, bin any thing increaſed to ſpeake of. In ſo much as the two little gozelles mentioned before, being they that doo cary moſt water ouer this rouing ground, are neither of them ſo great, but that their ſtreames might at any time all this yeare (and ſo many ſtill) eaſily paſſe through an auger hole of an Inch and halfe broade. Which I ſpeake to this end, that the ſtrange cariage, moouing, dryuing, and

diſplacing of huge maſſe of earth, and the heauing vp of the vallyes and lowe pits, with the great rootes thereof rayſed and mounted vnto hilles, with the trées therevpon, cannot be imputed to the aboundance of water enforcing it as the cauſe therof, as ſome perhaps otherwiſe would imagin and ſuppoſe.
            The whole maner of the ſtraunge confuſion of this plat cannot be diſcribed according as it is but there hath (by report of the Farmers and others) come to ſee it at ſundry times, from London and other partes of the country foure thouſand people ſince it firſt began: to whom it hath ſéemed to be a very ſtraunge and fearefull ſight, giuing occaſion vnto ſome of them, to thinke vpon that great opening of the earth that ſhalbe in the latter day when ſhe ſhall yeelde vp her dead, that be in her to come to the reſurrection, to other to thinke vpon that fearefull gaping of the ground wherein Corah and his company were deuoured.
            And to the intent the reader may not thinke himſelfe to be abuſed in this report by ſome vaine deuiſed fable, ſundry of the neighbors and inhabitants, and they of the beſt credit dwelling thereabout, who haue bin at it, and are eye witneſſes thereof, haue bin content here vnto to giue their teſtimony, by ſubſcribing their names at the beginning of this booke.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   