
      
         
            
            
            A FREE AND OFFENCELES Iustification, OF A LATELY PVBLISHT and most maliciously misinterpreted Poeme: ENTITVLED Andromeda liberata.
            Veritatem qui amat, emat.
            LONDON, Printed for LAVRENCE L'ISLE and are to be sold at his shop in Pauls church-yard at the signe of the Tigers-head, 1614.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A FREE AND OFFENCELES IVSTIFIcation: Of a lately publisht and most maliciously misinterpreted Poeme; Entituled▪ Andromeda liberata.
            
               AS Learning, hath delighted from her Cradle, to hide her selfe from the base and prophane Vulgare, her ancient Enemy▪ vnder diuers vailes of Hierogl
                     •
                  phikes Fables, and the like; So hath she pleased her selfe with no disguise more; then in misteries and allegoricall fictions of Poesie. These haue in that kinde, beene of speciall reputation; as taking place of the rest, both for priority of time, and precedence of vse; being borne in the ould world, long before Hieroglyphicks or Fabels were conceiued: And deliuered from the Fathers to the Sonnes of Art; without any Aucthor but Antiquity. Yet euer held in high Reuerence and Aucthority; as supposed

to conceale, within the vtter barke (as their Eternities approue) some sappe of hidden Truth▪ As either some dimme and obscure prints of diuinity, and the sacred history; Of the grounds of naturall▪ or rules of morall Philosophie, for the recommending of some virtue, torturing some vice in general (For howsoeuer Phisitions alledge; that their medicins, respect non Hominem, 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  t Socratem; not euery, but such a speciall body: Yet Poets professe the contrary, that their phisique intends non Socratem sed Hominem, not the indiuiduall but the vniuersall) Or else recording some memorable Examples for the vse of policie and state: euer (I say) enclosing within the Rinde, some fruit of knowledge howsoeuer darkened; and (by reason of the obscurity) of ambiguous and different construction. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                &c. Est enim ipsa Natura 
                     〈◊〉
                   Poe
                     •••
                   anigmatu
                     •
                   plena,
               
                  Pl
                        •
                     t. in A
                        ••
                     b. 2. 
               nec qu 
                     •
                  is eam dignostit: This Ambiguity in the sence, hath giuen scope to the varietie of expositions; while Poem in al ages (challenging, as their Birth-rights, the vse and application of these fictions) haue euer beene allowed to fashion both, pro & contra, to their owne offencelesse, and iudicious occasions. And borrowing to farre the priuiledg'd licence of their professions; haue enlarged, or 
                  〈◊〉
                the Allegory, with inuentions and dispositions of their owne, to extend it to their present doctrinall and illustrous purposes▪ By which aucthority, my selfe (resoluing amongst others,

to offer vp my poore mite, to the honour of the late Nuptials; betwixt the two most Noble personages, whose honored names renown the front of my Poeme) singled out (as in some parts harmelesly, and gracefully applicable to the occasion) The Nuptials of Perseus and Andromeda, an innocent and spotlesse virgine, rescu'd from the polluted throate of a monster; which I in this place applied to the sauage multitude; peruerting her most lawfully-sought propagation, both of blood and blessing, to their owne most lawlesse and lasciuious intentions: from which in all right she was legally and formally deliuered. Nor did I euer imagine till now so farre-fetcht a thought in malice (such was my simplicitie) That the fiction being as ancient as the first world, was originally intended to the dishonor of any person now liuing: but presum'd, that the application being free I might pro meo iure dispose it (innocenly) to mine owne obiect: if at least, in mine owne wrighting, I might be reasonablie & conscionablie master of mine owne meaning. And to this sense, I confinde the allegory throughout my Poeme; as euery word thereof, (concerning that point) doth cleerely and necessarilie demonstrate: without the least intendment (I vow to God) against any noble personages free state, or honor. Nor make I any noble (whose meere shadowes heerin, the vulgar perhaps may imitatate) any thought the more mixt with the grosse substance of the vulgar:

but present the vulgare onely in their vnseuerd herde; as euer in antient tradition of all autenticall Aucthours they haue beene resembled: To whom they were neuer beholding for any fairer Titles;
                  Caligula.
                then the base, ignoble, barbarous, giddie multitude; The Monster with many heads (which the Emperor, in his displeasure, wisht to haue sprung all from one necke; that all at one blow, he might haue v
                  •
               trunkt them) cui lumen 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               ; without an Eye; or, at most, seeing all by one fight (like the Lamiae, who had but one eie to serue all their directions, which, as anie one of them went abroad, she put on, and put off when she came home) giuing vp their vnderstandings to their affections, and taking vp their affections on other mens credits,
                  
                     〈1 paragraph〉
                  
                neuer examining the causes of their Loues or hates, but (like curres) alwaies ba
                  •
               king at all they know not: whose most honored deseruings (were they knowen to them as to others of neerer and truer obseruation) might impresse in them as much reuerence as their ignorance doth rudenesse: Euermore baying lowdest at the most eminent Reputations, & with whō as in the kingdom of Frogges) the most lowd Crier, is the loftiest Rule
                  •
               
               ▪ No reason nor aucthority able to stoope them; though neuer so iudicially & religiously vrdging them: whose impartiall and cleere truth; not their owne bold blindnesse can denie; vnlesse they will dare to mutter with the Oratour touching the Delphicke Oracles, and say

our Oracles of Truth,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                did likewise 
                  〈◊〉
                encline to Philip putting no difference betwixt Illusion and Truth, the consciences of learned religious men▪ and the cunnings of prophane. And then how may my poore endeauours, in dutie to Truth, and my most deare Conscience (for Reputation, since it stands, for the most part, on beasts feete, and Deserts hand is nothing to warrant it, let it goe with the beastly) reforme or escape their vnrelenting detractions? The Loues of the right vertuous and truly noble, I haue euer as much esteemed, as despised the rest▪ finding euer of the first sort, in all degrees, as worthy as any of my rancke, till (hauing enough to doe in mine owne necessary ends, hating to insinuate and labour their confirmation, and encrease of opinion, further then their owne free iudgements would excite and direct them) I still met with vndermining laborers for themselues, who (esteeming all worth their own, which they detract from others) deminisht me much in some changeable estimations (Amicu
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Animal facile mutabil
                     •
                  
               ) whose supplies yet farre better haue still brought me vnfought: and till this most vnequall impression opprest me, I stood firme vp with many, now onely, with God and my selfe. For the violent hoobub, setting my song to their owne tunes, haue made it yeeld so harsh and distastefull a sound to my best friends, that my Integritie▪ euen they hold, affected with the shrill eccho thereof, by reflexion receiuing it

from the mouthes of others. And thus (to 
                  〈◊〉
               , as strooke dumbe with the disdaine of it, their most vnmanly lie both of my ba
                  •••
               ing and wounding, saying▪ Take this for your Andromeda, not being so much as toucht, I witnesse God, nor one sillable suffering) I will descend to a conclusion with this, that in all this my seede time, sowing others honours, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  super semi
                     •
                  auit Zizania &c. Whiles I slept in mine innocencie, the enuious man hath beene heere, who like a venomous spider, drawing this subtle thred out of himselfe, cunningly spred it into the eares of the manie (who as they see all with one eye, so heare all with one eare, and that alwaies the left) where multiplying and getting strength it was spred into an Artificiall webbe, to entangle my poore poeticall flie; being otherwise (God knowes) for enough from all venome, saue what hath beene 
                  •
               oro'st into her, by her poisonous enemy to sting her to death. But the allusion (you will say) may be extended so farre; but qui nimium emulget elicet sanguinem; a malicious reader by straining the Allegorie past his intentionall limits, may make it giue blood, where it yeeldes naturally milke, and ouercurious wits may discouer a sting in a flie: But as a guiltlesse prisoner at the barre sayd to a Lawyer thundring against his life, Num quia tu disertus es, ego peribo? because malice is witty, must Innocence be condemned? Or if some other, not sufficiently examining what I haue written, shall by mistaking the title,

suppose it carrie such an vnderstanding; doth any Law therfore cast that meaning vpon me? Or doth any rule of reason make it good, that let the writer meane what he list, his writing notwithstanding must be construed in mentem Legentis? to the intendment of the Reader? If then, for the mistaking of an enuious or vnskilfull Reader, who commonly being praeiudicia pro iudicijs, I shal be exposed to the hate of the better sort, or taken forciblie into any powerfull displeasure, I shall esteeme it an acte as cruell and tyranous, as that of the Emperour, who put a Consul to death for the errour of a publique Crier; misnaming him Emperour in stead of Consul. For my selfe I may iustly say thus much, that if my whole life were layd on the racke, it could neuer accuse me for a Satyrist or Libeller, to play with worthie mens reputations; or if my vaine were so addicted, yet could I so farre be giuen ouer, as without cause or end, to aduenture on personages of renownd nobilitie? hauing infallible reason to assure my selfe, that euen those most honoured personages, to whose graces I chiefly intended these labors, might they but in the lest degree haue suspected any such allusion by me purposed, as is now most iniuriously surmised against me, they would haue abhorred me and banisht me their sight. To conclude Hic Rhodus, hic saltus; as I said of my life, so of my lines; heere is the Poeme; let euerie sillable of it be tortured by any how partiall and preiudicate so euer (for as the case

hath beene carried: I can now looke for no difference) and if the least particle thereof, can be brought, necessarilie or iustly to confesse, any harmefull intention of mine to the height imagined, hauing already past the test of some of the most Iudiciall and Noble of this Kingdome: if Malice will still make vnanswerably mine, what her selfe hath meerely inuented, and say with Phisitians, that the fault of the first concoction cannot be corrected in the second, (my meat supposed Harpylike rauisht at first, into her vicious stomacke) And that as Herodotus is vniustly said to praise onlie the Athenians, that all Grecians else he might the more freelie depraue, so Malice will as licentiouslie affirme, that my Poeme hath something honourablie applicable, that the rest might the more safely discouer my malignance: And lastelie, If my Iudges (being preiudicd with my accusation, haue no eare left to heare my defence) will therefore powerfullie continue their hostilitie both against my life & reputation, then Collū securi, I must endure at how inhumane hands soeuer (at least) my poore credits amputation: humblie retiring my selfe within the Castle of my Innocence, & there in patience possessing my Soule, quietlie abide their vttermost outrage: dedefending my selfe, as I maie, from the better sort, by a cleere conscience, from the baser, by an eternall contempt.
            
               Pereas, qui calamitates hominum colligis.
               
                  Eur:
               
            
            
            
               The worst of the greatest Act.
                Aetna quencht.
            
            
               Dist:
               Two Plants in one soile fruitlesse; Both transplanted:
               (Vntoucht) finde fit meanes for posterity granted.
            
            
               The worst of the least.
               The spleenelesse Flie.
            
            
               Dist:
               The Innocent deliuerd, her destroier
               Her trophe is: Her Sauer, Her Enioyer.
            
            
               Tamen haec fremit Plebs.
               
                  Liv:
               
            
            Yet further opposd; admit a little further answer.
            
               Dialogus.
               The Persons Pheme and Theodines.
               
               
                  Phe.
                  HO! you! Theodines you must not dreame
                  Y'are thus dismist in Peace, se as too extreame
                  Your song hath stird vp, to becalmd so soone:
                  
                     Nay, in your hauen you shipwracke, y'are vndone,
                  Your Perseus is displeasd, and sleighteth now
                  Your worke, as idle, and as seruile, yow.
                  The Peoples god-voice, hath exclamd away
                  Your mistie cloudes, and he se
                        •
                     s cleere as day
                  Y'aue made him scandald for anothers wrong,
                  Wishing vnpublisht your vnpopular song.
               
               
                  Theo.
                  O thou with peoples breaths and bubbles fild.
                  Euer de
                        •
                     iuered, euermore with childe:
                  How Court and Citty burnish with th
                        •
                      breede
                  Of newes and ni
                        •
                     les? seasoning all their feede
                  With nothing, but what onely (drest like thee)
                  Of surfet tasts and superfluitie?
                  Let all thy bladder-
                        〈◊〉
                     still inspire▪
                  
                  And make embroderd facte-
                        •
                     als for the mire
                  With thy suggestions: On the clouen feete
                  Of thy Chymaera tost from streete to streete;
                  Out Perseus 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      with the pre
                        •
                     s
                        •
                     
                  
                  Or like th' inconstant Moone be, that like these
                  M
                        •
                     kes her selfe readie by her glasse the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  The common Rendes vous of all rude streames:
                  And fed in some part, with our common Thames
                  
                  As that is hourely seru'd with sewers and sinckes,
                  Strengthening and cleansing our sweet meats and drinkes,
                  Our Perseus by Mineruaes perfect Mirror
                  
                  Informes his beauties: that reformd from th'
                        •
                     rror
                  Which Change and Fashion in most others finde,
                  Like his faire bodie, he may make his minde,
                  Decke that with knowing ornaments, and then
                  Effuse his radiance, vpon knowing Men,
                  
                  Which can no more faile then the sunne to show
                  By his in-
                        •
                     ight, his outward ouerflow.
                  
                     
                     Perseus? (that when Minerua in her spring
                  Which renders deathlesse, euery noble thing
                  Clarified in it, thri
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      hath his 
                        〈◊〉
                     )
                  Take from a Sow, th
                        •
                     t washeth in her stoode
                  (The common ken
                        •
                     ell) euery gut she feedes?
                  His food then thinking cleaner? And 
                        〈◊〉
                      then
                  Take it for manly; when unfit for Men?
                  Can I seeme seruile to him, when ahlas
                  My whole Lifes freedome, shewes I neuer was?
                  If I be rude in speech, or not expresse
                  My Plaine Minde, w
                        •
                     th affected Courtlines
                  His Insight can into the Fountaine reach,
                  And knowes, sound meaning nere vsde glosing speach.
               
               
                  Phem.
                  Well, be he as you hope, but this beleeue,
                  All friends haue left you, all that knew you gri
                        •
                     ue
                  (For faire condition in you) that your Thrall,
                  
                  To one Mans humour, should so lose them all:
               
               
                  Theo.
                  
                     One may be worth all, and they thus implie
                  
                  
                     Themselues are all bad, that our Good 
                     
                        ••
                     uie▪
                  
                  
                     Goodnesse and Truth they are (the All-good knowes)
                  To whom my free Sole all her labours vowes.
                  If friends for this forsake me, let them flie;
                  And know that 
                        〈◊〉
                      their inconstancie
                  Grieues, or disheartens my resolu'd endeauours
                  Then I had shaken off so many fea
                        •
                     ers.
                  M
                        •
                      faire condition moues them 
                        •
                      Euen right thus
                  Far'd the Phisition, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  With still poore Socrates; who terming rude,
                  Lust
                        •
                     ull, vnlearnd▪ and with no wit indude,
                  The most wise Man, did adde yet, he is iust.
                  And with that praise, would giue his dispraise trust.
                  For as a man, whom Arte hath flattery taught,
                  
                     And is at all parts, master of his Craft;
                  With long and varied praises, doth sometimes
                  Mixe by the way, some sleight and peruiall crimes
                  As sawce; to giue his flatteries taste and scope,
                  So, that Malignitie, may giue her hope
                  Of faults beleeu'd effect, she likewise laies
                  In her strowd passage, some light flowers of praise.
                  But tis not me ahlas, they thus pursue
                  With such vnprofiting, Cunning, nor embrue
                  Their bitter spent mouthes, with such bloud-mixt some,
                  In chace of any action that can come
                  From my poore forme, but from the foot they tread
                  Those passages, that thence affect the head.
                  And why? who knowes? not that next spirit that is
                  Organe to all their knowing faculties,
                  
                     
                        Linceus.
                     Or else, I know I oft haue read of one
                  So sharpe-eyd, he could see through Oke and Stone,
                  
                     
                        Callicrates.
                     Another that high set in Sicilie
                  
                  
                     
                        Mirmecides.
                     As farre as Carthage numbred with his eye,
                  The Nauie vnder saile▪ which was dissite
                  A night and daies saile; with windes most fore-right;
                  And others, that such curious chariots made
                  As with a flies wing, they hid all in shade,
                  And in a Ses
                        •••
                     ine (small Indian graine)
                  Engrau'd a page of Homers verses plaine.
                  These farre-seene meruailes, I could neuer see
                  Being made of downe right, flat simplicitie,
                  How neere our curious Craftsmen come to these
                  They must demonstrate, ere they winne the wise:
               
               
                  Phe.
                  But who are those you reckon Homicides
                  
                  In your rackt Poeme? I sweare, that diuides
                  Your wondering Reader, far from your applause.
               
               
                  
                  Theo.
                  I ioie in that, for weighing with this cause
                  Their other Reason, men may cleerely see,
                  How sharpe and pregnant their constructions be.
                  I proue by Argument, that he that loues
                  Is deade, and onely in his louer moues.
                  His Louer as t'were taking life from him:
                  And praising that kinde slaughter I condemne
                  As churlish Homicides,
                     
                        See my reasons in their places.
                      who will denie
                  In loue twixt two, the possibility
                  To propagate their liues into descent
                  Needefull and lawfull, and that argument
                  Is Platoes,
                     
                        Quippe non minus homicida censendus est qui hominem praecipit nasciturum; quam qui natum tollite medio. Audacior autem, qui presentem ab
                              •
                           umpit vitam, crudelio
                              •
                           , qui lucem inuidet naseituro, & nondum natos filios suos enecat. Plat. in Sympo.
                      to a word, which much commends
                  The two great personages, who wanting th'ends
                  Of wedlocke, as they were; with one consent
                  Sought cleere distunction, which (with blest euent)
                  May ioine both otherwise, with such encrease
                  Of worthy Ofspring, that posterities
                  May blesse their fautors, and their fauoures now:
                  Whom now such bans and poisons ouerflow.
               
               
                  Phem.
                  Bound to a barraine rocke, and death expected,
                  See that with all your skill then cleane dissected.
                  That (barraine) cleere your edge of, if you can.
               
               
                  Theo.
                  As if that could applied be to a Man?
                  O barraine Malice! was it euer sayd
                  A man was barraine? or the burthen layd
                  Of bearing fruite on Man? if not, nor this
                  Epithete barraine, can be construed his
                  In least proprietie: but that such a one
                  As was Andromeda;
                     
                        Virgo sanè egreg
                              ••
                           , & omnibus animi & corporis dotibus ornatissima Natal: Co: de Andromeda.
                      in whose parts shone
                  All beauties, both of bodie and of minde
                  The sea dame to a barraine rocke should binde
                  In enuie least some other of her kinde
                  
                     Should challenge them for beauty any more;
                  Encreast the cause of making all deplore
                  So deare an innocent, with all desert
                  No more then (for Humanities shame) peruert
                  For of your whole huge reckonings heere's the sum,
                  
                     O saeclum insipiens, & inficetum.
                  
               
               
                  Quod dignis adimit, transit ad Impios.
               
               
            
         
      
   