
      
         
            
            
            
               An anſwere to a
ſeditious pamphlet lately
caſt abroade by a Ieſuite,
with a diſcouerie
of that blaſphemous
ſect.
            By William Charke.
            
               1. Reg. 20 11.
               Let not him that girdeth on his armour,
boaſt, as he that putteth it of.
            
            ¶Imprinted at London
by Chriſtopher Barker,
Printer to the Queenes
moſt excellent
Maieſtie.
Anno 1580.
            Decembris. 17.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            THe Lord hath many wayes to bring the enemies of the
Goſpel to the loue thereof. Eſpecially he requireth of
vs the defence of his trueth, and earneſt prayer that
ſuch defenſe may reforme the iudgement and conſcience
of the aduerſarie. For though there were will and labour
for the trueth on both ſides (which is to be wiſhed) yet it is
not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth; but in God
that ſheweth mercie. This mercie we muſt pray at Gods
hand, that our planting and watering may receiue of him
daily and great increaſes. Therefore, good reader, when
this ſmal, or any great defenſe of the trueth cometh to thy
hand, reioyce that the trueth is defended, that error and
vanitie is diſcouered: but ioyne with that ioye a care to
haue him brought into the waye of ſaluation, which either
ignorantly or wilfully wandreth from the ſame. Hate
his errors, but in compaſsion pray for his reformation. Who
knoweth whom and when the Lord will call? Moreouer
when thou ſeeſt the diligence and boldnes of the enemies
ſo great in repayring the ruines of Babylon: pray alſo that
we marking what wiſedome they haue in their generation,
may the rather be prouoked to greater diligence & might
infiniſhing the walles of Ieruſalē. Laſt of al let vs as manie
as profeſſe the Goſpel, bring forth fruites worthie of the
Goſpel, leaſt the Papiſts on the one ſide, and the godleſſe
familie of ſelfeloue on the otherſide preuaile more and
more againſt the trueth, for a iuſt puniſhment of our ſinnes
in contemning the Goſpel, which by doctrine with diſcipline,
and by mercie with iuſtice muſt be maintained,
and bring forth fruite to the
glory of God, and the peace
of his Church for euer.
Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            An anſwere to a ſeditious
Pamphlet lately caſt abroade
by a Ieſuite.
            
               ALbeit the queſtions of religion,
which the Papiſtes
hold, haue bene by them alreadie
from time to time
maintained with all their
iudgement and learning
in their publique wrytings, and are alſo in
writing ſufficiently anſwered, to make all
men ſee the trueth, that do not wilfully ſhut
their eyes againſt it: yet notwithſtanding,
as Affrica is ſaide ſtill to bring foorth ſome
new monſters, ſo the ſchooles of the Romiſh
church are continually occupied in forging
ſome new miſſhapen arguments and inſtrumēts
againſt the Goſpel, eſteeming it great
ſeruice to their general Prouoſt, to be ſtill in
the chalenge, though they receiue no honour
in the fielde: ſtill to caſt out their dartes,
though they be beaten back to the wounding
of that head, they would moſt defend.
            Hereupon it commeth that one Edmond

                     •
                  ampion, a principal champion belike of ye
               
                  •
               opiſh religion, flying farre from the fielde

ſome yeres paſt for want of armour, is now
                  •
               
returned with furniture out of Germanie
and Boeme, from Rome and other places, &
maketh, he one alone, like another Golias, ye
chalenge, wherein whole armies heretofore
haue had as great ouerthrowes, as euer had
the Philiſtines by the arme of God fighting
with Iſrael.
            
            This Coronell doeth by a pamphlet moſt
vnſittingly writtē as to her Maieſties moſt
honorable priuie Coūſel, & more vnſittingly
ſcattered abroade, require diſputation before
all, and with all: and hauing in deede ſmall
hope to preuaile, and in trueth litle will to
come to the triall (for he can not but ſee the
heauie hand of God againſt him & his cauſe)
yet he hath a purpoſe to diſturbe all by the
very proclayming of this ſpiritual fight, and
by giuing aime to them, that in the ſame
league attempt otherwyſe more dangerous
matters againſt the ſtate.
            Theſe letters comming to my hand, after
I had read them, and conſidered his inſolent
vaunts againſt ye trueth, ioyned with
woordes pretending great humilitie, his
proteſtation of zeale to ſaue ſoules, deliuered
with matter that draweth them into damnable
hereſies, I expected a preſent yſſue by

his perſonall anſwere, before them to whom
ſuch cauſes apperteine. But not vnderſtanding
of any ſuch yſſue, and finding the letters
to be more and more ſpred as Libels,
abuſing the name and holy authoritie of the
Counſell, and that they prepare inconſtant
mindes to the miſlike of religion, and deſire
of Poperie (which plainely appeareth to be
the practiſe of the Champion in ſcattering
them) I thought it my dutie to anſwere the
ſame, in reſpect of the publique iniurie offred
to religion, with all humilitie offering
this anſwere, or further proceeding with the
ſaide Libell, to their honours moſt wiſe
conſideration.
            But before I come to ye particular points
of his letters, I am ſhortly to touch ye chiefe
and onely matter therein pretended: which
is a deſire to haue a diſputation graunted, or
ſolemne audience for ſome ſermons to bee
made in the mayntenance of the moſt worthily
abandoned Popiſh religion.
            This petition ſeemeth to all Papiſts
needfull, & I can not blame thē, for it would
do them good to obteine, if it were but a
queſtion for ſomewhat, who haue right to
nothing. But I would wōder, if any which
profeſſe the Goſpell ſhould now looke for a

diſputation, to anſwere euery vaine chalenge,
& that after ſo many & bleſſed yeeres,
wherein error hath euery way bene confuted,
& the trueth eſtabliſhed. For our partes,
we are ſo aſſured of the manifeſt trueth, that
we make no doubt thereof. For their parts,
if they ſought conference in a good conſcience,
& with a deſire to learne, it were neceſſary
to regard their deſires, & to relieue their
conſcience. But returning into the lande,
with vngodly vowes and obſtinate mindes
to perſiſt in their errors, and hauing hope
with their maſkes to deceiue many, it is
meete to keepe them as farre from doing
harme by their lies, as they withholde themſelues
farre from receiuing good by our
trueth. For to our profeſſion they minde not
to be brought, they are votaries to the contrarie.
What then ſhall we gaine by diſputing
with them, when they will not bee gained
to the trueth? To our ſelues alreadie
through the great mercie and power of God
and his word, we haue by diſputations made
great gaine within the realme and abroade,
and the ſame gaine increaſeth to the ſaintes
of God, with increaſe of ſorowe and lamentation
to all that yet haue traffique with the
whore of Babylon.Reue. 18. 11. Moreouer in this diſputation

to ouerthrowe the chalengers by
the worde (as often their maſters haue bene,
and they eaſily may bee) what great victory
can it bee ouer two or three of the laſt & leaſt
in ye quarrel? They make accompt to gayne
nothing indeede, yet by falſe report of ſome
that ſtand readie preſt, to poſt away ye newes
of victorie, before there be a ſtroke ſtriken,
they may winne ſome piece of their deſire.
Alſo they think it ſome profit, onely to barke
againſt ye trueth.2. Reg. 18. 36 But whē Rabſhakeh came
from Babylon, and blaſphemed at the gates
of Ieruſalem, good Ezechias following the
rule of Salomon commanded,Prou. 26. 4. ſaying, Anſwere
ye him not. And I pray you, who of
vs woulde in the things of this life yeelde to
an euill minded man, that he ſhould enter an
action for the things, whereof we haue the
right and quiet poſſeſſion? But here the pretenſed
Catholiques are wiſe in their generation.
For when did they graunt to a free
diſputation, or to haue any ſermons made
by them of the religion, but beeing enforced
thereunto? Yea, at this very time, howſoeuer
this Champion and ſome others challenge
and call for diſputation, yet their
forerunners, and fathers in Poperie refuſe
the ſame. With what forehead then can

theſe Ieſuites demaund of vs, that themſelues
will not graunt? Or ſeeing it hath
bene graunted at Auſpurge, and at Poiſſy
and els where, and they gained nothing by
the graunt, why ſhould they call the Miniſters
to an vnorderly diſputation, from their
ordinarie charge: wherein beſide other dueties
of their miniſterie, they ſoundly confute
by the plaine word of God, as occaſion
is offred, euen the chiefeſt arguments that
the enemie can alledge? As for the trial theſe
Ieſuits wil make, it ſhalbe wt falſe weights,
and meaſures,Prou. 20. 23. which are an abomination to
the Lord: while, after their cuſtome, they
diſpute with vnlearned and peeuiſh diſtinctions,
falſe arguments, abſurd interpretatiōs,
plauſible notwithſtanding to them that haue
a foreſtalled iudgement againſt the trueth.
But S.2. Tim. 2. 23. Paul warneth vs to auoide thē that trouble the Church with ſuch diſputations
and contentions.Tit. 3. 9, 10. For it is euident that the purpoſe of theſe Ieſuites is but to caſt in
matter of griefe to the godly, when they
ſee ſo bolde enterpriſes of the enemie, not
at the walles of the citie, but euen in the
market place: and, as by a blaſing ſtarre,
to prognoſticate ſome further matter to
the Papiſt and time ſeruer: but moſt of

all to diſturbe the peace of the Church, and
to make the people ſtagger in religion, as
many of them, as by diligent hearing of the
worde haue not attained to the certeine loue
of the trueth. Neuertheleſſe, although I
thinke it inconuenient in a ſettled eſtate, to
haue the trueth of God, and her Maieſties
moſt godly proceedings called into diſputation
by theſe men, who are her alienated ſubiectes,
and in this maner againſt a ſingular
peace: yet vpon other circumſtances, as diſputations
haue bene heretofore graunted, ſo
they may agayne. For not wee, but the Papiſtes
refuſe lawfull diſputation: not we, but
they feele and confeſſe that they get nothing
thereby.R. Maffeus in Iudam. Watſon and others at home. The inconueniencie is that, which
I note in the ſeditious practiſe of this man,
and his confederates. Otherwiſe the common
wealth hath more cauſe then ye Church
to dreade their forces. Wee ſeeke not to eſche
we any ſnare they can laye: we feare not
their euidence, or doubt of our owne title.
They haue had and may haue the libertie of
their pen: if theſe Ieſuites haue any thing
that their maſters had not, or which our
fathers in the Goſpell haue not anſwered,
let thē lay it downe in writing wt true forme
of argument, (which is the moſt certeine

tryall, & of greateſt iudgemēt) & in writing,
by the grace of God, they ſhalbe anſwered.
For howe litle we feare them, & howe much
they feare vs, it appeareth by that they ſuffer
not a ſcroule of religion, or tending neuer ſo
litle that way, in any mās hand, but it is preſently
a matter for the inquiſition. Yea, they
withhold the very word it ſelfe. Wheras we
find yt the very view of their outward Rome
with her abominations, and the inward ſeeing
into yt heart of popiſh religion, with her
abſurdities, haue made many, as well groſſe
Papiſts, as others indifferent betwene both
religions, to ſtand reſolued in the trueth, and
to acquaint themſelues with the cleare and
comfortable doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt, after
the execrable ſuperſtitions of the Pope once
throughly knowen.
            But nowe to come to his letters, I finde
(to ſpeake generally) that they haue a preface
to nine articles: the preface and articles
being to the ſame purpoſe. For all is in effect
thus much: that he hath taken a farre &
dangerous iourney, boldly & plainely to offer
himſelf a procter to mainteine againſt al
commers in diſputation, at the commandement
of the Pope, the Popiſh religion, & to
confute the doctrine of Chriſt Ieſus. This

is the chalenge. The promiſe is to perſuade
euen Prince & people profeſſing the trueth,
that they are in error: as if both Prince and
people had not ſufficient aſſurance of their
faith: or the chiefeſt Papiſtes did not from
day to day receiue great ouerthrowes both
in diſputatiō and writing. For (to the glory
of God in the miniſterie of the Goſpell be it
remembred, and to the heart griefe of al Romiſh
Catholiques) the Lord addeth to the
true Catholique Church of his elect, great
numbers continually: & to thoſe that openly
profeſſe the religion, many notable cities,
which lately were firſt in the zeale of Poperie,
and are nowe not the laſt of them that
embrace the trueth: notwithſtanding ſo many
artes and inſolencies vſed to ſtoppe the
courſe and increaſe of the Goſpell. Therefore,
if the Lord do not puniſh our contempt
of the word we profeſſe, what hope may our
Chalenger haue, that the Pope ſhall recouer
others, when he can not keepe his own,
no not them that lately carried the canopie
ouer his head?
            In the preface, ye Ieſuite reporteth his pilgrimage
out of Germany and Boeme into
Englād his deare coūtry, at the cōmādemēt
of his ſuperiours yt ſent him, where he giueth

a note of his danger & of his obedience. But
touching his obedience, it commeth to be noted
afterward. As for his dāgers, I ſee them
not ſo great as he pretēdeth. For I dout not
but he was wel contented that this place fell
to his lot: & that he wayted a time to aduenture
himſelfe, when there was, in his opinion,
leſſe danger then heretofore, & more hope
of ſome golden daye. But the man is come
into this noble realme for the glorie of God
and the benefite of ſoules. What glory of
God cā come by a man ſworne to Antichriſt
againſt Gods glory: ſworne to the Councill
of Trent againſt the peace of this kingdom?
What care of ſoules can hee haue, which
would withdraw their foode, & in enraged, &
therfore would enrage others with ye cup of
poiſon wherwith the whore of Babylō hath
heretofore poyſoned the princes of ye earth?Reuel. 17. 2.
What benefite of ſoules can poore ſoules
looke for at his hand, that in place of the moſt
cleare light of the Goſpel, would bring in a
greater plague of darkenes, then that of Egypt?
This is the effect of the Ieſuites loue
which he would ſhew to his deare coūtry after
ſo many yeeres abſence out of her ſight.
            Being now arriued, he keepeth his perſon
ſecret, that he may vnderhand & ſafely ſowe

matter of hereſie & ſedition: but by letters he
maketh his purpoſe knowen with cunning
ſpeaches. Why he keepeth himſelfe ſecret ſo
long as he may, one reaſon is to auoide, that
hee would ſeeme to make none accompt of:
namely a iuſt puniſhment of his contempts
againſt ye law. Another reaſon is (as I ſayd)
to make way for the Pope priuately, becauſe
he dareth not effect his meſſage opēly. That
he deliuereth his minde in writing, not as a
priuate letter in one copie, but as a publique
matter in many copies all abroade, it is to
entertaine ſliding mindes with vaine hope:
to caſt ſome diſgrace vpon the cauſes of religion,
& all by a promiſe of that which all the
Ieſuites in the worlde can not performe,
though this Chāpion alone doth vndertake
it. Such vndertakers are like ynough to ouertake
ſome ſimple ones, not yet cleanſed
from the dregges of Properie: otherwiſe it
will be hard to preuayle with men of vnderſtanding,
who euer ſuſpect them of bankrupting,
that aſke ſo much credit of their owne
word wtout any ſureties. Thus it appeareth
that this Ieſuites promiſes, & crauing credite
to be beleeued in ſo great things, is but
to withdrawe many of her Maieſties ſubiectes
from the loue of the Goſpel, whereby

they are taught to their owne ſaluation: and
conſequently from regard of them ſelues, &
from obedience to her Maieſties moſt noble
and godly proceedings. Yet as if he did not
minde this matter, he doth inſinuate his own
danger for weldoing: as if it were like, that,
notwithſtanding his cloſe dealing, as much
to keepe himſelfe as he may, this buſie world
might finde him out ſooner or later, and interrupt
a buſie felow, & this watchful world
would finde him out for all his watchfulnes.
But I would this ſuſpicious worlde would
more ſuſpect them that come to vs in ſheeps
clothing, being inwardly rauening wolues.
It is to ſmall purpoſe that he layeth downe
the confeſſion of the matter without preſentment
of the man. For if the mā were founde,
there is matter ynough againſt him without
his confeſſion. Yet he would be accounted a
good dealer, and to ſaue his examiners from
ſome labour when he ſhall haply be founde
and brought to examination. Neuertheleſſe
if in theſe letters al be not plainely confeſſed,
that may iuſtly be implyed, then he hath not
eaſed his examiners from the practiſe of
their wit in finding out more daungerous
practiſes concealed, then are thoſe, which
are here expreſſed to cloke the reſt. It followeth

to ſpeake of his articles layd downe
directly, truly, reſolutely to opē his purpoſe.
            
            1 In the firſt hee confeſſeth his calling,
That, albeit vnworthy, hee is a prieſt of the
Romiſh church, which he doth falſly honour
with the name of the Catholique Church.
Such as ye Church is, ſuch is his prieſthood
alſo: the Church Antichriſtian, & the prieſts
thereof miniſters of Antichriſt, taking vpon
them againſt the manifeſt worde of God to
offer vp a ſacrifice for the quicke & dead. An
intolerable blaſphemie againſt the all ſufficient
ſacrifice of the Lord Ieſus,Heb. 9. 26. & 10. 12. & 18. offring him
ſelfe once for all & for euer. But, to iudge an
euill ſeruant by his owne mouth, hee that is
vnworthy of ſo foule a prieſthood, what ſhal
he be worthy of? Not by the great mercie,
but by the iuſt iudgement of God worthy of
that that is worſe: worthy of a place among
the newe and deteſtable Ieſuites.
            In this place, becauſe theſe ſcorpiōs, ye Ieſuites
are vnknowē amōg vs in England, I
haue occaſiō to ſpeake of thē, yt ye godly may
take heed of their leauen, & that their louers
may iuſtly be aſhamed of ſuch loue.Ieſuites. The Ieſuites
are a kinde of Regulars profeſſing obediēce
to ye Pope & their General, at whoſe
ſēding they muſt forſooth of free coſt preach,

whereſoeuer they be ſent. They had an obſcure
cōceptiō about fiue & forty yeres paſt,
not long after ye reſtoring of the Goſpel, one
Layolas a Spaniard being the father of thē.
But they had not their ful creation & cōmiſſion,
till within theſe thirtie yeres by Pope
Paulus quartus. Before that time al Friers
profeſſed the rule of ſome one Frier, as the
Frāciſcans the rule of Francis, the Dominicans,
ye rule of Dominic, or ſome one ſuch
like Patrō. Afterward when euill colors bewrayed
thē ſelues at a good light, & the preaching
of ye Goſpel brought popiſh orders into
open iudgement, then many papiſts were
aſhamed, yt there was not an order after an
honeſt name, whereupō ſome boldly aduētured
to borow ye holy name of Ieſus, & called
thēſelues the ſocietie of Ieſus, or Ieſuites.
Nowe it was not ſo vile a thing before, to
name thēſelues by ſome baſe & beggerly frier,
but it was afterwarde more hautie pride,
whē they preſumed to abuſe ye name proper
to Ieſus,Philip. 2. 9. at which name all the knees of all
things in heauē & earth muſt bow down thē
               ſelues.
This mighty & glorious name, theſe
Ieſuites bring in, to giue credite to their
weake & ſhamefull order, reckening ye Lord
Ieſus himſelf amōg Friers, withal making

him but a Patrone of the yongeſt cōpany of
Friers, & ſo to ſtand behind Francis & Dominick.
Theſe new Ieſuites muſt be called
ye ſocietie of Ieſus, as if they alone were in
the ſocietie of Ieſus, & all other vtterly excluded:
whereas rather theſe Ieſuites are
excluded for their hereſies, & they onely included
in the felowſhip and body of Ieſus
Chriſt, which folow his doctrine, and haue ye
anointing of his Spirite, contenting them
ſelues with the name of Chriſtians, made to
them expreſly lawfull and honorable by the
word of God.Act. 11. 26. Wherefore theſe that corruptly
haue called themſelues Ieſuites, may
be called Iebuſites, without offence to the
Lord Ieſus, & moſt aptly in reſpect of their
dealings. As their name, ſo chalenged to
themſelues, is abſurd, ſeruing them only to
make a ſhew of holineſſe, and to deceiue the
poore people: ſo their practiſes are yet more
deteſtable. For they gather learning onely,
as the ſpider gathereth poyſon, that they
may infect the heart & ſtomake of their diſciples.
And as good Phyſicians prepare a
countrepoyſon to ſaue life, ſo theſe in a
contrarie courſe prouide not a countre venim,
but venim it ſelfe againſt the wholſome
meate, euen againſt the worde of God, the

foode of our ſoules, whereby they are nouriſhed
& preſerued into life euerlaſting. Theſe
Monkiſh Friers, or Frierly Monkes (O
heauy iudgement of God) theſe Iebuſites I
ſay, from whoſe contagiō we haue bene free
euer hitherto, they haue lately aduētured into
England, as ſkoutes to the Iriſh rebels,
and prepare to eſtabliſh againe popiſh ſuperſtitions.
But let vs yet further examine theſe
Ieſuites, that plague all nations where they
come,Exod. 8. 2. as the Frogges and Caterpillers of
Egypt did. Our baſtard Papiſts in Englād,
that are neither true to vs, nor faithfull to
their owne ſide, woulde ſeeme aſhamed of
many groſſe points in Poperie, ſaying, they
verely hold Images, Pardons, Praying to
Saints, & ſeruice in an vnknowen tongue,
as wicked things. But let thē & all true profeſſors
alſo know, that ye Papiſts hold Steuen
Gardiners rule: Yelde but in haly water
(ſaid he to Cardinall Poole that bluſſhed at
ſome enormities in popery) and yeeld in all.
Thereupon Papiſtes yeeld in nothing, howſoeuer
our home Papiſts thinke or diſſemble
the matter. This is proued by the open
dealing of the Ieſuites: for there is nothing,
be it neuer ſo impious, neuer ſo abſurde, yea
though in their owne conſcience neuer ſo

contrary to trueth & commō ſenſe, but they
defend it in a booke written wt publike conſent,
& called,Cenſur. Colon. ye 
               Cenſure of Colen. Hitherto
it hath bin truely declared, yt ye Ieſuites are
wicked Monkiſh Friers, yt they labour for
learning to aboliſh learning, that they ouerlay
the nations where they come, that they
defend all abſurdities of the popiſh Church.
But for proofe of their abſurd and blaſphemous
doctrines,Donati Gotuiſi lib. de fide Ieſu & Ieſuitarum. out of a treatiſe cōcerning
this matter, I haue enterlaced their owne
words, as they are to be foūd in ye ſame book,
& in other of their writings, adioining to euery
article of their doctrine, ye cleane cōtrary
doctrine out of ye word of God, as foloweth.
            1 It is not ſinne whatſoeuer is againſt
the Lawe of God. Cenſure of Colen, leafe
44. Contrary to ye word of God. 1. Ioh. 3.4.
The tranſgreſſion of the Law is ſinne.
            
            2. Cōcupiſcence remaining in the regenerate,
although it be againſt the lawe of
God, yet it is not ſinne properly in it ſelf, or
of it owne nature. Cenſ. Col. 38. &c. in the
hādling of Caniſius Catechiſme, leaf. 184.
A contrary doctrine is taught by Chriſt,
Mat. 5. 28. I ſay vnto you, yt whoſoeuer ſhal
ſee a womā to luſt after her, he hath already
committed adulterie with her in his heart.
            
            
               
3 The firſt motions of luſt are without
hurt of ſinne. Cenſ. Col. Fol. 54. 89. contrary
to the tenth commandement, Thou ſhalt
not couet. Exod. 20. 17.
            4 The holy Scripture is a doctrine vnperfect,
maymed, lame, not conteining all
things neceſſarie to faith & ſaluation. Cenſ.
Col. fol. 220. cōtrarie to that place of Paul,
2. Tim. 3. 16, 17. Al ye Scripture is giuen by
inſpiration of God, & is profitable to teache,
to confute, to correct & to inſtruct in iuſtice,
that the man of God may bee perfect, and
throughly inſtructed to euery good worke.
            5 The want of the holy Scriptures muſt
be ſupplied by peecing it out with traditions.
Cenſ. Col. 220. Contrary to a Lawe
in Moſes. Deut. 4. 2. Thou ſhalt not adde to
the wordes which I ſpeake to thee, neither
ſhalt thou take from them.
            6 The holy Scripture is a noſe of waxe.
Cenſ. Col. 117. Contrary to the wordes of
Dauid, The law of the Lord is perfect, conuerting
the ſoule. Pſal. 19. 7.
            7 The reading of the holy Scripture is
not onely not profitable, but many wayes
very hurtfull to the Church. Cenſ. Col. 21.
Chriſt deliuereth a cōtrary note, Mat. 22. 29.
Ye erre, not knowing the Scriptures, nor

               parte of Chriſtendome, or heatheneſſe,
vpon lyke aſsignation, I doubt not (as I
ſayde before) but that hee was more readie
and ioyous to bee ſent into his owne countrey.
But what authoritie hath the Pope
to ſend out ſwarmes of Ieſuites into all the
worlde? Are they not content falſely to
make him Peters ſucceſſor and head of the
Church, but that they will alſo allowe him
to apoynt theſe newe Apoſtles, to goe out
into al ye worlde, namely theſe Ieſuites, enemies
to the doctrine of the true Apoſtles:
yea, and that in nūber not ſo fewe (I thinke)
as xii. hundred for xii. becauſe he would haue
more to pull downe, then Chriſt ſent abroad
to build vp withall?
            3 His aſſigned charge is laide downe
in the third article, which is, of free coſt to
preach the Goſpell, and miniſter the ſacraments.
Cunning wordes to cloke an euill
matter. For he ſpeaketh in words fit for the
Goſpel, to auoyd the vſuall and proper ſpeaches
of his Popiſh prieſthod and order,
that are full of derogation agaynſt the
trueth. For they preach not the Goſpell, but
againſt the Goſpell, in the traditions and
ordinances of the Pope. Their miniſterie
of the Sacramentes is the ſaying or

ſinging Maſſe, and corrupt baptiſme, with
other actions which they call Sacraments,
but are none by any warrant out of the word
of God. For in their definitions of theſe
other fiue falſly named Sacraments, they
ſurcharge their margents with great ſhewe
of proofes,Catechiſ. Caniſii. but almoſt all are authorities of
men: there are very fewe places of ſcripture
quoted, and thoſe manifeſtly peruerted.
The wordes that folowe in his charge, To
inſtruct the ſimple, reforme ſinners, confute
errors, and in briefe to crye an alarme
ſpirituall againſt foule, vice and proude ignorance,
howe great ſhewe doe they make
in the monſter.Cic. offic. 1. 
               Tullie noteth thoſe byers
and ſellers that gayne but litle, except they
lie much.Apo. 18. 11. Euen ſo theſe marchants that bye
and ſell with the woman that ſitteth vpon
many waters, in whoſe forehead this name
is branded,Apoc. 17. 5. 
               A myſterie: Great Babylon,
the mother of whoredomes and abominations
of the earth: they gayne nothing
but by their ſhameleſſe lyes. For that which
they ſet out to ſale for inſtruction, is deſtruction
touching the fayth: their reformation
is a deformation: and in their kingdome it
may ſeeme waſte labour, ſeeing they haue a
ſhorter way to woorke, in blotting that out

ſpel. He hath taken vpon him a ſpeciall kinde
of warfare vnder the banner of obedience.
If it be of obedience to God vnder Chriſtes
banner, it is common to all Chriſtians: if
it be of obedience to ſome new falſe Apoſtleſhip
of the Popes creation, it is as much diſobedience
to God, as it is obedience to thoſe
monkiſh ordinances. What plaine dealing
then can this be? Vnder the title of the glorious
banner of obedience, the Ieſuite recommendeth
to the Lordes of the Counſell his
diſobedience to God, his diſobedience to the
trueth, and obedience onely to his Fathers,
chiefely ye Pope,2. Theſ. 2. 4. the moſt blaſphemous enemie
of God,His bulles. & moſt open enemie to her Maieſtie both in his conſiſtorie,His forces in Ireland. & in the field.Iere. 7. 22. Obedience
acceptable to God is according to his word,Mat. 15. 9. not according to ye traditions & ordināces of mā. As for ye Pope, he holdeth vp
a bāner of rebelliō alwaies againſt ye kingdō
of Ieſus Chriſt: & many times alſo againſt
ye kingdome of Princes. Vnder this banner
he hath lately placed theſe Ieſuites wt ſome
armour, finding all other vnlettered and idle
Monkes & Friers, not ſo fit for ye campe, as
for the cloiſter. If this votarie hath reſigned
great intereſt, or manye poſſibilities of
welth, honor & felicity, (as he pretēdeth) thē
               
the iudgemēt of God was ye heauier againſt
him, yt he ſhould ſell all he had, not to bye the
precious pearle recōmēded by Chriſt,Mat. 13. 46. but to purchaſe the marke of the beaſt deliuered by
Antichriſt.Reuel. 13. 16. For yt was not the way to make a
friend of vnrighteous Mammon, but ſo to
forſake ye bleſſings of this life, that thereby he
forſooke alſo ye bleſſings of the life to come:
except the ſerpent obteine mercie, & caſt his
ſkin. Neuertheleſſe this vngodly loſſe is alledged
as a great gaine to his euill cauſe.
            2 The ſecond & third article are one in effect:
for the ſecōd in ſubſtāce doth only & out
of order make mentiō of the place where he
is to exerciſe his charge, before the charge be
expreſſed. To folow him & his order, in this
article he mentioneth his returne into England,
as for great good: but paſſeth by his departure
thence with ſilence, as carying a
plaine note of much euil. He taketh his voyage
from Prage to Rome, and thence into
England being commanded by a warrant
from heauen and an oracle of Chriſt. Great
wordes emporting a great ambaſſage. But
leaſt any ſhould take it, that hee receiued his
warrant in a dreame, or hearde a voyce in
deede out of heauen, he expoundeth him ſelf,
yet with wordes doubtfull, as oracles

among the Gentiles were wont to ſpeake.
For whether hee vnderſtande the generall
Prouoſt of the Ieſuites onely, or whether
hee vnderſtande the Pope him ſelfe, it is
ſomewhat doubtfull. If he meant not the
generall Prouoſt of the Ieſuites, (which I
rather thinke) then hee auoyded the name of
Pope, as iuſtly odious euery where for his
abominable ſuperſtitions, pride, and tyrannie
ouer mens liues and conſciences: but in
England moſt of all,His moſt inſolent and malicious Bull. 1569. anſwered by M. Bullinger for that he hath againe
and againe throwen out his thunderbolts of
curſe both againſt the Prince, and agaynſt
the people. Wherin, by the way, let vs looke
to the effect of thoſe curſes. Did not ye Lord
turne them into bleſſings? Did it not appeare
euen to the Papiſts howe vnderſerued
the curſes were, and howe litle the blaſphemouſly
ſuppoſed omnipotencie of the Pope
can doe? Was not Salomons Prouerbe
iuſtified in thoſe Bulles?Prou. 26. 2. As a byrde wandreth,
and a ſwallowe flyeth away, ſo doeth
a curſe that is vnderſerued.
            But to returne to ye doubtful ſpeach, whether
he meant the Pope, or the Ieſuites maſter,
what blaſphemie is it to attribute ye authoritie
of a warrant from heauen, and the
voyce of Chriſt, to a man whoſe breath is in

his noſtrelles, and whoſe ſinnes reach vp to
heauen, calling for vengeance? Doe we now
perſwade and preach men?Galat. 1. 10. or rather, as the
Apoſtle ſaith, Ought not euen the Apoſtles
themſelues to preach Chriſt Ieſus ye Lorde,
and them ſelues ſeruantes?3. Cor. 4. 5. Saint Paul
woulde not preach otherwiſe then the Goſpel,
no not at the voyce of an Angell from
heauen:Galat. 1. 8, 9. and theſe come to preach Antichriſtianitie
at the voyce of the man of ſinne.
Therefore, how are all men, eſpecially they
whom the Lorde hath exalted to his place of
iuſtice, howe are they to take diligent heede
of theſe men, and of the matter they bring,
much more dangerous thē the former buls?
If the Popes worde be to them a warrant
from heauen, and an oracle of Chriſt, then
at his word they muſt inuade kingdomes,
throwe downe eſtates, change gouernementes,
roote out the Goſpell, and plant ignorance,
with all other their beggerly and
wicked ſuperſtitions that accōpanie the Popiſh
doctrine. It foloweth that the Pope is
alwayes reſiant at Rome: but ye Ieſuite muſt
remember that hee may remooue his chaire
to Sibyllas denne, or any other place by the
doctrine of the Ieſuites. As for his readie
mynde to haue gone ioyouſly into anie
               
the power of God.
            8 That the righteous mā liueth by ſaith,
he hath it not in Chriſt, but by his owne
workes. Cenſ. Col. 118. A contrary place in
Paul. Rom. 11. 6. If righteouſneſſe bee of
workes, it is no more grace.
            
            9 Men doe ſurely hope that euerlaſting
life ſhalbe giuen them, but they do not beleeue
it: now hope often faileth, otherwiſe
it were no hope. Cenſ. Col. 108. A contrary
place. Heb. 6. 19. Hope is ye ſure anchor of ye
ſoule: & Rō. 5. 5. Hope maketh not aſhamed.
            
            10 The Scripture in deede neuer teacheth
the inuocation of Saints, yet we muſt
beleeue, receiue & hold it Fol. 230. Contrary
to this is the place. Eſai. 63. 16. Thou art
our Father, and Abraham knewe vs not: and
Iſrael was ignorant of vs.
            
            11 Chriſt neuer ſaid to the lay men, Do
this, in the remēbrance of mee. Fol. 302. S.
Paul doth plainely confute this. 1. Cor. 11.
            12 Traditiōs are of equal authoritie with
the worde of God: we muſt beleeue them,
thogh they be manifeſtly againſt the ſcripture.
Fo. 230. Cōtrary to this ſaith Chriſt, In
vaine do mē worſhip me, teaching doctrines
that are but the traditions of men. Mat. 15. 9.
            13 We muſt worſhip the image of Chriſt

with like honour that wee doe the holy
bookes of the Goſpel. Fol. 66. Againſt this
ſaith S. Paul, 2. Cor. 6. 15. What agreement
is there betweene the Church of God
and Idoles?
            
            Theſe and many other blaſphemies doe
the Ieſuites maintaine. There is not a ſpider,
nor a ſpiders web in any corner of the
Popes breſt, but theſe Doctors will hold it
no leſſe holy, then that which commeth out
of Chriſtes breſt. But doe not euen the Papiſts
that know theſe things, eaſely ſee, how
the Ieſuites in theſe doctrines bewray the
ſpirit of Antichriſt,Apoc. 16. 14. that went out into all the
world to deceiue and deſtroy? Surely none
can ſee,Acts. 16. 14. except the holye Ghoſt open their
heart:Gen. 19. 16. none can depart out of Sodom, except
the Lorde doe drawe them. Although I
haue bene long in this matter, yet for a further
diſcouery, and for plaine warrant that
the ſect of Ieſuites is moſt wretched, at the
ende of my anſwere I haue added a trāſlation
of a booke,Colloquium Ieſuiticum. wherein ye ſect is notably diſcouered
by a teſtimonie out of their own heart.
            Nowe to returne to Campions wordes:
He hath bene a Ieſuite theſe viii. yeeres. A
long time to ſee ſo many enormities, & in al
ye ſpace not to returne from them to the Go-ſpel,

with a ſhort pardon, which cannot be rooted
out but by much preaching. Their confutation
of errors is in deede a confutation of
the trueth, and a confirmation of lies, as appeareth
nowe more then the lyght of the
Sunne at noone. For as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh
of them,2. Tim. 3. 8. They ſhall preuayle no longer:
their madneſſe is made euident to all
men, as the inchantment of Iannes and
Iambres. As theſe withſtoode Moſes: ſo
the Ieſuites reſiſt Ieſus Chriſt, & the lyght
of the Goſpel, men full of ambition in their
corrupt mindes, and enemies to the Croſſe
of Chriſt. That he thinketh his poore countreymen
abuſed with proude ignorance, I
maruell what hee meaneth to blame ignorance
in any. For we that profeſſe the Goſpell,
lament and crye out againſt ignorance:
our aduerſaries they alwayes haue made
much of it, as the mother of deuotion: yea
euen the moſt famous order of the Franciſcan
Fryers, that extol Francis their Father,
and their order aboue the heauen of heauens,
they haue a rule that the vnlettered among
them ſhoulde not care to learne letters.
But the Ieſuites, they profeſſe and teache
knowledge. Let vs ſee, what knowledge,
and for what cauſe. It is the very ſame

knowledge which ye ſerpent performed:Gen. 3. 1. who
promiſed the knowledge of euill, to take away
the knowledge of good: who promiſed
life, and brought in death. Therein alſo the
cauſe appeareth: for this maſter promiſeth
to roote out proude ignorance, minding in
deede to roote out the fyncere knowledge of
the Goſpell,Rom. 1. 16. which is the power of God to
ſaluation. Here the Ieſuite moſt wickedly
calleth the knowledge of the Goſpel, ignorance:
and the ſtedfaſt confeſſion of our faith
& hope that wauereth not,Hebr. 10. 22, 23. he termeth pride.
But Poperie, which this rooter out of the
Goſpell woulde plant in place thereof, is in
deede proude ignorance, and a treading vnder
foote of ye blood of Chriſt. For it proudly
refuſeth to heare, and reioyceth to bee without
vnderſtanding. Therefore Poperie is
that proud ignorance that muſt not reenter,
and the diſeaſe therof remaining in many, is
that which muſt be more & more rooted out.
For, though it promiſe all good things,
what one good thing can that religiō bring,
which ioyneth the merittes of man with the
merittes of Chriſt, which matcheth, or ouermatcheth
the worde of God with traditions,
the commandement of God with the countermaund
of the Pope, the Temple of God

with Idoles? Which doctrines and many other
are the doctrines of men, as contrary to
ye holy worde of God, as is darknes to light,
& infidelitie to faith in Chriſt Ieſus. What,
I ſay, can the Ieſuites religion bring, but
ſome vnbleſſed bleſſings of a mā, which draw
after them the euerlaſting curſes of God?
The ſunne of righteouſnes, that ſhineth into
our hearts, being thus taken awaye, this
Ieſuite would bring vs to ſome knowledge
of the woman that is arayed with purple &
ſcarlet,Apoc. 17. 4. & ouerlaid wt gold, precious ſtones,
and pearle. Which woman is ſet out vnto
the carnall eye, & ſenſe, by ſuch allurements
to recouer ye kings of ye earth her old louers,
that ſhe may make thē drunken againe with
her cup of fornications. Therefore in the bowels
of Ieſus I beſeech all my deare countrey
men not to be deceiued by this Ieſuite,
who bringeth into Englād a worſhip cleane
contrary to the worſhip of God. For Gods
worſhip is in Spirit and trueth:Ion. 4. 23. 24 and poperie
is in gold and ſiluer & pearle, and crucifixes,
and Agnus deis, all for the eye, and to ſnare
the heart of a carnall man, bewitching it
with ſo great gliſtering of the painted harlot.
It is alſo in all kynde of muſike to fyll
the eare with delight, and in all excellent

perfumes to pleaſe the ſmell. Theſe and all
the reſt are carnall intiſements, to quenche
the Spirite, bewraying that Poperie worketh
in vs, not a feeling or iudgement of
Gods ſeruice in Spirite, but of fleſhly pleaſures,
to cary vs away to the fornications of
that ſtrumpet of all the worlde. Nowe as
Popery is not a worſhip of God in Spirit,
ſo is it not ioyned with any worſhip of God
in trueth, but in ye canons & decrees of men,
who, to rayſe vp their owne kingdome, goe
about to throw down both the kingdome of
men, and (which is their chiefeſt practiſe) the
kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt. Therefore it
was too broade to charge the Goſpel nowe
preached, as an abuſing of his poore countreymen:
whereas he himſelfe ſeeth wherewith
they are many of them abuſed from
Rome, and by theſe cloſe meſſengers from
thence: namely with moſt fooliſh and beggerly
traſhe, as Bulles, pardons, holie
graines, copper pieces of Agnus dei, with
ſuch other childiſh inuentions, wherein (if a
ſtrong ſpirit of error did not reigne in ſome)
I maruell that the beggerlineſſe and follie
of their religion is not more eſpied and had
in a perpetuall deteſtation.
            4 The fourth article doeth ſhew as much

trueth in his words, as is in his religiō. For
in wordes hee doeth openly deny that which
is moſt apparant in his doinges, and moſt
neceſſary for his cauſe. He neuer had mind,
and was ſtreightly forbidden by his father
that ſent him, to deale in any reſpect with
any matters of ſtate, &c. Here he doeth earneſtly
affirme that which muſt not be beleeued:
here he doeth perſwadingly craue that
which muſt not at al be giuē him. He would
be thought no enemie of the ſtate, no dealer
with the common wealth or policie: & rendreth
a reaſon, (if you wil beleue him,) It apperteineth
not to his vocation: and from it
he doeth gladly eſtrange, and ſequeſter his
thoughtes. But all theſe wordes are as if a
man woulde manifeſtly wounde his neighbour
to the heart, and yet in the deede doing
cry out, ſaying, I doe not ſo much as thinke
him any harme. For he that ſmiteth our religion,
woundeth our common wealth: becauſe
our bleſſed eſtate of policie ſtandeth
in defence of religion, and our moſt bleſſed
religion laboureth in the mayntenance
of the common wealth. Religion and policie
in Englande are, through Gods ſingular
bleſſings, preſerued together in life, as
with one ſpirite: hee that doeth take awaye

the life of the one, doeth procure the death of
the other. Neyther can any Ieſuite from
Prage or Rome, come ouer to confute and
alter religion, but hee muſt attempt the
change of the ſtate, to the lamentable deſtruction
of the lande. Hee can not agayne
bring in the Pope, but he muſt take awaye
from her royall Maieſtie, her iuſt ſupreme
ſoueraintie, and depriue her at one clappe
of the authoritie ſhee hath ouer all perſons
and ordinances. She muſt haue nothing
to doe with the bodie or goods of the Clergie
(as they ſpeake:) ſhee muſt ſeeke a
reconciliation from the Popes curſe: her
chiefe lawes muſt bee no lawes: the preſent
gouernement, that I may not ſaye
the preſent gouerner, muſt bee changed,
a newe eſtabliſhed, and made ſubiect to the
checke of the Prieſt of Rome. Notwithſtanding
this man that woulde ouerthrowe
all, woulde make vs beleeue his purpoſe
is to touche nothing. Becauſe he caryeth
no ſworde, he woulde hee thought to cary
no weapon. But is not one trumpet worſe
then many ſwordes? What manifeſt diſſimulation
is then in the champions wordes?
what playne contrarietie? But it is no
new thing: for his whole pamphlet is full of

ſuch monſterous contrarietie, while hee deliuereth
humilitie in ſhewe, but pryde in
deede: agayne, while he vttereth the words
of ſwelling pryde, hauing no matter but
vile and baſe. But Antichriſt and his miniſters
muſt needes learne of their father
his chiefeſt leſſon, which is to lye, that the
ſaying of Chriſt may appeare,Iohn. 8. 44. Satan
is a lyer, and the father of lyes. As for his
reaſon, that thinges of policie appertayne
not to his vocation: although it bee true
in deede, yet it is ſo ſayde onely to couer
his purpoſe, which is to the contrary. For
appertayneth it to Saunders in Irelande
by the ſame oracle, and doeth it not appertayne
to Campion in England? Surely it
doeth apperteyne aſmuch but the open attempt
is not ſo ſafe. Therefore it commeth
here to bee conſidered, that the oracle hath
a double heart and a double tongue, ſet at
large to denye or breake euen an othe made
to one, not of his ſect, and euermore to ſay
and vnſaye, to promiſe, and breake promiſe,
as may make moſt for his deuiliſh
practiſes.
            5. Now foloweth ye execution of his meſſage,
wherein he aſketh with ſhewe of great
humilitie, the thing that bewrayeth his ſingular

                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
pride. For he aloue profeſſeth with a
chalenge in all knowledge, touching his
cauſes, to encounter with all ſortes of learning,
and learned men: and againſt them,
notwithſtanding their ſtrength, and the
ſtrength of their cauſe, to prooue the moſt
weake and languiſhing title of Popiſh religion.
And before whom? Not before ſome
fewe in a corner, but in the light & preſence
of this renowmed eſtate, ſo enriched with
ſingular giftes of learning, experience and
iudgement: namely in the preſence of her
honorable Counſell, before the Doctours,
Maſters, and choyſe men of both the Vniuerſities:
and thirdly before the lawyers
ſpirituall (as he ſpeaketh) and temporall.
But let vs further examine what hee vttereth.
In this place the Ieſuite a man profeſſing
ſo great knowledge knoweth not himſelfe,
he remembreth not in this article, what
he ſolemnly proteſted in the former. For
there he affirmed that he minded not, that
he might not in any reſpect deale with
matters of ſtate: but now as hauing his will
altered and a ſecrete diſpenſatiō againſt the
charge of his fathers, he wil diſcourſe of religiō
ſo far as it toucheth the cōmō wealth
& their nobilities. But out of the abundāce

of the heart,Mat. 12. 34. doth the mouth ſpeaketh, & the
pen writeth. It foloweth, wherof he maketh
moſt account, to try the matter out with the
doctors, & maſters of ech vniuerſity. What
he bringeth from a newe forge, I may more
eaſely geſſe, then determine. But if it be no
more, then his maſters of theſe & all other vniuerſities
haue brought already into their
bookes & diſputations, it is nothing yt long
agoe hath not bene confuted. It may be, not
hauing better reaſons, he preſumeth of him
ſelfe that he hath fayrer colours then they
had, and a ſtronger ſpirite of illuſion to deceiue
and cary away ye preiudicate & inconſtant
hearer againſt reaſon. The manifolde
waies he promiſeth to cōuince by, are profes
inuincible, ſcriptures, &c. If he can prooue
his cauſe by inuincible ſcriptures, it is ſufficient:
there neede no further proofes. But
if he alledge ye ſcriptures for his cauſe,Mat. 4 6. as ſatan
did, & as heretikes doe, vſing ſome of the
words, & leauing the fulnes of the ſentence,
or peruerting ye words to another ſenſe then
the holy Ghoſt deliuereth, then ſhall he preuaile
as Satan did, and his reward ſhalbe among
the falſe prophetes.Councils. Fathers. Stories. As for Councils,
Fathers, and ſtories, they are rather witneſſe
one to another of ſome contrarietie, and all

witneſſes of ye time, howe corruptions crept
into the Church, then authentical iudges in
cauſes of religion. Neuertheleſſe we haue
(if we woulde vſe thē) in their true allegation,
matter ſufficient to confute yt which the
Ieſuite hopeth to confirme by falſe allegation.
Touching places in the fathers to the
contrary, ſome of thē are alredy condemned
of baſtardie, being places manifeſtly forged:
other not gyltie of forgery, howe great ſo euer
the authors of thē were, yet it is euident
they were but men: & that the word of God
alone hath credit of & for it ſelfe:2. Tim. 3. 16. Pſal. 119. 130. that ye word
of God alone is ye touchſtone, & fining pot yt
ſheweth ye leaſt corruption, the leaſt cōmixture
of corruption: much more the palpable
errors of ye new Ieſuites. Moreouer for the
latter Councils, becauſe ye Pope reigned ouer
thē, he, being now arraigned, is no lawfull
witneſſe in his owne caſe. And becauſe
theſe Councils make warre againſt the authoritie
of Gods word,Eſai. 11. 4. 2. Theſ. 2. 8. ye Spirit of ye Lordes
mouth, which is his word, ſhal proceed more
and more to conſume them. Afterwarde the
Ieſuite, not ſo carefull to performe, as to
moue great expectation by promiſe, draweth
mē to looke for profes of his religiō, where
profes are no more to be founde, then a ſure

foundatiō vpon the ſande, or a place of light
in the kingdome of darkenes. So impoſſible
are the things that now he vndertaketh.
For among other proofes, he vndertaketh
to auow ye faith of the Catholike Church,
by naturall and morall reaſon, which are
two great enemies of true religion, & two
great nourſes of Atheiſme and hereſie. The
Apoſtle teacheth this, that the naturall man
can not diſcerne the thinges of God,1. Cor. 2. 14. they
ſeeme fooliſhnes to him. Dauid finding the
rebellion and ignorance of a naturall heart,Pſal. 51. 10.
craued a cleane heart to bee created within
him, and a newe ſpirit: newe, not onely in
affections, but in vnderſtanding, that hee
myght learne the iudgementes of God. For
want of this heart,1. Kin. 11. 5. 1. Kin. 3. 12. Salomon was a ſtranger
from God a long time, notwithſtanding
he had a natural and morall wiſdome aboue
any that euer reigned in Ieruſalem.Mat. 16. 16. Peter
coulde not receiue the reuelation of fayth
from fleſh and blood: but this Ieſuite can
deliuer it from thence. Therefore the religion
which Ieſuites woulde plant againe in
England, is not according to ye holy Scriptures
giuē by inſpiration of God,2. Tim. 3. 16. but according
to the carnall ſenſe of vntaught men,
which muſt haue gods to goe before themExod. 32. 1.
               
that is, they muſt haue a religion allowing
gods, & images, & worſhippings in ye feeling
and wiſdome of a naturall man, that can not
looke with the eyes of fayth vp into heauen:
nor with ſpirituall iudgement into ye great
myſterie of godlineſſe conteined in the holy
ſcriptures.1. Tim. 3. 16. Laſt of all this chalenger, as one
brought vp in ye Innes of court, & at Padua
in the middeſt of ſpiritual lawyers, vndertaketh
to iuſtifie his ſaid faith by commō wiſdome
of law, ſtanding yet in force & practiſed.
Wherein againe he promiſeth to paye
out that, which he neuer receiued in. But if
he hath borowed ſomewhat out of the lawes
to ſaue his credit, let vs examine howe farre
it may go for paiment. Among other lawes
he relieth moſt vpon the Canon lawe,Canon lawe. and
ſome ſuch fragments thereof as yet he thinketh
to ſtand in ſome force. To ſpeake therfore
of the Canon law, many matters therein
are ſo groſſe, that euen many Papiſtes,
which otherwiſe haue a harlots forehead, cā
not read them without bluſhing. Neuertheleſſe,
out of a ſea of ſuch abſurdities, there is
a booke extant,Sententiae Halleri ex decretis canon. collectae yt hath gathered many notable
places to proue aboue thirtie poyntes of
our religion. This was the iuſt iudgement
of God againſt the Popes, that they ſetting

downe wicked canons, ſhoulde not remember
to take away ye good. Nowe for ſo much
of that law as is in practiſe, if it be not pure,
let not the worlde maruaile, if in purging
the Church from ſo many abominations
wherewith the aduerſaries had in all places
and ſo long time together defiled it, ſome
ſmall matter remained not ſwept away and
caried out with the reſt.Common lawe. As for the poſitiue
lawes of the lande, wherein alſo the Ieſuite
woulde ſeeme to haue knowledge and matter
for maintenance of his popiſh ſuperſtitions,
they make wonderfully againſt him. I
ſpeake not this onely in reſpect of the moſt
godly lawes made of late vnder King Henrie
the eyght, her Maieſties father of noble
fame, or ſince vnder the Joſias of theſe ages
King Edward the ſixt, and in the moſt bleſſed
and proſperous raigne of her Maieſtie:
but lawes made in the time of Edwarde the
firſt, Richard the thirde, and ſome others
before and after.A treatiſe of the ſupremacie. Alſo ſermōs and bookes by Tunſtall, Gardiner, Bonner, and other papiſts againſt the Pope. For euen theſe haue made
auncient lawes (as appeareth by a booke
written onely of this argument aboue fourtie
yeeres ſince) to abandon the Popes authoritie:
which head of the Popiſh Church
being taken away, the body can not remaine
but as a dead carkeis, that muſt haue preſent

buriall: or remaine as one of ye antique images
of Rome, that hauing loſt the head, yet
is highly eſteemed onely for antiquitie.
            6 In the ſixt article firſt he ſheweth how
litle power he hath ouer his tongue, or ouer
his pen. For being loth to ſpeake any thing
that might but ſounde of an inſolent brag
or chalenge, yet hee doeth moſt inſolently
bragge more then any, and chalenge more
then all. For what one man hath made ſuch
a bragge, or ſuch a chalenge, as out of al ſciences
againſt al men to mainteyne that that
for want of maintenance is fallen, as ye Angel
prophecied of ye fall,Reuel. 14. 8. & 18. 2. ſaying, Great Babylon
is fallen, & the inhabitants & friendes
thereof ſee her dayly fall, and there is neyther
violence nor ſubtiltie that can lift her
vp againe. But the Ieſuite moueth pitie, &
rendereth a reaſon why he may not boaſt.
He is a dead man to this worlde.
               Friers and ſuch like entring into their order, are ſaide to die & may make their will, which is proued & ſtandeth in force, as if they were dead. In what
ſenſe he is dead, I know not. In deede as yet
he can neither be founde aliue, nor dead, nor
the place of his buriall. Whatſoeuer other
may thinke, hee thinketh not himſelfe ſpiritually
dead: but dead by reſignation of a
worldly life, or danger of death that may
come by iuſtice of lawe. Whatſoeuer it
is, he woulde be pitied, before he commeth

neere any danger. As he moueth pitie, ſo he
beggeth loue for the wonderfull loue & ready
minde he would ſeeme to beare towarde
euery man. He offreth hayle maſter, as Judas
did, & a kiſſe downe to the ground. But
we muſt not beleeue words of loue from an
enemie yt ſheweth malice in deede. Yet there
is ſome thing in his profeſſed loue. For to
treade afterward proudly vpon our heads, &
to make vs kiſſe ye Popes feete, he wil in the
Popes ſeruice firſt laye his head vnder our
feete, & kiſſe the ground we tread vpon. O
falſe ſhew of gracious lowlines! O ſeruile
wordes of flatterie, ioyned with intolerable
pride of a deceitfull heart! For to whome is
not ye notorious pride, & hideous crueltie of
Antichriſt knowen? It foloweth to ſee how
ſoone & ſuddenly a double minded man ſheweth
him ſelfe inconſtant in all his wayes.Iam. 1. 8.
He that in one line abaſeth him ſelfe to the
duſt, in the next exalteth him ſelfe againſt
heauen. He nowe pretending the defence of
the maieſtie of Chriſt, and yet intending to
defend ye tyranny of Antichriſt, doeth diſplay
his courage, his affiance, his aſſurance, his
euidence, ſo impregnable, that no mā may
encountre with him. As before he promiſed
to crye a falſe Alarme againe ſinne, ſo

nowe in preſumption of himſelfe he ſoundeth
the victory, and proclaimeth a triumph,
and that before he hath ſhewed his face in the
field. If thoſe wordes did no more tickle the
Papiſts that beleeue all and receiue al from
Rome, then they doe vs, who examine ſpirites
by the worde, he might haue reſerued
them for a fitter time, and a better place. In
a good cauſe, it is good alwaies to be bolde,
to haue ſingular affiance in the gratious fauour
of Ieſus Chriſt. On the other ſide in
an euil cauſe to truſt to a broken reede of Egypt,
is a double folly, & bringeth a double
miſchiefe: firſt an ouerthrow in the attempt,
and afterward the ſhame of an euill matter.
Moreouer, for an enemie of the kingdome
of Chriſt to call Chriſt his King, and to borowe
his name to iuſtifie a foule enterpriſe,
it is nothing elſe, but to ſinne the ſinne of
them that ſweare,Iere. 5. 2. The Lord liueth, and yet
deceyue. For therein the offender maketh
the Lord of hoſtes a witneſſe,Ioſh. 7. 10. & a reuenger
of his impietie. In the wordes folowing (if
his heart varyed not frō his pen) he maketh
account to haue very fauorable readers, that
will beleeue ſo great matters in ſo ſlender
a man.Papinianus. Ael. Spartianus in vita Caracalli. For, as one ſayde of another matter,
It is eaſier to commit murther then to defende

it, ſo is it eaſier to fal into the error of
Poperie, then to mainteyne it. Neuertheleſſe
this chalenger doeth ſo vndertake the
maintenāce, as if nothing could be replyed
againſt him. And not contenting himſelfe
to ſay, The Proteſtants cannot anſwere, he
doeth in ſpitefull wordes of diſgrace eaſe
his ſtomacke of much gall againſt the preachers
and againſt their pulpits: againſt the
hearers, and their vnlearned eares. His impreſſions
of malice are ſo ſtrong, and the opinion
conceiued of his owne ſufficiencie ſo
great,Horatius: Quid dignū tanto feret hic promiſſor hiatu. that he vaunteth, ſaying, I know perfectly
that no one Proteſtant, nor all the
Proteſtants liuing can mainteine their doctrine.
They haue mainteined it by the word
of might and trueth againſt all the aduerſaries
in writing and ſolemne diſputation, as
hath bin noted. And can they not now mainteine
it againſt one man, but of eight or nine
yeeres ſtanding in his profeſſion, as litle in
deede, as he is great in his owne conceipt?
Yes, ye meaneſt of many by ye grace of God
can mainteyne it, and ſhall preuayle. And if
our aduerſaries wyll looke into our defences
already publiſhed, they ſhall ſee the defence
of our religion ſo great, and the cauſe
ſo manifeſt, that I may truely vſe theſe

wordes againſt the chalenger on the otherſide,
No one Ieſuite, nor all the Ieſuites
liuing ſhall be able to anſwere that that is
written, or to roote out that which is planted.
We face not men downe in our pulpits
(which is his foule reproch againſt our
holy exerciſe of preaching) but wee labour
by the powerfull worde of God to bring all
men to the knowledge and obedience of the
trueth. As for our kingdome of Grammarians,
againe I vnderſtande not his taunt.
Wee prayſe God for the knowledge of many
tongues by many Grammers: and for
the knowledge of Grammer, that leadeth
into further vnderſtanding: and theſe gifts
wee vſe to the glory of God, and the confutation
of your religion. If his taunt was to
note, that we want other good artes, & haue
onely ſome ſwaye in Grammer, herein alſo
he is gyltie of a falſe and ſpitefull accuſation.
For we can make proofe that the Lorde
hath giuen vs of the ſpoiles of Egypt, of Arabia,
of Iewry, and of Rome. But it may
be he noteth it, that many nowe rule in the
Church, that in times paſt haue ruled onely
in Grammer ſchooles. I graunt that
ſome fewe ſuch are amongſt vs: but ſuch
profitable and ſufficient teachers of men,

that it were pitie, they ſhoulde any more
teache children. Nowe let vs paſſe from his
ſcoffes, and come againe to his vaunts. The
Campmaſter hauing with Rabſhaketh denied
the arme of our God to be able to deliuer
vs,2. King. 18. 30. and condemning our cauſe before it bee
indited, doeth notwithſtanding craue the
combat with all and euery one of vs, offering
the beſt welcome to him that commeth
beſt furniſhed. I anſwere, Theſe are
wordes. The prouerbe maketh it a vayne
fight to fight with a ſhadowe: but wee haue
not ſo much as his ſhadowe for a meaſure of
the Champion, or for an argument that hee
is at hande. But as already he hath vaunted
of the vniuerſalitie of his knowledge, ſo
nowe he ſetteth out the vniuerſalitie of his
powers, making him ſelfe a monſter that
hath infinite perſons to ſtand it out, infinite
eares to heare, and infinite tongues to anſwere
all and euery Proteſtant. Can hee
ſpeake wiſely in a ſuddē diſputatiō, that vttereth
folly in a premeditate and weightie
letter? will he looke to win, that knoweth
not how to make his match? The laſt point
of ye article is his proteſtatiō of ioy to meete
with no vnarmed enemie: but the better we
come furniſhed, the better welcome. We

haue nowe heard more then ynough of his
ſelfe liking: more thē needed of his chalēge,
wherin hitherto we finde nothing hard, but
yt which he doeth not brag of: namely where
to finde him. For ſome will beare me witneſſe,
it is harder to finde him, then to anſwere
him when hee is founde. But theſe
wordes are deliuered to draw credit to himſelfe
and his cauſe: alſo to caſt diſcredit vpō
vs, and our religion: Wherein he doeth ſtill
affirme the concluſion that ſhoulde be prooued.
It is not ynough for a Ieſuite, or for
the oracle of the Ieſuites to affirme, except
proofes appeare. But we muſt tarry till the
Champion come to the liſtes.
            7 In the ſeuenth article he ſpeaketh good
words & true, touching the ſingular graces
of God, wherewith he hath enriched her
Maieſtie in noble giftes of nature, learning
& princely education. It is very wel if you
thinke thus duetifully in your heartes, and
ſpeake ſo reuerently of her Maieſty abroad,
and in your ſecret prayers. But why do you
paſſe ouer the grace of graces in her, which
deſerue perpetuall honor: namely her godly
zeale and knowledge, in profeſſing & publiſhing
ye glorious Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt, &
in abandoning your popiſh ſuperſtitions?

Why moreouer did you not yeelde to her
highnes al thāks frō the heart, for her exceeding
clemencie, by the which many of you
liue, & yet ſhew your ſelues vnworthy of ſo
great mercie? If the giftes of enemies be
giftleſſe gifts (as the prouerbe noteth) what
are the bare words of them that are more diſloyall
in deede, then they can ſhewe themſelues
loyall in wordes? But be it knowen
to you, that her Maieſtie by her rare giftes
which you acknowledge, woulde eaſily ſee
your flattering hypocriſie, and your groſſe
preſumption of her readineſſe to incline, or
rather to decline to you: and moreouer readily
iudge of your ſandy foundatiō, and vntempered
morter, if either your letters were
worthy the leaſt reading, or your ſelfe meete
for any place in her moſt honorable preſēce:
Your faire light woulde be dimme in the
brightneſſe of her wiſedome, your good methode
would appeare to haue a great maime
at her learned conſideration, & your playne
dealing would ſhew it ſelfe plaine dallying
with Gods cauſes, if in the ſingular dexteritie
of her iudgement, ſhee were preſent at
your diſputatiō or ſermōs to giue ſentence.
Therefore let mee heere once chalenge and
charge ye chalenger, that he did ſo far breake

out into ſeditious and diſloyall ſpeach, as to
offer that wrong to her Maieſtie & wiſdom,
in ſuggeſting to her ſubiects, that ſhe can be
remoued with a ſhaken reede, who was not
moued in the cauſe, at the earneſt ſutes, and
threates of mightie Princes. Wherein as
her Maieſtie hath receyued a notable prerogatiue
of Gods fauour, and hath ſingular
cauſe to reioyce before him in the peace of
conſcience, that paſſeth al vnderſtanding: ſo
ſhe hath made proofe to the worlde, that ſhee
is reſolued for the happy cōtinuance of that,
which hath had ſo happie and manifold bleſſings,
and promiſeth more and more, till we
come to the fulneſſe thereof for euer.
            As for her Maieſties loue to her people,
and their moſt dutifull loue and ioye to
her againe, it requireth no Popiſh Doctor
or doctrine to alter it: being already eſtabliſhed
in the knowledge of the Goſpel, which
worketh the effectuall bonde of peace and
perfection in Prince and people.Epheſ. 4. 3. Col. 3. 14. Therefore
the ſecond poynt of this article is as preſūptuous
as the firſt. The firſt in drawing her
Maieſties excellent iudgement and zeale of
Gods houſe into doubt of alteration vpon a
diſputation or a few ſermons: the ſecond in
calling her beſt proceedings into accuſation

as hurtfull to the Realme. But it is not the
Goſpell that hurteth the realme: it is you,
ye Papiſtes, and your religion that hurt it,
and would bring it to miſerable deſolation,
to ſet vp agayne your abomination. Yea
many yeeres ſince you had done it, but that
the Lord, of mercy and iudgement, ſtriueth
whether he may ſhew greater tokens of his
gracious fauour to her Maieſtie & the land,
or indignation to you, and your moſt wicked
attemptes, in diſcouering from time to
time ſo many of your ſecrete conſpiracies
and deepe practiſes: and in meeting ſo happily
with your open rebellions and inuaſions.
In the wordes following, the chalenger
doeth trippe himſelfe, for hauing preſently
before prayſed her Maieſtie, nowe
correcting himſelfe, he doth vtter his griefe
agaynſt her, that hee and his confederates
are oppreſſed, and finde not equitie at her
hande. O vniuſt complaynt, that I ſaye no
more. Her mighty arme and ſword hath not
bene ſo heauie, as the little finger of thoſe
that perſecute the Church. Therefore, if
mine aduiſe may be taken in good parte, I
woulde wiſh you that are ſo great oppreſſers,
except ye were oppreſſed, and namely
you Ieſuites (who notwithſtanding the

ſaluation ſignified by the name of Ieſus,
which you take, yet you are the bellowes to
kindle and increaſe the fire of perſecution
more then any, in all places where you can
preuayle) not to complayne of oppreſſion,
leaſt it be redoubled vpon you, and yet without
breach of equitie.
            8 From preſuming of her Maieſties pliableneſſe
to their ſide, he returneth to her honorable
Counſel in the ſame maner & meaning.
For attributing to them the prayſe of
nobilitie & much wiſdome, and drift in caſes
moſt important, he notwithſtāding promiſeth
himſelfe without doubt (as hauing ye
diſpoſition of their hearts in his hande) that
they alſo will at laſt for their own ſoules, &
for many thouſand ſoules that depend vpō
their gouernmēt, diſcoūtenāce the religiō,
& hearken vnto Papiſtry. He would not beforehand
make this promiſe, & (which is his
chiefe purpoſe) drawe the multitude to expect
backſliding in their honors, if he did not
highly eſteeme his owne baſeneſſe, & baſely
iudge of their excellēcie. But how doth this
inconſtant Ieſuite ſtill giue in one line, and
take away in another? Haue her Maieſties
moſt honorable Counſell wiſdome in caſes
moſt importāt? & are they without wiſdome

in the moſt importāt cauſe of religiō, which
more thē al other cauſes, importeth them for
their owne ſoules & many thouſande ſoules
beſide?1. Cor. 2. 6, 8. Rom 8. 5, 6, 7 Without this wiſdom of God in the
Goſpell, there is no wiſedome in the wiſeſt
men of the worlde. Then the Ieſuite withdrawing
from their honors this wiſdome, he
attributeth to them a wiſedome which is no
wiſedome, and ſo his praiſes are no praiſes.
But he findeth, & in their wiſe gouernment
feeleth their wiſedome to bee according to
knowledge, & their knowledge ioyned with
zeale, according to ye reuealed trueth, which
they vnder her Maieſtie mainteine to Gods
glory, & ye cutting off of Popiſh enterpriſes
to the contrary. Wherefore ye ages that ſhal
come after, ſhall witnes for her Maieſtie &
for them, that in ſingular wiſdom, they haue
reſtored & mainteined the glorious Goſpell
of Ieſus Chriſt, & bleſſedly withſtoode the
flatteries of Ieſuites, and the violence of the
vnholy fathers army, that would in Englād
ſet vp the beaſt,Reue. 1
                     •
                  8. & 18. 21. that muſt be throwen downe
into the nethermoſt hel, & neuer riſe againe:
whoſe feareful fall will draw with it the fall
of as many as depend vpō her, & yeeld their
ſeruice to her, notwithſtanding her intolerable
pride & bloody fornications. Moreouer

this Ieſuite writeth to their honor without
regard of their honors. For as if they had no
eyes to ſee, nor hearts to conſider what may
be, and what hath bene ſaid for Popiſh religion,
he wil now open the queſtions of religion
ſo faithfully, that their honors ſhall
ſee the ſubſtantiall groundes whereon the
Popiſh faith is builded. Haue all other Ieſuites
wanted learning? Haue euen this
Champions maſters wanted ſtrength in the
field, and dexteritie in their enterpriſes? To
heale the woundes of the beaſt,Iob. 13. 4. are all other
Phiſitions, Phiſitions of no valew?
            Thus we ſee how this Ieſuite chargeth
the Lordes, as not hauing their eyes yet open
to ſee what religion is, and alſo noteth
the wantes of his maſters, that haue not
done, that himſelfe will vndertake. But to
performe all theſe promiſes, he muſt not alledge
the authoritie of his oracle: for the oracle
himſelf may ſooner with Atlas beare the
weight of the worlde vpon his ſhoulders,
then mainteine ſo great a quarell, as is the
defenſe of the Romiſh Church againſt the
Goſpel of God: as is the maynteining of
the worldly kingdome of the Pope, againſt
the ſpirituall and mightie kingdome of Ieſus
Chriſt. After theſe things he returneth

to his ſlaunders againſt the preachers of the
worde, charging them, that they huddle vp,
and confounde queſtions of religion. But
whatſoeuer the Ieſuite thus caſteth out in
malicious & falſe termes, God bath bleſſed
the preachers of the Goſpell with worthie
gifts, and a pure forme of preaching, agreeable
to the puritie of the Goſpel which they
profeſſe. So that if our aduerſaries, & their
giftes come to a right examination, it ſhall
appeare to al men, that if Papiſts haue learning,
ſo we alſo: if they haue order and methode,
ſo wee alſo: if they haue giftes to
perſwade, we much more, vpon more excellent
groundes. And (which is more then all)
whereas they preach men, we preache God,
whereas they preache error, we preache the
trueth, not according to men, but according
to the foundation of the holy Prophets and
Apoſtles,Ephe. 2. 20 Chriſt Ieſus being the head corner
ſtone. As for Antiquitie, Fathers, Coū
               cils,
we allowe them as farre as the worde
of God doeth not diſalowe them. But if any
oracle from heauen, or conſent of all the
worlde, teache, or perſwade any thing, otherwiſe
then we haue receiued in the word,
we ſubſcribe to the ſentence alreadie pronounced
by Saint Paul,Gal. 1. 8, 
                     •
                  . and regiſtred in

his holy Epiſtle to the Galathians. What
kinde of new preaching theſe new Ieſuites
bring, I know not: but if they followe the
veine of their forefathers the auncient Friers,
then I know that they wil draw byaſe,
whether they huddle or no. The worlde is
yet full of volumes, wherein their ſermons
are penned downe, but with matter ſo ridiculous,
and Latine ſo barbarous, that all
bookes written to make ſport, muſt giue
place to them. From charging the preachers,
he proceedeth to charge ye 
               ſway of the
time, for preuayling againſt him and his.
The time is neither ſhorter, nor longer, better,
nor worſe in it ſelfe: therefore in this figuratiue
ſpeach, he couertly chargeth the
gouerners of the time. Wherein he againe
vttereth his murmuring, & repineth that his
golden times ſo often calculated, can yet
take no place. But bleſſed be the Lord, that
hath ſtretched out his arme, the ſwaye and
ſtroke whereof preuayleth againſt all enemies
of the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt: and
let not their praiſes die for euer, whome the
Lord hath rayſed vp to be his inſtruments
in ſo glorious a worke. As for the beſt
blood in your bodies which you woulde
ſpēd for their honors, which of them require

any ſuch ſacrifice at your hande? who ſtand
in neede of it? In ſo euil a cauſe, as the perſwading
of error, what can it auaile? If I
may againe aduiſe you, keepe it to preſerue
life: it may be the Lord hath appointed a
day for your true repentance, that renouncing
your former workes of merite and ſupererogation,
you may receiue ye loue of the
trueth, and builde your faith vpon the merites
of Chriſt alone,Phil. 3. 7. &c. which ſhalbe your
owne ſaluation. And leaue to profeſſe loue,
where you practiſe treaſon: ceaſe to promiſe
the ſheading of your blood willingly, as
in a good cauſe, whereas experience hath
lately ſhewed that you & your confederates
loſt blood in a notorious euill cauſe.In Ireland 29. Nouemb. But
that was the mercy of God that watcheth ouer
vs ſtill, to take the wicked in their wickednes,
which mercie ſhall watch ouer vs
continually, if we auoide the contempt of yt
Goſpel we profeſſe, and ſhewe our ſelues
thankefull to his maieſtie for ſo great mercies.
Againe the Ieſuite flaunteth in words,
& vaunteth of his innocent handes lifted vp
to heauen euery day & euery houre, as for
the good of their honours. To make your
hands no fowler then they are, yet thoſe innocent
handes haue written no innocent

bookes: they haue caſt abroade no innocent
libels: they helde out no innocent banner of
Popiſh obedience in their actual rebellions
heretofore in England, & preſently in Ireland.
But if thoſe handes may be innocent
that haue done theſe things, and moreouer
crucifie the ſonne of God againe euerie day
in their moſt blaſphemous ſacrifice of the
Maſſe: yet when you holde vp thoſe handes
in prayer, I doubt not, but it is with deſire
to haue Popiſh religion reſtored, to haue the
Lords of the Counſell remoued: to haue
way made for you to returne frō your beggerly
eſtate to the dignities and regencie of
the lande. And why then doe you, that are
knowen to make this prayer, and to followe
your prayers with practiſes, notwithſtanding
make mention of them as a dutiful and
holy ſeruice towarde the Counſell. If the
things ye ſeeke by prayer & otherwiſe, were
good, then the prayer & enterpriſe alſo may
be good: but if ye aſke the thinges that are
euil, the praier is turned into ſinne: and you
finde, how true the wordes of Iames are,
concerning ſuch praiers and ſuch purpoſes,
you aſke,Iam. 4. 3. and receiue not. But howſoeuer
you pray or purpoſe, we in all trueth & loue,
holde vp both our handes and heartes vnto

God for you, that are in darkenes and in the
ſhadowe of death, praying him in his deare
ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, to caſt vpon you the
light of his countenance, that you may ſee &
finde that righteouſnes which S.Phil. 37. &c. Paul deſired,
with the loſſe of al the other helpes &
preeminences: namely, not the righteouſnes,
which was his owne, which is of the
lawe, but the righteouſnes which is of God
through faith. This is vnfeinedly our publique
and priuate praier for you, with continuall
ſupplication, that God woulde make
vs all ſheepe of the ſame folde, whereof Ieſus
Chriſt alone is the great Paſtor.Iohn. 10. 11. heb. 13. 20. To
come againe to that which followeth in the
letter: he addeth the praiſe of Engliſh ſtudents
beyonde Sea, ſaying, Their poſteritie
ſhal not die. No more ſhall the poſteritie
of Antichriſt, til they and their abominations
be brought into iudgement. As for the
vertue & ſufficient knowledge which they
gather, I would know whether it be vertue
or knowledge that cauſe them in ſome places
to carie letters, & to enter into ſedicious
matters priuilie: in other places to carrie
armes againſt her Maieſtie openly. Other
fruite of their abandoning the lande, & great
ſtudies beyond ſea I heare of none, a fewe

motiues excepted. In the next wordes you
profeſſe better vertue, and more knowledge,
if the euil cauſe were not ſtil the ſame. For
in deede it is ye heauenly gift of God in our
calling to deſpiſe the death of the bodie,Phil. 2. 17, 30 for
the life of their ſoules, whom otherwiſe we
cannot in our miniſterie bring to ſaluation.
But your cauſe tendeth not to the ſaluation,
but to the condemnation of thoſe whom you
carie away with your carnall worſhippings
and falſe doctrine. Moreouer it may be,
theſe are but wordes of a vaine bragge, as
hitherto appeareth. For albeit you woulde
ſeeme determined, vpon your league neuer
to giue ouer the Lords of the Counſel, but
either to winne them to heauen (as if now
they were loſt to hell) or to die vpon their
pikes: yet you that haue taried ſo long, from
ſo great a worke, tarie yet longer, making
no haſte to come to ſo good a match. Theſe
valiant & reſolute ſouldiers vnder ye Popes
banner of obedience appeare not: euen this
Campmaſter appeareth not. But it may be,
he hath withdrawen himſelfe, to write his
letters conſolatorie into Ireland, and backe
againe to Rome: and among other his large
offers, he mindeth to afforde vs this, that we
ſhall haue ſome time to prepare for ſo dangerous

a combat. To let this paſſe, that
which followeth, doeth ſhew his ſpirit. For
out it muſt with ful mouth and great ſound,
he can no longer keepe his own counſel. It
woulde be marked, and taken heede of, not
for feare of the matter, but to ſee the rebellion
of the men. The ſocietie of Ieſuites proclaime
by their trumpet Maſter Campiō, &
make it knowen, that they haue all made a
league not to leaue a mā of thēſelues aliue,
free from the honor of Stories Tiburne, or
conſumption in priſon, til they haue ouerreached
all the practiſes of Englād. Fearefull
wordes threatning paper ſhot. But the
weakenes of their force, taketh nothing frō
the greatneſſe of their malicious and trayterous
purpoſe. For if their power were as
their purpoſe, ſee, I pray you, what an alteration
they would ſoone worke in this land!
Neuertheleſſe theſe Ieſuites that minde to
leaue no way, that they thinke may eſtabliſh
the beaſt, whom they worſhip, yet they vtter
this traiterous branch of the vnholy league,
as if it were no other thing, thē by preaching
to winne men to ſaluation. But I haue
largely ſhewed, that it is deſtruction that
they call ſaluation. Therefore to conclude
theſe matters, his purpoſe is with his confederates

by al meanes to ſubdue men to the
Popes bondage: and in this piece of ſeruice
to preuayle, or to die vpon any daungers. A
great offer for ſo ſmall gayne: a great danger
for ſo wretched a purpoſe. But if the Ieſuite
report the concluſion of ye league truely,
when it is put in execution (which notwithſtanding
they wil flee more then we cā
feare) it wil not go ſo ill with the Church of
God in England, as it will go wel with all
other Churches. For if all the Ieſuites in
the worlde bend their forces towarde England,
and come to carie the croſſe, that here
ſhalbe layd vpon them, we ſhalbe ouerlayed
with thoſe ſwarmes of graſhoppers, except
the Lord prouide a mighty weſt wind to caſt
them violently into the Sea: but all other
Churches ſhalbe free from that plague. But
if anſwereably to our profeſſiō we remaine
ye Iſrael of God, though Egypt be plagued,
yet there ſhalbe no complaining in the tents
of Iacob. After theſe bragges in words only,
howe readie they are in the planting of
Popiſh religion to die at Tiburne or in any
other torments, he ſheweth vs that the expence
is reckoned, the enterpriſe is begun.
To gather theſe matters, Firſt he publiſheth
a general cōſpiracie of al the Ieſuites

in the world (and they were not alone in the
decree) to die vpon our pikes, or to draw vs
frō religiō. Secōdarily he forewarneth definitiuely,
that this their league, ſucceſſion
& multitude, muſt ouerreach al the practiſes
of England: Thirdly that the accōpt is
made, & the enterpriſe begun. In reſpect
of any thing theſe Ieſuites, or their adherēts
can doe, we haue no cauſe to feare at all, for
their rage ſhal turne to ye praiſe of God, who
wil cōfound thē for his trueth, & to get glory
to his name. But in reſpect of our ſinnes,
in not bringing forth fruites worthie of the
Goſpell, we may feare leaſt ſome of theſe
noyſome beaſts in their ſwarmes caſt ſome
ſhadow vpō the tree of life. Touching thoſe
laſt wordes ſo playnely laying downe their
multitude, confederacie, threats and beginnings,
I leaue any further to examine them:
they are for an other examination, as drawing
neere the heart of the common wealth,
for the purpoſe and execution thereof. The
laſt wordes of this article are in ſound very
plauſible (as the reſt of his ſpeeches) pretending
nothing but trueth in his falſe cauſe, &
nothing but loue in his ſeditious pamphlet.
Therfore let them be examined. Speaking
of Popiſh religion, he ſayth it is of God. A

bare affirmation without any proofe. So in
all his letter he onely affirmeth, referring
vs to his credite: whereas men would rather
be caried wt reaſon. But his reaſōs are to be
looked for, whē he commeth to anſwere his
chalenge. Yet to anſwere him with a reaſon,
Poperie is not of God, for then it could
not haue receiued ſo great ouerthrowes, only
by the word of God. Neither was ye Popiſh
religion planted in blood, neyther is it
like (whatſoeuer is layd downe in bragges)
that in blood theſe Ieſuites or any other wil
reſtore it. Otherwiſe the wordes may haue
this true conſtruction: Popiſh religion was
planted in ſtrength, by ſheading the blood, &
aboliſhing the doctrine of the Martyrs: & in
like ſort they hope to reſtore it agayne. By
perſecutions it preuayled at the firſt, and by
perſecutions they looke to preuayle at the
laſt. But bleſſed be God that hath ſhewed ye
vanitie of this hope, by ſhewing in our daies
that the blood of his Martyrs, whoſe godly
cauſe iuſtifie their godly death, is the ſeede
of the Church. France, Flanders, and our
owne countrey are wonderfull arguments
of this, if any man will deſcend into ye deepe
cōſideration of the particulars. If the Lord
hath heretofore made Nebuchadnezzar his

ſeruant to puniſh Iſrael,Iere. 25. 9. & 27. 6. it was not the
power of Babel that did it, but the ſinnes of
Ieruſalem.Ier. 24. 7, 8, 9 All ſuch chaſtiſements of the
Church redound to the good of the Church,
and leaue wrath againſt thoſe that riſe vp againſt
his people,Pſal. 116. 15. and the blood of his ſaints
that is ſo precious in his eyes.
            9 In the laſt place he aggreueth the fault
of her Maieſties moſt honorable priuy Coū
               ſell,
if they will not receyue that which he
doeth not offer. For, although his letters
be full of promiſes and verball offers, yet in
trueth and deede, he offreth nothing, no not
ſo much as theſe letters. They were ſcattered
abroade before any copie came to their
handes: ſo it appeareth, that as he meant
not to ſtand to the anſwere of his chalenge,
ſo he meant not ſo much as to ſende the letters
of chalenge, whyther he woulde haue
them thought to be directed. Now after all
ſtormes, and other outrageous actes in this
tragedie and imaginarie chalenge, the Ieſuite
hauing charged ye Lords for their part,
if they reiect his offer, & reward his endeuours
and pilgrimage of many thouſande
miles with rigour: he for his part falleth to
a calme concluſion. Therein he promiſeth
(hauing no more to ſay) to recōmende our

caſe and his owne to Almightie God the
ſearcher of hearts, and prayeth that in heauen
we may be made friends. This prayer
if he will make from the heart, we alſo will
pray that through their cōuerſion God may
graunt it in Chriſt Ieſus. If he wil pray it
in loue and trueth, to that praier he ſhal haue
our Amen. But let euery man that ſpeaketh
well, meane accordingly, leaſt the ſearcher
of hearts finde out & puniſh their hypocriſie.
His laſt wordes ſomewhat touch the former
ſore, & therefore muſt not be paſſed ouer
with ſilence. In being our remembrancer,
that in heauē all iniuries ſhalbe forgotten,
he couertly complaineth againe of iniuries.
The iniuries he ſuſteineth, he alone is guiltie
of. For what greater iniurie can be done
to another, thē he hath done vnto himſelf? He
hath departed frō the faith, left his coūtrey,
& refuſed ye protection of a gracious Prince,
with many other honours & felicities, as he
declared in ye firſt article. In him therfore,
ye cōplaint of iniuries is vniuſt: but againſt
him, ye complaint, not of iniuries alone, but
of ſeditions, of hereſie, & of impietie is very
iuſt: ſo yt he is to take heed hereafter vnto his
ſteps, leaſt, though al iniuries be forgottē in
heauē, yet for want of repentāce, ſuch iniquities

receiue puniſhment in an other place.
            Therefore, briefly to ſee into al this matter
& to cōclude, theſe letters of Ed. Campion
ye Ieſuite, which were caſt abroad wtout a directiō,
to comfort the Papiſts, & ſweetely to
feed them wt hope of a great cōqueſt againſt
the religion, are foūd vpon examination to
ſound a falſe Alarme, hauing nothing for ye
Papiſts to feede vpon, but vaine hope, or venim
to ſatiſfie a hart nouriſhed wt reproches:
nothing to truſt vnto, but a broken reede, &
that not yet in hand. Touching the Proteſtants
the ſame libel hath nothing, that can
either ſtrike the leaſt feare into them, or caſt
the leaſt diſcredite vpon them, or their religion.
Notwithſtanding againſt ye Papiſts,
and for the Proteſtants, eſpecially thoſe in
place further to conſider it, the pamphlet
hath (beſide the vanitie) many points diſcouering
as well great miſchiefe intended
againſt her Maieſties peaceable and godly
gouernement, as againſt the heauenly and
moſt fruitful preaching of ye Goſpel. Which
miſchiefe notwithſtāding the Lord our God
hath from time to time, and lately wonderfully
diſappoynted, that the Papiſts which
will not heare what is taught out of the
worde, may ſee and conſider what the Lord

preacheth to them in thoſe his notable iudgements:
and that we, both Prince & people
ſo bleſſed of God, woulde with new ſongs
praiſe the Lord, who is euermore good to
Iſrael: the Lord, I ſay, whoſe mercie
and trueth endureth and preuaileth
for euer.
Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   