
      
         
            
            AN EDICT OR ORDONANCE OF THE FRENCH King, conteining a Prohibition and Interdiction of al preaching and aſſembling, and exerciſe of any other Religion, then of the Catholique, the Apoſtolique, and the Romaine Religion.
            ITEM AN OTHER EDICT OE THE SAME KING, REMOuing al Protestants from bearing any Office vnder the King, in the Realme of France.
            
               Nevvly tranſlated out of Frenche into Engliſh.
            
            LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum, Anno 1568.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            An Edict, or ORDONANCE of the French King, conteining a Prohibition and Interdiction of all preaching, aſſembling, and exerciſe of anie other Religion then of the Catholike, the Apoſtolique and the Romaine Religion.
            
            
               
                  CHARLES by the grace of God King of France to all for the time being and for the time to come. It is well knowen to all men, that the deceaſed Kinges of moſt woorthie memorie our Father, and Graundfather (whoſe ſoules God pardon)

bearing them ſelues as moſt Chriſtian Princes and defendours of the holie Churche, haue endeuoured and trauailed by Edicts and Ordonances, and by waies of iuſtice, to preſerue the vnitie therof, and to repreſſe the diuiſion of Religion in their time, whiche had gotten into this realme by preachinges, by ſecret practiſes and aſſemblies, and by caſting abrode of inhibited bookes. It is well knowen alſo, that after the lamentable death of our ſaied Lord and Father certaine of the Nobilite prouoked therto by the miniſters of the newe opinion, haue diſcontented and ſeparated them ſelues, not for anie zeale of anie Religion one or other, but through ambition and deſire to haue in their handes the gouernmēt of this ſaid realme vnder the deceaſed our moſt dere and moſt beloued Lord ād elder brother King Frācis ſecond of that name, notwithſtanding that he was a maried man and of full

yeres by the lawes of the ſaied realme, and one that had the authoritie, the iudgemēt and the meaning to gouerne and to commaunde rightly with the moſt prudent counſell of our moſt excellent Ladie and mother the Quene, and of other great and worthie perſonages, which had alwaies ben neere about the ſaid deceaſed King our Father, and were continued by our ſaied deceaſed brother, as one that minded in all pointes to folowe his Fathers ſteppes: the which he hath wel declared by his deedes during the time of his reigne, who had alſo ſetled his ſaied realme in ſuche peace and quiet as he foūd it in at his coming to the Croune, if it had pleaſed God to haue lent him longer life, for ſo muche as his eſtate had ben moleſted and diſquieted by the diſagreemēt of certaine of the Nobilite, who daring not openly to ſhew them ſelues, ſtirred vp by the helpe of the ſaid miniſters, the tumult of Amboies,

vnder the colour of preſenting a certaine requeſt with a confeſsion of their faith to the ſaid King: who though he knew well the verie fountaine and firſt Authors of that miſchiefe, yet through his ſingular and natural clemencie folowing the example of our heuenlie Father, and hoping by his grace to do more good by waie of pitie, then by rigour of iuſtice, gaue (by plaine Edict made at Amboies in the moneth of March in the yeare 1559) a general Pardon to all ſuche his deceiued and ſeduced ſubiectes in the faith, as would come home▪ againe, and furthermore by an other Edict made at Romorantin in the moueth of May folowing, he left thoſe which woulde not come home againe, to the Eccleſiaſtical cenſure only (which reacheth not ſo farre as to bloude) in caſe that they troubled not the common quiet. Al this notwithſtanding, the ſaid King was deceued of his expectatiō through

the ſaid ſecrete practiſes of the ſaied Noble men, obſtinate in their purpoſes: and aſſayinge by force of Armes, to moleſt this ſaid Realme, how be it vnder pretenſe of Religion. Wherof the ſaid King being fully aduertiſed, remaining then at Fontaine-bleau, was cōſtrained to remoue to Orlians with force of Armes alſo, for to ſet thinges there in good order. Who alſo for the ſame purpoſe had commaunded a meting of the generall Eſtates, at whiche time and place it pleaſed God to call him to his mercie, geauing into our handes the Kingdome, we being then of age betwene ten and eleuen yeares, leſſe able to gouerne this ſaid puiſſant Realme.
            Moreouer the chiefe ſuccour which God had lefte vnto vs in our affaires, whiche was the wiſe and prudent gouernement of our moſt excellent Ladie and Mother, 
                  〈◊〉
                was excedingly letted and diſapointed through the cō
               tempt

of our minorititie, whiche certaine of the Nobility (the chiefeſt next after our moſt deere and moſte welbeloued brethren) had conceiued, and through partes taking and contradictions which thei with their Adherents, ſtirred againſt our ſaid moſt excellent Ladie and Mother, who alſo to make their part ſtronger tooke vppon them the protection of the ſaid new opinion, which by their ſupport and fauour was greatly augmented.
            For remedy whereof, at our returning from our Annointing and Coronation, we came to the ſuburbes of S. German in the fieldes nigh to Paris, and we cawſed to be aſſembled in our Parlament the Princes and thoſe of our priuie counſel, with al the courtes of the ſame parlamēt in the monethes of Iune and Iulie of the yeare 1561. At what time by their aduiſe at S. Germaines in Laye we made the Edict of the ſaid moneth of Iuly in the ſaied

yeare, by the which Edict, we forebad al other exerciſe of Religiō, then ſuch as was according to the receiued cuſtome and maner obſerued in the Catholique Churche, from and ſence the time of the Chriſtian faith receiued by the Kinges of Fraunce our Predeceſſours, and by the Biſhops and Prelates, Perſons and Vicares, and their Deputies. This the ſaied protectours of the ſaid new opinion perceiuing, and ſeing that their ambitious enterpriſe was by this Edict vtterly diſappointed, would not ſuffer it to take place: but cauſed through our whole Realme, thoſe of the ſaid new opinion, to riſe vp and to ſtop the execution thereof. And then by reaſon of ſuch troubles, which thei them ſelues had ſtirred, and cauſed to be ſtirred in diuerſe places, thei would make men beleeue, that it was impoſſible, to execute the ſaied Edicte, and therefore they called vppon an other aſſemblie of a certaine number of Preſidentes

and Counſellers of al the high Coūrtes of this ſaied Realme, that this might be a matter of greater authoritie. Although yet the ſame aſſemblie was leſſe by two partes of the three, then the other, whiche was made in our ſaied Parlament of Paris, being of the two ordinarie companies. Beſide that in their aſſemblie, were ſuch men as they choſe them ſelues, they being the ſtronger parte of our priuie Counſell, hauing alſo placed therein a greater number of the ſaid newe opinion then of the Catholiques, to bring ſo at length their matter about, which they did in deede, obteining a toleraton for the exerciſe of both Religions by our Edict, made onely by way of prouiſion, the ſeuententh of Ianuarie, in the ſaid yeare, 1561. The whiche Edicte our ſaid moſt excellent Ladie and Mother, being then not able to withſtand, was forced againſt her opinion, to let paſſe: ſhee beinge alwaies otherwiſe

moſt Chriſtian. In like manner alſo, were forced our moſte deere and beſt beloued Couſen, the Cardinal of Bourbon, with our moſt dere and welbeloued Couſens alſo the Cardinal of Tournon, the Duke of Montmorency, Cō
               ſtable, and the Mareſhal of S. Andre: who were the principal and moſt auncient Counſellers, and Officers of our Crowne, that the deceaſed Kings, our ſaid Lordes, our Father, and Brother, had lefte vnto vs. Who alſo among other occaſions, which moued them to the toleration aboue ſaid, declared to our ſaid moſte excellent Ladie and Mother, that this was yet the leſſe miſchiefe, that then could be ſuffered: Prouided alwaies, that this tolerated exerciſe of the ſaid new opinion, ſhuld not in any wiſe enter into any towne. And that alſo it was to be hoped, that we ſhould be able to redreſſe this miſchiefe, at what time we ſhould come to our full yeares, authoritie, and power:

al whiche ſhould make our ſubiectes more obedient vnto vs. Vpon the which hope our ſaid moſt excellēt Ladie and Mother moſt gredily attending, diſpoſed her ſelfe to goe foreward with al diligence poſsible, in the bringing vp of vs, and of our moſt dere and beſt beloued brethren, and of our moſte deere and beſt beloued Siſter, in the true Religion of the Catholique, Apoſtolique, and Romaine Churche: which the moſt Chriſtian Kinges our Predeceſſours, haue kept and mainteined, almoſt theſe eleuen hūdred yeres: whereof wee and our ſubiectes, are greatly boūd and beholden vnto her. And though that by the ſaid Edicte of Ianuarie, thoſe of the newe opinion, had good cauſe to quiet and contente them ſelues, if ſome other ambition and practiſe had not rather pricked them, then the quieting of their conſciences, as doe ſufficiently witneſſe vnto vs their behauiours, going ordinarily

to their preachinges and aſſemblies, with armes and weapons: yet notwithſtanding they not contenting them ſelues with the ſaied licence and toleratiō, ſtraight after our Edict publiſhed, declared moſt amply and manifeſtly to the whole worlde, their wicked intention and purpoſe, arming them ſelues vpon their owne priuate Authoritie againſt vs. Taking vp our townes: bringing ſtrangers into our ſaied Realme, and doinge all Actes of hoſtilitie and open enmitie, euen ſo farre, that they gaue vs a Battail vnder the towne of Dreus. In the whiche God gaue vs the victory, hauing compaſsion of his people ſubiected vnto vs, and that we might once agayne ouercome by Clemency our rebellyous Subiectes, and reduce them vnder our obedience.
            Again hoping that in time, the goodneſſe of God, by the meanes of our ripe yeares, woulde bringe them alſo

vnder the obedience of his Church, with continuance of the common quyet, we graunted vnto them being yet in our Minority, the Edict of Pacification made at Amboyſe, the xix. of March, in the yere. 1562. In the which we permitted vnto them the exerciſe of their Religiō, ſuch as is there more amply conteined. And though that afterward, to take awaie from them all maner of feare, miſtruſte, or ſurmiſe that poſsibly might be conceiued, we did publiſh euen by their owne aduiſe and after their owne meaning, diuers declarations, Rules, and Ordonances, all tending to a common quiet, and reuniting of all our ſubiectes, yet notwithſtanding they for their part haue daily and licentiouſly infringed and violated our ſaid declarations, Rules, and Ordonances. Yea though that by the ſame Declarations, Rules and Ordonaunces, our ſaied Edicte (whiche yet was neuer other then by waye

of prouiſion onely, and by vs at all times reuocable) was the better maintained, only to auoyde tumultes, and calamities enſuing therevpon, not geuing them thereby ſo much as the leſt occaſion in the worlde to take weapon and armes againe: as they did notwithſtanding at Michelmas laſt, and ſet vpon vs in the waye betweene Meaus and Paris, we being then accompanyed with our ſayed moſt Excellent Lady and Mother, and our ſaid moſt dere, and beſt beloued brethern, and Siſter. Pretending afterward, that they meant the ſame time to preſente vs a Supplicatiō for the maintenaunce of their Religion. And yet did they notwithſtanding, without intermiſsion continue open warre againſt vs, ſo farre, that they beſeaged vs in our Head Citie of Paris: that they burned the milles to famiſh vs, that they tooke vppe many of our Cities, that they brought in ſtraungers once againe into

our Realme, and forced vs at laſt to geue them battail euen vnder the gates of Paris, to rayſe the ſiege which they had laied againſt vs, briefely vſing all wayes and meanes, of open enmytie and hoſtilitie.
            Al this notwithſtāding, we deſiring to ſpare the bloude of our Nobilytie, and of other our ſubiectes, hoping ſtil to winne them by Clemency and gentleneſſe, and hauing greate pitie vpon the poore peple ſpoiled and deuoured by bothe Armies, being required of them to haue a pacification made by our letters patentes, to be geuen at Paris the xxiij. of March laſt, we graū
               ted to them the ſelfe ſame former Edict of pacification made the xix. of Marche in the yeare. 1562. vpon promiſe made to vs, that they for their part ſhould entierly and fully obſerue it and kepe it, and trouble no more our ſaied Realme. The whiche promiſe they breaking (though we in the

meane failed not to keepe and obſerue the ſaied Edict to the vttermoſt) they breaking, I ſay, their promiſe made vnto vs, for ſo muche as they woulde not rendre vp vnto vs, our townes of Rochelle, of Montaubam, of Caſtres, and of diuerſe other, as well in Languedoc, as in the Dolphyne, whiche they promiſed to doe, for ſo muche as alſo in certaine places of our ſaied Realme, they haue cauſed metinges in armes, whiche haue murdred many of our Catholique ſubiectes, and haue farder practiſed with ſtraungers, pretending to them that certaine of their Religion haue bene killed by the Catholikes ſence the time of the Edict of pacification, of whiche matters vpon their complainte, we haue geuen forth commiſsion to take information, and to doe Iuſtice vpon ſuche treſpaſſes, they (as I ſaie) theſe many waies breaking their promiſe, haue within fiue moneths after their promiſe made,

taken weapon agayne, and armes againſt vs. They haue retired agayne to the ſaied Rochelle, and the Countrie there aboute, making there open warre.
            Wherein, we ſeeing them ſo ofte and ſo many times to abuſe our Clemency and fauour, that we can no more doubte of their wicked and damnable enterpriſe, which is to eſtabliſh, and to ſet vppe in this ſaied Realme ſome other Soueraintie and Supreme Gouernement, to the ouerthrowing of ours, ordayned and ſet vp by God, and by ſuche practiſes to plucke from vs our good ſubiectes, by the meanes of the permiſsion and toleration of the ſaied exerciſe of their Religion, and of the aſſemblyes whiche they make vnder colour of their prechings and communions, at the whiche they make gatherings of mony, billing of men, othes, cōfederacies, conſpiracies, practiſes, and deuiſes: and by Armes

as well within as without our ſaied Realme, they trouble it and diſquyet it: yea and hauing their weapons in their handes, they deale with vs as felowes and companions, not as obediēt ſubiectes, as they declare them ſelues wel, bothe by woord and by writings: yea and doe the dedes of very mortal enemyes: ſuch as it is not poſsible for vs to quiet and to ſtay, but do encreaſe daily more and more, vtterly to ouerthrowe, if they were able, our Religion and Eſtate, that they might therby remaine the only Lordes and maſters, by meanes of the ſaid exerciſe permitted vnto them during our Minorite, and ſomewhat after continued, for the loue of peace and quyet: and to auoyde thereby a worſe inconuenience, directly againſt our owne will and minde: we haue at all times faſt ſettled in our harte the true Religion, as moſte Chriſtian Kinges ought to haue: and who be fully reſolued to

liue and dye therein: acknoweleadging herein the Grace, that God by his infinite goodnes hath geuen vs, as to haue preſerued our ſaied Religion and Eſtate, from the time of our firſt coming to the Crowne hytherto, againſt ſo mighty practiſes to the contrary, and to haue geuen vs nowe the Age, the witte, and the Iudgement ſufficient to gouerne our ſelues, and al that is committed vnto vs: As alſo to haue geuen vs for our ayde and comforte our moſt dere and beſt beloued Brother the Duke of Anjow, a man alſo as we are, our Lieutenant General, moſt entierly affectioned to our Perſon, and Seruice, knitte and vnited in Religion with vs, as is alſo our other moſt derelye beloued Brother the Duke of Allenſon.
            For theſe Cauſes▪ and other greate and waightie Conſiderations mouing vs herevnto, hauing had herevppon the aduiſe of our moſt Excellent Ladie

and Mother, of our ſaid moſt dere and beſt beloued Brethren, of other Princes of our Bloude, and of other men of Honour, the Lordes and the Honourable of our Priuie Councell, wee haue by Edicte and Ordonaunce perpetuall and irreuocable, inhibited and forbidden, wee doe inhibite and forbidde vppon payne of confiſcation of bodie and goodes, to all perſonnes, of whatſoeuer dignitie, condition, or qualitie ſo euer they be, wythin our ſaied Realme, and Lande of our obedience, all manner exercice of anie Religion, then onely of the Catholique, and Romaine, the whiche wee holde and mainteine, and the Kinges our Predeceſſours haue holden and mainteined. And to this effect we ordeine, that all Miniſters of the ſaied Religion pretended refourmed, bee bounde within xv. dayes after the publication of theſe preſentes, to auoide and departe our ſaied Realme, and

Lande of our obedience, vppon the paine aboue ſaied.
            This not withſtanding, we meane not, ne wil not, that thoſe of the ſaied Religion pretended refourmed, be by any meanes examined vpon their conſciences, ſo that they refraine from the exerciſe of all other Religion, then of the ſaid Catholique and Romaine: hoping that hereafter by the inſpiration of God, and by the greate diligence which we purpoſe to vſe, to ſee that al Biſhops and Paſtours of the Church of our ſaid Realme doe their endeuour and duety alſo, hoping, I ſay, that our ſaid ſubiects of the ſaid pretended Religion, wil retourne and ioyne againe with vs, and with other our ſubiectes, in the vnitie of the holy Catholique Church. Farther to all ſuche our ſaid ſubiects as obeying to this our preſent Edict, will laie downe their weapon, will breake vppe their aſſemblies, and will retire home againe, liuing as good

and loyall ſubiectes oughte to doo, within twentie daies after the publication of theſe preſentes, to all ſuche wee haue geauen a generall Pardon, and Remiſsion of all that hath ben by them committed, as well againſt our Perſon, our ſaied moſte honourable Ladie and Mother, our ſaid moſt derely beloued brethren, as againſte any other perſonnes, in reſpecte of theſe preſent troubles, and of the former, or of their Religion, vntill the daie of this preſent Edict: in ſuche ſorte, that in this reſpect, they neede not to take any other pardon or ſpeciall remiſsion from vs, ſo that they, within the ſaied time, doe rendre and reſtore vnto vs, our Townes and Places, by ſuch as do holde them, or haue their power in them.
            All the whiche perſonnes obeying vnto vs, we take and receiue into our ſafegard and protection, in like ſorte, as our other ſubiectes. Forbidding

moſte expreſſely all our ſaied ſubiects, to reproche them with any matter that is paſt: forbiddinge alſo all our Iudges and Officers to trouble them, or to moleſt them, either in their perſonnes, or in their goodes. We wil alſo and ordaine, that al priuat quarels, or particular grudges, be they betwene high or lowe, cōmunalties or Cities, or any other perſonnes of what qualite ſo euer they be, proceding of the ſaid troubles of Religion, be quenched and extinguiſhed, without any more word ſpeaking thereof, or any more ſearche made after them, vpon payne to be puniſhed as guilty of treaſon, and as diſtourbers of the common quiet. Forbiddinge moreouer to all our ſubiectes, that they prouoke not, nor reproche not one an other, either by worde or by dede. We declare alſo, that the ſaied twentie daies being paſſed, we wil procede againſt the obſtinate, and diſobediente, againſte all

their adherentes and complices, by all waies and maners dewe and permitted of God in ſuch caſe, without any more ſhewing of fauour for euer, and without exception of any.
            We geue alſo in commaundement by theſe preſents to our beloued and truſty, ſuche as holde our Courtes of Parlamēt, Baillyes, Stewards, Preuoſts, or their Lieutenants, and to al other our Iuſticers and officiers, and to euery one of them, as it ſhall to eche one appertayne, that our preſent Edict, Ordonance, will, and Intention, they cauſe to be read, publiſhed, and inregiſtred, that they intertayne it, kepe it, and obſerue it, and cauſe it to be intertayned, kept and obſerued, inuiolably and without breache. And to haue this done and ſuffred, that they conſtrayne, and cauſe to be conſtrayned, al, to whom it ſhal apperteine, and all which for this purpoſe they ſhal cauſe to be conſtrained: And to proceede

moſte expreſſely all our ſaied ſubiects, to reproche them with any matter that is paſt: forbiddinge alſo all our Iudges and Officers to trouble them, or to moleſt them, either in their perſonnes, or in their goodes. We wil alſo and ordaine, that al priuat quarels, or particular grudges, be they betwene high or lowe, cōmunalties or Cities, or any other perſonnes of what qualite ſo euer they be, proceding of the ſaid troubles of Religion, be quenched and extinguiſhed, without any more word ſpeaking thereof, or any more ſearche made after them, vpon payne to be puniſhed as guilty of treaſon, and as diſtourbers of the common quiet. Forbiddinge moreouer to all our ſubiectes, that they prouoke not, nor reproche not one an other, either by worde or by dede. We declare alſo, that the ſaied twentie daies being paſſed, we wil procede againſt the obſtinate, and diſobediente, againſte all

their adherentes and complices, by all waies and maners dewe and permitted of God in ſuch caſe, without any more ſhewing of fauour for euer, and without exception of any.
            We geue alſo in commaundement by theſe preſents to our beloued and truſty, ſuche as holde our Courtes of Parlamēt, Baillyes, Stewards, Preuoſts, or their Lieutenants, and to al other our Iuſticers and officiers, and to euery one of them, as it ſhall to eche one appertayne, that our preſent Edict, Ordonance, will, and Intention, they cauſe to be read, publiſhed, and inregiſtred, that they intertayne it, kepe it, and obſerue it, and cauſe it to be intertayned, kept and obſerued, inuiolably and without breache. And to haue this done and ſuffred, that they conſtrayne, and cauſe to be conſtrayned, al, to whom it ſhal apperteine, and all which for this purpoſe they ſhal cauſe to be conſtrained: And to proceede

againſt the trāſgreſſours, by the paines aboue ſaied.
            We commaunde alſo, that our ſaid Baylies, Stewars, Preuoſtes, and other our Officiers, do aduertiſe vs, and put vs to knowleadge, within a moneth after the publiſhing of theſe preſents, of their endeuour and diligence that they haue vſed, for the execution and obſeruation of the ſame. For ſuche is our pleaſure. Al maner of Edicts, Ordonances, commaundements, or Inhibitions to the contrary, notwithſtanding. All the which, in regard of the contentes in theſe preſentes, not yet in other matters preiudicating vnto them, we haue abrogated, and doe abrogate.
            In witneſſe hereof we haue ſigned theſe preſents with our owne hande, and haue cauſed to be put thereunto our Seale.
            
               Geuen at S. Maur de Foſſes, in the moneth of Septembre, in the yeare of grace. 1568.
            And of our Raigne, the eight.
            Signed,
CHARLES.


            
            
               And vpon the folde, By the Kinge, the Quene his Mother, my Lordes, the Duke of Anjou, and of Allenſon, brothers of the ſaied Kinge. My Lordes the Cardinals, of Bourbon, of Loraine, and of Guiſe. The Dukes of Nemours, of Longueuille, and of Aumale. The Mareſhals of Dampuille and of Coſſe. The Duke of Vzez. The Lorde of Moruillier. The Archebiſhop of Sans, the Biſhoppes of Anxerre, and of Lymoges, Al reſpectiuely Counſellers in the priuie Counſell of the ſaid Kinge. The Lordes of Lanſac and of Carnauallet, preſent.
               Signed,
DE L'AVBESPINE.
               
            
            
               
               And vnderneth, Viſa. And ſealed in grene waxe, vpon laces of ſilke read and grene.
            
            
               
                  Read, publiſhed and inregiſtred, the Kinges Attorney Generall hearing, requiring, and conſenting, at Paris in Parlement, the xxviij. day of Septembre, in the yeare. 1568.
               Thus ſigned.
Du Tillet.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
            An Edict, or ORDONANCE of the French King, conteining a Declaration, that he will not from hence forewarde, vſe for his Officers, either in matters of Iudgemēt, or in the Courtes of his Receites, ſuche as are of the newe pretended Religion.
            
               CHARLES by the grace of God, Kinge of France, to al thoſe that ſhall ſee theſe preſente Letters, greeting. The euil behauiour, whiche we haue heretofore knowen and perceiued in many of our

Officers, as wel in matters of Iudgemente, as in the Courtes of our Receites, which make profeſsion of the newe pretended Religion, ſhewinge themſelues ſo blinde in their affections, and ſo litle remembringe their duetie towards vs, that ſome of them, inſtede of wel and truly diſcharging their Offices, haue found the meanes to take vp certaine of our Cities, and to plucke them from our Obedience: Other haue ſeaſed vpō our Reuenues, and with the ſame haue relieued, ſuccoured, and abetted ſuche as tooke Armes againſte vs, to the great hinderance, dommage, and preiudice of our affayres: geaueth vs fayre warning in this time of troubles, renewed yet againe by thoſe whiche make profeſsion of the new pretended Religion,

taking Armes againſte vs, and doing all actes of hostilitie and enmitie against the Catholiques, our good and loyal ſubiects, to take aduiſe, that ſome good order may be ſette therin, for the preſeruation of our ſaid good and loyal ſubiects, who do verely perſwade themſelues, that they ſhal neuer obteine any dewe and lawfull adminiſtration of Iuſtice, at the hands of thoſe of the newe pretended Religion. And as litle hope haue they, that our Reuenues by them to be paied, will be at any time by them faithfully bestowed and employed to our Seruice and vſe. Who alſo for this cauſe deſire, that ſome prouiſion be made accordingly, and that nothing beforgotten, which may ſeme to the preſeruation and maintenance

of our Eſtate in al ſuerty and ſafetie.
            We geue therfore to vnderſtand, that we, by the aduiſe and deliberation of the Quene, our moſt excellent Ladie and Mother, of our moſt derely beloued Brother, the Duke of Anjou, ād of Bourbonnoys, ād our Lieutenāt General, repreſenting our perſon, throughout our whole Realme, Land, and Subiectes, of the Princes of our bloud, and other Princes, the honourable and chiefe Perſonages of our Priuie Counſell, haue declared, and do declare by theſe preſents, that we wil not vſe hereafter, the ſeruice of ſuch our ſaid Officers, of the ſaid newe Religion, vvhether they be of our Courts of Parlament, of our Exchecker, of our Grand Councel, Treaſurers of France, and Generals of our

Reuenues, Maisters of our Mintes, Bailies, Stewardes, Preuoſtes, or their Lieutenants, and other Officers whatſoeuer, being of the ſaid new Religiō, as wel in maters of Iudgement, and Courtes of our Receites, as in any other ſort. Diſcharging them for this intent, as moreouer we doe diſcharge them, of thoſe Eſtates and Offices to be herafter by vs diſpoſed, and to be beſtowed vppon ſuche Catholike perſonnes, ſufficient and capable, as ſhal to vs ſeme good.
            Notwithſtanding for ſo much as, emongeſt theſe our Officers, of the ſaied Religion, ſome there are, which are in Armes, in companie of them, whiche haue a freſhe taken Armes against vs, which reteine vnto them, aſsiſt them, helpe them, and abbette

them with their counſell, reliefe and poſſeſsions: and other ſome there are, which haue ſtaied and doe ſtaie them ſelues quietly vnder the toleration of our Edictes, of whome it is reaſon a difference be made, and that they be not dealed withal, in like manner as the other▪ We wil and ordeine, that ſuch our Officers of the ſaid Religiō, whiche haue not borne Armes with the ſaid Rebels, neither haue no maner of dealinge or intelligence with them, that within. xx. dayes of the publicatiō of theſe preſents, thei ſend vnto vs their Proxes, to geue vp into our handes their ſaid Eſtates and Offices. In which roomes we wil place Catholike Perſonnes, ſufficient and capable thereof, as hath ben ſaied. And touching ſuch paiementes of money

as ſhall fall out, by compoſition made for thoſe Offices, we ſhal cauſe a rente to be aſsigned vnto them, vpō the towne howſe of our good Citie and towne of Paris, whiche they and their heyres ſhal plainely and peaſeably enioye.
            We geue alſo in commaundemēt, to our beloued and truſty of our Courts of Parlements, of our Exchekers, of the Court of aydes, Baillyes, Stewards, Preuoſts, or their Lieutenants, and to all other our Iuſticers, Offycers and ſubiectes, that our preſent declaration, pleaſure, Intention, and that is here aboue cōteyned, they cauſe to be read, publiſhed, and inregiſtred, maintayned, kept, and obſerued inuiolably, without contradiction, or ſuffering of any Contradiction.

Ceaſing, and cauſing to be ceaſed, all troubles and lettes to the contrary. For ſuche is our Pleaſure.
            In witneſſe whereof we haue ſigned theſe preſentes, with our owne hande, and haue cauſed our Seale to be put thereto.
            Geuen at S. Maur des Foſſez: the xxv. daye of September. In the yeare of Grace. 1568. And of our reigne the eight.
            Signed,
CHARLES.


            
            
               And vpon the folde: By the KING, being in his Counſel: Fizes And vpon the ſide, Viſa.
               
               And ſealed with grene waxe, in laces of ſilke red and grene.
            
            
               
                  
                  Read, publiſhed and inregiſtred, the Kinges Atturney General hearing, requiring and conſenting, at Paris in Parlament, the xxviij. of Septembre. In the yere. 1568.
               
               Thus ſigned.
Du Tillet.
               
            
            
               Viri qui contenta horum Edictorum legerunt & approbarūt ſunt Anglici Idiomatis & ſacrae Theologiae peritiſsimi, quibus meritò credendum eſſe Iudico, & proinde haec tutò & ſecurè imprimi poſſe. 29. Octob.
               
                  Cunerus Petri, Paſtor S. Petri Louanij. Anno. 1568.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  RESPICITE VOLATILIA COELI, ET PVLLOS CORVORVM
               
            
            
         
      
   