
      
         
            
            
            AN EPICEDE OR Funerall Song: On the most disastrous Death, of the High-borne Prince of Men, HENRY Prince of WALES, &c. With The Funeralls, and Representation of the Herse of the same High and mighty Prince; Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewaile and Rothsay, Count Palatine of Chester, Earle of Carick, and late Knight of the most Noble Order of the GARTER. Which Noble Prince deceased at St. Iames, the sixt day of Nouember, 1612. and was most Princely interred the seuenth day of December following, within the Abbey of Westminster, in the Eighteenth yeere of his Age.
            LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Iohn Budge, and are to bee sould at his shop at the great south dore of Paules, and at Brittanes Bursse. 1612.
         
         
            
            
            TO MY AFFECTIONATE, AND TRVE Friend, Mr. Henry Iones.
            
            
               My truest Friend:
            
            
               THE most vnualuable and dismaifull hope of my most deare and Heroicall Patrone, Prince HENRY, hath so stricken all my spirits to the earth, that I will neuer more dare, to looke vp to any greatnesse; but resoluing the little rest of my poore life to obscuritie, and the shadow of his death; prepare euer hereafter, for the light of heauen.
            So absolute, constant, and noble, your loue hath beene to mee; that if I should not as effectually, by all my best expressions, acknowledge it; I could neither satisfie mine owne affection, nor deserue yours.
            Accept therefore, as freely as I acknowledge, this vnprofitable signe of my loue; till God blessing my future labours, I may adde a full end, to whatsoeuer is begunne in your assurance of my requitall. A little, blest, makes a great feast (my best friend) and therefore despaire not, but that, out of that little, our loues alwayes made euen, may make you say, you

haue rather beene happy in your kindnesse, then in the least degree, hurt. There may fauours passe betwixt poore friends, which euen the richest, and greatest may enuy. And GOD that yet neuer let me liue, I know will neuer let me die an empaire to any friend. If any good, more then requitall succeede, it is all yours as freely, as euer yours was mine; in which noble freedome and alacritie of doing; you haue thrice done, all I acknowledge. And thus knowing, I giue you little contentment, in this so farre vnexpected publication of my gratitude; I rest satisfied with the ingenuous discharge of mine owne office. Your extraordinary and noble loue and sorrow, borne to our most sweet PRINCE, entitles you worthily to this Dedication: which (with my generall Loue, vnfainedly protested to your whole Name and Family) I conclude you as desertfull of, at my hands, as our Noblest Earle; and so euer remaine
            
               Your most true poore Friend, GEO: CHAPMAN.
            
            
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  The Herse and Representacion of our late Highe and Mighty HENRY Prince of Wales. &c▪
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  AN EPICED, OR Funerall Song: On the most disastrous Death, of the High-borne Prince of Men, HENRY Prince of WALES, &c.
                  
                     IF euer aduerse Influence enui'd
                     The glory of our Lands, or tooke a pride
                     To trample on our height; or in the Eye
                     Strooke all the pomp of Principalitie,
                     Now it hath done so; Oh, if euer Heauen
                     Made with the earth his angry reckening euen,
                     Now it hath done so. Euer, euer be
                     Admir'd, and fear'd, that Triple Maiestie
                     VVhose finger could so easily sticke a Fate,
                     Twixt least Felicity, and greatest state;
                     
                        Such, as should melt our shore into a Sea,
                     And dry our Ocean with Calamitie.
                     Heauen open'd, and but show'd him to our eies,
                     Then shut againe, and show'd our Miseries.
                     
                        
                           Expostulatio à perturbatione.
                        O God, to what end are thy Graces giuen?
                     Onely to show the world, Men fit for Heauen,
                     Then rauish them, as if too good for Earth?
                     VVe know, the most exempt in wealth, power, Birth,
                     Or any other blessing; should employ
                     (As to their chiefe end) all things they enioy,
                     To make them fit for Heauen; and not pursue
                     VVith hearty appetite, the damned crue
                     Of meerely sensuall and earthye pleasures?
                     But whē one hath done so; shal strait the tresures
                     Digg'd to, in those deeps, be consum'd by death?
                     Shall not the rest, that error swalloweth,
                     Be, by the Patterne of that Master-peece,
                     Help't to instruct their erring faculties?
                     VVhen, without cleare example; euen the best
                     (That cannot put by knowledge to the Test
                     what they are taught) serue like the worst in field?
                     Is power to force, who will not freely yield,
                     (Being great assistant, to diuine example)
                     As vaine a Pillar to thy Manly Temple?
                     
                        when (without perfect knowledge, which scarce one
                     Of many kingdoms reach) no other stone
                     Man hath to build one corner of thy Phane,
                     Saue one of these? But when the desperate wane
                     Of power,
                           Potentia expers sapientiae quo maior est, eo perniciosior: sapientia procul à potentia manca videtur. Plat. and of example to all good,
                     So spent is, that one cannot turne the flood,
                     Of goodnes, gainst her ebbe; but both must plie,
                     And be at full to; or her streame will drie;
                     VVhere shall they meete againe, now he is gone
                     Where both went foot by foot; & both were one?
                     One that in hope, tooke vp to toplesse height
                     All his great Ancestors; his one saile, freight
                     VVith all, all Princes treasures; he like one
                     Of no importance; no way built vpon,
                     Vanisht vvithout the end, for vvhich he had
                     Such matchlesse vertues, & was God-l
                           •
                        ke made?
                     Haue thy best vvorkes no better cause t'expresse
                     Themselues like men, and thy true Images?
                     To toile in vertues study, to sustaine
                     (vvith comfort for her) want, & shame, & paine;
                     No nobler end in this life, then a death
                     Timeles, and wretched, wrought with lesse then breath?
                     And nothing solide, worthy of our soules?
                     Nothing that Reason, more then Sense extols!
                     
                        Nothing that may in perfect iudgement be
                     A fit foote for our Crowne eternitie?
                     All which, thou seem'st to tell vs, in this one
                     Killing discomfort; apt to make our mone
                     Conclude gainst all things, serious and good;
                     
                        
                           Chymaera, a monster, hauing his head and brest like a Lyon; his belly like a Gote; and taile like a Dragon.our selues, not thy forms, but Chymaeras brood.
                     Now Princes, dare ye boast your vig'rous states
                     That Fortunes breath thus builds and ruinates?
                     Exalt your spirits? trust in flowry youth?
                     Giue reynes to pleasure? all your humors sooth?
                     Licence in rapine? Powers exempt from lawes?
                     Contempt of all things, but your own applause?
                     And think your swindge to any tyranny giuen,
                     VVill stretch as broad, & last as long as heauen;
                     whē he that curb'd with vertues hand his powre
                     his youth with continence; his sweet with sowre
                     Boldnes with pious feare; his pallats height
                     Applied to health, and not to appetite;
                     Felt timeles sicknes charge; state, power to flie,
                     And glutted Death with all his crueltie.
                     
                        To Death.Partiall deuourer euer of the best,
                     VVith headlong rapture, sparing long the rest
                     Could not the precious teares his Father shed,
                     (That are with Kingdomes to be ransomed?)
                     
                        His Bleeding prayer,The Prayer of the King in the Princes sicknes. vpon his knees t'implore,
                     That if for any sinne of his, Heauen tore
                     From his most Royall body that chiefe Limme,
                     It might be ransom'd, for the rest of Him?
                     Could not the sacred eies thou didst prophane
                     In his great Mothers teares? The spightful bane
                     Thou pour'dst vpon the cheeks of al the Graces
                     In his more gracious Sisters? The defaces
                     (with all the Furies ouer-flowing Galles)
                     Cursedly fronting her neere Nuptials?
                     Could not, O could not, the Almighty ruth
                     Of all these force thee to forbeare the youth
                     Of our Incomparable Prince of Men?
                     whose Age had made thy Iron Forcke his Pen,
                     T'eternise what it now doth murder meerely;
                     And shal haue from my soule, my curses yerely.
                     Tyrant, what knew'st thou, but the barbarous wound
                     Thou gau'st the son, the Father might cōfound?
                     Both liu'd so mixtly, and were ioyntly One,
                     Spirit to spirit cleft. The Humor bred
                     In one heart, straight was with the other fed;
                     The bloud of one, the others heart did fire;
                     The heart and humour, were the Sonne & Sire;
                     
                        The heart yet, void of humors slender'st part,
                     May easier liue, then humour without heart;
                     The Riuer needes the helpfull fountaine euer,
                     More then the Fountaine, the supplyed Riuer.
                     
                        
                           Simil.
                        As th'Iron then, when it hath once put on
                     The Magnets qualitie, to the vertuous Stone
                     Is euer drawne, and not the stone to it:
                     
                        
                           Apodesis.
                        So may the heauens, the sonnes Fate, not admit
                     To draw the Fathers, till a hundred yeeres
                     Haue drown'd that Issue to him in our teares.
                     
                        
                           Reditio ad Principem.
                        Blest yet, and sacred shall thy memory be,
                     O-nothing-lesse-then-mortall Deitie.
                     Thy Graces, like the Sunne, to all men giuing;
                     Fatall to thee in death, but kill me liuing.
                     Now, as inuerted, like th'Antipodes,
                     
                     The world (in all things of desert to please)
                     Is falne on vs, with thee: thy ruines lye
                     On our burst bosomes, as if from the skye
                     The Day-star, greater then the world were driuen
                     Suncke to the Earth, and left a hole in Heauen;
                     throgh which, a secōd deluge now poures down
                     On our poore Earth; in which are ouer-flowne
                     The seeds of all the sacred Vertues, set
                     In his Spring-Court; where all the prime spirits met
                     
                        Of all our Kingdomes;Those that came to the Princes seruice seem'd (compared with the places they liu'd in before) to rise from death to the fields of life, intending the best part of yong and noble Gentlemen. as if from the death,
                     That in men liuing; basenes and rapine sheath,
                     VVhere they before liu'd, they vnwares were come
                     Into a free, and fresh Elisium;
                     Casting regenerate, and refined eyes
                     On him that rais'd them from their graues of vice,
                     Digg'd in their old grounds, to spring fresh on those
                     That his diuine Ideas did propose,
                     First to himselfe; & then would forme in them.
                     VVho did not thirst to plant his sonne neer him
                     as neer the Thames their houses? what one worth
                     VVas there in all our world, that set not forth
                     All his deserts, to Pilgrime to his fauors,
                     VVith all deuotion, offering all his labors?
                     And how the wilde Bore, Barbarisme, now
                     will roote these Quick-sets vp? what hearb shall grow,
                     that is not sown in his inhumane tracts?
                     No thought of good shall spring, but many acts
                     Will crop, or blast, or blow it vp: and see
                     How left to this,The parting of the Princes Seruants. the mournfull Familie,
                     Muffled in black clouds, full of teares are driuen
                     With stormes about the relickes of this Heauen;
                     Retiring from the world, like Corses, herst
                     Home to their graues, a hundred waies disperst.
                     
                        
                        The Princes house an Olimpus, where all contention of vertues were practised.O that this court-schoole; this Olimpus meerly,
                     VVhere two-fold Man was practisde; should so early
                     Dissolue the celebration purpos'd there,
                     Of all Heroique parts, when farre and neere,
                     All were resolu'd t'admire, None to contend,
                     VVhen, in the place of all, one wretched end
                     VVill take vp all endeauours; Harpye Gaine,
                     
                        
                           Non Homeri Aurea Restis
                        Pandare to Gote, Ambition; goulden Chaine
                     To true mans freedome; not from heau'n let fal
                     To draw men vp; But shot from Hell to hale
                     All men, as bondslaues, to his Turckish den,
                     For Toades, and Adders, far more fit then men.
                     
                        Saint Iames his house.His house had well his surname from a Saint,
                     
                     All things so sacred, did so liuely paint
                     Their pious figures in it: And as well
                     
                        Richmond.His other house, did in his Name fore-tell
                     what it should harbour; a rich world of parts
                     Bonfire-like kindling, the still-feasted Arts,
                     which now on bridles bite, and puft Contempt
                     Spurres to Despaire, from all fit foode exempt.
                     O what a frame of Good, in all hopes rais'd
                     Came tumbling downe with him! as when was seisde
                     By Grecian furie, famous Ilion,
                     
                     VVhose fall, still rings out his Confusion.
                     
                        VVhat Triumphs, scatterd at his feete, lye smoking!
                     Banquets that will not downe; their cherers choking,
                     Fields fought, and hidden now, with future slaughter,
                     Furies sit frowning, where late sat sweet laughter,
                     The actiue lying maim'd, the healthfull crasde?
                     All round about his Herse? And how amaz'd
                     The change of things stands! how astonisht ioy
                     VVonders he euer was? yet euery Toy
                     Quits this graue losse: Rainbowes no sooner taint
                     Thinne dewye vapors, which oppos'd beames paint
                     Round in an instant, (at which children stare
                     And slight the Sunne, that makes them circular
                     And so disparent) then mere gawds peirce men,
                     Slighting the graue, like fooles, and children.
                     So courtly nere plagues, sooth and stupefie
                     And vvith such paine, men leaue selfe flatterie.
                     Of vvhich,The Prince not to be wrought on by flattery. to see him free (who stood no lesse
                     Then a full siege of such) who can expresse
                     His most direct infusion from aboue,
                     Farre from the humorous seede of mortal loue?
                     He knew,His knowledge and wisdome. that Iustice simply vsd, vvas best,
                     Made princes most secure, most lou'd, most blest
                     No Artezan; No Scholler; could pretend,
                     No Statesman; No Diuine; for his owne end
                     
                        Any thing to him, but he vvould descend
                     The depth of any right belong'd to it,
                     Where they could merit, or himselfe should quit.
                     He would not trust, with what himselfe concern'd,
                     Any in any kinde; but euer learn'd
                     
                        Any man is capable of his own fit course and office in any thing.The grounds of what he built on: Nothing lies
                     In mans fit course, that his own knowledge flies
                     Eyther direct, or circumstantiall.
                     O what are Princes then, that neuer call
                     Their actions to account, but flatterers trust
                     To make their triall, if vniust or iust?
                     
                        
                           Apostrophe. Men grow so vgly by trusting flattery with their informations, that when they see themselues truely, by casting their eyes inward, they cast themselues away with their owne lothing.Flatterers are houshold theeues, traitors by law,
                     that rob kings honors, & their soules-bloud draw;
                     Diseases, that keep nourishment from their food.
                     And as to know himselfe, is mans chiefe good,
                     So that vvhich intercepts that supreame skill,
                     (which Flattery is) is the supreamest ill:
                     VVhose lookes will breede the Basilisk in kings eyes,
                     That by reflexion of his sight, dyes.
                     
                        
                           Simil.
                        And as a Nurse lab'ring a vvayward Childe,
                     Day, and night watching it, like an offspring wilde;
                     Talkes infinitely idly to it still;
                     Sings with a standing throate, to worse from ill;
                     
                        Lord-blesses it; beares with his pewks and cryes;
                     And to giue it a long lifes miseries,
                     Sweetens his food, rocks, kisses, sings againe;
                     Plyes it with rattles, and all obiects vaine:
                     So Flatterers, with as seruile childish things,
                     Obserue, & sooth the waiward moods of kings;
                     So kings, that flatterers loue, had neede to haue
                     as nurse-like councellors, & contemn the graue;
                     Themselues as wayward, and as noisome too;
                     Full as vntuneable in all they doe,
                     As poore sicke Infants; euer breeding Teeth
                     In all their humours, that be worse then Death.
                     How wise then was our Prince that hated these,
                     and wold with nought but truth his humor plese
                     Nor would hee giue a place, but where hee saw
                     One that could vse it; and become a Law
                     Both to his fortunes, and his Princes Honor.
                     Who wold giue fortune noght she took vpon her,
                     Not giue but to desert; nor take a chance,
                     That might not iustly, his vvisht ends aduance.
                     His Good he ioyn'd with Equitie and Truth;
                     VVisedome in yeeres, crown'd his ripe head in youth;
                     His heart wore all the folds of Policie,
                     Yet went as naked as Simplicitie.
                     
                        Knew good and ill; but onely good did loue;
                     In him the Serpent did embrace the Doue.
                     Hee was not curious to sound all the streame
                     Of others acts, yet kept his owne from them:
                     " He whose most darke deeds dare not stand the light,
                     " Begot was of imposture and the night.
                     " VVho surer then a Man, doth ends secure;
                     " Eyther a God is, or a Diuell sure.
                     The President of men; whom (as men can)
                     All men should imitate, was God and Man.
                     In these cleere deepes our Prince fish't troubl'd streams
                     of bloud & vantage challenge diadems.
                     In summe, (knot-like) hee was together put,
                     That no man could dissolue, and so was cut.
                     But we shal see our foule-mouth'd factions spite
                     (Markt, witch-like, with one blacke eie, th'other white)
                     Ope, & oppose against this spotlesse sun;
                     Such heauen strike blinder thē th'eclipsed moon
                     Twixt whom and noblesse, or humanities truth,
                     As much dull earth lies, and as little ruth,
                     (Should all things sacred perish) as there lyes
                     Twixt Phaebe, and the Light-fount of the skies,
                     In her most darke delinquence: vermine right,
                     That prey in darknesse, and abhorre the light;
                     
                        Liue by the spoile of vertue; are not well
                     But when they heare newes, frō their father hell
                     Of some blacke mischiefe; neuer do good deed,
                     But where it does much harme, or hath no need.
                     What shall become of vertues far-short traine,
                     when thou their head art reacht, high Prince of men?
                     O that thy life could haue disperst deaths stormes,
                     To giue faire act to those Heroique formes,
                     with which al good rules had enricht thy mind,
                     Preparing for affayres of euery kinde;
                     Peace being but a pause to breathe fierce warre;
                     No warrant dormant, to neglect his Starre;
                     The licence sense hath, is t'informe the soule;
                     Not to suppresse her, and our lusts extoll;
                     This life in all things, to enioy the next;
                     Of which lawes, thy youth, both contain'd the text
                     And the contents; ah, that thy grey-ripe yeeres
                     Had made of all, Caesarean Commentares,
                     (More then can now be thoght) in fact t'enroule;
                     And make blacke Faction blush away her soule.
                     That,
                           Simil.
                         as a Temple, built when Pietie
                     Did to diuine ends offer specially,
                     What men enioy'd; that wondrous state exprest,
                     Strange Art, strange cost; yet who had interest
                     
                        In all the frame of it; and saw those dayes,
                     Admir'd but little; and as little praise
                     Gaue to the goodly Fabricke: but when men,
                     That liue whole Ages after, view it, then,
                     They gaze, and wonder; and the longer time
                     It stands, the more it glorifies his prime;
                     Growes fresh in honor, and the age doth shame
                     That in such Monuments neglect such fame;
                     So had thy sacred Frame beene rais'd to height,
                     Forme, fulnesse, ornament: the more the light
                     Had giuen it view, the more had Men admir'd;
                     And tho men now are scarce to warmnesse fir'd
                     VVith loue of thee; but rather colde and dead
                     To all sense of the grace they forfeited
                     In thy neglect, and losse; yet after-ages
                     VVould be inflam'd, and put on holy rages
                     with thy inspiring vertues; cursing those
                     VVhose breaths dare blast thus, in the bud, the Rose.
                     But thou (woe's me) art blown vp before blowne,
                     And as the ruines of some famous Towne,
                     Show here a Temple stood; a Pallace, here;
                     A Cytadell, an Amphitheater;
                     Of which (ahlas) some broken Arches, still
                     (Pillars, or Columns rac't; which Art did fill
                     
                        VVith all her riches and Diuinitie)
                     Retaine their great, and vvorthy memory:
                     So of our Princes state, I nought rehearse
                     But show his ruines, bleeding in my verse.
                     What poison'd Ast'risme, may his death accuse?
                     Tell thy astonisht Prophet (deathles Muse)
                     And make my starres therein, the more aduerse,
                     The more aduance, vvith sacred rage my Verse,
                     And so adorne my dearest Fautors Herse.
                     That all the wits prophane, of these bold times
                     May feare to spend the spawne of their rancke rymes
                     On any touch of him, that shold be sung
                     To eares diuine, and aske an Angels tongue.
                     VVith this it thundred; and a lightning show'd
                     VVhere she sate writing in a sable cloud;
                     A Penne so hard and sharpe exprest her plight,
                     It bit through Flint; and did in Diamant write;
                     Her vvords, she sung, and laid out such a brest,
                     As melted Heauen, and vext the very blest.
                     In which she cal'd all worlds to her complaints,
                     And how our losse grew,
                           Musae lachrimae.
                         thus vvith teares shee paints:
                     Hear earth & heauen (& you that haue no eares)The cause and manner of the Princes death.
                     
                     Hell, and the hearts of tyrants, heare my teares:
                     
                        Thus Brittaine Henry tooke his timelesse end;
                     VVhen his great Father did so far transcend
                     All other Kings; and that he had a Sonne
                     In all his Fathers gifts, so farre begunne,
                     As added to Fames Pynions, double wings;
                     And (as braue riuers, broken from their springs,
                     The further off, grow greater, and disdame
                     To spread a narrower current then the Maine)
                     Had drawne in all deserts such ample Spheares,
                     As Hope yet neuer turn'd about his yeeres.
                     All other Princes with his parts comparing;
                     Like all Heauens pettie Luminaries faring,
                     To radiant Lucifer, the dayes first borne)
                     
                        
                           Rhamnusia (Goddesse of reuenge, and taken for Fortune) in enuy of our Prince, excited Feuer against him.It hurld a fire red as a threatning Morne
                     On fiery Rhamnusias sere, and sulphurous spight,
                     who turn'd the sterne orbs of her ghastly sight,
                     About each corner of her vaste Command,
                     And (in the turning of her bloudy hand)
                     Sought how to ruine endlesly our Hope,
                     
                        The Feuer the Prince died on (by Prosopopeia) described by her effects & circumstances.And set to all mishap all entries ope.
                     And see how ready meanes to mischiefe are;
                     She saw, fast by, the bloud-affecting Feuer,
                     
                     (Euen when th'Autumnal-starre began t'expire)
                     Gathering in vapours thinne, Ethereall fire:
                     
                        Of which, her venomde finger did jmpart
                     To our braue Princes fount of heat, the heart;
                     A praeternaturall heat; which through the vaines
                     And Arteries, by'th blood and spirits meanes
                     Diffus'd about the body, and jnflam'd,
                     Begat a Feuor to be neuer nam'd.
                     And now this loather of the louely Light,
                     (Begot of Erebus, and vglie Night)
                     Mounted in hast, her new, and noysefull Carre,
                     Whose wheeles had beam-spokes frō th'Hungarian star;
                     And all the other frame,The Fever the Prince dyed off, is observ'd by our Moderne Phisitions to bee begun in Hungarie. and freight; from thence
                     Deriu'd their rude and ruthlesse jnfluence.
                     Vp to her left side, lept jnfernall Death
                     His head hid in a cloud of sensuall breath;
                     By her sat furious Anguish, Pale Despight;
                     
                        Murmure, and Sorrow, and possest Affright;
                     Yellow Corruption, Marow-eating Care;
                     Languor, chill Trembling, fits Irregulare;
                     Inconstant Collor, feeble voyc't Complaint;
                     
                        Relentles Rigor, and Confusion faint;
                     
                        Frantick Distemper;Out of the property of the Hare that never shuts her eyes sleeping. & Hare-eyd vnrest;
                     And short-breath'd Thirst, with th'euer-burning breast
                     A wreath of Adders bound her trenched Browes;
                     Where Tormēt Ambusht lay with all her throws
                     
                        
                        
                           Marmaricae Leunes, of Marmarica a Region in Affrica where the fiercest Lyons are bred; with which Feuer is supposd to bee drawn, for their excesse of heat & violence, part of the effects of this Feuer. The properties of the Feuer in these effects.
                        Marmarian Lyons, frindg'd with slaming Manes,
                     
                     Drew this grym furie, and her brood of Banes,
                     
                     Their hearts of glowing Coles, murmurd, & ror'd,
                     To beare her crook't yokes, and her Banes abhord,
                     To their deare Prince, that bore them in his Armes,
                     
                     And should not suffer, for his Good, their Harmes;
                     Then from Hels burning whirlepit vp she hallde,
                     The horrid Monster fierce Echidna calde;
                     That from her Stigian Iawes, doth vomit ever,
                     
                        Quitture, and Venome, yet is empty neuer:
                     Then burnt her bloudshot eyes, her Temples yet
                     Were cold as Ice, her Necke all drownd in swet:
                     
                        Palenes spred all her breast, her lifes heat stung:
                     The Minds Interpreter, her scorched tongue,
                     Flow'd with blew poison: frō her yawning Mouth
                     
                     Rhumes fell like spouts fild frō the stormy South:
                     Which being corrupt, the hewe of Saffron tooke,
                     A feruent Vapor, all her body shooke:
                     From whence, her Vexed Spirits, a noysome smell,
                     Expyr'd in fumes that lookt as blacke as Hell.
                     
                     A ceaseles Torrent did her Nosthrils steepe,
                     Her witherd Entrailes tooke no rest, No sleepe:
                     
                     Her swoln throte ratl'd, warmd with lifes last spark
                     And in her salt jawes, painfull Coughs did barke:
                     
                        Her teeth were staind with Rust, her sluttish hand
                     Shee held out reeking like a New-quencht Brand:
                     
                     Arm'd with crook'd Tallons like the horned Moone,
                     
                     All Cheere, all Ease, all Hope with her was gone:
                     In her left hand a quenchles fire did glow,
                     And in her Right Palme freez'd Sithonian Snow:
                     The ancient Romanes did a Temple build
                     To her, as whome a Deitie they held:
                     So hyd, and farre from cure of Man shee flyes,
                     In whose Lifes Power she mates the Deities.
                     When fell Rhamnusia saw this Monster nere,
                     (Here steele Heart sharpning) thus she spake to her:
                           Rhamnusi
                                 •
                              
                            excitatiō of feuer
                     
                     Seest thou this Prince (great Maid & seed of Night)
                     Whose brows cast beams about thē, like the Light:
                     Who joyes securely in all present State,
                     
                     Nor dreams what Fortune is, or future Fate:
                     
                     At whome, with fingers, and with fixed eyes
                     All Kingdomes Point, and Looke, and Sacrifice:
                     
                     Could be content to giue him: Temples rayse
                     To his Expectance, and Vnbounded Praise:
                     
                     His Now-ripe Spirits, and Valor doth despise,
                     
                        Sicknesse, and Sword, that giue our Godheads Prise:
                     His worth contracts the worlds, in his sole Hope,
                     
                     
                        Religion, Vertue, Conquest haue no scope:
                     
                        But his Indowments; At him, at him, flie;
                     More swift, and timelesse, more the Deitie;
                     His Sommer, Winter with the jellid flakes;
                     His pure Life, poyson, sting out with thy Snakes;
                     This is a worke will Fame thy Maidenhead:
                     
                        
                           Rham: durst no lō
                           ger indure her, beeing stirred into furie.With this, her speach and she together fledde;
                     Nor durst she more endure her dreadfull eyes;
                     Who stung with goads her roaring Lyons thyes;
                     And brandisht, round about, her Snak-curld head
                     
                        The starry Euening describ'd by Vulcans setting to worke at that time. The Night being ever chiefesly consecrate to the Works of the Gods, and out of this Deities fires, the Starres are supposd to flye; as sparkles of them.With her left hand, the Torch it managed.
                     And now Heavens Smith, kindl'd his Forge & blew;
                     And throgh the round Pole, thick the sparkls flew
                     When great Prince Henrie, the delight of fame;
                     Darkn'd the Pallace, of his Fathers Name;
                     And hid his white lyms, in his downie Bed;
                     Then Heaven wept falling Stars that summoned
                     (With soft, and silent Motion) sleepe to breath
                     On his bright Temples, th'Ominous forme of death;
                     Which now the cruel Goddes did permit,
                     That she might enter so, her Mayden fit;
                     When the good Angell, his kind Guardian,
                     Her withet'd foot, saw neare this spring of Man;
                     
                        The good Angell of the Prince to the Fever, as shee approache.He shrik't and said: what, what are thy rude ends;
                     Cannot, in him alone, all vertues friends,
                     
                        (Melted into his all-vpholding Neru's;
                     For whose Assistance, euery Deity serues)
                     Mooue thee to proue thy Godhead, blessing him
                     With long long life, whose light extinckt, wil dim,
                     All heavenly graces? all this, moou'd her nought;
                     But on, & in his, all our rujnes wrought:
                     She toucht the Thresholds, and the thresholds shooke;
                     The dore-posts, Palenes pierst with her faint look:
                     The dores brake open, and the fatall Bed
                     Rudely sh'aproacht, & thus her fell mouth said;
                     
                        Henrie,
                        Feuer to the prince; who is thougght by a friend of mine to speake too mildly; not being satis compos mē
                              tis Portice, in this. Her counsell or perswasiō, shewing onlie how the Prince was perswaded & resolu'd in his deadlyest sufferāce of her which shee is made to speake in spight of her selfe, since he at her worst was so sacredly resolute. why tak'st thou thus thy rest secure?
                     Nought doubting what Fortune & fates assure;
                     Thou neuer yet felt'st my red right hands maims,
                     That I co thee, and fate to me proclaimes;
                     Thy fate stands jdle; spinns no more thy thread;
                     Die thou must (great Prince) sigh not; beare thy head
                     In all things free, even with necessity
                     If sweet it be to liue; tis sweet to dye:
                     This said shee shooke at him her Torch, and cast
                     A fire in him, that all his breast embrac't,
                     Then darting through his heart a deadly cold,
                     And as much venome as his vaines could holdj
                     Death, Death, O Death, jnserting, thrusting in,
                     Shut his faire eyes, and op't our vglie sinne:
                     
                        This seene resolu'd on, by her selfe and fate;
                     Was there a sight so pale, and desperate,
                     Euer before seene, in a thrust-through State?
                     
                        Descriptiō of the tempest that cast Sir Th. Ga
                                 •
                              es on the Bermudas, & the state of his Ship and Men, to this Kingdomes Plight applyed in the Princes death.The poore Verginian, miserable sayle,
                     
                        A long-long-Night-turnd-Day, that liu'd in Hell
                     Neuer so portrayd, where the Billowes stroue
                     (Blackt like so many Devils) which should proue
                     The damned Victor; all their furies heighting;
                     Their Drum, the thunder; & their Colours lightning,
                     Both souldiers in the battel; one contēding
                     To drown the waues in Noyse; the other spēding
                     His Hel-hot sulphurous flames to drink thē dry:
                     When heaven was lost, when not a teare-wrackt eye,
                     Could tell in all that dead time, if they were,
                     Sincking or sayling; till a quickning cleere
                     Gaue light to saue them by the ruth of Rocks
                     At the Bermudas; where the tearing shocks
                     And all the Miseries before, more felt
                     Then here halfe told; All, All this did not melt
                     Those desperate few, still dying more in teares,
                     Then this Death, all men, to the Marrow weares:
                     All that are Men; the rest, those drudging Beasts,
                     That onely beare of Men, the Coates, and Crests;
                     And for their Slaue, sick, that can earne thē pence,
                     
                        More mourne (O Monsters) thē for such a Prince;
                     Whose soules do ebbe & flow still with their gain,
                     Whō nothing moues but pelf, & their own pain;
                     Let such (great Heauen) be onely borne to beare,
                     All that can follow this meere Massacre.
                     Lost is our poore Prince; all his sad jndurers;
                     The busie Art of those that should be Curers;
                     The sacred vowes made by the zealous King,
                     His God-like Syre; his often visiting;
                     Nor thy graue prayers and presence (holy Man)The Archbishop of Cantebury passing pyous in care of the Prince. S. Ed: Phillips Master of the Rols and the Princes Chancelor, a chiefe sorrower for hlm.
                     
                     This Realme thrice Reverend Metropolitan,
                     That was the worthy Father to his soule▪
                     
                     Th'jnsulting Feuer could one fit controule.
                     Nor let me here forget on farre, and neare;
                     And in his lifes loue, Passing deepe and deare;
                     That doth his sacred Memorie adore,
                     Virtues true favtor his graue Chancellor,
                     
                     Whose worth in all workes should a Place enioie,
                     Where his fit Fame her Trumpet shall jmploie,
                     Whose Cares, and Prayers, were euer vsde to ease
                     His feu'rous Warre, & send him healthfull peace,
                     Yet sicke our Prince is still; who though the steps
                     Of bitter Death, he saw bring in by heaps
                     Clouds to his Luster, and poore rest of light;
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                        And felt his last Day suffering lasting Night;
                     His true-bred-braue soule, shrunck yet at no part,
                     
                        The prince heroical his bearing his sicknes at the Kings comming to see him, careful not to discomfort him.Downe kept he all sighs, with his powers al-Hart;
                     Cler'd euen his dying browes: and (in an Eye
                     Manly dissembling) hid his Misery.
                     And all to spare the Royall heat so spent
                     In his sad Father, fearefull of th'event.
                     And now did Phoebus with his Twelfth Lampe show
                     
                        The Twelfth day after his beginning to bee sicke, his sicknes was hold incurable.The world his haples light: and in his Brow
                     A Torch of Pitch stuck, lighting halfe t'half skies,
                     When lifes last error prest the broken eyes
                     Of this heart-breaking Prince; his forc't look fled;
                     Fled was all Colour from his cheekes; yet fed
                     His spirit, his sight: with dying now, he cast
                     On his kind King, and Father: on whome, fast
                     He fixt his fading beames: and with his view
                     A little did their empty Orbs renew:
                     
                        The prince dying to the King.His Mind saw him, come frō the deeps of Death,
                     To whome he said, O Author of my Breath:
                     Soule to my life, and essence to my Soule,
                     Why grieue you so, that should al griefe cōtroule?
                     Death's sweet to me, that you are stil lifes creature,
                     I now haue finisht the great worke of Nature.
                     I see you pay a perfect Fathers debt
                     
                        And in a feastfull Peace your Empire kept;
                     If your true Sonnes last words haue any right
                     In your most righteous Bosome, doe not fright
                     your hearkning kingdoms to your cariage now;
                     All yours, in mee, I here resigne to you,
                     My youth (I pray to God with my last powres)
                     Substract from me may adde to you and yours.
                     Thus vanisht he, thus swift, thus instantly;
                     Ah now I see,The sorrowes and bemones of the King Queene, Prince and his most Princely Sister, for the Princes death. euen heauenly powres must dye.
                     Now shift the King and Queene from court to court
                     but no way can shift off their cares resort,
                     That which we hate the more vve flie, pursues,
                     that which we loue, the more we seek, eschewes:
                     Now weepes his Princely Brother; Novv alas
                     His Cynthian Sister, (our sole earthly Grace)
                     Like Hebes fount still ouerflowes her bounds,
                     And in her colde lips, stick astonisht sounds,
                     Sh'oppresseth her sweet kinde; In her soft brest
                     Care can no vent finde, it is so comprest:
                     And see hovv the Promethean Liuer growesThe funerall described.
                     
                     As vulture Griefe deuoures it: see fresh showes
                     Reuiue woes sence, and multiply her soule;
                     And worthely; for vvho would teares controle
                     On such a springing ground? Tis dearely fit,
                     To pay all tribute, Thought can poure on it:
                     
                        For vvhy vvere Funerals first vs'd but for these,
                     Presag'd and cast in their Natiuities?
                     The streames were checkt a while: so Torrents staid
                     Enrage the more; but are (left free) allaid.
                     Now our grim waues march altogether; Now
                     Our blacke seas runne so high, they ouerflow
                     the clouds they nourish; now the gloomy herse
                     Puts out the Sunne: Reuiue, reuiue (dead vierse)
                     death hath slain death; there ther the person lies
                     VVhose death should buy out all mortalities.
                     But let the world be now a heape of death,
                     Lifes ioy lyes dead in him, and challengeth
                     No lesse a reason: If all motion stoode
                     Benumb'd and stupified, with his frozen blood;
                     And like a Tombe-stone, fixt, lay all the seas
                     There were fit pillers for our Hercules
                     To bound the world with: Men had better dye
                     Then out-liue free times; slaues to Policie.
                     On on sad Traine, as from a crannid rocke
                     Bee-swarmes rob'd of their honey, ceasles flock.
                     Mourne, mourne, dissected now his cold lims lie
                     Ah, knit so late vvith flame, and Maiestie.
                     where's now his gracious smile, his sparkling eie
                     His Iudgement, Valour, Magnanimitie?
                     O God, what doth not one short hour snatch vp
                     
                        Of all mans glosse? still ouer-flowes the cup
                     Of his burst cares; put with no nerues together,
                     And lighter, then the shadow of a feather.
                     On: make earth pomp as frequent as ye can,
                     'Twill still leaue black, the fairest flower of man;
                     Yee vvell may lay all cost on miserie,
                     Tis all can boast, the proud'st humanitie.
                     If yong Marcellus had to grace his fall,
                     Sixe hundred Herses at his Funerall;
                     
                        Sylla sixe thousand; let Prince Henry haue
                     Sixe Millions bring him to his greedy graue.
                     And now the States of earth, thus mourn below
                     Behold in Heauen, Loue with his broken Bow;
                     his quiuer downwards turn'd, his brands put out
                     Hanging his wings; with sighes all black about.
                     Nor lesse, our losse, his Mothers heart infests,
                     Her melting palmes, beating her snowy brests;
                     As much confus'd, as when the Calidon Bore
                     The thigh of her diuine Adonis tore:
                     Her vowes all vaine, resolu'd to blesse his yeeres
                     VVith Issue Royall, and exempt from freres;
                     Who now dyed fruitlesse; and preuented then
                     The blest of women, of the best of men.
                     Mourne all ye Arts, ye are not of the earth;
                     Fall, fall with him; rise with his second birth.
                     
                        Lastly, with gifts enrich the sable Phane,
                     And odorous lights eternally maintaine;
                     Sing Priests, O sing now, his eternall rest,
                     His light eternall; and his soules free brest
                     As ioyes eternall; so of those the best;
                     And this short verse be on his Tomb imprest.
                  
                  
                     EPITAPHIVM.
                     SO flits, ahlas, an euerlasting Riuer,
                     As our losse in him, past, will last for euer.
                     The golden Age, Star-like, shot through our Skye;
                     Aim'd at his pompe renew'd, and stucke in's eye.
                     And (like the sacred knot, together put)
                     Since no man could dissolue him, he was cut.)
                  
                  
                     Aliud EPITAPH.
                     VVHom all the vaste frame of the fixed Earth
                     Shrunck vnder; now, a weake Herse stands beneath;
                     His Fate, he past in fact; in hope, his Birth;
                     His youth, in good life; and in spirit, his death.
                  
                  
                     Aliud EPITAPH.
                     BLest be his great Begetter; blest the Wombe
                     That gaue him birth, though much too neare his Tombe
                     In them was hee, and they in him were blest;
                     What their most great powers gaue him, was his least,
                     His Person grac't the Earth; and of the Skies,
                     His blessed Spirit, the praise is, and the prise.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE FVNERALS OF THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE HENRY, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewaile and Rothsay, Count Palatine of Chester, Earle of Carick, and late KNIGHT of the most Noble Order of the GARTER. Which Noble Prince deceased at St. Iames, the sixt day of Nouember, 1612. and was most Princely interred the seuenth day of December following, within the Abbey of Westminster, in the Eighteenth yeere of his AGE.
                  
                     LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Iohn Budg
                           •
                        e, and are to be sould at his shop at the great south dore of P
                           •
                        ules, and at Brittanes Bursse. 1613.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE FVNERALS OF THE HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCE HENRY, Prince of VVales, Duke of Cornewaile and Rothsay, Count Palatine of Chester, Earle of Carick, and late Knight of the most Noble Order of the GARTER.
                  VVhich Noble Prince deceased at Saint IAMES, the 6. day of Nouember, 1612. and was most Princely interred the 7. of December following, within the Abbey of Westminster, in the Eighteenth yeere of his AGE.
                  
                     
                        THe body of the said PRINCE being bowelled, enbalmed and closed vp in Lead, there were foure Chambers hung with blackes, viz. the Gaurd chamber and the Presence with blacke Cloth, the Priuy Chamber with finer Cloth,

and that which was his Highnes Bed-chamber, with blacke Veluet: in the middest whereof was set vp a Canopy of blacke Veluet, valanced, and fringed; vnder which vpon Tressels the Coffin with the body of the PRINCE was placed, couered with a large pall of blacke Veluet and adorned with Scuchions of his Armes. Vpon the head of which Coffin was layde a Cushion of blacke Veluet, and his Highnesse Cap and Coronet set thereon, as also his Robes of estate, Sword and Rod of Gould; and so it remayned (being daily and nightly watched) vntill two or three dayes before his Highnesse Funerals. In which time euery day, both Morning and Euening Prayers were said in his Presence or Priuy Chamber, by his Chaplaines, and his Gentlemen and chiefe Officers attendant thereat.
                     Thursday before the Funeralls his Princely body was brought forth of his Bed-chamber into his priuie chamber.
                     Friday, it was brought into his Presence-chamber and set vnder his cloath of estate.
                     Satterday, the fift of December, about three of the clocke in the after-noone it was remoued into the Guard-chamber, where all his chiefe seruants and Officers being assembled, and the Officers of Armes in their Coates, the corps was solempnly carried into the Chappell of that house, and placed vnder a canopy in the middest of the Quire, the Bishop of Lich-field red the Seruice, and the Gentlemen of the Kings Chappell, with

the children thereof, sung diuers excellent Antheams, together with the Organs, and other winde instruments, which likewise was performed the day following, being Sunday.
                     Munday, the 7. of December, (the Funerall day) the representation was layd vpon the Corps, and both together put into an open Charior, and so proceeded as followeth:
                  
                  
                     
                        Pooremen, in gownes, to the number of 140.
                     
                        
                           About 300. Gentlemens seruants.
                        
                           About 300. Esquires seruants.
                        
                           About 300. Knights seruants.
                        
                           About 300. Baronets seruants.
                        
                           About 300. Barons sonnes seruants.
                        
                           About 300. Viscount sonnes seruants.
                        
                           About 300. Earles sonnes seruants.
                     
                     Two Drummes and a Fife, their Drummes couered with blacke cloth, and Scuchions of the Prince his Armes therevpon.
                  
                  
                     
                        Portesmouth, Pursuiuant of Armes.
                     The great Standard of Prince HENRY, being a Lyon crowned, standing on a Chappean, borne by Sir Iohn Win, KNIGHT and Baronet, the Motto therein, Fax mentis honestae gloria.
                     
                     
                        
                        About 306. Prince HENRY his Houshold Seruants, according to their seuerall Offices and Degrees: with Trades-men and Artificers that belonged vnto his Highnesse.
                  
                  
                     Trumpets.
                     The Coronet of the Prince, being the three Feathers in a Crownet, with his Motto: Iuuat ire per altum; borne by Sir Roger Dallison, Knight and Baronet.
                     
                        
                           About 360. Barons seruants.
                        
                           About 360. Viscounts seruants.
                        
                           About 360. Earles seruants: as well English as Strangers.
                        
                           About 360. The Duke of Lenox his seruants.
                        
                           About 360. The Lord Chauncellors seruants.
                        
                           About 360. Count Henry de Nassau his seruants.
                     
                  
                  
                     Trumpets.
                     A Banner of th'Earledome of Carick, borne by Sir Dauid Fowles.
                     
                     A Horse led by a Quirry of the Stable; the Horse was couered with blacke cloath, and armed with Scuchions of that Earledome, hauing his Cheiffron and Plumes.
                     
                        
                        
                           About 80. Archbishops seruants.
                        
                           About 80. Prince Palatine his seruants.
                        
                           About 80. Prince Charles his seruants.
                     
                  
                  
                     Blew-mantle Pursuyuant of Armes.
                     A Banner of the Earledome of Chester, borne by the Lord Howard of Effingham.
                     
                     A Horse led by a Quirry of the Stable, couered with blacke cloath, and armed with Scuchions of that Earledome, his Cheiffron and Plumes.
                     
                        
                           About 40. Faulconers and Huntsmen.
                        
                           About 40. Clearkes of the workes.
                        
                           About 40. Clearkes of the Poultry.
                        
                           About 40. Clearkes of the Acatry.
                        
                           About 40. Clearkes of the Larder.
                        
                           About 40. Clearkes of the Spicery.
                        
                           About 40. Clearkes of the Kitchin.
                        
                           About 40. Clearkes of the Coffery.
                        
                           About 40. Clearkes of the Stable.
                        
                           About 40. Clearkes of the Auery.
                        
                           About 40. Clearkes of the Wardrobe.
                        
                           About 40. Mr. of the Workes.
                        
                           About 40. Pay-Mr.
                        
                           About 40. And Clearke Comptroller.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           About 60. Seriants of the Vestry.
                        
                           About 60. Children of the Chappell.
                        
                           About 60. Gentlemen of the Chappell in rich Copes.
                        
                           About 60. Musitians.
                        
                           About 60. Apothecaries and Surgions.
                        6. Doctors of Physicke.
                        24. The Princes Chapleyns.
                     
                  
                  
                     Portcullis Pursuyuant of Armes.
                     A Banner of the Dukedome of Rothsay, borne by the Lord Bruse, Baron of Kinlosse.
                     
                     A Horse led by a Quirry of the Stable, couered with blacke cloath, armed with Scuchions of that Dukedome, his Cheiffron and Plumes.
                     
                        
                           About 80. Pages of the Chamber.
                        
                           About 80. Gentlemen, the Princes seruants extraordinary.
                        
                           About 80. The Princes Solicitor, and Counsell at Law.
                        
                           About 80. Groome Porter.
                        
                           About 80. Gentlemen Vshers, quarter Waiters.
                        
                           About 80. Groomes of the Priuy-Chamber extraordinary.
                        
                           About 80. Groomes of the Priuy-Chamber in ordinary.
                        
                           About 80. Groomes of the Bed-chamber.
                        
                           About 80. Pages of the Bed-chamber, and the Princes owne Page.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Rouge-Dragon Pursuyuant.
                     A Banner of the Dukedome of Cornewall, borne by the Lord Clifford.
                     
                     A Horse led by Mr. Henry Alexander, couered with blacke cloath, armed with Scuchions of that Dukedome, his Cheiffron and Plumes.
                     
                        
                           About 146. Count Henrickes Gentlemen.
                        
                           About 146. Count Palatines Gentlemen, viz.
                           
                              
                                 viz. Mounsieur Eltz.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Helmstadt.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Colbe.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Benefer.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Adolshein.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Nenzkin.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Walbron.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Waldgraue.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Factes.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Carden.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Berlinger.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Grorode.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Cawlt.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Stensels.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Ridzell.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Helinger.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Henbell.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Auckensten.
                              
                              
                                 
                                 viz. Mouns. Gellu.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Wallyne.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Pellinger.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Berlipps.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Shott.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Weldensten.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Croilesemere.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Leuinsten.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Pathenes.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Colbe.
                              
                           
                           
                              Scultetez.
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Rampf.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Dawnsier.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Maier.
                              
                              
                                 viz. Mouns. Wanebach.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           About 146. Prince Charles his Gentlemen.
                        
                           About 146. Gentlemen of Prince Henries Priuy-Chamber extraordinary.
                        
                           About 146. Knights and Gentlemen of his Highnesse Priuy-Chamber in ordinary, and of his Bed-Chamber, with Sewers, Caruers, and Cupbearers.
                        
                           About 146. The Prince his Secretary.
                        
                           About 146. The Prince his Thresorer of his Houshold. The Thresorer of his Reuenewes, and the Comptroller of his Houshould together, bearing their white staues.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Roug-croix Pursuyuant of Armes.
                     A Banner of the Princes Principalitie of Scotland, with a Labell, borne by the Viscount Fenton.
                     
                     A Horse led by Sir Sigismond Alexander, couered with blacke cloath, armed with Scuchions of that Kingdome, his Cheiffron and Plumes.
                     Baronets.
                     Barons yonger sonnes.
                     Sir Edward Phillips, Mr. of the Roles, being the Prince his Chaunceller, going alone.
                     Knights Priuy Councellors to the KING: viz.
                     
                     
                        Sir Iohn Herbart, Secretary.
                        Sir Iulius Cesar Chaunceller of the Exchequer.
                        Sir Thomas Parry, Chaunceller of the Duchie of Lancaster.
                        
                     
                     Barons eldest sonnes.
                  
                  
                     Three Trumpets. Lancaster Herauld.
                     A Banner of England, France, and Ireland, quartered with Wales, borne by the Viscount Lisle.
                     
                     
                        A Horse led by Sir William VVebb, Knight, couered with blacke cloath, his Cheiffron and Plumes.
                     Earles yonger sonnes.
                     Viscounts eldest sonnes.
                     Barons of Scotland.
                     Barons of England: viz.
                     
                     
                        Lord Kneuit.
                        
                        Lord Arundell of VVardor.
                        
                        Lord Stanhop.
                        
                        Lord Spencer.
                        
                        Lord Danvers.
                        
                        Lord Peters.
                        
                        Lord VVotton.
                        
                        Lord Norris.
                        
                        Lord Hunsden.
                        
                        Lord Northe.
                        
                        Lord Sheffeild.
                        
                        Lord VVharton.
                        
                        Lord VVentworth.
                        
                        Lord Mounteagle.
                        
                        Lord Stafford.
                        
                        Lord Morley.
                        
                        Lord Candish.
                        
                        Lord Carewe.
                        
                        Lord Denny.
                        
                        Lord Garrard.
                        
                        Lord Harington.
                        
                        Lord Russell.
                        
                        Lord Knowles.
                        
                        Lord Compton.
                        
                        Lord Chandos.
                        
                        Lord Darcy of Chich.
                        
                        Lord Rich.
                        
                        Lord Evers.
                        
                        Lord VVindesor.
                        
                        Lord Dudley.
                        
                        Lord Dacres.
                        
                        Lord Laware.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Bishops 5.
                        The Bishop of Rochester.
                        
                        The Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield.
                        
                        The Bishop of Ely.
                        
                        The Bishop of Oxford.
                        
                        The Bishop of London.
                        
                     
                     The Earle of Excester.
                     
                     The Prince his Chamberlayne, Sir Thomas Chaloner, alone, bearing his white staffe.
                     The Lord Chancellor, and Count Henricke.
                     
                     The Archbishop of Canterbury: Preacher.
                     The great Embrodered Banner of the Vnion, borne by the Earles of Montgomery and Argyle.
                     
                     A Horse led, called Le Cheual de deul, couered with blacke Veluet, and ledde by a chiefe Quirry. Monsieur Sant Antoin.
                     
                     The Prince his Hachments of HONOVR, caried by Officers of Armes, viz.
                     
                     The Spurres, by Windsor.
                     
                     The Gauntlets, by Somerset.
                     
                     The Helme and Crest, by Richmond.
                     
                     The Targe, by Yorke.
                     
                     The Sword, by Norroy, King of Armes.
                     
                        The Coat, by Clarencieux, King of Armes.
                     Three Gentlemen Vshers to the Prince, bearing their wands.
                     The Corps of the Prince, lying in an open Chariot, with the Princes representation thereon, inuested with his Robes of estate of Purple Veluet, furred with Ermines, his Highnesse Cap and Coronet on his head, and his Rod of Gould in his hand, and at his feet, within the said Chariot, sat Sir Dauid Murrey, the Master of his Wardrobe.
                     The Chariot was couered with blacke Veluet, set with Plumes of blacke feathers, and drawne by sixe Horses couered, and Armed with Scuchions, hauing their Cheiffrons and Plumes.
                     A Canopy of blacke Veluet borne ouer the representation by sixe Baronets.
                     Tenne Bannerols, borne about the body by ten Baronets.
                     
                        Sir Moyle Finch.
                        
                        Sir Thomas Mounson.
                        
                        Sir Iohn Wentworth.
                        
                        Sir Henry Sauile.
                        
                        Sir Thomas Brewdnell.
                        
                        Sir Anthony Cope.
                        
                        Sir George Gresley.
                        
                        Sir Robert Cotten.
                        
                        Sir Lewis Tresham.
                        
                        Sir Phillip Tiruit.
                        
                     
                     
                        Foure Assistants to the Corps, that bore vp the corners of the Pall. viz.
                     
                     
                        1 The Lord Zouch.
                        
                        2 The Lord Abergaueny.
                        
                        3 The Lord Burghley.
                        
                        4 The Lord Walden.
                        
                     
                     
                        William Seger, Garter, Principall King of Armes, betweene the Gentleman-Vsher of Prince Charles, and the Gentleman-Vsher of the Prince Palatine.
                     
                     
                        Prince CHARLES chiefe Mourner, supported by the Lord Priuy-Seale, and the Duke of Lenox.
                     
                     His Highnesse Traine was borne by the Lord Dawbney, Brother to the Duke of Lenox.
                     
                     Then followed the Prince Elector, FREDERICK, Count Palatine of the Rhein.
                     
                     His Highnesse Traine was borne by Mounsieur Shamburgh.
                     
                     Twelue Earles Assistants to the chiefe Mourner, viz.
                     
                     
                        Earle of Nottingham.
                        
                        Earle of Shrewsbury.
                        
                        Earle of Rutland.
                        
                        Earle of Southampton.
                        
                        Earle of Hartford.
                        
                        Earle of Dorset.
                        
                        Earle of Suffolke.
                        
                        Earle of Worcester.
                        
                        Earle of Sussex.
                        
                        Earle of Pembroke.
                        
                        Earle of Essex.
                        
                        Earle of Salisburie.
                        
                     
                     
                        Earles strangers, attendants on Count Palatine,
                        
                           Count VVigensten.
                           
                           Count Lewis de Nassau.
                           
                           Count Leuingsten.
                           
                           Count Hodenlo.
                           
                           Count Ringraue.
                           
                           Count Erback
                              ▪
                           
                           Count Nassaw. Scarburg.
                           
                           Count Le Hanow, Iunior.
                           Count Isinbersh
                              ▪ Page.
                           Count 
                                 
                                    •
                                 olmes. Page.
                           Count Zerottin. Page.
                        
                     
                     The Horse of Estate, led by Sir Robert Dowglas, Maister of the Princes Horse.
                     The Palzgreaues Priuy-Counsellors, viz.
                     
                     
                        The Count of Solmes.
                        
                        Mounsieur Shouburgh.
                        
                        Mounsieur de Pleshau.
                        
                        Mounsieur Helmestedt.
                        
                        Mouns. Shouburgh, Iunior.
                        Mouns. Landshat.
                        
                     
                     Officers and Groomes of Prince Henries stable.
                     
                        
                           The Guard.
                        
                     
                     The Knight Marshall, and twenty seruants that kept order in the proceeding.
                     Diuers Knights and Gentlemen, the Kings seruants that came in voluntary in blacks. So that the whole number amounted to 2000. or thereabout.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   