
      
         
            
            
            The Ioyfull Returne, OF THE MOST ILLVSTRIous Prince, CHARLES, Prince of great Brittaine, from the Court of SPAINE.
            Together, With a Relation of his Magnificent Entertainment in MADRID, and on his way to St. ANDERAS, by the King of Spaine.
            
            The Royall and Princely Gifts interchangeably giuen.
            Tranſlated out of the Spaniſh Copie.
            His wonderfull dangers on the Seas, after his parting from thence: Miraculous deliuery, and moſt happy-ſafe Landing at PORTSMOVTH on the 5. of October Stil. veteri, to the vnſpeakable Ioy of both Nations.
            Teſtified no leſſe by Triumphall Expreſſions of the Spaniſh Ambaſſadours, (here now reſiding) as by the lowd Acclamations of our owne People.
            
               LONDON: Printed by Edward All-de for Nathaniell Butter and Henry Seile. 1623.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The returne of Prince Charles from Spaine.
            
            
               AS no tranſitory glories can bee greater than to ſee Kingdomes married to Kingdomes in Commerce, confederacie, and honourable Vnion: So, next vnto That, (or rather firſt aboue That, becauſe This ſecond is a Roote, from whence thoſe Cedars of Bleſſings more often ariſe,) no Chaines can bee made of purer gold, than Thoſe by which, two Princes potent and neighbouring Nations are linked together in holy and honourable Bondes of Wedlocke. Our moſt excellent Prince therefore (Charles) heire apparent to all the Kingdomes of our Royall Soueraigne King James (his Father,) hauing that care (due to all Princes) to lengthen out his Name, by leauing a Royall Propagation

behind him; did by the conſent of the King his Father, depart in priuate from England, in March laſt, with a ſmall traine, of which the then Lord Marqueſſe, now Duke of Buckingham, next to his Highneſſe was Chiefe.
            His Princely deſires ſeruing him as wings to flye ouer the dangers of the Seas, into Spain, there to behold that admirable Lady of the world, (for Birth, Beauty, and all the richeſt Ornaments, both of Minde and Body) the Infanta of Spaine, (Donna Maria) Siſter to Philip the fourth King of Spaine, &c. And not onely to behold her, but alſo, that by preſenting to her faire eyes, a Prince, equall to her in all excellencies of perfection, there might from their mutuall enter-viewes one of another, a heauenly fire of Loue be kindled, out of which might ſhine a memorable glory to both the Nations.
            
               England could not truſt the Sea with a greater maſſe of Treaſure, yet ventured ſhe to lock it vp in the boſome of the deepe: France in a ſhort time had gotten into her poſſeſſion a richer Flower than her owne Flower Deluce, and but for a ſhort time kept it: for neither

Seas, nor Land had charmes ſtrong enough to hold the vnbounded ſpirit of our Prince, vntill he had arriued at that place, to which the brauery of his reſolution had vowed to carry him. The Heauens had vndertaken to waft him vnto Spaine, and there, after many weary iourneys, did they ſafely bring him to the King of Spaines Court, at his royall City of Madrid.
            
            What exultations were made at his arriuall, what generall acclamations ſhouted out his Welcomes: His Magnificent entertainements, princely Feaſtings, with all the curioſities of Kingly Triumphs, that either ſumptuous expences, quickneſſe of inuention, or the cuſtome and quality of that Countrie could bring forth, haue beene already ſo ſhrilly ſounded out of the Trumpet of Fame, that here againe to proclaime them, were to ſet vp a Candle, after a Firmament of lights had ſhowne them to the world.
            Now albeit, (aboue theſe Temptations,) there was in the young King, and our Prince (of themſelues) ſufficient allurements, not to haue them parted aſunder, (they being as Darlings one to another;) for they were a paire

of ſweet-ſounding Inſtruments, ſet to one Tune, and equally ſtrung with the ſame Number of yeares, (or not much differing:) All their thoughts, wiſhes, recreations, ſpeeches and Actions, being Lines meeting in one Center, and their often-infolded Armes, the circumference to that Center.
            Nay more, albeit, that high-borne Princeſſe, Donna Maria the Infanta, through the naturall Magicke of her Beauty, ſweetneſſe of Voyce, variety of Languages, with all the rareſt and moſt princely comportments, fitting to her birth was able to faſten, ſuch a power vpon our Prince, that he well might beleeue no countrie in the world but Spaine was worth his abiding in it. Adde likewiſe to this boundleſſe Ocean of Delight, other cleere-running ſtreames falling into their Current, as the continuall and endeerde Embraces of the Infante Cardinall, and the Infante Don Carlos (brothers to the King:) bring vp beſides to theſe, all the Honors, complements, congratulations, attendances, and courtly regards beſtowed daily vpon our Prince, by Grande's, Conde's, and Lords of State; the leaſt of which by it ſelfe, but all

of them knit together, being of vertue to make any man conſent to be drawne away in ſo golden a Chariot: Yet there was a heape of Kingdomes (one day to be his owne) which beckond to haue him come and feele their embraces.
            Hee might as farre as from the Court of England, to that at Madrid in Spaine, heare his Royall Father (King Iames) often wiſh, to haue his princely Charles againe by his ſide. Not that he feared any malitious danger could fall vpon him, (There,) but rather at his being parted from thence, when thoſe two inuincible Pirats of the Sea, (the windes and the waues) ſhould fall out and fight one againſt another, might play the Traitor and take him from vs.
            Hee might heare the Lords of his Fathers moſt Honourable priuie Councell, lamenting for his abſcence: The Nobility diſcontentedly ſighing, the cleargy ſtill praying for him: the Gentry complaining, and the common people more than madde in their longings, to haue him make a quicke returne home.
            Thus, were the warning-pieces, which continually were ſhot off to giue him notice,

how much the kingdome ingenerall languiſhed for him. This was his owne country-muſicke, ſtriking vp of purpoſe to haue his princely Eare liſten to the Tunes. Theſe were a mixture of ten thouſand voyces, (like Ecchoes) dwelling in euery Hill, Peer, Promontory, and Cape at ſea, betweene vs and Spaine, hollowing to our Charles (like ſo many merry whiſtling windes) to haue him come aboord, and make for England.
            
            But before we can make our eyes ſo happy, as to behold him, we muſt awhile looke into Spaine. And there obſerue what care the King of Spaine took, for the preparation of his Highneſſe iourney: appointing Attendants and officers befitting the State of ſuch a perſons▪ This that followes being Verbatim tranſlated out of a ſhort Spaniſh Relation of that entertainment, Printed at Madrid.
            
            
               
                  
                  A Relation of the departure of the moſt Illuſtrious Prince of Wales, from MADRID the ninth of September this preſent yeare. 1623. Stilo Nono.
To Don Alonſo Neli de Reibadeneyra, Lord of Vega de Porras, neere to Valladolid.
                  THe wonder of Cordoua (Seneca, Romes Maſter,) ſaid, that the firſt point of Ingratitude, was to bee forgetfull of a benefit. Thoſe which I receiud from Don Franceſco de Reibadeneyra, a Knight of the Order of Santiago, Father to your Worthines, I cannot in gratitude paſſe ouer in ſilence, for acknowledging whereof, I may well ſay (that the Sonne of Reaſon and recognition roſe in me early) and moreouer by an hereditary bequeathment, Sonnes put their Fathers in mind, what I ſtood endebted in to yours, whereof I now pay a part, laying at the Feete of your cenſure, (for the diſcharge of my Office, in reſpect of your wit, and more then humane parts) this laſt diſcourſe, of the departure and magnificences of the Prince, except the ſhallowneſſe

of my owne braine abate ſome graines of the due eſtimate.
                  
                     Fare you well. Andrez de Mendoza.
                     
                  
               
            
            The comming of the Illuſtrious Prince of Wales into theſe Kingdomes, being the ſtrangeſt occurrent that in a Royall perſon the world hath for many ages ſeene, which daſht and obſcured all ancient patternes and examples, it aſtoniſhed whole Nations, and raiſed vp aſſured hopes of great proſperities and opinions, of his comming amongſt men, being ſo diuerſly conceiued, beyond the bounds of ordinary diſcourſe, as in ſundry of my Relations hath beene reported, wherein are diſcouered and reuealed many points of vrbanity, greatnes, and gallantrie, I thought my ſelfe likewiſe obliged to write of his departure, comprehending (as you ſhall ſee) ſo many circumſtances of pleaſure, and contentment. For which, the ninth of September was conſtituted, and by the Conde de Oliuares, as chiefe Maſter of the Horſe, Councellor of Eſtate, and the Kings neereſt confident; order was giuen, that hee ſhould bee accompanied by twelue Gentlemen Wayters, to ſerue and attend him, Conde de Villa mor, de Meiorada, de Villa Franqueza,
               
and Catillana, D. Iohn de Sabe, Ara the Gallant, D. Diego de Zarate Landi, D. Ioſeph de Samano, D. Antonio Zapata, D. Garcia de Caſtro, D. Iuan de Cordoua, D. Aularo de Guzman, D. Pompeio de Farſis, all perſons of renowned and great quality▪ they and their ſeruants, with all honourable apparence, of Coaches, Horſelitters, Iewels, Liueries, and Gallantry, manifeſting the greatnes of their perſons, by vndertaking it with that obſeruance & cheerefulnes, which vſually they ſhew, in any thing commended to their care.
            The Carriages were committed to the Licentiate Don Lewis de Paredes Alcayd of the Pallace and Court, and his care and diligence herein was but requiſite, for ſo great prouiſions as belonged to the King and the Infantes, beſides thoſe of the Prince which hee had in charge, and the preparing of the wayes, and opening of paſſages, to the Licentiated Iuan de Queniones, Lieutenant to the Corrigidor of Madrid, who in this, as in all other things, ſhewed his affection and deſire to ſerue the King; Then to prouide victuall, to miniſter Iuſtice to both parts, and to gouerne a company ſo neceſſary to be ruled and ordered, as

ſuch a number of Coachmen, Littermen, and Muleters, was referred to the Licenciate, Don Diego Franco, de Garnica Alcayd, which was not one of the leaſt ſeruices that euer hee performed.
            The Cardinall Zapata, the Marques de Aytona, and the Conde de Gondomar, Counſellors of Eſtate, were appointed to accompanie, and to aſſiſt, in whatſoeuer was neceſſarie to bee conſulted or treated of, in the behalfe of the King; for as there is no Action of Princes, which is not ſubiect to great variety of Accident, and new reaſons giue occaſion of preſent debatements, points of State muſt neceſſarily bee ſcand and diſcuſt; the Conde de Monterrey, Preſident of Italy, ſo rare and famous in vnderſtanding; was commaunded to attend his Highnes, for the contentment hee had giuen herein ſince his comming, and the great acceptance which the Prince made of his ſeruice; and hee was commaunded to ioyne with the Counſell of Eſtate, to treat of any matter that ſhould come in queſtion, and for Secretarie there was ordained Don Andres de Prada, and Loſudà Knight of the Order of Saint Iohn, one that

alſo deſerued higher employments.
            The Kings houſe, furniſht with double officers, from the higheſt to the leaſt, at the diſpoſition of the Conde de Baraias, his Mayordome, or Steward.
            The Priuy chamber and all belonging to it, was commended to the Duke of Buckingham, who attended in that place, and moſt of the Gentlemen there attending were of the Engliſh nation, and the Offices being inferiour to ours, it was the leſſe inconuenient,Thoſe of his Maieſties Chamber being all of the chiefe Nobility of Spaine.
                they ſhould come for the time vnder forraine obedience, then to oblige ſo great Nobilitie, to new orders and cuſtomes: the Seruants and Pages of Condi de Olivaries, attended and ſerud the Duke, as they had done ſince the firſt day of his arriuall.
            Horſes, and Mules of carriage, with whatſoeuer to them belonged was referred to the charge of D. Franciſco Zapata, one of the Kings Ryders, who was confident of his owne experience: and amongſt ſo many and ſundry perſons that went along in this troop, there were D. Iacynto Caſtelin, and Don Antonio de Farſis: D. Gieronimo de Tapia, and D. Manuel

Gutienes the Kings Pages, the chiefe of the Order of Calatraua, the reſt were of the order of St. Iago.
            
            The Lieuetenant to the great Poſt-Maſter, Sanctiago de Saldanna and his Officers, and the Spaniſh, and Almaine guardes, were vnder Baraias command, and whatſoeuer elſe belongs to ſo many Lords: all which ſtroue to the vttermoſt, in adorning their owne perſons, and enriching their ſeruants Liueries.
            His Maieſtie preſented to the Prince: And the Marques Flores de Auila his principall Rider, and a Gentleman of his Chamber, in his name, deliuerd eighteene Spaniſh Genets, ſixe Barberies, ſixe breeding Mares, and twenty Foles, all couered with clothes of Crymſon Veluet, garniſht and garded with gold lace, and Scutchions of his armes, and one of them had a Saddle of fine Lambskinnes, the other furniture ſet and embroyderd with moſt rich Pearle, beſeeming well both his Maieſtie, and his Highneſſe, and two Stallions, with their Mares, and a Piſtoll, Sword and Dagger, ſet with Diamonds of great value and eſtimation,

foureſcore ſmall ſhot, the like number of Croſſ-bowes, with which the Duke of Medina Sidonia had ſerued, and a Sword, and Piſtoll, with which the Duke of Oſſuna once ſerued his Maieſtie: and an hundred ſelected ſwords, amongſt all thoſe of the Court, and the Prince gaue the Marqueſſe of Flores, a rare iewell of Diamonds.
            To the Duke of Buckingham were giuen twelue Spaniſh Gennets, foure Moriſcos or Barberie horſe, foure Mares, and ten Foales couered with Mantles of crimſon Veluet, garniſht with gold, and of ſwords and handpeeces, about fiftie: with a Girdle of Diamonds of the value of thirty thouſand crownes.
            And to the Captaine of the Guard, Baron of Kenſington, two hundred buttons of Diamonds, and foure horſes, and with them certaine Slings. And to the eſtimation of fifty 1000. Duckets in Iewels amongſt the Engliſh Gentrie: a gift and largeſſe correſpondent to ſo great a Monarch.
            The Queene our Lady and Miſtres beſides Linnen, preſented to the Prince, fiftie

skins of Ambar vnſhauen, and an hundred and fiftie Cabretanes, or of young Kids: their ſent and perfume amounting to a great ſum of crownes.
            The Conde d'Olivares (beſides diuers pictures and other rich vtenſils of the houſe) preſented his Highnes with three Chains of needle worke, ſo rich as proper only for a Prince.
            
               Don Layme Manuel de Cordeues Marqueſse of Belmonte, gaue him foure Barbary horſes, and his Highnes commanded a very faire Chaine, to be giuen him that brought them.
            His Maieſtie and his Highneſſe went twice, to take leaue of the Lady Infanta, and of other royall perſons, to the Monaſterie of the Deſcallſas; where they were entertained with teares of ioy, and his Maieſtie commanded that the Marques of Villena, and the Prince of Eſquilache, ſhould enter, with other Lords, that had ſiſters and daughters there. And her Highnes gaue vnto the Prince, many Boxes of ſents, flowers, and other things of great curioſity and riches.
            
               The Embaſſadors, Grandes, and Counſellors of Eſtate, went to take leaue of his Highnes; by whom they were honor'd, and he thanked them for the care & paines they tooke, in all the meetings for his diſpatches: and hee ſent to viſit all Religious and graue perſons, Eccleſiaſticall and Secular of the Aſſembly, to whom he gaue the like thankes: for as in greatneſſe, ſo is hee in no manner of vrbanitie defectiue. On Thurſday at ſeuen of the clocke in the morning, in the preſence of the Counſell of Eſtate, betweene the hands of the Illuſtrious Patriarke of the Indies, his Highneſſe with the King of Spaine, performed ſome ceremonies of the Matrimoniall capitulations, and thoſe of the conuention of the State.
            The day after, in the euening, about fiue of the clocke, his Maieſtie went for the Prince in publike, wearing a blacke ſute, and Iewels, for the ſorrow of the Princes departure, and his Highneſſe ware no Iewels at all. The concourſe of people was ſo great,

that neither any reſpect of his Maieſtie, nor feare of the Guards could keepe them back, ſo dearely Spaine loues her Kings. The loue of the, Prince, is growne ſo naturall: and his confidence, & tractabilitie in Treaties, hath ſo augmented it; as alſo the Spaniards are ſo eaſily wonne with affabilitie, an infallible effect of their demerit and valour. And ſo likewiſe, as beeing ſonne to a moſt abſolute & vnderſtanding King, his Highneſſe knew how to imitate with ſuch admirable ſufficiency. The Queene and the Infanta, accompanied with all the Ladies of the Court, the wiues and Ladies of Embaſſadors, Ladies, & Menima's [which are certaine yong Nobilitie] expected thē; who being entred, they went & receiued him without the Tarrima.
               A place of the Court ſo called. And all turning towards her, Hee firſt tooke leaue of the Queene of Spaine, without an Interpreter in the French tongue: and afterwards by meanes of his Embaſſador Ordinarie, who interpreted for the Infanta, with whom hee continued about halfe an houre. And all the Engliſh

Lords and Knights kiſſed the Queenes, and the Infanta's hands.
            Where being conducted and accompanied by the Lords Infantes, to his Coach, and the Duke of Infantado, the Conde de Oliuares, the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earle of Briſtoll, the Spaniards on the ſide of his Highneſſe, and the Engliſh on the Kings ſide, they went to the Deſcalſa's,
               A Monaſtery of barelegd Friers. to take their laſt leaue of his Highnes, leauing behinde them this great and famous place. They returned by night. And afterwards his Highnes Gifts and Preſents were made knowne, ſuch as beſeemed a Prince, to perſons who ſhall be made knowne; wherein he ſhewed the greatneſſe of his Perſon, and the deſire and reſpect they bare to his Maieſty, and ought to ſhew and manifeſt.
            To the King our Lord hee gaue a ſword ſet with Diamonds, which in the leaſt eſtimate muſt needs be held a great gift: and his Maieſty gaue him that deliuered it, a Iewell correſpondent to the Maieſtie of a King.
            
               To the Queene our Miſtreſſe, hee ſent a faire and relucent Diamond, which was eſteem'd to bee of twenty Caracts weight: And a Triangle, and two Eare rings of Diamonds, as big as an indifferent beane, great in value, but greater in Art and workmanſhip: and the Queenes Maieſtie gaue to the Keeper of the Wardrobe that brought them, three thouſand Crownes.
            To the Lady Infanta a ſtring of two hundred & fifty great peare-faſhioned Pearles, of rare perfection, and of fiue Caracts: and one with a Diamond which cannot be valued: and two little Peare-pearles for the eares, of ineſtimable value: and other two Pearles for the ſame parts, maruellous great.
            To the two chiefe Ladies of the Chamber, the Ducheſſe of Gandia, and the Counteſſe of Lemos. To the chiefe Mayor-domos or Stewards: the Duke of Infantado, and the Conde of Benauente, Iewels of Diamonds. And the Duke gaue fiue hundred Ducats to him that brought them: and to ſeuenteene

Ladies and Minima's ſeuenteene Iewels, as eſtimable for value, as for Art.
            To the Lord Infante Don Carlos a poynted Diamond, in a Cup, ſet in a Ring, as a true preſent from a Prince to his Highneſſe.
            To the Lord Cardinall Infante a Pectorall of Topazes, Diamonds, and a pendent Pearle, which might ſupply the abſence of the Peregrina.
            
            To the Conde de Oliuares, a great Diamond called a Portugues,Some rare Iewell ſo called, and it was ſometime Don Sebaſtians, it is of eight Caracts, with a pendent Pearle of great price. And the Conde gaue to the Keeper of the Wardrobe, to Mr. 
               Endimion Porter, & Mr. 
               Thomas Carey of his Highneſſe Chamber, Iewels of good value, and each of them ſixe excellent Swords, with all their furniture.
            To the Counteſſe of Oliuares, a Croſſe of very great Diamonds in forme of a columne. And to the Lady Maria de Guzman her Daughter, a Ring worth a great ſumme of crownes.
            
               To the Admirall of Caſtilia a great iewel, & his Excellency gaue a 1000. crowns to him that brought it, & to the Marqueſſe of Carpio the like.
            To the Duke of Hixan: To the Marques of Mondexar: To the Kings Confeſſor, and to the Biſhop of Segouia foure Iewels of Diamonds worthy of ſuch perſons, and him that gaue them.
            And to all the Gentlemen of the Chamber, rings with faire Diamonds, and to the Counſellors of Eſtate, ſtones of double the greatneſſe.
            To foureteene of the Kings Pages, ſo many chaines, and ſixe and fifty thouſand Ryals to the inferiour Officers that waited. To the guard of Archers foure thouſand Crownes; and to euery one was giuen a very good Ring. And alſo to Don Melchior of Alcazar, whoſe obſeruance & attendance deſeru'd it.
            To the Conde de la Puebla del Maeſtre, a Chaine of a thouſand, an hundred and ſeuenteene Diamonds; & a Iewell with forty

ſeuen more, with his owne picture.
            The Duke of Buckingham gaue to Don Rodrigo de Aguiar, and Don Pedro Ares, ſeruants to the Conde de Oliuares, two ſutes of apparell, and Croſſes of Diamonds double the value. The like were giuen to Don Iuan de Santacruz, and Don Pedro de Vega: And to thirteene Pages, thirteene Chaines of gold: and to the inferiour Officers and ſeruants, a great ſumme of money: and to all that carried Horſes, or any other thing into England, great gifts of money and Chaines, reſeruing ſtill, the ſhewing them a further fauour there. The Prince did the like to the Gentlemen-waiters to the King. To Marco Antonio Darroque, and to Don Iuan de Fonſeca Rabelo, Attendants about the Kings perſon, to each of them a thouſand fiue hundred Crownes.
            On Saturday by faire day-light, they departed, the Prince, the King, and the Infantes, and in a manner, all the Court, and euery ones Family; to San Lorenço, or the Eſcuriall, whither they came that day. And

the day following, there were ſhewed to his Highneſſe, accompanied with the Royall perſons, the Pantheon, Sepulchers, Veſtrie, Quire, Libraries, Cloiſters, and Gardens: who admired it, as it well deſerues: and to all thoſe Lords it ſeem'd not onely greater then the fame that went of it, but then any conceit or imaginatiō they could haue therof: and in reaſon, it was exalted with the title of the eighth wonder of the world, and the Epilogue and concluſion of all the reſt.
            Monday following, being the eleuenth, (while they that were to goe the iourney; came on to the reſt of the company) vvas ſpent in ſeeing the Freſneda,
               A place of pleaſure in Spaine. & the Boſcages, as alſo in hunting there.
            Tueſday morning was ſpent after the ſame manner: And his Maieſtie determining with their Highneſſes, to accompany them to the Groue of Balſayn: when his Highnes requeſted him, hauing reſpect to the Queenes being great with child, that he would no longer continue his abſence; His Maieſty reſiſted, but in the end was ouercome

by his Highneſſe: for his iuſt demand required no leſſe.
            They departed from the Eſcuriall; and in a little Field not farre off the place ordain'd for their taking of leaue; they alighted, & ſo ſitting down for the ſpace almoſt of halfe an houre, conuerſed.
            Afterwards they embraced, and the Queene, the Infanta, with the brothers, Don Carlos, and Infante Cardinall, came to doe the like: Then all the Engliſh Lords and Gentlemen kiſſed the Kings hand, and the Spaniards the Princes: by both whom they were vouchſafed great honours. And returning to embrace againe, with wonderfull demonſtrations of loue, a Trophee was commanded to be erected, with an Inſcription of all that ſucceeded, in this place where they took leaue.
            The Prince departed to lye at Guardarama in his Coach, with the Duke of Buckingham, Conde de Monterrey, Conde de Gondomar, & his Fathers Embaſſador Leager: And the King and their Highneſſes

went to Madrid. And this night the Admirall of Caſtile and Leon, in his Maieſties name, with a great traine and ſhow of followers, was ſent Poſt to viſit the Prince, and one of the Engliſh Lords was likewiſe ſent by his Highneſſe to the King of Spaine.
            
            On Wedneſday hee went to dine at Balſayn, where hee tooke great delight in the houſe and Boſcages; as alſo in the rare and ſtrange ſituation. And about foure of the clocke in the euening, he entred into Segouia, where all the Country came flocking in to ſee him. He admired the building of the Church, and of the Palace, when, vpon the opening of the Coach, they gaue him a welcome with all their Artillerie, which was much and good. And lighting on foote, hee viewed all the houſe, extolling the memory of prudent Philip the ſecond, the Re-edifier thereof, delighting to ſee his Armes quartered, with thoſe of theſe Kingdomes in the Scutcheons of the ſecond great Hall. The worke of Don Henriques
               
the third, who married with a Neece of the Kings his Progenitors.
            The Conde de Chinchon Alcayd of that Royall Houſe,An Officer of great Place. and the Treaſurer of the money Mint, was appointed to entertain him: Which hee performed with the greatneſſe of his quality, and ſingular wit and diſcretion: who attended him at the gate, accompanied with his Lieutenant, the Guard, and the Captaine of the Alcazar or Palace, and withall their ſeruants ſet forth in all brauerie, and hee offered him the chiefe and double Key, becauſe the principall Key of the Fuerca is onely preſented to the Kings Perſon; or elſe obtaining it by Plea of Homage.
            His Highneſſe was pleaſed to merender, or make his Collation,Betweene dinner and ſupper a collation of ſome Fruits and Iunkets.and the Conde ſerued him, with a number of delicates, and certaine Trouts of extraordinarie greatneſſe. Alſo Don Sancho Giron, a Knight of the Order of Alcantara, Corrigidor, (the glory of Talauera, his Countrie) was ready with a Preſent of milke confections, of that Citie, ſo celebrated,

which he eſteemed, and for it ſent him great thankes.
            Afterwards the whole Citie in ranke and order, with Mace-bearers, came to kiſſe his hand, whom he honor'd, diſcouering himſelfe to them, and not permitting the ceremony of a kiſſe, hee imbraced them with ſhew of great ioy and contentment.
            Then he went downe to ſee the Minthouſe: where alſo the Count himſelfe offered him the Keyes; and the Alcazar, or Palace, gaue him a full ſalue. All the ſtamps were imployed, and wrought of all ſorts in his preſence, and here, after he had admired the form and maner thereof, The Conde de Chinchon ſerued him in Founts, with more then three thouſand Crownes, telling him, how it was the fruit of thoſe gardens, in doubles, of an hundred, eight, foure, two, and plaine plates, Ryals of fifty & of eight, and from them to halfe Ryals: He accepted of this ſeruice; and among thoſe Knights and

Gentlemen, that delighted in the beauty of the coyne, he imparted ſome; the reſt with much contentment, hee diſperſt among the people, who beheld him, with many acclamations and benedictions.
            Being returned to the Palace, when he had ſupt, the place was girt round about with lights & fires: and the Palace with a number of Torches, & ſome great ones very artificiall, which yeelded much light: an excellent inuention: and he preſented him with a gallant Mask of thirty & two Knights, which might wel haue appear'd in the Court, wherin there were Liueries of Cloth and Silkes, mounted on excellent Iennets. The Palace diſcharges al their Artillery, which was mingled with the ſound of Bels, Trumpets, and muſical Inſtruments, which took vp a great part of the night. They had prouided Buls, and twelue Lanciers; but the haſte of the iourney could not admit of this ſeruice.
            His Highneſſe gaue to Chinchon a Iewell worth 3000. Crownes, and hee to him that brought it, a chaine worth three hundred.
            He cōmanded money to be giuen among

the Officers of the houſe, and 200. Crownes to the Maſters of the Artillerie, and as many to Don Iuan de Torres, a pregnant and witty Poet, who dedicated vnto him certaine ingenious and elegant verſes: and to Andres de Mendoça, Author of this Relatiō, who preſented him with a congratulation of his happy Eſpouſals in the Latine tongue, three thouſand Ryals, with many honours and manifeſtations of contentment. And about fiue in the morning, hee cheerefully departed frō 
               Agaſaxo, being receiued into that Citie: hee dined at Santa Maria de Nieua, & the day following, at Santiuſtie, and lay at Olmedo: on Saturday he dined at Valdestillas, & by two came to Valladolid, where the whole Chancerie, Citie, and Vniuerſitie kiſſed his hand, with a great traine and company, whom he honored with ſignes of ioy and gladneſſe: he was entertained by thoſe Lords with brauery and gallantrie, wherein they ſhewed affection to ſerue their King, & by celebrating the ioy of the Prince his cō
               ming, which his Maieſtie formerly manifeſted: Amongſt whom, the Marqueſſe de

los Velez, & the Conde de Aluade Aliſte, exemplified themſelues, in the great traine of Seruants, the glorious apparell of their owne perſons, and in the riches of their Liueries; al which he honoured as they deſerued, and as hee well knowes how to performe it. His Highnes went to ſee the Kings Garden, hee was much delighted with the Pictures of Raphael de Vrbino, and Michael Angelo, and with the Alabaſter Fountaine, which the Illuſtrious great Duke of Tuſcan gaue to my Lord Cardinall, the Duke of Lerma; he was ſerued with it: It is the portrature of Cain and Abel. And his Highneſſe took great contentment in the rich ſhops of the Citie, which honoured him with feſtiuities of fires, (for he would ſtay for no other ſolemnities) and leauing among the Officers of the Palace & the Garden, teſtimonies of his magnificence, he departed to Duennas, where, by order, the Duke of Cea, Vice-admiral of Caſtilia, entertained & feaſted him; and in Palencia he was receiued & feaſted by the Biſhop, to whom he gaue a great Iewell, & to his beſt, and inferiour ſeruants, a liberality of mony:

from whence he departed to Carrion. Hee viſited the Antiquities of the Citie, and ſo went to Fromiſta, and hauing entertainement in the Marqueſſes houſe, by his order, he was ſerued with a great ſumptious Dinner: The like was ſhewed him in Alguilar de Campo, by the Marqueſſe thereof: and in Herrera Rio de Piſuerga. The Conſtable of Caſtilia and Leon, preſented him with the like, for his own honour, and the eminency of his Family, omitting nothing, wherin he may teſtifie it.
            And thus the Author cuts off the thread of his Narration, reſeruing the reſt for ſome more elegant Pen, till his comming to London.
            
            
               With Licence from the Lord Gançalo Perez de Valençuela.
            In Madrid by the widdow of Alonſo Martin, 1623.
            
               Thus far runnes the printed Spaniſh Relation: what enſued after, you ſhall now heare, from the report of ſome of his Highneſſe Traine, that attended in the Ʋoyage. And thus it beginnes.
            
            
               He arriued at Saint Andera on Saint Mathews day: not farre off from this Port, the Prince dined (hauing not yet made his entry into the towne) whilſt he ſat at dinner (circled about with all his noble company) a double newes ſaluted him at the boord, and both of them good: the one was, that his ſiſter (the Princeſſe Palatine) was ſafely brought to bed of a ſonne; the other was, that the whole Fleet (vnſhaken by any dangerous Sea-bruizes) was arriued in the hauen of Saint Andera. In the afternoone of the ſame day that the newes was brought, about foure of the clocke, he was with all honor receiued and welcomed into the Towne: Being entertained vpon the way, not only with multitudes of people teſtifyng much affection in their faces, and vttering no leſſe in their Spaniſh tongues, that it came from their hearts: but to render this ioy more ſubſtantially, he was firſt all the way he came along preſented with vollies of Musketeeres, and at the towne with a ringing peale of Ordnance. He was no ſooner in the towne, but his deſire was to take a view of his Fleet, being attended by many great Lords of Spaine who had come along to Saint Andera with him; the Conde of Monterey being a principall; with many Engliſh of good quality.
            
               How ſoone are ioyes turned into ſorrowes? ſafetie into dangers? a ſhining forenoone into a gloomy euening? His Highneſſe after all that feaſting and triumphing in Saint Andera, being deſirous to go aboord that goodly ſhip (the Admirall of his Fleet) called the Prince, (a title due to it for the brauery and Princely building of it) ſpent ſo much time, that the euening drew on apace, and with the euening a more threatning enemy: for not onely the tyde reſiſted his comming backe (his Highnes being then in his own Barge, & his owne Watermen rowing in it) but a ſtorme began to ariſe, and the billows to ſwel high, before the Watermen had gottē halfe way frō the ſhips to the towne, the diſtance between the ſhore and the ſhips being at leaſt a Spaniſh league. The Watermen were ſtrong, cunning, and couragious, but the furious waues taught their Oares another māner of practiſe then euer they were put to vpon the Thames. To the town they could not poſſibly get, againſt a wind and tyde ſo raging, or if they had ventured, it had been dangerous, in regard a huge Barke (to ſaue her ſelfe) lay very neere the mouth of the Harbour: to the ſhore they were as fearefull to put, it being full of rocks; to the ſhips back againe to flie for ſuccour, night (a darke night) being ſpred

ouer that Horizon, denied that comfort, for if they ſhould miſſe the ſhips, they were in doubt to be carried into the maine, the channell where the Fleet anchored, running with an impetuous and irreſiſtable torrent. In this full-Sea of Horrors, the Prince reſolued to turn back towards the ſhips, and to fall in vpon the firſt they could faſten, rather then truſt to the mercy of the rockes, vpon euery one of which ſat ineuitable deſtruction.
            What could Hope truſt to here, where neither the watermens skill, nor ſtrength, could incourage them to bring ſafety to their Maſter?A hideous night. The clouds opened, and diſcharged their artillery of raine, lightning, and thunder: elements of contrary nature, warring one vpon another, whilſt the waters (which were called vp, to decide the controuerſie) quarrelling with the winds, made the vproare more horrid and tempeſtuous.
            And ſo much greater was the danger, by how much the night (by reaſon of the ſtorme) grew darker and darker: yet at laſt, that omnipotent Arme, which can teare vp rocks from their center, and that voyce which can call in the winds; and ſtill them with the mouing of his finger, ſent a Doue with an Oliue branch in her bill, as an aſſurance of comfort. For by caſting out a

roape from a ſhip called the Defiance, (which with much hazard of life, one of the Princes watermen catched hold off) by ſpying a light in the ſame ſhip, his Highneſſe and all in the Barge with him, (praiſe be giuen to the Almighty Pilot, that ſtood at Helme) were, with vnſpeakable ioy receiued into that ſhippe, and there tooke vp his lodging till the next morning: nothing at all daunted at theſe terrors, ſithence dangers to noble minds are but the triumphs of their conſtant ſufferings.
            The next day (being Satturday) his Highneſſe was brought to ſhore, and dined in a Houſe appointed for him and his company; where after Dinner, he tooke leaue of the Spaniſh Commiſſioners, and others, who had waited on him thither; and a little before the euening, went aboard his Ship, called the Prince, with a full reſolutiō to make the compaſſe of thoſe woodden walles, the Prince of Englands Court, and in that Sea-chamber of Preſence euen to dwell, without any remoue, vntil it ſhould pleaſe God to ſend a proſperous winde, fit to carry him into England.
            
            
               The Spaniſh Lords feaſted in the Princes ſhip, for a laſt fare-wel.On Sunday (which was the 14 of September) his Highneſſe inuited the Spaniſh Commiſſioners, and other Gentlemen to a Feaſt aboard, as

a farewell to them before they ſet forward to Madrid; and at their returne from his Shippe, where they had ſuch royall entertainment, as the time and place could conueniently prepare, the whole Fleete in their paſſage by euery particular Ship, beſtowed vpon them a Sea-ſalutation and farewell, from the mouthes of their Artillery, whoſe Ecchoes met them vpon their very landing on the ſhore.
            Leaue we thoſe Lords of Spaine, fitting their iourney backe againe to Madrid, and let vs returne to our Prince; whoſe progreſſe (after the King of Spaine had taken leaue of him at Campillo) ending at S. Andera (or S. Andrew) the time vntill he ſet ſayle for England, was thus entertained.
            On the 10 of September, his Highneſſe came to the Towne; on the 11. his whole Fleete, (being eight ſhips of his Maieſties Nauy Royall, and two Pinnaces) ſafely arriued in ſight of the Towne: the 12.13.14.15.16. and 17. went away (as before is related) in entertainments on ſhore and aboard, in ſurueying, and making ready the Fleete; and laſt, in that laſt farewell giuen to the Spaniſh Commiſſioners, which was on the 14 of September; after whoſe departure, his Highneſſe continued aboard foure dayes, before he

weighed Anchor, which was with much ioy, eleuation of voyces, thundring of Drums, and Trumpets, and that excellent muſicall tumult of Mariners, nimbly running vp and downe to ſet forward ſo royall a buſineſſe.
            Anchors now are weighed, all the linnen brauery of ſwelling ſailes, courting the winds to ſpeed them in their iourney: Spaniſh people ſtand vpon the ſhore; our Prince and Engliſh Noble men vpon the deckes, taking leaues one of another in dumbe ſhewes, with lookes, hands, and hats; And now ſuppoſe that for nine dayes & nights together you behold his Highneſſe and his Noble attendants, flying apace towards England with the wings of proſperous winds. But on the 29. day of September (being Michaelmas day) the Seas grew churliſh, the windes angry, and to auoyd their fury, the whole Fleet was forced to put into the Iland of Silley, from whence they came into Saint Maries Sound, and then on the third of October, being accompanied onely with a ſide-wind, they came merrily forward; and within two dayes after, that is to ſay, on the fifth of October, (being Sunday) at nine of the clocke in the morning, his Highneſſe, (with vnſpeakable ioy of all within reach of ſuch happy tidings) landed at Portſmouth.
            
            
               Yet before he could meet this happineſſe of Landing, a misfortune had a minde to croſſe him, but Heauen would not ſuffer it: for one of the ſhips in the Fleet had like to ouer-ſet him, but the malice of this danger ended in his preſeruation.
            Being thus then in health and ſafety ſet vpon the ſhore, let vs with the ſame ſpeed follow him to London, which he himſelfe makes, to glad with his preſence, the eyes of his royall Father.
            But the ioy (that he was come) being ſwifter then he could be himſelfe, put both the Countrey, (all the way that it came) and the City, (when euen after midnight it was entred into it) into ſuch in-vtterable expreſſions of affectionate gladneſſe, ſuch vnlimitable & violent inundations of ioy, that the people (to remember the comfort they receiued in their Prince) ſeemed to looſe their owne being, and to forget that they were themſelues: men, women, and children made but one conſort, and the muſicke of that conſort, ſounded nothing but The Prince is come, our Charles is come. From the Noble man to the Artificer, if contention had aroſe, which of them was fulleſt of good wiſhes, of glad welcomes, of lowd-reſounding acclamations for

his comming, it had beene hard to decide the difference.
            So many Bels were heard ringing for a whole day together, that a ſtranger but newly 
                  •••
               ring the Citie, might haue thought here, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               eene ſpoken no other language, all language elſe being drowned.
            So infinite were the Bonefires, ſo coſtly, and ſo high flaming, that had they all beene ſeene burning in the night-time, that weeke might haue boaſted, it had gotten one day more than any other weeke in the yeere, ſo vniuerſall was the light.
            The day was foule and rainy, but there were artificiall Sun-beames in euery ſtreete to dry vp the ſhowres.
            What need I buſie my ſelfe againe to draw forth this Engliſh Maſter-peece of ours, when euery man carries the picture of it in his boſome! It will be a legacie for yong men when they grow old, to reade (by the fire ſide) the Chronicle of this day to their children.
            Let vs leape therefore from land againe and behold at Sea one remarkable accident, with which his Highneſſe happily encountred in his paſſage homewards. And that was this.
            About a day before they put in at Silley, a

great thundring of Ordnance beat round about the aire, in ſo much that in a ſhort time after, the fire of the peeces was a farre off eaſily diſcerned.
            The Fleet approching neerer and neerer, certaine Dunkerkers & Hollanders were at it pell mell: Hereupon two Ships of his Highneſſe Fleet, called the ſeauen Starres and the Rainbow (being the formoſt of the reſt) gaue them a Shot and haild them; vpon which firſt came vp foure Shippes ſingled from the reſt, who being asked what they were? they anſwerd Men of Warre, and of Dunkerks: Our Men bid them goe to the Lee-ward, and ſpeake to the Prince of England; they preſently did ſo, and went vnder our Princes Sterne.
            Then came vp 5. Ships more, they being likewiſe hailed, came; & being demanded what they were? they anſwered, Holland Men of Warre; theſe alſo were bidden to go to the Lee-ward, and ſpeake to the Prince of England.
            Theſe comming then vnder the Princes Sterne, as the other had done before; his Highneſſe commanded them to hoyſe out their Boates, and the Captaines of either ſide to come aboard: they did ſo; and the cauſe of their fighting being examined by the Prince,

it was found that the foure Dunkerkers comming out for them, made after them, & chaſed them to fight. His Highneſſe vnderſtanding by their own relations the truth of their Quarrell, told them that ſince it was their fortune to fall into his Company, hee would perſwade them to bee at peace, and to giue ouer the Chaſe, and to bid farewell one to another. The Hollander ſeemed vnwilling to this, vrging rather the contrary; but his Highneſſe (out of a noble deſire to ſaue the ſhedding of bloud) vſed many gracious mediations to draw them to peace, and preuailed ſo much at that time, as that they parted friends & vpon equall termes; And for preuention of returning to their Quarrell, his Highnes ſet them one from the other ſome good diſtance off, and ſo let them goe.
            
               
               
                  The names of the Shippes that were in the Engliſh Fleete, their Burthen, and what noble Gentlemen vnder the Prince were Commanders.
                  
                      
                     Burthen.
                     Ordn.
                  
                  
                     1 THE Prince-Royall, in which came his Highnes: the Earle of Rutland being Admirall.
                     
                     1200.
                     55.
                  
                  
                     2 The Saint Andrew, in which was the Lord Morley Vice-admirall.
                     
                     0898.
                     42.
                  
                  
                     3 The Swift-ſure, in which the Lord Windſor was Rere-admirall.
                     
                     0700.
                     42.
                  
                  
                     4 The Saint George, in which Sir Francis Steward was chiefe Commander.
                     
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     5 The Defiance, in which Sir Sacuile Treauer commanded.
                     
                     0700.
                     40.
                  
                  
                     6 The Bonauenture, Sir William Sentliger Commander.
                     
                     0674.
                     34.
                  
                  
                     7 The Rainbow, commanded by Sir Henry Palmer.
                     0650.
                     40.
                  
                  
                     8 The Antilope, commanded by Captaine Lone.
                     0450.
                     34.
                  
                  
                     9 The Charles, vnder the Command of Captaine Harris.
                     0140.
                     14.
                  
                  
                     10 The Seauen Starres commanded by
                     
                     0140.
                     14.
                  
                  
                     
                        The numbers of Peeces of Ordinance, carried in the whole Fleete, amount to
                     
                     315.
                  
               
            
            
               Memorable therefore for euer amongſt vs, bee the fift day of October, for our Prince his ioyfull Arriuall here in England, after ſo many tempeſts at Sea, and hazardous Aduentures by Land, in his paſſage through other Kings Dominions: As thoſe two other fift daies ſtand remarkable to the end of the world; viz. the fift of Auguſt, and fift of Nouember; the firſt for the particular preſeruation of our King; the ſecond, for the generall deliuery of our Country. Let one red Letter more bee now added to our Calendar, & an Anniuerſary held with thankſgiuing to God, and with Belles and Bonefires, teſtifying the ioy of the people in memory of ſo ineſtimable a happineſſe.
            And now to ſhut vp this ſhort Diſcourſe with a matter worthy obſeruation: What an vnexpected comfort was mixed with the misfortunes of thoſe 9. Priſoners. (7. Men and 2. Women) when the very ſound of a Princes Name ſtayed the hand of the Law from ſtriking them? Ioy did ſo tranſport the ſoule of the whole Kingdome, that death was loth to do his Office euen vpon thoſe poore condemned Wretches: Mercy ſet a Portcullis before the gates of Iuſtice, ſo that when her ſword was vpon drawing to cut off the liues of 9. miſerable Creatures,

the very breath of our Princes comming put the blow by: In ſtead of that charitable Bell, which at the end of euerie Seſſions, is with a dolefull ſound rung out after mid-night, to put condemned perſons in remembrance of their end, which is to be the next morning, the poore ſoules were cheered vp, with peales from a thouſand Belles long before breake of day, ſo that in ſtead of being cald downe out of the Iayle to go to their deaths, they came as ioyfully from their Dungeon, as if they had beene to haue gone to a Wedding.
            Neither hath this abundant grace and mercy of the Prince giuen glad hearts and thankfull tongues to theſe 9. only (their Pardons being now ſignd) but it flyeth like a gentle gale of Wind, into all the Priſons of the Land, to fanne comfort, and freedome, to all ſuch as lie impriſoned or condemned for petty Crimes.
            Laſt of all, to ſaue the Reader a labour of turning ouer Leaues, to ſatisfie himſelfe, with a briefe Calender how time went away with the Prince after hee came to Port Saint Andera, let him bee thus informed; That his Highneſſe came to that Towne, on the 10. of September, (this yeare 1623.)
            
               The whole Fleete came and met him there on the 11. day.
            In feaſting the Spaniſh Commiſſioners, ſurueying his Fleete, taking leaue, and other correſpondencies required in a deſigne of ſuch State, 6. dayes more were ſpent.
            On the 18. day he put to Sea; on the 29. day he put into the Sillies; and on the 5. of October, landed at Portſmouth; ſo that hee continued at Sea, in his comming homewards, 18. daies.
            
               
               His Iourney by Land from Madrid, till he came to Saint Andera.
               
               On the eighth of September, 1623, ſtilo veter. the Prince comming from Madrid, was accompanied with the King of Spaine, his two brothers, &c. to Campillo, where they tooke leaue, that Towne being but eight miles from Madrid.
               
               
                  From Saint Lorenzo to Guadarama, Leagues 2
                  From Guadarama to Segouia, 6
                  From Segouia to S. Maria de nieua, 7
                  From Sancta Maria de nieua to Olimedo, 8
                  From Olimedo to Valladolid, 8
                  From Valladolid to Paſencia, 8
                  From Paſencia to Carrion, 7
                  From Carrion to Herrera, 8
                  From Herrera to Reynoſa, 8
                  From Reynoſa to la Puente de Nieuas, 8
                  From Puente de nieuas to Port St 
                     Andera, 7
                  Number of Leagues 77.
               
               
                  There came along with the Prince, in one of the ſhippes of the Fleet, an Ambaſſador, called Don Diego de Mendoza, a Gentleman of a noble Family, and Kinſman to the Duke of Infantado; who comes to congratulate with his Highneſſe Father our King, and vpon his returne is to goe into Allemaine, Flanders, and France, to giue account to their Maieſties and Highneſſes of theſe happy concordances, carrying with him Iewels and other prouiſion for his perſon.
               FJNJS
               
            
         
      
   