
      
         
            
            The High and Mighty Prince Charles, Prince of Wales, &c. The Manner of his Arriuall at the Spaniſh Court, the Magnificence of his Royall Entertainement there: His happy Returne, and hearty welcome, both to the King and Kingdome of England, the fifth of October, 1623. Heere liuely and briefely deſcribed, together with certaine other delightfull paſſages, obſeruable in the whole Trauatle.
            
            
               
            
            
               NO longer let ſad dolours darke your eyes,
               Nor longer feares your doubtfull hearts ſurprize,
               Leaue gazing on each other, o're the Land,
               As if the Countries ſtate were at a ſtand:
               The ſolitary night is paſt away,
               Succeeded by the glorious light of day,
               Which brought the brightfull Sunne, againe to reare
               His rayes aboue our Brittiſh Hemiſpheare;
               That now the Land, which thirty weekes did mourne,
               Dries her tear'd face, and finds her ioy returne.
            
            
               His Departure, and Iourney.
               This griefe did growe (without a fain'd pretence)
               Vpon departure of our gracious Prince;
               Whoſe often perils, mixt with trauaile-paine,
               And oft diſtempers which he did ſuſtaine,
               Both on the Sea, and that huge tract of way,
               That in a hundred forty a ſtages lay,
               While to, and through the very heart of France
               
               He paſt, deſeru'dly doe his fame aduance.
               In morning of the Spring he 'gan to goe,
               And made it Winter here, which was not ſo;
               Whoſe Winters viſiting vs now againe,
               Makes vs new Spring of gladneſſe entertaine.
               On Marche's ſeuenth day, to Spaines Courtly aire
               Vnto Madrid was made his firſt repaire;
               Where both our Kings b Embaſſadours, on knee,
               With wonderment him welcom'd heartily;
               With whom he priuately himſelfe repoſ'd
               Till to that Monarch there, he was diſcloſ'd.
            
            
               His Entertainement there.
               His Comming knowne, the Maieſtie of Spaine,
               
               That euer to his Highneſse did maintaine
               Royall reſpect, him graciouſly ſaluted,
               And as his c Second Selfe the Prince reputed;
               Yeelding large Quarter, and the Courtlieſt place,
               With ſtore of Nobles to attend his Grace:
               Who from all d coaſts (as their Lords will imported)
               Eight hundred of the chiefeſt there reſorted:
               Theſe ſtriuing, preſt with ſeruiceable loue,
               Themſelues euen as his Leigemen ſtill to proue:
               Deuiſing often e Maſques, Tilt, Tournament,
               Barriers, Flights, Chace, each thing to cauſe content;
               Sparing no coſt, expoſing (the greateſt treaſure)
               Their perſons to aſſault (to ſhew him pleaſure)
               Fierce f Bulls, vntam'd, vntide: nor was this all;
               
                  Spaines Soueraigne held himſelfe a g Feſtiuall,
               To Honour Englands Heire, t'adorne which, were
               The Queene, and faire Infanta preſent there.
               Ne're Prince ſuch liking, ſo much grace accrewde,
               Both of King, Nobles, Gentry, Multitude:
               And this for ſixe moneths ſtay. But leauing theſe,
               Haſte we to ſee'em vpon, and paſt the Seas.
            
            
               His Returne, Arriuall, and welcome.
               Bidding the King, his Court, theſe ſports adiew,
               T'embarke at Biſcay ſhore he ſtraite withdrew,
               And waited long to meete a luckie wind,
               At laſt, his wiſh was anſwered to his mind:
               Heau'n proues propitious, winde his loue imparts,
               Drawne by the prayers, driu'n by the ſighes, from hearts
               Of thouſands here: So thence he forward ſet,
               And Portſmouths Port, in ſeuen daies ſaile he fet.
               But being arriu'd, no tongue can halfe expreſſe
               The rauiſht Countries wondrous ioyfulneſſe,
               The Peoples clamour, Trumpets clangor, ſound
               Of Drums, Fifes, Violls, Lutes, theſe did abound;
               Loud Cannons thundring from the Caſtels, Towers,
               And Ships, ſhooke Ayre and Earth, all to their powers,
               Pourde healths of wine for welcome; Bels were rung,
               Bonefires were kindled, fire-workes each-where flung:
               Yet's not enough high fires in ſtreets to frame,
               Vnleſſe the fire of zeale your hearts enflame;
               And that in Churches Pſalmes of thankes be ſinging,
               As well as in the Steeples Bells a ringing.
               Yee' haue pray'd, your prayer's heard; now this is done,
               Laud God, and loue your King, and Kingdomes Sonne.
            
            
               His arriuall at London, his welcome to the Court, with the generall Applaudite's of all the People.
               Yet louingly his louing mind he ſhewes
               To London, where his Subiects loue beſtowes;
               Some for meere ioy, burning their whole eſtate;
               That Brittaines Prince might not find them ingrate:
               All ſhew'd their loues, all did forbeare to mourne,
               When Englands Ioy, with ioy did ſafe returne.
               Thus did he haſte to ſee his Fathers Court,
               Where thouſand hearts with Ioy did free reſort,
               To giue their beſt of welcomes: Englands Deare,
               Was ne're more welcome; when their Heart was here,
               That Heart, that dead did lay ſo many hearts,
               When he from Brittany ſo freely parts,
               Did with his ſight reuiue thoſe hearts againe.
               Which his long abſence hath a long time ſlaine.
               The Royall Caeſar of Great Brittaynes Ile,
               Did entertaine his Sonne; a gracious ſmile,
               And bleſſing he vpon his head doth powre,
               Reioycing at that happy ioyfull houre.
               
                  Brittaines chiefe Deare did thus embrace his Deare,
               Iuſt in the forme you ſee pourtraied here.
               Then ſince all count theſe dayes the happy dayes,
               To Him that makes man happy, be the Praiſe.
            
         
         
            
               Theſe Notes, with their directory letters, are here inſerted, for the better explayning ſome of the Verſes, and Story.
            
               a His Iourney by Land, conſiſted of 141. Stages, here in England, France, & Spaine; ſome of them containe but 8 or 10, ſome 12 or 16 miles in length; ſo that the computation of the vvay that his Highneſſe rode Poſte, amount to about 1100. miles.
            
               b The Lord Digby, Earle of Briſtoll, Embaſſadour extraordī
               nary for the Kings Maieſtie; and Sir Walter Aſton, Leiget there.
            
               c For the King of Spaine appointed him halfe his Guard, and a moſt ſumptious Quarter in the Court, for his reſidence; as alſo cauſed him to ride in Triumph through Madrid.
            
            
               d The Catholike King, becauſe other triumphes were preparing, ſent mandatory letters about, eſpecially to the Principall Nobility of Aragon, that they ſhould come and giue attendance at the Court, vpon the Princes pleaſure; becauſe they haue the reputation to be excellent men at Armes.
            
               e Of which Maſques, the moſt magnificent, was on Eaſter day laſt, preſented by the Lord Admirall of Caſtile and Leon, in celebration of our moſt Illuſtrious Princes Arriuall there; wherein the King alſo was thought to haue beene an Actor.
            
               f It hath bin, and is a cuſtome of that Countrey, at ſome great ſolemnities, for their Noblemen, as Dukes, Earles, Lords, and others of beſt note, to enter the liſts, and maintaine combate with Lances, Targets, Swords, and Darts, againſt looſe furious Bulls, in which they exerciſe their Courage and abilities, ſometimes not without danger; and as they merit, purchaſe eſtimation. This was performed at Whitſontide.
            
               g That Feſtiuall before mentioned, was made by the King of Spaine at Madrid, the 21 of Auguſt laſt, 1623. to honour the Eſpouſall Treaties of Prince Charles, with the Lady Infanta Maria of Auſtria; and the maner was by darting with Canes, after the vſe there.
            And this may ſuffice for a briefe, yet plaine deſcription of our Noble Princes ſudden Iourney thither, his Royall entertainment there, and moſt happy Returne hither, and wel-come home againe: To Gods glory, and the exceeding ioy and comfort of all true loyall hearted Subiects.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London, 1623.
         
      
   