
      
         
            
            
            ANDROMEDA
LIBERATA.
OR
THE NVPTIALS OF
PERSEVS and ANDROMEDA. By GEORGE CHAPMAN.
            
               Nihil a veritate nec virtute remotius quam vulgaris opinio.
               Pet.
            
            LONDON,
Printed for LAVRENCE L'ISLE and are to be sold
at his shop in St, Paules-Church-yard, at the signe of
the Tigers-head▪ 1614.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
WORTHILY HONORED,
Robert Earle of Sommerset, &c.
AND
HIS MOST NOBLE LADY
the Ladie FRANCES.
            
               AS nothing vnder heauen is more remou'd
            From Truth & virtue, then Opinions prou'
                  •
               
            
            By vulgar Voices: So is nought more true
            Nor soundly virtuous then things held by few:
            Whom Knowledge (entred by the sacred line,
            And gouernd euermore by grace diuine,)
            Keepes in the narrow path to spacious heauen,
            And therfore, should no knowing spirit be driue
                  •
               
            
            From fact, nor purpose; for the spleens prophan
            Of humours errant, and Plebeian;
            
            
               But, Famelike, gather force as he goes forth,
            The Crowne of all Acts ends in onely worth.
            Nor will I feare to postrate this poore Rage
            Of forespoke Poesie, to your patronage,
            (Thrice worthy Earle), & your vnequald grace
            (Most Noble Countesse) for the one-ear'd Race
            Of set-eyd vulgars, that will no waie see
            But that their stiffe necks driue them headlongy,
            Stung with the Gadflie of misgouernd zeale:
            Nor heare but one tale and that euer ill.
            These I contemne, as no Rubs fit for me
            To checke at, in my way t' Integritie.
            
            Nor will ye be incenst that such a Toie
            Should put on the presumption to enioie
            Your grauer eare, my Lord, and your faire eye
            (Illustrous Ladie) since poore Poesie
            
            Hath beene a Iewell in the richest eare
            Of all the Nuptiall States, that euer were.
            For as the Bodies pulse (in Phisique) is
            A little thing; yet therein th' Arteries
            
               Bewray their motion, and disclose, to Art
            The strength, or weakenesse, of the vitall part;
            Perpetually moouing, like a watch
            Put in our Bodies: So this three mens catch,
            This little Soules Pulse, Poesie, panting still
            Like to a dancing pease vpon a Quill,
            Made with a childes breath; vp and downe to fly
            (Is no more manly thought) And yet thereby
            Euen in the corps of all the world we can
            Discouer all the good and bad of man,
            Anatomise his nakednesse, and be
            To his chiefe Ornament, a Maiestie:
            Erect him past his human Period
            And heighten his transition into God.
            Thus Sun-like, did the learnd and most diuine
            Of all the golden world, make Poesie shine;
            That now, but like aglow worm, gleams by night
            Like Teachers, scarce foūd, by their proper light.
            But this (my Lord) and all poore virtues else
            Expos'd, ah las, like perdu Sentinels
            
               
               
                  •
               o warne the world of what must needs be nie
            
               
                  •
               or pride, and auarice, glas'd by Sanctitie,
            
            Must be distinguisht, and decided by
            Your cleere, ingenuous, and most quiet eye
            Exempt from passionate, and duskie fumes,
            That blinde our Reason: and in which consumes
            The Soule, halfe choakt, with stomacke casting mists
            
               
                  •
               red in the purest, turnd mere humorists.
            And where with douelike sweet humility
            They all things should authorise or deny,
            The vulgar heate and pride of splene and blood
            Blaze their opinions, which cannot be good.
            For as the Bodies Shadow, neuer can
            Shew the distinct, and expact Forme of man;
            So nor the bodies passionate affects
            Can euer teach well what the Soule respects.
            For how can mortall things, immortall shew▪
            
            Or that which false is, represent the trew▪
            
            The peacefull mixture then that meetes in yow
            (Most tēperat Earl) that nought to rule do thow:
            
               In which, as in a thorough kindled Fire,
            
               Light and Heat marrie Iudgement and Desire.
            
            Reason is still in quiet, and extends
            All things t' aduantage of your honored Ends,
            May well authorise all your Acts of Note,
            Since all Acts vicious, are of Passion got:
            " Through dead Calms, of our Perturbations euer
            " Truths Voice (to soules eares set) we heare or neuer
            " The meerely animate Man, doth nothing see
            " That tends to heauen: It must be onely He
            " That is mere foule: Her separable powers
            " The scepter giuing heere: That then discourse
            " Of Motions that in sence doe neuer fall,
            " Yet know them too, and can distinguish all
            " With such a freedome, that our earthly parts
            " Sincke all to earth: And then th'ingenuous arts
            " Doe their true office, Then true Policie
            " Windes like: a serpent, through all Empery.
            " Her folds on both sides bounded, like a flood
            " With high-shores listed, making great and good
            
                " Whom she instructeth, to which, you (my Lord)
            May lay all claimes that Temper can afford;
            Nought gathering ere t' is ripe: and so must taste
            Kindely and sweetely, and the longer hast,
            All fruits, in youth, ripe in you; and must so
            Imply a facultie to euer growe.
            And as the morning that is calme and gray,
            Deckt all with curld clowds; that the Sunne doth lay
            With varied coullours; All aloft exhall'd
            As they t'adorn euen heauen it selfe were call'd,
            And could not fall in slendrest deawes till Night,
            But keepe daies Beauty: firme and exquisite;
            More for delight fit, and doth more adorne
            Euē th'Euē with Graces, then the youthful morn:
            So you (sweete Earle) stay youth in aged bounds
            Euen absolute now, in all lifes grauest grounds,
            Like Aire, fill euery corner of your place,
            Your grace, your virtue heightning: virtue, grace
            And keeping all clowds high, aire calme, & cleer
            And in your selfe all that their height should rere
            
               Your life and light will proue a still full Moone,
            And all your night time nobler then your noone,
            The Sunne is in his rising, height, and set
            Still (in himselfe) alike, at all parts great,
            His light, heat, greatnes, coullors that are showne
            To vs; as his charge, meerely is our owne.
            So let your charge, my Lord, in others be,
            But in your selfe hold Sun-like constancie.
            For as men skild in Natures study, say,
            The world was not the world, nor did conuay
            To coupling bodies Natures common forme,
            But (all confus'd, like waues struck with a storme)
            Some small were, and (in no set being, staid)
            All comprehension, and connexion fled;
            The greater, and the more compact disturb'd
            With ceaseles warre, and by no order curb'd,
            Till earth receiuing her set magnitude
            Was fixt her selfe, and all her Birth indu'd
            With staie and law, so this small world of ours:
            Is but a Chaos of corporeall powers:
            
               Nor yeelds his mixt parts, forms that may becom
            A human Nature; But at randome rome
            Past brutish fashions, and so neuer can
            Be cald the ciuill bodie of a man;
            But in it, and against it selfe still fights,
            In competence of Cares, loyes, Appetites:
            The more great in command, made seruile more,
            Glutted, not satisfied: in plenty, poore:
            Till vp the Soule mounts, and the Scepter swaies
            Th'admired Fabricke of her world suruaies,
            And as it hath a magnitude confinde,
            
               
                  •
               o all the powers therein, she sees combinde
            
               
                  •
               n fit Acts for one end, which is t'obay
            
               Reason, her Regent; Nature giuing way:
            
               Peace, Concord, Order, Stay proclaim'd, and Law,
            
            And none commanding, if not all in Awe,
            
               Passion, and Anger, made to vnderlie,
            And heere concludes, mans morall Monarchie
            
               
                  •
               n which, your Lordships milde Soule sits so hie
            Yet cares so little to be seene, or heard,
            
               That in the good thereof, her scope is Sphear'd.
            The Theban Ruler, paralleling Right,
            Who, thirst of glory, turnd to appetite
            Of inward Goodnesse, was of speech so spare,
            To heare, and learne, so couetous, and yare,
            That (of his yeares) none, things so many knew:
            Nor in his speeches, ventured on so few:
            Forth then (my Lord) & these things euer thirst
            Till Scandall pine, and Bane-fed enuie burst.
            And you, (most noble) Lady as in blood
            In minde be Noblest, make our factious brood
            Whose forked tongs, wold fain your honor sting
            Conuert their venomd points into their spring:
            Whose owne harts guilty, of faults faind in yours
            Wold fain be posting off: but, arme your powers
            With such a seige of vertues, that no vice
            Of all your Foes, Aduantage may entice
            To sally forth, and charge you with offence,
            But sterue within, for very conscience
            Of that Integritie, they see exprest
            
               In your cleere life: Of which, th'examples Rest,
            May be so blamelesse; that all past must be
            (Being Fount to th'other) most vndoubtedly
            Confest vntouch't; and Curiositie
            
            The beame picke rather from her own squint eie,
            Then ramp stil at the motes shade, faind in yours,
            Nought doth so shame this chimick serch of ours
            As when we prie long for assur'd huge prise,
            Our glasses broke, all vp in vapor flies.
            And as, the Royall Beast, whose image you
            Beare in your armes, and aires great Eagle too;
            Sill as they goe, are said to keepe in close
            Their seres, & Tallons, lest their points shold lose
            Their vseful sharpnes, when they serue no vse:
            So this our sharp-eyd search that we abuse
            In others brests, we should keepe in, t'explore
            Our owne fowle bosomes, and quit them before
            VVe ransacke others: but (great Ladie) leaue
            These Rules to them they touch; do you receaue
            Those free ioies in your honour, and your Loue
            
               That you can say are yours; and euer moue
            VVhere your comand, as soon is seru'd as kown,
            Ioyes plac't without you, neuer are your owne.
            Your Honours euer most humbly and faithfully vowd. Geo. Chapman.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the preiudicate and peremptory Reader.
            
               I Am still in your hands; but was first in his,
that (being our great sustainer of Sincerity,
and Innocence) will, I hope, defend mee
from falling. I thinke you know not him I
intend, more then you know me, nor can you know mee,
since your knowledge is imagined so much aboue mine,
that it must needes ouersee. He that lies on the ground
can fall no lower. By such as backebite the highest, the
lowest must looke to be de uor'd, Forth with your curious
Scrutinie, and finde my Rush as knotty as you lust, and
your owne Crab-tree, as smooth. Twillbe most ridiculous▪
and pleasing, to sit in a corner, and spend your teeth
to the stumps, in mumbling an ould Sparrow, till your
lips bleed, and your eyes water: when all the faults you
can finde are first in your selues, t' is no Herculean labor
to cracke what you breed. Ah las who knowes not your
vttermost dimensions? Or loues not the best things you

would seeme to loue, in deed, and better? Truth was neuer
the Fount of Faction. In whose Sphere since your
purest thoughts moue, their motion must of force be oblique
and angulare. But whatsoeuer your disease bee, I
know it incurable, because your vrine will neuer shew it.
At aduenture, at no hand be let blood for it, but rather
sooth your ranke bloods and rub one another.
            You yet, ingenuous and iudicious Reader: that (as
you are your selfe) retaine in a sound bodie, as sounde a
soule: if your gentle tractability, haue vnwares let the
common surfet surprize you: abstaine, take Phisique
heere, and recouer. Since you reade to learne, teach:
Since you desire to bee reform'd, reforme freely. Such
strokes shall bee so farre from breaking my head; they
shall be rich Balmes to it, comfort, and strengthen
the braine it beares, and make it
healthfully neese out, whatsoeuer
anoies it.
            Vale.
         
         
            
            The Argument.
            
               
                  ANdromeda, Daughter of Cepheus, King of Aethiopia;
and Cassiope (a virgine exempted from cō
               parison
in all the vertues & beauties, both o
                  •
               
minde and bodie) for the enuie of Iuno to her
Mother; being compar'd with her for beauty
and wisedome; (or as others write, maligned
by the Nereides, for the eminent Graces of her selfe) moued so
much the Deities displeasures; that they procur'd Neptune to
send into the Region of Ceph
                     •
                  us, a whale so monstrously vaste
and dreadfull: that all the fields he spoild and wasted; all the
noblest edifices tumbling to ruine; the strongest citties of the
kingdome, not forcible enough to withstand his inuasions. Of
which so vnsufferable a plague Cepheus consulting with an Oracle;
and asking both the cause, and remedie; after accustomed
sacrifices, the Oracle gaue answer, that the calamity would neuer
cease, till his onely daughter Andromeda, was exposed to the
Monster. Cepheus returnd, and with Iron chaines bound his
daughter to a rocke, before a cittie of the kingdome called
Ioppe. At which cittie, the same time, Perseus arriued with the
head of Medusa &c. who pittying so matchles a virgines exposure
to so miserable an euent; dissolu'd her chaines and tooke

her from the Rock. Both sitting together to expect the monster,
& he rauenously hasting to deuoure her, Perseus, turndpart of
him into stone, & through the rest made way with his sword to
his vtter slaughter. When (holding it wreath enough for so renownd
a victory) He took Andromeda to wife, & had by her one
daughter called Perse, another Erythraea, of whom, the sea in
those parts is called Mare Erythraeā; since she both liued and died
there: and one sonne called after himselfe, another Electrion, a
third Sthenelus: and after liued Princely and happily
with his wife and his owne Mother to his
death. Then faind for their vertues
to be made Constellations
in Heauen.
         
      
      
         
            
            ANDROMEDA LIBERATA.
            
               AWay vngodly Vulgars, far away,
            Flie ye prophane, that dare not view the day,
            Nor speake to men but shadowes, nor would heare
            Of any newes, but what seditious were,
            Hatefull and harmefull euer to the best,
            Whispering their scandals, glorifying the rest,
            Impious, and yet gainst all ills but your owne,
            The hotest sweaters of religion.
            Whose poysons all things to your spleenes peruert,
            And all streames measure by the Fount your heart,
            That are in nought but misrule regulare,
            To whose eyes all seeme ill, but those that are,
            
               That hate yee know not why, nor with more cause,
            Giue whom yee most loue your prophane applause,
            That when Kings and their Peeres (whose piercing eies
            Broke through their broken sleepes and policies,
            Mens inmost Cabinets disclose and hearts;
            Whose hands loues ballance (weighing all desarts)
            Haue let downe to them; which graue conscience,
            Charg'd with the blood and soule of Innocence.
            Holds with her white hand, (when her either skole,
            Apt to be sway'd with euery graine of Soule,
            Her selfe swaies vp or downe, to heauen or hell,
            Approue an action) you must yet conceale,
            A deeper insight, and retaine a taint
            To cast vpon the pure soule of a Saint.
            Away, in our milde Sphere doth nothing moue,
            But all-creating, all preseruing Loue,
            
            At whose flames, vertues, lighted euen to starres,
            All vicious Enuies, and seditious Iars,
            Bane-spitting Murmures and detracting Spels,
            Bannish with curses to the blackest hels:
            
               Defence of Beauty and of Innocence,
            
            And taking off the chaines of Insolence,
            
            From their prophan'd and godlike Lineaments,
            Actions heroique, and diuine descents,
            All the sweet Graces, euen from death reuiu'd,
            And sacred fruites, from barren Rockes deriu'd,
            Th' Immortall Subiects of our Nuptials are:
            Thee then (iust scourge of factious populare;
            Fautor of peace, and all the powers that moue
            In sacred Circle of religious Loue;
            Fountaine of royall learning, and the rich
            Treasure of Counsailes, and mellifluous speech:)
            Let me inuoke, that one drop of thy spring
            May spirit my aged Muse, and make her sing,
            As if th'inspir'd brest, of eternall youth
            Had lent her Accents, and all-mouing truth.
            The Kingdome that the gods so much did loue,
            And often feasted all the Powers aboue:
            At whose prime beauties the enamour'd Sunne,
            His Morning beames lights, and doth ouerrunne
            
               The world with Ardor (Aethiopia)
            
            Bore in her throne diuine Andromeda,
            
            To Cepheus and Cassiope his Queene:
            Whose boundlesse beauties, made ore'flow the spleene
            Of euery Neirid, for surpassing them:
            The Sun to her, resign'd his Diadem:
            And all the Deities, admiring stood,
            Affirming nothing mou'd, like flesh and blood:
            Thunder would court her with words sweetly phraz'd,
            And lightning stucke 'twixt heau'n and earth amaz'd.
            This matchlesse virgin had a mother too,
            That did for beautie, and for wisdome goe
            Before the formost Ladies of her time:
            To whom of super-excellence the crime
            Was likewise lai'd by Iuno, and from hence
            Pin'd Enuie suckt, the poison of offence.
            No truth of excellence, was euer seene,
            But bore the venome of the Vulgares spleene.
            And now the much enrag'd Neireides
            
            Obtain'd of him that moues the marble seas
            
               (To wreake the vertue, they cal'd Insolence)
            A whale so monstrous, and so past defence,
            That all the royall Region he laid wast,
            And all the noblest edifices rac't:
            Nor from his plague, were strongest Cities free,
            His bodies vast heape rag'd so heauily.
            With noblest names and bloods is still embrewd
            The monstrous beast, the rauenous Multitude.
            This plague thus preying vpon all the land,
            With so incomprehensible a hand:
            The pious virgin of the father sought,
            By Oracles to know, what cause had brought
            Such banefull outrage ouer all his State,
            And what might reconcile the Deities hate.
            His orisons and sacrifices past,
            The Oracle gaue answere, that the waste
            His Country suffered, neuer would conclude,
            Till his Andromeda he did extrude,
            To rapine of the Monster, he (good man,)
            Resolu'd to satiate the Leuiathan:
            
            
               With her, before his Country, though he lou'd
            Her past himselfe, and bore a spirit mou'd
            To rescue Innocence in any one
            That was to him, or his, but kindly knowne,
            To grace, or profite; doe them any good
            That lay in swift streame of his noblest blood,
            Constant to all, yet to his deerest seed,
            (For rights sake) flitting: thinking true indeed,
            The generall vprore, that t'was sinne in her,
            That made men so exclaime, and gods conferre
            Their approbation: saying the Kingdomes bale
            Must end by her exposure to the Whale:
            With whom the Whale-like vulgare did agree,
            And their foule spleenes, thought her impiety,
            Her most wise mother yet, the sterne intent,
            Vow'd with her best endeauour to preuent.
            And tolde her what her father did addresse;
            Shee (fearefull) fled into the wildernesse:
            And to th' instinct of sauage beasts would yeeld,
            Before a father that would cease to shield
            
               A daughter, so diuine and Innocent:
            Her feet were wing'd, and all the search out went,
            That after her was ordered: but shee flew,
            And burst the winds that did incenst pursue,
            And with enamoured sighes, her parts assaile,
            Plaide with her haire, and held her by the vaile:
            From whom shee brake, and did to woods repaire:
            Still where shee went, her beauties dide the ayre,
            And with her warme blood, made proud Flora blush:
            But seeking shelter in each shadie bush:
            Beauty like fire, comprest, more strength receiues
            And shee was still seene shining through the leaues.
            Hunted from thence, the Sunne euen burn'd to see,
            So more then Sunne-like a Diuinity,
            
            Blinded her eyes, and all inuasion seekes
            To dance vpon the mixture of her cheekes,
            Which show'd to all, that follow'd after far,
            As vnderneath the roundure of a starre,
            The euening skie is purple'd with his beames:
            Her lookes fir'd all things with her loues extreames.
            
               Her necke a chaine of orient pearle did decke,
            The pearles were faire, but fairer was her necke:
            Her breasts (laid out) show'd all enflamed sights
            Loue, lie a sunning, twixt two Crysolites:
            
            Her naked wrists showde, as if through the skie,
            A hand were thrust, to signe the Deitie
            Her hands, the confines, and digestions were
            Of Beauties world; Loue fixt his pillars there.
            Her eyes that others caught, now made her caught,
            Who to her father, for the whale was brought,
            Bound to a barraine Rocke, and death expected;
            But heau'n hath still such Innocence protected:
            Beauty needs feare no Monsters, for the sea,
            (Mother of Monsters) sent Alcyone,
            
            To warrant her, not onely gainst the waues,
            But all the deathes hid in her watrie graues.
            The louing birds flight made about her still,
            (Still good presaging) shew'd heau'ns sauing will:
            Which cheering her, did comfort all the shore
            That mourn'd in shade of her sad eyes before:
            
               Her lookes to perle turn'd peble, and her looks
            To burnisht gold transform'd the burning Rocks.
            And no
                  •
                came roring to the tied, the Tide
            All the Neireides deckt in all their pride
            Mounted on Dolphins, ro
                  •
               de to see their wreake
            The waues fom'd with their enuies; that did speake
            In mutest fishes, with their leapes aloft
            For brutish ioy of the reuenge they sought.
            The people greedie of disastrous sights
            And newes, (the food of idle appetites
            From the kings Chamber, straight knew his intent,
            And almost his resolu'd thoughts did preuent
            In drie waues beating thicke about the Shore
            And then came on the prodegie, that bore
            In one masse mixt their Image; that still spread
            A thousand bodies vnder one sole head
            Of one minde still to ill all ill men are
            Strange sights and mischiefes fit the Populare.
            Vpon the Monster red Rhamnusia rode,
            The Sauage leapt beneath his bloody load
            
               Mad of his prey, giu'n ouer now by all:
            When any high, haue any meanes to fall,
            Their greatest louers proue false props to proue it
            And for the mischiefe onely, praise and loue it.
            There is no good they will not then commend,
            Nor no Religion but they will pretend
            A mighty title to, when both are vs'd,
            To warrant Innouation, or see brus'd
            The friendlesse Reed, that vnder all feet lies:
            The sound parts euermore, they passe like flies,
            And dwell vpon the sores, ill in themselues,
            They clearely saile with ouer rockes and shelues,
            But good in others ship wracke in the Deepes:
            Much more vniust is he that truely keepes
            Lawes for more shew, his owne ends vnderstood
            Then he that breakes them for anothers good.
            And 'tis the height of all malignity,
            
               
                  •
               o tender good so, that yee ill implie:
            
               
                  •
               o treade on Pride but with a greater pride.
            When where no ill, but in ill thoughts is tri'd,
            
               To speake well is a charity diuine:
            The rest retaine the poyson serpentine
            Vnder their lips, that sacred liues condemne,
            And wee may worthily apply to them,
            This tragicke execration: perish hee
            That si
                  •
               ts too far humane infirmity.
            But as your cupping glasses still exhale
            The humour that is euer worst of all
            In all the flesh: So these spic't conscienc't men
            The worst of things explore still, and retaine.
            Or rather, as in certaine Cities were
            Some ports through which all rites piaculare,
            All Executed men, all filth were brought,
            Of all things chast, or pure, or sacred, nought
            Entring or issuing there: so curious men,
            Nought manly, elegant, or not vncleane,
            Embrace, or bray out: Acts of staine are still
            Their Syrens, and their Muses: Any ill
            Is to their appetites, their supreme good,
            And sweeter then their necessary food.
            
               All men almost in all things they apply
            The By the Maine make, and the Maine the By.
            
            Thus this sweete Ladies sad exposure was
            Of all these moodes in men, the only glasse:
            But now the man that next to Ioue comptrold
            The triple world▪ got with a shoure of gold:
            (Armed with Medusa's head, and Enyos eye:
            The Adamantine sword of Mercury
            
            The helme of Pluto, and Minerua's Mirror,
            
            That from the Gorgus made his passe with Terror)
            Came to the rescue of this enuied mayd:
            Drew neere, and first, in admiration stay'd
            That for the common ill of all the land,
            She the particular obloquie should stand:
            And that a beauty, no lesse then diuine
            Should men and women finde so serpentine
            As but to thinke her any such euent:
            Much lesse that eies and hands should giue consent
            To such a danger and to such a death.
            But though the whole Realme laboured vnderneath
            
               So foule an error, yet since Ioue and he
            Tendred her beauty, and integretie,
            In spight of all the more he set vp spirit
            To doe her right; the more all wrong'd her merit,
            He that both vertue had, and beauty too
            Equall with her to both knew what to doe:
            The Ruthles still go laught at to the Graue
            Those that no good will doe, no goodnesse haue:
            The minde a spirit is, and cal'd the glasse
            In which we see God; and corporeall grace
            The mirror is, in which we see the minde.
            Amongst the fairest women you could finde
            Then Perseus, none more faire; mongst worthiest men,
            No one more manly: This the glasse is then
            
            To shew where our complexion is combinde;
            A womans beauty, and a manly minde:
            Such was the halfe-diuine-borne Troian Terror
            Where both Sex graces, met as in their Mirror.
            
               Perseus of Loues owne forme, those fiue parts had
            Which some giue man, that is the loueliest made:
            
               Or rather that is loueliest enclin'd,
            And beares (with shape) the beauty of the mind:
            Young was he, yet not youthfull, since mid-yeeres,
            The golden meane holds in mens loues and feares:
            Aptly composde, and soft (or delicate)
            Flexible (or tender) calme (or temperate)
            Of these fiue, three, make most exactly knowne,
            The Bodies temperate complexion:
            The other two, the order doe expresse,
            The measure and whole Trim of comelinesse.
            A temperate corporature (learn'd Nature saith)
            A smooth, a soft, a solid flesh bewrayeth:
            Which state of body shewes th' affections State
            In all the humours, to be moderate;
            For which cause, soft or delicate they call
            Our conquering Perseus, and but yong withall,
            Since time or yeeres in men too much reuolu'd,
            The subtiler parts of humour being resolu'd,
            More thicke parts rest, of fire and aire the want,
            Makes earth and water more predominant:
            
               Flexible they calde him, since his quicke conceit,
            And pliant disposition, at the height
            Tooke each occasion, and to Acts approu'd,
            As soone as he was full inform'd, he mou'd,
            Not flexible, as of inconstant state,
            Nor soft, as if too much effeminate,
            For these to a complexion moderate
            (Which we before affirme in him) imply,
            A most vnequall contrariety.
            Composure fit for Ioues sonne Perseus had,
            And to his forme, his mind fit answere made:
            " As to be lou'd, the fairest fittest are;
            " To loue so to, most apt are the most faire,
            " Light like it self, tran
                  •
               parent bodies makes,
            " At ones act▪ th'other ioint impression takes.
            " Perseus, (as if transparent) at first sight,
            " Was shot quite thorough with her beauties light:
            " Beauty breedes loue▪ loue consummates a man.
            " For loue, being true, and Eleutherean,
            
            " No Iniurie nor con
                  •••
               elie beares;
            
               " That his beloued, eyther feeles or feares,
            " All good-wils enterchange it doth conclude
            " And mans whole summe holds, which is gratitude:
            " No wisdome, noblesse, force of armes, nor lawes,
            " Without loue, wins man, his compleat applause:
            " Loue, makes him valiant, past all else desires
            " For Mars, that is, of all heau'ns erring fires
            "  Most full of fortitude (since he inspires
            " Men with most valour) Cytheraea tames:
            " For when in heau'ns blunt Angels shine his flames,
            " Or he, his second or eight house ascends
            " Of rul'd Natiuities; and then portends
            " Ill to the then-borne: Venus in aspect
            " Sextile, or Trine doth (being conioyn'd) correct
            " His most malignitie: And when his starre
            " The birth of any gouernes (fit for warre
            " The Issue making much to wrath enclin'd
            " And to the ventrous greatnesse of the minde)
            " If Venus neere him shine she doth not let
            " His magnanimity, but in order set
            
               " The vice of Anger making Mars more milde
            " And gets the mastry of him in the childe:
            " Mars neuer masters her; but if she guide
            " She loue inclines: and Mars set by her side
            " Her fires more ardent render, with his heat:
            " So that if he at any birth be set
            " In th' house of Venus, Libra, or the Bull,
            
            " The then-borne burnes, and loues flames feels at full.
            " Besides, Mars still doth after Venus moue
            " Venus not after Mars: because, of Loue
            " Boldnesse is hand-maid, Loue not so of her:
            " For not because men, bold affections beare
            " Loues golden nets doth their affects enfold;
            " But since men loue, they therefore are more bold
            " And made to dare, euen Death, for their belou'd,
            " And finally, Loues Fortitude is prou'd
            " Past all, most cleerely; for this cause alone
            " All things submit to Loue, but loue to none.
            " Celestials, Animals, all Corporeall things,
            " Wisemen, and Strong, Slaue-rich, and Free-borne Kings
            
               " Are loues contributories; no guifts can buy,
            " No threats can loue constraine, or terrifie
            " For loue is Free, and his Impulsions still
            Spring from his owne free, and ingenious will.
            Not God himselfe, would willing loue enforce
            But did at first decree, his liberall course:
            Such is his liberty, that all affects
            All arts and Acts, the minde besides directs
            To some wish't recompence, but loue aspires
            To no possessions, but his owne desires:
            As if his wish in his owne sphere did moue,
            And no reward were worthy Loue but Loue.
            Thus Perseus stood affected, in a Time
            When all loue, but of riches was a crime
            A fancy and a follie. And this fact
            To adde to loues deseruings, did detract;
            For twas a Monster and a monstrous thing
            Whence he should combat out, his nuptiall ring,
            The monster vulgar thought, and conquerd gaue
            The combatant already, the foule graue
            
               Of their fore-speakings, gaping for him stood
            And cast out fumes as from the Stigian flood
            Gainst his great enterprise, which was so fit
            For Ioues cheefe Minion, that Plebeian wit
            Could not conceiue it: Acts that are too hie
            For Fames crackt voice, resound all Infamie:
            O poore of vnderstanding: if there were
            Of all your Acts, one onely that did beare
            Mans worthie Image, euen of all your best
            Which truth could not discouer, to be drest
            In your owne ends, which Truths selfe not compels,
            But couers in your bottoms, sinckes and hels.
            Whose opening would abhor the sunne to see
            (So ye stood sure of safe deliuerie
            Being great with gaine or propagating lust)
            A man might feare your hubbubs; and some trust
            Giue that most false Epiphonem, that giues
            Your voice, the praise of gods: but view your liues
            With eyes impartiall, and ye may abhorre
            To censure high acts, when your owne taste more
            
               Of damned danger: Perseus scorn'd to feare
            The ill of good Acts, though hel-mouth gap't there:
            Came to Andromeda; sat by, and cheerd:
            But she that lou'd, through all the death she fear'd,
            At first sight, like her Louer: for his sake
            Resolu'd to die, ere he should vndertake
            A combat with a Monster so past man
            To tame or vanquish, though of Ioue he wanne
            A power past all men els, for man should still
            Aduance his powers to rescue good from ill,
            Where meanes of rescue seru'd: and neuer where
            Ventures of rescue, so impossible were
            That would encrease the danger: two for one
            Expose to Ruine: Therefore she alone
            Would stand the Monsters Fury and the Shame
            Of those harsh bands: for if he ouercame
            The monstrous world would take the monsters part
            
               
                  •
               o much the more: and say some sorcerouse art
            Not his pure valour, nor his Innocence
            Preuail'd in her deliuerance her offence
            
               Would still the same be counted, for whose ill
            The Land was threatned by the Oracle.
            The poisoned Murmures of the multitude.
            Rise more, the more, desert or power obtrude:
            Against their most (sayd he) come I the more:
            Vertue, in constant sufferance we adore.
            Nor could death fright him, for he dies that loues:
            And so all bitternesse from death remoues.
            He dies that loues, because his euery thought,
            (Himselfe forgot) in his belou'd is wrought.
            If of himselfe his thoughts are not imploy'd
            Nor in himselfe they are by him enioy'd.
            And since not in himselfe, his minde hath Act
            (The mindes act chiefly being of thought compact)
            Who workes not in himselfe, himselfe not is:
            For, these two are in man ioynt properties,
            To worke, and Be; for Being can be neuer
            But Operation, is combined euer.
            Nor Operation, Being doth exceed,
            Nor workes man where he is not: still his deed
            
               His being, consorting, no true Louers minde
            He in himselfe can therefore euer finde
            Since in himselfe it workes not, if he giues
            Being from himselfe, not in himselfe he liues:
            And he that liues not, dead is, Truth then said
            That whosoeuer is in loue, is dead.
            If death the Monster brought then, he had laid
            A second life vp, in the loued Mayd:
            And had she died, his third life Fame decreed,
            Since death is conquer'd in each liuing deed:
            Then came the Monster on, who being showne
            His charmed sheild, his halfe he turn'd to stone
            And through the other with his sword made way:
            Till like a ruin'd Cittie, dead he lay
            Before his loue: The Neirids with a shrieke
            And Syrens (fearfull to sustaine the like)
            And euen the ruthlesse and the sencelesse Tide
            Before his howre, ran roring terrifi'd,
            Backe to their strength: wonders and monsters both,
            With constant magnanimitie, like froth
            
               Sodainely vanish, smother'd with their prease;
            No wonder lasts but vertue: which no lesse
            We may esteeme, since t' is as seldome found
            Firme & sincere, and when no vulgar ground
            Or flourish on it, fits the vulgar eye
            Who viewes it not but as a prodegie?
            
               Plebeian admiration, needes must signe
            All true-borne Acts, or like false fires they shine:
            If Perseus for such warrant had contain'd
            His high exploit, what honour had he gain'd?
            Who would haue set his hand to his designe
            But in his skorne? skorne censures things diuine:
            True worth (like truth) sits in a groundlesse pit
            And none but true eyes see the depth of it
            
               Perseus had Enyos eye, and saw within
            That grace, which out-lookes, held a desperate sin:
            He, for it selfe, with his owne end went on,
            And with his louely rescu'd Paragon
            
            Long'd of his Conquest, for the latest shocke:
            Dissolu'd her chaines, and tooke her from the rocke
            
               Now woing for his life that fled to her
            As hers in him lay: Loue did both confer
            To one in both: himselfe in her he found
            She with her selfe, in onely him was crownd:
            While thee I loue (sayd he) you louing mee
            In you I finde my selfe: thought on by thee,
            And I (lost in my selfe by thee neglected)
            In thee recouer'd am, by thee affected:
            The same in me you worke, miraculous strange
            Twixt two true Louers is this enterchange,
            For after I haue lost my selfe, if I
            Redeeme my selfe by thee, by thee supply
            I of my selfe haue, if by thee I saue
            My selfe so lost, thee more then me I haue.
            And neerer to thee, then my selfe I am
            Since to my selfe no otherwise I came
            Then by thee being the meane: In mutuall loue
            One onely death and two reuiuals moue:
            For he that loues, when he himselfe neglects
            Dies in himselfe once, In her he affects
            
               Straight he renewes, when she with equall fire
            Embraceth him, as he did her desire:
            Againe he liues too, when he surely seeth
            Himselfe in her made him: O blessed death
            Which two liues follow: O Commerce most strange
            Where, who himselfe doth for another change,
            Nor hath himselfe, nor ceaseth still to haue:
            O gaine, beyond which no desire can craue,
            When two are so made one, that either is
            For one made two, and doubled as in this:
            Who one life had: one interuenient death
            Makes him distinctly draw a two fold breath:
            In mutuall Loue the wreake most iust is found,
            When each so kill that each cure others wound;
            But Churlish Homicides, must death sustaine,
            For who belou'd, not yeelding loue againe
            And so the life doth from his loue deuide
            Denies himselfe to be a Homicide?
            
            For he no lesse a Homicide is held,
            That man to be borne lets: then he that kild
            
               A man that is borne: He is bolder farre
            That present life reaues: but he crueller
            That to the to-be borne, enuies the light
            And puts their eyes out, ere they haue their sight.
            All good things euer we desire to haue,
            And not to haue alone, but still to saue:
            All mortall good, defectiue is, and fraile;
            Vnlesse in place of things, on point to faile,
            We daily new beget. That things innate
            May last, the languishing we re'create
            
               
                  •
               n generation, re'creation is,
            And from the prosecution of this
            Man his instinct of generation takes.
            Since generation, in continuance, makes
            Mortals, similitudes, of powers diuine,
            Diuine worth doth in generation shine.
            Thus Perseus sayd, and not because he sau'd
            Her life alone, he her in marriage crau'd:
            But with her life, the life of likely Race
            Was chiefe end of his action, in whose grace
            
               
Her royall father brought him to his Court
            With all the then assembled glad resort
            Of Kings and Princes: where were solemniz'd
            Th'admired Nuptialls: which great Heau'n so priz'
                  •
               
            
            That Ioue againe stoopt in a goulden showre
            T'enrich the Nuptiall as the Natall howre
            Of happy Perseus▪
                white-armd Iuno to
            Depos'd her greatnesse, and what she could do
            To grace the Bride & Bride-groome, was vouchsaf
                  ••
               
            
            All Subiect-deities stoopt to: and the Shaft
            Golden and mutuall, with which loue comprest
            Both th'enuied Louers: offerd to, and kist:
            All answerablie feasted to their States:
            In all the Starres beames, stoopt the reuerend Fates:
            And the rere banquet, that fore ranne the Bed
            With his presage shut vp, and seconded:
            And sayd they sung verse, that Posteritie
            In no age should reproue, for Perfidie.
            
            
               
               Parcarum Epithalamion.
               
                  O You this kingdomes glory that shall be
                  Parents to so renownd a Progenie
                  As earth shall enuie, and heauen glory in,
                  Accept of their liues threds, which Fates shal spin
                  Their true spoke oracle, and liue to see
                  Your sonnes sonnes enter such a Progenie,
                  
                  As to the last times of the world shall last:
                  Haste you that guide the web, haste spindles haste.
               
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     ee Hesperus, with nuptiall wishes crownd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ake and enioy; In all ye wish abound,
                  Abound, for who should wish crowne with her store
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut you that slew what barren made the shore?
                  You that in winter, make your spring to come
                  Your Summer needs must be Elisium:
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      race of mere soules springing, that shall cast
                  
                     
                        •
                     heir bodies off in cares, and all ioyes taste.
                  Haste then that sacred web, haste spindles haste.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Ioue loues not many, therefore let those few
                  That his guifts grace, affect still to renew:
                  For none can last the same; that proper is
                  To onely more then Semideities:
                  
                  To last yet by renewing, all that haue
                  More merit then to make their birth their graue,
                  As in themselues life, life in others saue:
                  First to be great seeke, then lou'd, then to last:
                  Haste you that guide the web, haste spindles haste.
               
               
                  She comes, ô Bridegroom shew thy selfe enflam'd
                  And of what tender tinder Loue is flam'd:
                  Catch with ech sparke, her beauties hurle about:
                  Nay with ech thoght of her be rapt throughout;
                  Melt let thy liuer, pant thy startled heart:
                  Mount Loue on earthquakes in thy euery part:
                  A thousand hewes on thine, let her lookes cast;
                  Dissolue thy selfe to be by her embrac't,
                  Haste ye that guide the web, haste spindles haste.
               
               
                  
                  As in each bodie, there is ebbe and flood
                  Of blood in euery vaine, of spirits in blood;
                  Of Ioyes in spirits, of the Soule in Ioyes,
                  And nature through your liues, this change imploies
                  To make her constant: so each minde retaines
                  Manners and customs, where vicicitude reignes:
                  Opinions, pleasures, which such change enchains.
                  And in this enterchange all man doth last,
                  Haste then who guide the web, haste spindles haste.
               
               
                  Who bodie loues best, feedes on dantiest meats,
                  Who fairest seed seekes, fairest women gets:
                  Who loues the minde, with loueliest disciplines
                  Loues to enforme her, in which verity shines.
                  Her beauty yet, we see not, since not her:
                  But bodies▪ (being her formes) who faire formes beare
                  We view, and chiefely seeke her beauties there.
                  The fairest then, for faire birth, see embrac't,
                  Haste ye that guide the web, haste spindles haste.
               
               
                  
                  Starres ye are now, and ouershine the earth:
                  Starres shall ye be heereafter, and your birth
                  In bodies rule heere, as your selues in heau'n,
                  What heer Detraction steals, shall there be giuen:
                  The boūd that heer you freed shal triumph there
                  The chaine that touch't her wrists shal be a starre
                  Your beauties few can view, so bright they are:
                  Like you shalbe your birth, with grace disgrac't
                  Haste ye that rule the web, haste spindles haste.
               
               
                  Thus by diuine instinct, the fates enrag'd,
                  Of Perseus and Andromeda presag'd
                  Who, (when the worthy nuptial State was done
                  And that act past, which only two makes one,
                  Flesh of each flesh and bone of eithers bone)
                  Left Cepheus Court; both freed and honoured.
                  The louing Victor, and blest Bride-groome led
                  Home to the Seriphins, his rescu'd Bride;
                  Who (after issue highly magnifi'd
                  
                     Both rapt to heau'n, did constellations reigne,
                  And to an Asterisme was turn'd the chaine
                  That onely touch't his grace of flesh & blood,
                  In all which stands the Fates kinde Omen good.
               
            
            
               
               APODOSIS.
               THus through the Fount of stormes (the cruell seas)
               Her Monsters and malignant deities,
               Great Perseus made high and triumphant way
               To his starre crownd deed, and bright Nuptiall day.
               And thus doe you, that Perseus place supply
               In our Ioues loue, get Persean victorie
               Of our Land Whale, foule Barbarisme, and all
               His brood of pride, and liues Atheisticall:
               That more their pallats and their purses prise
               Then propagating Persean victories:
               Take Monsters parts, not aucthor manly parts:
               For Monsters kill the Man-informing Arts:
               And like a lothed prodegie despise
               The rapture that the Arts doth naturalise,
               Creating and immortalising men:
               Who scornes in her the Godheads vertue then,
               The Godheads selfe hath boldnesse to despise,
               And hate not her, but their Eternities:
               
                  Seeke vertues loue, and vicious flatteries hate,
               Heere is not true sweete, but in knowing State.
               Who Honor hurts, neglecting vertues loue,
               Commits but Rapes on pleasures; for not Ioue
               
               His power in thunder hath, or downeright flames,
               But his chiefe Rule, his Loue and Wisedome frames▪
               
               You then, that in loues strife haue ouercome
               The greatest Subiect blood of Crhistendome,
               The greatest subiect minde take, and in Both
               Be absolute man: and giue that end your oth.
               So shall my sad astonisht Muse arriue
               At her chiefe obiect: which is, to reuiue
               By quickning honor, in the absolute best:
               And since none are, but in Eternitie, blest,
               He that in paper can register things
               That Brasse and Marble shall denie euen Kings:
               Should not be trod on by ech present flash:
               The Monster slaine then, with your cleere Seas, wash
               From spots of Earth, Heauens beauty in the minde
               
                  
                     •
                  n which, through death, hath all true Noblesse shinde.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   