
      
         
            
            
               
¶ The Edict of the French King, for the appeaſing of the troubles of his Realme.
Publiſhed at Paris in the Court of Parliament the eleuēth of Auguſt. 1573.
Printed in French by Federic Morel the Kings ordinarie Printer, with the Kings Priuilege.
            PRINTED AT LONDON by Henric Bynneman.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Edict of the Frenche King for the appeaſing of the troubles in his Kingdome.
            
               
                  CHARLES by the grace of God King of Fraunce, to all preſente or to come greeting. Oure intente hath alwayes bene and is, after the example of our predeceſſors, to rule and S. Bartholmew. 24. of Auguſt. 1572. gouerne our Realme, and to receiue of our ſubiectes the obeyſance to vs due, rather by gentle and louing maner, than by force. Wherefore our moſt deare and welbeloued brother the King of Polonia, hauing full vnderſtanding of our wil and pleaſure, hath (following the commaundement and ſpeciall power that wee haue ſente him for that purpoſe) appointed and deputed certaine of the chiefe perſonages of our priuie coū
               ſel being with him, to heare and vnderſtande

the complaintes, griefes, and ſupplications of the Maior, ſhiriffes, & Councellers, dwellers and inhabitantes of our Towne of Rochell, Gentlemen and others that are there abyding. And for as much as it is ſo, that nowe in the ende our moſt deare brother the ſayd King of Polonia, according to our pleaſure & good will, hath (by the aduiſe of our moſt deare and welbeloued brethren the duke of Alencon and king of Nauarre, and our moſte deare and welbeloued Couſins the Prince of Conde, and Prince Dauphin: the Dukes of Longueville, of Guiſe, Neuers, and of Vzes: the Lords of Montluc, Coūt of Rhetz, of Biron, of Villequier, of the Chappell Aux Vrſins, of Loſſes, of Vauguyon, of S. Supplice, of Malicorne, of Suze, ye Grādprior of Champaigne, and other great and notable perſonages beeing with him) made agreement with the ſayde inhabitantes

of Rochell, Gentlemen and others retyred thither, vppon the pointes and Articles that ſhall bee hereafter ſpecified, as wel for themſelues, as for the inhabitantes of our Towns of Moūtauban, and Niſmes, the Gentlemen and others retired into them, and others our ſubiectes, for whome they haue made ſute.
            We let you vnderſtande that, conſidering we can not doe better than to follow the counſell which is giuē vs by our ſayde brethren, Princes and Lordes afore ſaide, who for the zeale they haue to the honor of God, with the experience they haue in many things, and the affection they beare towardes the well ordering of our affayres, haue more knowledge than any other in thoſe matters, what is meete and neceſſarie for the profit and commoditie of our Realme. We by the aduice & counſell

of the Queene our moſt honorable Ladie and mother, of our moſte deare and welbeloued Couſins the Cardinals of Lorain, and of Guiſe: of our moſt deare & faithful Chauncellour: of the Lordes of Moruillier of Lanſſac, of Limoges: of the preſidents, firſt of Thou, and Seguier, the Lorde of Foix, the preſident Hannequin, the Lords of Cheuerny, of Mā
                  de and of Roeſsi, all Counſellers of our ſaid priuie Councel for the matters and cauſes beforeſaide, and for other good and great cōſiderations therunto ſpecially mouing vs) haue ſaide, declared, decreed and ordeyned, and do ſay, declare, decree, and ordeine, by this our preſent Edict, & our wyll and pleaſure is as followeth.
            I. Firſt, that the remembrance of all things that haue hapned by occaſion of the troubles and ſtirres in our

ſayde Realme, ſince the 24. of Auguſt laſt paſte, ſhall remaine wholly quenched and appeaſed as thinges that hadde neuer happened: neyther ſhall it be lawfull or permitted to any of our atturneys generall, or any other perſon either publique or priuate, in what tyme ſoeuer or for what occaſion ſoeuer it be, to make any mention there, nor any proces or ſute therevpon in any Courte or iuriſdiction.
            II. Forbidding alſo all our Subiects of what eſtate or quallitie ſoeuer they bee, that they renewe not the memorie thereof, nor to contend, nor to reuile, nor prouoke eyther other by reproching them with thinges that be paſt, in diſputing, reherſing, quarelling or doing outrage or offence one to an other, in word or in deede, but to forbeare, and to liue peacibly togither as brethrē, frends

and fellowe Citizens, vpon paine to them that ſhall doe the contrarie, to be puniſhed as brekers of the peace, and diſturbers of the cōmon quiet.
            III. We ordeine, that the Catholike and Romiſhe Religion bee ſet vp againe, and eſtabliſhed in all places & quarters of this our Realme and countrey vnder our obedience, wher the exerciſe of the ſame hath bene left off, and that it may be freely and peaſibly exerciſed without any trouble or let, vpon the paines aforeſaid: and that all thoſe whiche during theſe preſent warres, haue entred vpon houſes, goodes and reuenues belonging to the Churchmen and other catholiques, and ſuch as hold and occupie the ſame, ſhall leaue vnto them the full poſſeſſion and peaſible enioying therof, in al freedome and ſafetie.
            
               
IIII. And for to giue occaſion to our ſubiectes, abyding and inhabiting in our ſaid Towns of Rochell, Montauban, and Niſmes, to liue and remaine in reſte, wee haue permitted, and doe permit to them, the free exerciſe of the Religion, called reformed, within the ſaide Townes, the ſame too cauſe too bee exerciſed within their owne houſes, or place to them appertaining (excepte alwayes publique places) for them, their families and others that will be there preſent.
            V. And to alothers of the ſaid religiō (called reformed) which haue continued therein vntill this preſent; we do permit to retire into their houſes where they maye bee, and remaine throughout all other partes of our Realme, to go and come, and to liue in all libertie of conſcience: And to

the Gentlemen and others, hauing high Iuſtice, which in like manner haue hytherto remayned till this preſent in the ſaid Religion, bering Armes with the ſaide inhabitants, in the ſaide Townes, ſince the ſaide 24. of Auguſt laſt paſte, wee doe alſo permit to liue in the ſame libertie of conſcience in their houſes, and there onely to baptize and marrie after their accuſtomed maner, not hauing any aſſembly (beſides the kinred, Godfathers and Godmothers) aboue the number of tenne perſons, and that not within our Court, nor within two leagues about theſame, nor in the Towne, Prouoſtſhip and Vicountie of Paris, nor within tenne Leagues about the ſame Towne.
            VI. We charge our Baylifes, Seneſhalles, ordinarie Iudges, or other Subſtitutes, each one in his libertie or iuriſdiction, to prouide for the

buriall of the deade bodies of them of the ſaide Religion (called reformed) in the moſt commodious manner they can, and without offence.
            VII. If any of the ſaide Religion haue bene conſtrained to make promis & bonde, & to giue aſſurance to change their Religion: we haue diſcharged the ſame, and declare the ſame to be adnulled, & of none effect or value.
            VIII. The Schollers, ſickmen, and poore, of what religion ſoeuer they be, ſhall be indifferently receiued into the vniuerſities, cōmon ſcholes, hoſpitals, houſes for ſicke perſons, and Almes houſes.
            IX. We do permit to al our Subiects being of the ſaid religion, that they may ſell or alienate theyr goodes, and goe freely with all their money and other moueables, whither it

ſhall ſeeme them good, or to enioye the commoditie and benefite thereof, in what place ſoeuer they ſhall reſort vnto, be it within or without the Realme, ſo that it bee not in the lands of ſuch Princes, with whom we may haue warres.
            X. Our ſayde Subiectes of Rochell, Mountaban and Niſmes, and other before named, ſhall remaine quit & diſcharged of all ſummes of money, goods, debtes, arrerages of rentes, profits and reuenues of eccleſiaſticall perſons, and others which they ſhall ſufficiently make apparant to haue bene by them taken or leuied, ſince the ſaide. 24. of Auguſt, ſo that neyther they nor their committies, nor thoſe that haue furniſhed them with any thing, or delyuered the ſame vnto them, ſhall any wayes be charged nor condemned therfore at this preſent, nor for the time paſte,

nor at any time hereafter.
            XI. Likewiſe they ſhall remayne acquitted and diſcharged of all Artes of hoſtilitie, leuying and conducting of men of warre, coyning of money, caſting and taking of ordinance and munitions, making of powder and Saltpeter, Prizes, Fortifications or enterpriſes vpon Townes, pulling downe of Churches, houſes or other places, prizes of Ships, Galleyes and goodes vpon the Sea, eſtabliſhmēt of Iuſtice, and Iudgements, and the executions thereof, as well in caſes ciuill as criminall, voyages, intelligences, treaties, & dealings had for their ayde and conſeruation, and generally of all that hath by them beene done, wrought or committed to that effect, as well wythin as wythout our Realme, ſince the ſaide. 24. of Auguſt, as wel as if the ſame were particularly expreſſed

and ſpecifyed, ſo that for none of the thinges before named or others paſt and done, ſhall be imputed to them or to their poſteritie any crime of rebellion, diſobedience or Treaſon.
            XII. We do declare, that we holde and repute all thoſe aforenamed for our good, loyall and faythfull ſubiectes and ſeruantes, ſo that they doe 
                  〈◊〉
                ſweare vnto vs all obeyſance and fidelitie, and doe leaue off and deſiſt wholly from al ſuch aſſociations as they haue wythin or wythout our Realme, and that they do not hereafter make any gatherings of money without our permiſſion, nor enrolmentes of men, congregations, or aſſemblies, other than thoſe whiche are aboue to them permitted, & that without Armes, vpon paine to be rigorouſly puniſhed, as contemners of our commaundementes

and ordinances.
            XIII. All priſoners taken in warre, or others that bee holden in pryſons, galleyes, or elſewhere, for the cauſe of religion, and by occaſion of theſe preſent troubles, ſhall be enlarged and ſette at libertie without paying of ranſome, not meaning heereby, that the ranſomes which are alreadie payde, may bee aſked againe of thoſe that haue receiued them.
            XIIII. Thoſe of the ſayde religion ſhall not bee ouercharged, or burdened with any charges ordinarie or extraordinarie more than the Catholiques.
            XV. We haue declared and do declare, all defaults, ſentences, iudgements arreſtes, proceſſes, ſeyſures, ſales, and decrees made and giuen againſt thoſe of the Religion called reformed,

which bee or haue bene within the ſaide Townes of Rochell, Moū
                  tauban, and Niſmes, ſince the ſayde 24. of Auguſt laſt paſte, whiche haue beene giuen without hearing the parties, or their Proctors by them appoynted, ſince the ſayde 24. of Auguſt laſt paſte, alſo the execution of the ſame, as well in caſes ciuil as criminall, ſhall bee voyde, reuoked, and adnulled. And the Proceſſes ſhall remaine in the ſame eſtate as they were before, and the foreſayde perſons ſhal enter again vpon their temporall goodes, what ſo euer ſeyzures, ſales, and iudgementes haue beene made by vs or otherwayes, without making any recompence for the ſame.
            XVI. And touching heires, widowes, and other hauing any right or title from ſuch of the ſayde Religion, as are deceaſſed wythin the ſayde

Towns, that haue bin there or born Armes for them, in what parte of our realme ſoeuer it be ſince the ſaid 24. of Auguſt, we permit to them to reenter into the poſſeſſion and enioying of the goodes left by the ſaid perſons deceaſſed, and we do maintaine them in their good fame and reputation.
            XVII. All officers of the ſayd townes of Rochel, Mountauban, and Niſmes, as well pertayning to the Crowne as others, of what religion ſoeuer they be, that haue bene put out therof by reaſon of the ſame religion, and of theſe preſent troubles, ſhall be ſet againe in their eſtates, charges and offices: and other officers of other Townes and places ſhall obſerue our declarations therevpon made and publiſhed.
            XVIII. And to the ende that Iuſtice bee

miniſtred without any ſuſpition to our ſubiects of the ſaid townes, and others that be retyred into thē ſince the ſayde 24. of Auguſt, we haue ordeyned and do ordeine, and our will and pleaſure is, that all proces and differences moued, or to bee moued betwene the parties of contrarie religion, as well on the part of the demaundant, as the defendant, what matter ſo euer it be, ciuill, or criminall, ſhall be heard at the firſt inſtāce before our Baylifes, Seneſhals, & other our ordinarie Iudges, according to our ordinances. And where any appeale ſhall happen in any our Courtes of Parliament, there ſhall be prouided for them by vs onely, within the ſpace of one yeare, (accompting from the daye of the publication of theſe preſents,) Iudges vnſuſpected, ſuch as ſhal ſeeme beſt to vs (except always the court of Parliamēt of Tholouſe) in reſpect

of thoſe of Mountauban: and in the meane time they ſhall not bee conſtrained to appeare perſonally.
            XIX. And for as much as many particular perſons haue receiued and ſuffered ſo many iniuries & domages, both in their goods and perſons, as hardly they can forgette the remembrance of the ſame, ſo ſone as were requiſite for the execution of our intent, we willing to auoyde all incō
               ueniences, and to giue ſome meane for thoſe that might be in ſome fear, that vpon their return to their houſes they ſhould not be at reſt, til ſuch rancour & enmitie might bee aſſuaged, haue graunted and do graunte to them of the ſaide Townes of Rochel, Mountauban, and Niſmes, that they ſhall enioy their Priuileges both auncient and lately graunted, and their authorities of iuriſdictiō and other rightes, in whiche they

ſhal be mainteyned and preſerued, wythout hauing anye Garriſon, neyther ſhall bee made there any Caſtles, Fortes, or Citadels, without the conſent of the inhabitantes of the ſame Townes. Who for a demonſtration and ſuretie of their obeyſance, obſeruation and mainteyning of our will and intention, ſhall delyuer for the ſpace of two yeares, foure of the principal Burgeſes and inhabitantes of eache of the ſayde Townes, beeing of the ſayde Religion called reformed, the which ſhal bee by vs choſen out of thoſe that they ſhall name vnto vs, and thoſe to be changed euery three moneths, or in ſuche other time as ſhall ſeeme good vnto vs, and they ſhall bee put in ſuch Townes and places as ſhall pleaſe vs to appoynte within fiftie myles off at the fartheſt from the ſaid Townes, except in our townes of Paris and Tholouſe And to the end

there be no occaſion of complainte or ſuſpition, we will ſette in the ſayde Townes for gouernors, good men and well affectioned to our ſeruice, ſuche as ſhall bee vnſuſpected, willing neuertheleſſe, that the keeping of their Towns, Towers and Fortreſſes, ſhall remaine in the handes of the ſayde inhabitants, according to their auncient Priuileges.
            
               XX. We will likewiſe, that incontinent after the publication of oure preſent Edicte made in our Campe and Armie, Armes ſhall be altogether generally layde downe, the whiche ſhall remaine onely in our handes, and in our moſte deare and moſt welbeloued brothers the King of Polonia. Wee doe ordeine that the forces as well by lande as by Sea, ſhall bee withdrawne from before the ſayd Towns, the Fortes made as well of the one parte as of the other,

ſhal be raced and ouerthrown: the free traffique and paſſages ſhal be open againe in all the Townes, Borrowes and Villages, Bridges and paſſages of our ſayde Realme: the Forces and Garriſons whiche haue ben placed by occaſion of theſe preſent troubles (ſince the ſayde 24. of Auguſte) in Townes and other places, houſes and Caſtels, apperteining to our ſubiectes of what religion ſo euer they bee, ſhall departe incontinent, to leaue vnto them free and entire enioying as they had before they were diſpoſſeſſed of them.
            
               XXI. Such moueables as ſhal remain in their nature, and which haue ben taken by waye of hoſtilitie ſince the ſayde 24. of Auguſt laſt paſt, ſhall be reſtored to them to whome they belong, ſo alway that they pay to the buyers the price of ſuch as haue ben ſolde by authoritie of Iuſtice or by

other commiſſion and publique commaundement. And for the execution of the aforeſaide, the withholders of the ſayde moueable goodes ſhall be conſtrayned and ſubiect to reſtore them incontinent and without delay, notwithſtanding all obiections or exceptions, to yelde and reſtore them to the owners, for the price which they payde.
            
               XXII. And as touching the profites of vnmoueable goodes, as well eache man ſhal enter again into his houſe and ſhall enioye on. eache parte the fruites of the collection of this preſent yeare, notwithſtanding all ſeaſures and lettes made to the contrarie, ſince the ſayde 24 of Auguſt, as alſo euery one ſhal enioy the arrerages of the ſayd rentes, that haue not ben taken vp by vs or by our cōmandement, or the permiſſion and ordinance of vs or of our Iuſtice.
            
               
XXIII. Like-wiſe that al titles, writings, inſtructions and euidences whyche haue bene taken away, ſhall be rendred and reſtored on eyther parte, to thoſe to whome they belong.
            XXIIII. We alſo ordeine that thoſe of the ſayde Religion ſhal be ſubiect to the politike lawes of our Realme, that is to ſaye, the Halydayes ſhall bee kept, and they of the ſayde Religion ſhall not worke, ſell, or make any ſhewe on the ſayd dayes with open ſhop: and on faſting dayes in which the vſe of fleſhe is forbidden by the Catholike and Romiſhe Churche, the Butcheries ſhall not be open.
            XXV. And to preuent all doings to the contrarie that may happen in many of our tomus: The Bayliffes, Seneſhals, or their Lieutenants, ſhall cauſe the principall inhabitantes of

the ſayd Townes to ſweare to the mayntenaunce and obſeruation of this our peſent Edicte, and the one ſide mutually to giue aſſurance to the other, and to binde themſelues interchangeably, and by publique Acte, to anſwere to ſuch diſobediences as ſhall bee committed agaynſt the ſayde Edicte within the ſayde Townes, by the inhabitants of the ſame, or at the leaſt, to bring forthe and delyuer the offenders into the handes of the Iuſtice.
            We alſo charge al our welbeloued and faythfull people holding oure Courtes of Parliament, Chambers of our accomptes, Courtes of Aſſiſtāce, Bayliffes, Seneſhals, Prouoſtes, and other our Iuſtices and officers to whom it ſhall appertaine or their Lieutenantes, that they cauſe this our preſent Edict & Ordinance to be read, publyſhed, and regiſtred in their Courts & Iuriſdictions,

and to keepe, maynteine, and inuiolably to obſerue the ſame in all pointes: and that all thoſe to whom it ſhall appertaine, may enioy, and fully and peaſibly vſe the content thereof. Ceaſſing and cauſing to bet ceaſſed all troubles and empeachmentes to the contrarie, for ſuch is our pleaſure. In witneſſe heereof, we haue ſigned theſe preſents with our own hand, and to the end it may remaine a thing ſure and ſtable for euer, we haue to the ſame cauſed to be ſet our Seale.
            
               Giuen at our Caſtell of Bollogne, in the Moneth of Iuly, in the yeare of grace, 1573. and of our raigne the thirtenth.
Signed,
CHARLES.
And more lower is written,
By the King being in his Councell.
Signed,
DE NEVF-VILLE
               
And ſealed with a Labell of redde and gréene ſilke, and with gréene waxe, with the great Seale.
Read, publiſhed, regiſtred, and the kings Atturney generall being there vpon heard, at Paris in Parliament, the. 11. of Auguſt. 1573.
               
Signed,
DE HEVEZ.
Collation hath bene made wyth the originall.
Thus Signed,
DE HEVEZ.
            
         
      
   