
      
         
            
            
               
                  printer's or publisher's device
               
            
         
         
            
            
               THE REQVESTES PRESENTED VNTO THE FRENCHE KINGE and the Queene his mother, by the three Rulers or Triumuirat.
            With an aunſwere made to the ſame by the prince of Conde ⸫
            W. S.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A requeſte preſented vnto the kynge and queene, by the three rulers or Triumuirat.
            
               WE the duke of Guiſe, pair, great maiſter and greate chamberlaine of Fraūce, the Duke of Montmorencie, pair and Conſtable of Fraunce, S. Andre, marſhall of Fraunce, to the ende it may appeare vnto youre maieſties and all the worlde, that oure hartes and intentes, whiche haue ben ſufficiently knowen & declared by all our doynges heretofore, and the whole courſe of oure tyme & lyues, whiche haue ben beſtowed & ſpent none otherwiſe but in the faythfull ſeruice of the maieſties of our good kinges deceaſſed (whō god pardon) to the main teinynge and increaſe of their honoure, power, eſtate and crown: neyther were euer heretofore, neyther preſentlye are nor ſhal, by goddes grace, hereafter durynge our liues, be any other then ſuche as tende to the ſame good and faythfull ende, tofore declared, and that by iuſte, reaſonable, lawfull, and lowable meanes.

Wherunto, next after the ſeruice of God, we haue vowed the reſt of oure foreſaide liues, goodes, and fortunes.
            Wee moſte humbly beſeke your maieſties our ſoueraigne Lorde & Lady, to vnderſtand the botomes of our thoughtes and intentes, the whiche we diſcloſe and declare vnto you in all ſinceritie by this preſent writing, and therwith alſo the cauſes of our comming & abode nere about your maieſties, for the which we iudge in our Faythes and Conſciences (conſyderynge our eſtates and the charges whiche we haue taken vpon vs) that we maye in no wiſe departe therefrom without deſert of euerlaſting ſhame and reproche, not only to our ſelues, but alſo to our poſteritie, as vnfaythfull ſeruauntes and officers, forſakers & abandoners of the honour of God, the righte of the churche, the honour, welfare and ſauegarde of our kynge and countrey, & of the peace and quietneſſe of theſtate of the ſame: whiche we ſee in daunger of euident and ineuitable ruine, if it be not quickly and without delay prouided for, by the onely remedy of ſuche ordinaunces as we ſuppoſe ought to be made by

your maieſties, ſealed ſet forth and alowed, as well in your great counſell as alſo in the Courte of parlement of Paris, and other courtes of your Royalme ſuche as theſe be which be conteyned in thartycles folowyng, the which we propone with all reuerence and humilitie.
            ¶ Firſt, we thinke it neceſſary not onely for the diſcharginge of our owne conſciences, but alſo of the kynges and of his othe made at his coronation, for the quietneſſe and vnion of all his ſubiectes and thauoydinge of the confuſion of all diuine, humaine and politike orders, vpon whiche confuſion dependeth and foloweth neceſſarily the ouerthrowe of al Empires, Monarchies and common wealthes. That the kyng by an act remayninge for euer, declare that he neyther willeth ne purpoſeth to permit, allowe nor ſuffer within his royalme any diuerſitie of religion nor churche, preachinge, myniſtringe of ſacramentes or aſſemblies, miniſteries nor miniſters eccleſiaſtical. But willeth and purpoſeth that onely the churche Catholike and apoſtolike and Romaine receyued, kepte

and alowed by his maieſtie and of al his predeceſſours with the prelates and myniſters of the ſame, preachinges, miniſtring of ſacramentes by them and their deputies, ſhall take place in his whole royalme and countreye, obedient to hys crowne: al other aſſemblies for the like effecte being vtterly reiected & reproued.
            ¶ That all offycers of Fraunce, of the houſholde of his maieſtie and of my lordes his bretherne and ſiſter, all officers as well of iudgement as of warfare, to accomptes and finances of this realme, and others hauing charge, adminiſtrations or commiſſions frome his maieſtie, ſhal kepe and obſerue the ſame religion & ſhal make therof expreſſe declaration. And all ſuche as refuſe, delaye, or withſtande the ſame, ſhalbe depriued of their eſtates, offices, wages, charges and adminiſtrations or commiſſions, without to wchinge for the ſame their goodes or bodies, except they haue made tumulte, ſedicion, monopolies, or vnlawfull aſſemblies.
            ¶ That all prelates, benefyced perſons and ſuche as apperteine vnto the church

of this realme, ſhall make like confeſſion. And the refuſers or withſtāders therof ſhall be depriued of the tēporalities of their benefices: which ſhalbe gouerned vnder the hande of the king, and men of honeſtie and good religion ſhall be appointed to the adminiſtratiō of the ſame by their ſuperiours, ſuche as oughte of duetie to ſee thereunto. Who ſhall accordinge as they ſhall ſe it neceſſary and fitte, depriue theym of their tytles, and prouide other in theyr places, by due & lawfull meanes.
            ¶ That al churches within this realme whiche be violated, broken and ſpoyled, to the great diſhonour of god and of his churche, of the kynge and of his lawes and ordinaunces, as wel auncient as of later tymes (al which haue forbeden ſuche ſacrileges vnder peine of death) ſhal be wholly repayred and reſtored to their fyrſt and due eſtate, and amendes made vnto them of all their loſſes and damages receaued. And the offenders, breakers of the lawes and ſpoylers puniſhed according to their deſertes.
            ¶ That all armoure borne within this

realme by any perſon, who ſo euer he be or for what coloure, occaſion, or reaſon ſo euer he pretende, be lefte of and done away by them who bore the ſame, with out thexpreſſe cōmaundement to the cō
               trary of the kyng of Nauarre, lieuetenant generall of the kinges maieſtie, & who repreſenteth his perſon in al his realmes and countreyes, obediente to his crowne. And that ſuche as haue borne armoure in ſuch ſorte, and continue yet ſtil with the ſame, be pronounced rebelles and ennemies to the king & realme.
            ¶ That it ſhall be lawefull onely to the king of Nauarre (as who is lieutenant generall of the kynges maieſtie, and repreſenteth his perſon) and to ſuch as by hym ſhalbe ordeyned and appoynted, to aſſemble and haue with thē any power in this realme for thexecution & mayntenance of the thinges aforeſaide and others, ſuche as may be thought expedyent for the wealth of the king and of his realme.
            ¶ That the handes alredye begun to be aſſembled by the ſaid prince of Nauarre, for the ſeruice of the kinges maieſtie to

thententes afore declared, ſhalbe mainteyned and enterteyned vnder his ſayde auctoritie by the ſpace of certayne monthes. whithin which tyme there is good hope (if it be your maieſties pleaſure) to ſe the fruite of the remedies before reherſed, & of the quietnes of this realme.
            ¶ All other prouiſions requiſite and neceſſary, apperteyning to the wealth and quietneſſe of this realme, which may be here by vs omytted, ſhall be taken and ſupplied by the counſaile & aduiſe whiche was geuen by the courte of parlement of Paris: when you ſent laſt vnto the ſame M. de Auanſō, to haue his aduiſe concernynge the Remedies whiche he thought conuenient for prouiſion againſt the troubles of this realme, and concernyng that whiche the ſaide courte may preſently adioyne herevnto.
            ¶ Theſe thinges being doone and wholly performed accordinge as we haue before declared (without the whiche wee take this realme to be vtterly caſt away and ruined) we are ready euerye one of vs to go not onely home to oure houſes

(if we be ſo cōmaunded and appoynted) but alſo (if nede ſhulde ſo require) to the ende of the worlde into perpetual exile. After that our mindes ſhall be ſatiſfyed with perfect cōtentacion in that we ſhal haue gyuen vnto God, our kynge, oure countrey, and to our owne conſciences the honour, ſeruice, loue, charitie, and all other faithfull duetie which we owe vnto them, in ſo great and euident, ſoo important and notable daunger and neceſſitie. To the remedy and reſiſtaunce wherof we are ready to offer in vowe & ſacrifice our liues, all oure goodes, and ſuche thinges as we moſt eſteme in this worlde. The which thinges we declare vnto your maieſties & vnto the kynge of Nauarre, as wel to thende you may be witneſſe & iudges vnto vs therin, as alſo to ſet forth vnto you againſt the incō
               ueniences which you ſe the remedies before reherſed, the whiche wee take to be moſte neceſſary and onely in this caſe to be vſed: to thintent it maye pleaſe youe to declare therin your wyl and determination. Proteſting vnto god and youre maieſties that this our aduiſe before declared meanethe nothinge elles but the

wealth and ſauegarde of the kynge and of his realme, and that we verely think that who ſo euer earneſtly tendreth the ſame can in no wiſe diſſent frō the thinges before mentioned & declared in this writinge, the whiche we haue ſubſcrybed with our owne handes for the dyſcharge of oure conſciences and oure ſelues towardes God, towardes your maieſties and the whole worlde hereafter.
            
               Concluded at Paris the fourth of May. Anno. 1562.
                  
                
               Subſcribed. Frauncis of Lorrayne, De Montmorency. S. Andre.
            
         
         
            ¶ An other requeſt preſented vnto the Queene the ſame daye by the ſaide eſtate of the three Triumuirate.
            
               MAdame, beſides the contētes of the writyng the which we haue this preſent daye preſented vnto your maieſtie, the whiche alſo we purpoſe and truſt (with your fauour and licence) to cauſe to be ſet forthe and

publiſſhed throughout whole Chriſtendome: to thende we may gyue more occaſion to your maieſties to be aſſured yt we deſyre to ſubmyt our opinions to the iudgemente of your maieſtie, and of the kyng of Nauarre, and that we ſeke onely the quietnes of this realme. Sithe it hath pleaſed you to declare vnto vs that neyther the kynge nor you woulde euer commaund vs to depart frō your court.
            ¶ If ſo be that they whiche be at Orleans wil diſarme thē ſelues, & the countreys, townes and places of this realme geue due obedience to your maieſties, & that euery one wil ſweare that they wil be obedient to the kynge (as to their ſoueraigne and naturall lorde) and to all the ſtatutes and ordinaunces the which eyther be alreadye or ſhall hereafter be made by his maieſtie, by the aduiſe of his counſel, and publyſhed by his court of Parlement at Paris: The power of men of warre remaining ſtil in the handes of the kinge of Nauarre, who is the kynges lieutenaunt general, and repreſenteth his perſon, in ſuch nomber, qualitie, and ſo long as ſhall ſeme neceſſary:

without and before the performance of whiche thinges wee iudge as in oure faythe and conſciences (conſideryng our eſtates & charges) that we maye not neoughte not to departe from your courte and traine: but if we ſo do, we ſhal purchaſe parpetuall ſhame and reproche vnto our ſelues & our poſteritie as vnfaithfull ſeruauntes and officers, who haue abandoned the honour, wealth, & ſauegarde of our kynge and of his realme, of our cuntrey and the peace and quietnes of all theſtates therof, the whiche we ſe in daunger of euident and ineuitable ruine, if prouiſion be not out of hande and without delaye made therefore.
            ¶ Wee offer that we wyll withdrawe our ſelues euery one of vs to one of our houſes, there to obey the kynge of Nauarre in al that we ſhalbe commaunded to doo. Durynge the whiche abſence of ours, ſo moche lacketh (Madame) that we wyll deſyre or require the lyke departure of the prince of Conde to any of his houſes, that we wiſhe to ſe him preſent nere vnto your maieſties, and do beſeke you to procure the ſame, & to cauſe hym

to depart out of the place and companye where he is: where as we neyther canne wyll loke for at the hande of ſuche a prynce any other thing but ſuche as becommeth the bloud and ſtocke whereof be is come and deſcended.
            
               At Paris the fourthe of Maye. Anno. 1562.
                  
                
               Subſcribed as afore.
            
         
         
            ¶ An aunſwere made by the prince of Conde, to the requeſt preſented by the thre Triumuirat.
            
               ALthough by ſundry writinges which haue ben publiſhed, and by other meanes alſo I haue largely declared the cauſes which moued me to put on armoure, and there wythall vnder what condycions I was ready to lay of the ſame & to wythdrawe my ſelfe vnto my houſe: yet could I neuer get of theim whiche haue the kynge and queene in their power and cuſtodye other language then threatning words

and ſuch as were full of reproch and me naſing. And eſpecially at my firſt being at Orleans, before they had vnderſtandinge what my meaning was they ſente hether letters and ſo ſtraite commaunde mentes and in ſo outragious termes as if they had had a do with robbers by the highe waye or common theeues. But whan they perceaued that I ſet at naught their vndiſcrete behauiour, and that neyther theyr anger ne craftes coulde tourne me from the way which I had already taken (whiche was to continue in my iuſte and reaſonable requeſt, grounded not vppon myne owne affectyon or profite, nor vppon mine ambicion, but vppon the zeale that I haue and oughte to haue vnto the libertie of the king and queene and vnto the wealthe and quietneſſe of their ſubiectes) they deuyſed to preſente vnto theyr maieſties a certayne writing, the whych they call a requeſte, with all humilitie and reuerence, but except a man loke wel on it, and he do but lightly paſſe ouer it, a man woulde take it rather for a decree then a requeſt, that is to ſay a determination concluded and decreed by the thre peticioners which ar

the duke of Guiſe, the Conſtable, and the Marſhall. S. Andre with the legate the Popes meſſagier, and the embaſſadour of the ſtraungers. But they which by the ſpace of theſe ſixe monthes paſſed haue marked their practiſes and conueiaunces can beare wytneſſe, and that according to the truth that this concluſion was groūded not vpon any zeale towardes the faith or religion, but rather vpō the crafte, ſubtiltie, and ambicion of the foreſayde three peticioners, who ſeinge them ſelues out of the court, not for any diſpleaſure whiche they had there receaued, but bicauſe they could neuer in any time endure that a prynce of the bloudde royall ſhoulde remayne nere aboute the kynge, and alſo for that they ſawe well that the Queene wente about rather the kinges profyte and the comforte of hys people, than to pleaſe them, or (that I may more truely ſpeake) to ſatiſfy their couetouſeneſſe already knowen & abhorred of euery man: they laid their heades together, and ſought awaye howe they might be reſtored to their power, and recouer their aucthoritie to commaunde euerye man in more ample wyſe then eeuer

they had done theretofore. And for that they wel vnderſtode that they could loke for noo helpe at all, neyther of the people, nor yet of the nobylitie, and that all honeſte pretence, all meanes, all fauour and aſſiſtence of the kinges ſubiectes woulde faile them (ſo well haue they behaued thē ſelues ſyth the time of their gouernaunce) they grounded theyr purpoſe and enterpriſe vpon religion, truſtinge that the preſtes & ſuche as depende vpon them and haue gayne by theyr order, woulde aide them with men and money. And to aſſure theym ſelues the rather of the victorye, they cauled vnto thē ſtraungers to be partakers of their practiſes, (whyche thynge ſhall one daye be ſcene and iudged, to the ende they which come after vs may take example therof) and ſo being prepared and truſting vpon foliſhe and vain hopes, they determined to call vnto theym all theyr frendes, as they haue ſythe doone from all partes of this realme, howe bee it the number of theim was not verye greate. They appoyncted to viſyte the kynge and queene beinge ſo furniſhed and accompanied as that no manne durſte be bolde to wythſtande

what ſo euer it ſhoulde pleaſe thē they ſhoulde commaunde. And for the more aſſuraunce of their longe raygne, they made a rowle of all ſuche as ſhould ſuffer deathe, and of them whych ſhould be banyſhed, and of an infinite number of others whiche they purpoſed to putte oute of theyr offyces and eſtates and depryue them of theyr goodes. Emongſte the firſte number was the Chauncelour and diuers good men of the priuy counſell and other which were in honorable place and eſtymation nere aboute theyr maieſties. The men were alredy choſen and appoincted which ſhould ſupply the rowme of them whych they purpoſed to murther or exile. And it pleaſed god that they ſhould ſhewe their good iudgement by the ſixe whiche they choſe to be of the pryuye counſell in place of other ſyre whych they purpoſed to put oute of the ſame. The compariſon of the one parts vnto the other is ſuche that children are compelled to make ſonges of them.
            The queene ſhoulde haue ben ſente vnto Chenonceau, there to haue occupyed her ſelfe in makyng of gardeynes. My lorde the prynce de la Roche Surion, a

prynce of the bloude royall, a man wyſe and of greate vertue ſhoulde haue bene remoued from the kynge, and the place which he hath, ben geuen and appoincted to others which ſhoulde haue taught the youth of his maieſtie, neuer to here ſpeake of god nor of any ſuche thing as might nouriſhe his wytte, whiche of it ſelfe is enclined to all goodnes and godlineſſe. And yet muche leſſe ſhoulde he haue ben taught to vnderſtand his own affaires, and how he ſhould vſe his men as his miniſters and not as his maſters, to geue audience to euery one to honour his Nobilitie, to leue armes becauſe of neceſſitie, to mainteine Iuſtice, to comforte his people, and to fauour the pore eſpecially and to defende theim from all oppreſſions and vyolence, and aboue al other thinges not to ſuffer any Idole to remaine nere about him, that is to ſay, a man whiche maketh the kynge, and who vnder pretence of frendſhippe or longe ſeruice vſurpeth his auctoritie ouer his ſubiectes. Suche is the bringynge vp whiche the queene hath beſtowed vpon the kinge and whiche offendeth theſe gentil men verye muche, who deſire rather to

frame him for their owne toothe, and to make a kinge of him whiche can daunſe well, ryde a horſe, beare his ſtaffe wel, make loue, loue (as they ſay) his neighboures wyfe better then his owne, and in the reſt to be all together ignorante. For it is not ſyttynge for a kynge (ſaye they) to haue knowledge in any thynge at all. Let hym kepe his reputatiō with vſinge a certaine notable grauitie towardes pore people, who haue to do with hym. Let him auaunce his ſeruantes, & commytte vnto theym his affaires and the whole gouernemente of his realme, let him neuer giue audience to any man let hym neuer looke vppon any letters, neyther ſubſcribe theym with his owne hande, to thentent he neuer vnderſtand the deceptes whiche be vſed and paſſe vnder his owne ſeale. Lette him eſteme onely twoo or three whiche he ſhall him ſelfe chuſe, whoo ſhall be at debate one with an other for the pryncypall place of hys fauour, or for the eſpecial meane and aucthoritie to robbe and polle. Let hym be prodigall towardes thoſe whom 
                  •
               e fauoureth: but nygardely and myſerable towardes all others. Lette him be

cruell towardes hys people and ſpoyle theym of all theyr goodes. Lette the eſtates of iudgemente be ſolde for readye money, into the handes of ignoraunte men, couetouſe and ennemies of iuſtice. And fynallye lette the kynges houſe be tryumphant in vanitie and ſuperfluitie of garmentes and other ornamentes, & a receptacle of men of euyll lyfe and behauyoure. I ſpeake not theſe thynges without cauſe, but euery man may wel vnderſtande what I meane, & the queene alredy knoweth the newes.
            Theſe lordes therefore who preſente this requeſt, haue made this goodly faction more hurtefull and noyſome vnto this realme, and therewithal more blud dye than euer were the factions of Sylla or Ceſar, or the Triūuirat of Rome, whiche ſithe chaunced, the whiche they had erecuted before this time, if god had not geuen me the grace to withſtād thē. And ſurely I maruaile greatlye at their boldnes & with what face thei dare ſpeke in preſence of the quene ſuch thinges as they do ſpeke. But more I wōder at the paciēce of the forſaid lady who cā endure to here thē, eſpecially where as from the

time that they firſt beganne their prac
                  〈…〉
               
               ſes ſhe hath ben aduertiſed and had intelligence day by day of that which they haue done and purpoſed to doo. And at this preſent ſhe receiueth their gloſing
                  •
                wordes euen ſo as though ſhe had neuer ben made priuie of theyr purpoſes, wherin ſhe declareth euidentlye that ſhe is a priſoner in dede, and more then a priſoner. For ſhe taketh vpon her as though ſhe neuer eyther vnderſtode or ſuſpected ſo wicked an acte, and ſuche one as deſerueth publike reuēge, wherof ſhe hath ben fully informed. And if ſhe had not ben afraide leſt ſhe ſhould haue ben ſtrā
               gled in her bedde (as ſhe hath ben many tymes thretened, wherein I reporte me to her othe) ſhe wolde not haue miſſed to haue denied their requeſte, and to caſt in their teethe that they haue ben the cauſers of al this trouble by their cou
                  •
               touſneſſe and ambicion. And ſithe the danger wherein preſently ſhe remayneth, is cauſe that ſhe can not eyther dare not as knowledge the facte as it is in dede, and aunſwere vnto theym, who with fayre and flatteringe wordes cloke theſe matters: I am conſtrained for the mayntenaunce

of the kinges aucthoritie & hirs, to make aunſwere vnto their requeſt in the name of theyr maieſties: of whoſe liberties I haue taken vpon me to be a defendour emongſt others. Truſtynge that if the foreſaide peticioners wyl not acknowledge theyr faulte, God wyl aſſiſt me, and fauour the good minde and purpoſe which he hath geuen me, & that all the kynges good ſubiectes wil ioyne with me to delyuer this pore realme out of the handes of theym who woulde becomme tyrantes ouer it.
            ¶ In the beginning of their writing, to giue therby the more gloſſe and auctoritie vnto their woordes they declare their qualities, they make mencion verye honourablye of their greate and faithfull ſeruices, and wil that according to their deedes hearetofore men ſhall preſentlye geue iudgemente of their myndes and purpoſes.
            ¶ But they neded not to haue made ſoo goodlye a beginning (according to theyr owne iudgement) to bring to paſſe therof ſo euyll an ende. For if they were yet greater than they are and their ſeruices

worthye more commendation than they ſpeake of, yet ſhoulde it not folowe that their fault which is preſent and ſo great and euydent ſhould therfore be coucred, much leſſe alowed as a good and reaſonable work. And though ſome amongſt them haue done ſeruice (as ſurely I wil alwaies confeſſe that they haue) & haue neuer receaued any recompence for the ſame: yet muſt they not preſently ſeeke it by the vndoynge of the kynge and the ruyne of his whole realme. But thankes be to god they be ſo good huſbandes all three, and ſo muche euermore regarded their own profite that they haue not taryed ſo longe before they aſked and obteined their rewarde. My witneſſes bere in are two hundreth and fyfty thouſand liures in rentes, and a Million of golde in mouables, whiche at this daye ouer & aboue that whiche their fathers left thē, beſides three hundreth thouſande liures in rent which their kinſemen poſſeſſe of the goodes of the church. And if they be not content with the goodes & honours which they haue receiued at the hādes of our kings hertofore but for the ful aunſwere of their naturall diſpoſition wee

muſt moreouer accompt emongſt the rightes of reward certaine particular reuenges, in this behalf alſo they haue bē ſatiſfied to the ful. Let them cal to their remembrance a number of good and notable men whiche onely at their requeſt without charge or informatiō haue ben committed to priſon, a number of houſes decayed and of honourable famelyes empoueriſhed during the raines of king Frauncis the firſt, Henry, and Frauncis the ſeconde. So that they haue vſed the fauours of their maieſties not onely in aduauncing and enrichinge them ſelues: but alſo in enpoueriſhing of others and reuenging their priuate quarelles.
            And if they wyll (as they ſay) that their purpoſe be knowē by theyr doinges here tofore, it may be eaſely iudged that their enterpriſe is ſuch as all the kinges good ſubiectes and ſeruauntes oughte to oppoſe them ſelues vnto, and withſtande in all that they are hable.
            ¶ Afterwarde they ſaye that an euident and ineuitable ruine is greatly to be feared if it be not by thē ſpedely preuented and remedied. And to this ende they preſent

certaine articles with all humilitie and reuerence. But if a man ſhoulde aſke them whoo were the cauſe of their ruine and who it is that hathe ſoughte and procured it? If they would ſaye the trueth they ſhoulde be compelled to lay the blame therof vpon them ſelues. For after the publication of the ſtatute concluded in Ianuary there was an vniuerſall peace and quietnes throughoute all this realme. And a twoo coople of you (that is to ſay the Conſtable of Fraūce and the Marſhall. S. Andre) can not denye but that ſo longe as they thoughte that thoſe whiche were of the reformed religion would not be content with the order taken ſo long they toke vpon them to be pleaſed with it and to alowe it and ſwore betwixt the Dueenes handes (as did alſo the king of Nauarre and all the reſte of the counſayle, that they woulde cauſe it to be mainteyned in the countreys appointed to their gouernaunce, & that they wolde neuer ſpeake for diſpenſation or abrogation of the ſame for eyther the one parte or the other. But ſoo ſone as they ſawe and perceued that the profeſſours of the relygion aforeſayde,

obeyed readely the kynges commaundement, they went about to exaſperate the contrary faction. Howebeit they had ſo fewe to folowe theym that they coulde fynde no man fytte to be their myniſter, but onely the Prouoſt of the marchauntes, Marcel, and. x. or. xii. porters, ſo that the Duke of Guiſe hym ſelfe was faine to take the matter in hand at Uaſſy, and there to cutte in peeces the poore people as they were at their prayers.
            The Conſtable becauſe he could not entrappe the churche of Paris, wreaked his anger vpon the pulpittes of the prechours and vppon the houſes where the aſſemblies were made, whiche he cauſed to be ſette on fyer, and certayne houſes of ſuche as profeſſed the foreſaide relygion to be ſpoyled. And it is not to be marueyled that the reuenge hath benne made vpon Images in diuerſe partes of this realme. wherefore if they thyncke that the diuiſion of the people be the ruyne which they ſay is euydent, they thē ſelues are the authours therof, & ſo they ought to be taken and blamed therfore. And as for the humilitie and reuerence whiche they vſe towardes the kyng and

Queene, hitherto I haue not ſeene that they haue obeyed any commaundement geuen them by the ſaide lady. But well I wotte they haue al three refuſed to go vnto the countreis commytted to theyr charge and gouernaunce, and I knowe alſo well that they woulde not come to Monceaux as I my ſelfe dyd at the quenes commaundement.
            ¶ They cam to Paris in armes againſt her commaundement, and thence wolde they not depart for any prayer yt mighte be made vnto them, where as I came away from thence obeyinge the willes of their maieſties. They went to the king and queene beinge accompanyed with a bande of men in armes, althoughe they had expreſſely ben forbede the ſame.
            They brought them frō Fontaineblean to Melun, and from Melun to Paris, & that wholly per force. In whiche thing I reporte my ſelf vnto the conſcience of the queenes maieſtie, and to her othe or word at ſuch time as ſhe ſhalbe at libertie, ſo that ſhe may ſafely ſay the trueth. They had rather ſee ciuil warre within this realme, yea ſo farre forth that they

brynge forainers into the ſame, than be content to withdrawe them ſelues home to theyr howſes without deminiſhing of their goodes or eſtates. Loe this is the reuerence and humilitie of them whiche preſente the foreſaid requeſtes. This is the; eale whiche they beare to the ſaue-garde of the kinge as they ſaye, whome they loue & honoure ſo much that rather than they wyll go home they will ſe his realme in daunger of ruyne which they ſaye is euident and not poſſible to be auoyded. This is the loue whiche they beare to theyr countrey, into the which they brynge foraine power to pylle and ſpoyle it (and if god holde not his hande ouer it) to ſubdue and vtterly deſtroy it.
            ¶ Syth they require a decree which ſhal remayne for euer vpon theſtate of relygion. And where as wee required that that ſhoulde be obſerued whiche is alredy made vntyll the kynge ſhoulde come to age, they aunſwered that it was an vnciuyle and an vnreaſonable requeſte, for that it is in the kynges power and wyll to change, lymitte, enlarge and reſtrayn his decrees when ſo euer he thinketh

good. And that we in requyrynge that that whiche is alredye decreed by him and his counſel ſhould be kept and obſerued durynge his nonage, deſyre to kepe his maieſtie in pryſon & captiuitie. And yet this notwithſtanding they will that the decre which thei thre haue made ſhal remaine in force & vnchanged for euer. But if the reaſon which they aledge againſte vs are to be receaued, we wyll alſo by the ſelfe ſame conclude that they them ſelues wil keepe the king priſoner both in his nonage and lawful age. But by like they thinke they are able to maſter and keepe at commaundement not onely the kynges perſon but alſo the whole realme. Seing that in a thinge of ſo greate weighte and whyche bringeth with it ſo many incōuenience, they dar
                  •
                take vpon them to preſent a decree allowed onely by them thre. what more did euer Auguſt. Marke, Antonius and Lepidus, whan by their wicked & ſhamful triumuirate they ſubuerted the lawes & common wealthe of Rome. If they had ben mooued with a good and peaſible zeale (as they ſay) & not ſedicious, with a zeale of religion and not of ambition,

they woulde neuer haue begon with rigorous puniſhement as they haue done, they woulde haue cume vnarmed and preſented them ſelues with all humility and reuerence: They would haue declared the cauſes which moued them to miſlike the decre of Ianuary. They woulde haue humblye beſoughte the kinge and Queene to conſider with their counſel, with the aduyſe of the parlementes and of other eſtates. If any other meane mighte be founde to remedie theſe troubles, to the conſeruation of Goddes honour with the ſauegarde and encreaſe of the kinge and of this realme. And in ſo ſpeaking they ſhoulde haue ſhewed that they had ben ledde by none other affection, but onely by the zele of their conſciences. But their maner of proceadinge ſufficiently declareth that their religion ſerueth them to gette folowers and partakers and to ſo we ſtrife and diuiſion amongeſt the kynges ſubiectes, and with the one part hauing the ſtraungers ther unto adioined, to make thē ſelues lordes of the whole: vnto whom I am conſtrained to ſay that the princes of the bloude royall (vnto whom they haue euermore

ben enemies and thruſt them backe in al yt they might) will in no wiſe ſuffer that & ſtrange nation and ſuch as be not called to the gouernaunce ſhall take vppon them to make ſtatutes and ordinaunces in this realme. Moreouer they wyll and require that the churche of Rome (which they call the catholicke and apoſtolicke Church) be onely receaued and acknowledged in Fraunce, and that they which profeſſe the reformed religion be excluded from preaching & receuing of the ſacramentes. It is a duke of Guiſe an out landiſhe prince, a lorde of Montmorency and a lorde of S. Andre which make an ordinaunce contrary to the decre of Ianuarye, which was agreed vpon by the king and the quene his mother, the king of Nauarre, the princes of the bloudd
                  •
                royal with the kinges counſel, & forty of the chiefe of all the parlementes. They be three whiche make an ordinaunce againſte the requeſte preſented by the eſtates, that is to ſay the nobility and the third eſtate at Orleans firſte, and ſith at S. Germaine. The whiche two eſtates require that it wyll pleaſe the kynges maieſtie to giue and appoyncte churches

for them that profeſſe the forſaid reformed religion. They are three whiche make an ordinaunce that can not be executed with out ciuile warre and with out putting the realme in daunger of euident ruine. And they them ſelues ſee it and confeſſe it. Lo thus is the realme bounde vnto them, and this fruit bringeth forth their konwledge and good zeale (or that I may more trulye ſpeake) their practiſes, their conueyaunces and ambition of rule and commaundemēt.
            ¶ The Duke of Guiſe and hys bretherne takinge vpon theym this enterpriſe to baniſhe awaye the profeſſours of the refourmed religion, what good zele ſo euer they pretend to haue can not deny but that they willingly go aboute to trouble and bring into daunger this realme, wher as they ſe that in the lyke enterpriſe their matters had ſo euyle ſucceſſe in Scotlande. In the which contrey the one parte and the other liued in peace vnder the obedience of that good and vertuouſe princeſſe the queene dowagier, vnto ſuch time as it was by the aucthoritie of the forſayd Guiſe publiſhed and proclaymed that the kyng minded not to permit that any other religion wer receaued in the ſayde contreye but onely the

religion of the churche of Rome, whyche was cauſe that a certayne ſmal number of people of the common ſort riſe and put thē
               ſelues in armes, who were by the prudēce of the ſaide lady and the helpe of the nobilitie within ſhort time diſperſed. This beginninge might haue ſerued for an admonition to the ſayde Guiſe of the daunger whiche mighte enſue of greater troubles, if they geue not ouer theyr enterpriſe, of whiche thinge yet not withſtandinge they would take no regarde at all: but (contrarywiſe) beinge in greater heate than euer they were theretofore writ vnto the ſayde lady verye ſharpe letters blaminge her for that ſhe had vſed to much gentlenes, eſpecially in the quarell of religion. And that for the amēdes of her faultes paſſed it was needeful that ſhe ſhoulde bluddie her handes vpon them eſpecially whiche were the chefe. And for this purpoſe they ſente vnto her the biſhoppe of Amiens, and M. de la Broſſe, whoo to declare theym ſelues at their firſte cumminge good catholickes of the Romiſhe ſecte, they woulde haue conſtrained euery man to cum to maſſe. They obiected oftentimes to the ſaid lady and to M. de Oyſel that thei had marred al. They proclaymed their purpoſe which was that

they would vſe force and conſtraint in the matter. The biſhoppe of Amiens as the popes legate lokynge for the bulles of his legacie, promiſed that he would refourme the moſt parte of them which he ſaid were out of the way. M. de la Broſſe promiſed within the ſpace of one moneth to banyſh them which woulde not be refourmed.
            And for ſo much as couetouſenes is euermore the companion of crueltie, they caſt a pleaſant eye vpon the landes and poſſeſſions of the nobilitie. They wryte vnto them who had ſent them that by taxinge the people and putting to death out of the way ſuch gentylmen as fauoured and folowed yt reformed religion, meane might be found both to encreaſe the kinges reuenues two hundreth thouſand crownes by yere, & to furnyſhe a thouſand frēche gentilmen with houſes & goodes, who might continuallye dwell there and ſerue as an ordinarie garriſon of men of war. This condition was wyllingly receiued & well lyked and alowed, to the great commendation of theym who were the authours therof. And notwithſtanding al demonſtrations that the foreſaid lady and M. de Oyſel were hable to make, that the Scottes coulde nat ſo eaſely be brought vnder

yoke, but yt if they wēt about to cōſtrayne thē they wold put thē ſelues into the handes of ſtrangers, by whoſe ayde to aſſure thē ſelues of the whole they wold baniſhe the name and obedyence of the churche of Rome, & that therupō they ſhulde put in danger the eſtate & ſo much as aperteined to the aucthoritie of the king & queene. Al this was miſlyked & reiected. The queene was a good gentylwoman but ſhe hadde marred all. M. de Oyſell was but a fole without all vnderſtandynge, becauſe he wolde not loſe that whiche he had by his labour and diligence kepte ſo longe. In concluſion theſe gentilmen (who ſe ſo far in a mylſtone) handled the matter ſo wel by their wytty deuiſes, that the chief and greateſt part of the nobilitie aryſe and in armes & ioyned them ſelues with their ancient (and that I maye ſo ſay) with their natural enemies. And within ſhort tyme dryue away all their prieſtes, who might wel inoughe haue liued and continued in their eſtate, if they coulde haue ben contente with a common peace betwyxte the one parte & the other. So that bothe the name of Guiſe & the name of the churche of Rome was ſent backe agayne on thys ſide the ſea. And ſo thoſe folke which wold

haue had all to them ſelues loſt al.
            Hereof ſhuld the duke of Guyſe and his brethern haue taken exāple and haue acknowleged the fault which he committed in putting the realme of Scotland in dangier, & ſhulde haue kepte in thoſe wordes whiche ſo many times they haue reherſed and publiſſhed: whiche are that thone of theſe two religions muſte of neceſſitie be baniſhed out of the realme of Frāce, and that thone part muſt nedes geue place to thother. Theſe wordes are not ſitting to be ſpoken of a ſubiect or ſeruaunt. Theſe are the wordes of a king, being in his ful age & auctoritie, who hath bē aduiſed not onely by his ordinaries coūſel, but alſo by the wiſeſt of yt thre eſtates of this realme. For in ſuch a matter wherein cōmeth in queſtion the diminiſhing of the force of a king & of the halfe (I ſpeke of the leaſt) of his nobilite & of the people which is able to ſerue, we muſt not go ſo generally and roundly to work, as wel becauſe there is no king which feleth not as ſenſibly ſuch a loſſe, as if a man cut away the halfe of his limmes from his own bodye, as alſo conſideringe the daunger whiche ſhoulde enſue (at the leaſte at this preſente tyme) where as our kyng by reaſon of his tēder

age ruleth onely according to the opinion and affection of an other man) that this halfe ſeinge it ſelfe perſecuted dyd not inſtede of departure and geuing place, take courage and driue out the other. And as concernyng the eſtate of the Romiſhe relygion, they whiche go about by force of armes to plant the ſame onely in this realme, put it in danger of dimyniſhing euery day more and more, in that they tō
               mytte it vnto the force and defence of armes. And it had ben farre better to haue kept the one & the other in peace & vnion, & not to haue diſputed of theſe matters any other wiſe but with paper & parchmēt & not with māſlaughter & effuſiō of blud, which (peraduenture) hath prouoked the anger of god and called vpon his vengeaunce in ſuche ſorte, that the prieſtes and the other of their order (who might haue liued quietly in their charges and enidyed their goodes) ſhall be the fyrſte whiche ſhal ſuſteyne the daunger of the folly, and (that whiche is worſe) of the rage of the people. And what ſoo euer come to paſſe hereof, the protection of theſe gentilmen the peticioners can not but brynge vnto them a certain loſſe and the danger of an huge ruine. For ſeynge they were once

aſſured that they ſhoulde not be troubled or moleſted in their lyuing, in their charges, nor in their goodes: they could not ſay that they hadde any occaſion at all to complaine, excepte they wyll take vppon them that they were moued with compaſſhion for the loſſe of our ſoules. But how is it come to paſſe that they are lately become ſo carefull, where as there is neyther byſhop nor curet emongſt them who can proue that he hath heretofore regarded theym any thynge at all.
            Seing therfore that it was of our parte determyned that no man ſhoulde in anyewiſe trouble thē, what neded you to name them in this quarell and to couer your ſelues with the name of them & of the church of Rome? Is not this the way to prouoke and kindle the one part againſt the other? Is not this the way to make this order odiouſe to the whole people which already is to muche offended with it? Is not this the way to kyndle (if god do not ſet to his helping hand) emongſt them which lyued in peace, the lyke furyouſe hate vnto that which was in Scotlande. And what ſo euer chaunce therof ſeinge it is ſo that one of the two partes muſt nedes be baniſhed & that the petycioners wyl haue it ſo, ther

neuer chaunced in this realme ſo piteouſ
                  •
                a ſpectacle as that is lyke to be. Is there any profit in the world, is there any commoditie, is there any power (yea and if it were for the king him ſelfe) that ought to be bought ſo deare and with ſuch a ruine and deſolation? What pardones, what in dulgences, what bulles of the pope can euer recompence the loſſe of the bloud whiche ſhalbe ſhedde for this quarell? Theſe thre peticioners may ſaye vnto the kinge ſometime hereafter that in the defence of that which no man did aſſault in maintenaunce of the religion of Rome (which no man troubled nor letted) they haue cauſed him or would haue cauſed him to loſe the halfe of his nobilitie and of the beſt of hys maieſties ſubiectes. A man may and that according to the trueth lay to their charge that euen as with their fayned and falſe opinions they put the realme of Scotland in daunger of an euident ruine, and were cauſers of a great and piteouſe effuſion of bloude, ſo wyth the ſame opynyons, the ſame purpoſe, the ſame mynyſters theye haue caſt the apple of diſcord amidde this realme, & ſo haue inſtigate one againſt an other that theſe thre peticioners and their miniſters ſhalbe noted to poſteritie as the

onely authours of all the harmes and inconueniences which ſhal chaunce both to thoſe that be of the refourmed church and alſo of the church of Rome.
            Moreouer leaſt they ſhould faile to cauſe troubles ynough, they require that all officers, whether they be of houſeholde, of ordinaunce, of iudgement, of finaunces, and others hauing adminiſtration or commiſſion, & likewiſe prelates of the church ſhall make confeſſion of their fayth. And they which delay or refuſe the ſame, ſhall be depriued of their eſtates and penſions, and the men of the churche of their benefyces. Theſe be three priuate perſonnes, which make a law contrary to the lawes of this realme. For it hath neuer ben eyther ſeene or vnderſtoode that the kynges heretofore haue at any tyme conſtrayned their ſubiectes to make other confeſſyon of their Fayth eccept onely their ordinarye beliefe or Credo. This lawe is contrary to the lawes of the churche, I vnder ſtande of the churche as they do that is taken of the general counſells and of thoſe auncient fath
                  •
               rs whiche they allowe.
            Wherfore he who endyted theyr requeſt, who is of ſo great knowledge ſhuld haue brought ſome example therewith to haue

cloked his wycked pourpoſe, the whiche in dede he canne not do excepte he brynge into this realme the inquiſiciō of Spain. The whiche was iudged ſo vniuſt of al other nations that not one emongeſt them all would vſe or accepte it. And yf I ſhall ſay the trueth this law is the trappe whiche they hadde ſette at Orleans ſumwhat before the death of king Frauncis lately deceaſſed, the which can tende to no other but to the ruine and vtter ſubuerſion of al the kinges ſubiectes. For the foreſaid peticioners do knowe wel that there be ten thouſande gentle menne and an hundreth thouſand men after them able to beare armoure, which neither for force nor authoritie will euer forſake the religion which they haue receaued. Neyther wil they ſuffer that eyther preachinge adminiſtration of the ſacramentes be taken from theym. And the kynge beinge vnder age as he is there is no man that hathe aucthoritye to commaunde them to avoyde the realme, yea they wyll defende theym ſelues with the ſworde againſte them who in this behalfe wil abuſe the aucthoritie of his maieſtie. This great and notable companye can not be ouercome ne vanquiſſhed, if it ſo come to paſſe (which god forbidde) with

out the ruine of theſe whiche ſhall aſſayle them. So that the ſtraungers the whiche they haue already called (which is treaſon and an offence worthy of death) ſhal beare away the fruict of this ciuile warre. And for a concluſion ſpeakinge as I doo bothe for my ſelfe and for a number of great lordes of thys realme, and for ten thouſande gentelmen and other of oure trayne who will liue and die in thys quarrell. I ſaye that the forſayde decree was made by thre priuate perſons who by their aucthoritie haue broken them whyche were made by the kynge and hys counſell. And becauſe they woulde execute it before they had by lawful conſultacion approued it they put on armure & toke by force the kinges perſon. I ſay moreouer that the foreſaide decre is againſt the lawes of this realme, yt cuſtome of whole chriſtendōe againſte the decre of Ianuary, againſt the requeſte of the eſtates, againſt the quietneſſe & ſecuritie of the kinges ſubiectes, & agaynſt the concience, the honour, the life & goodes of an infynite nūber of honeſte people, who haue ſought to brynge ſome to deathe, to driue others out of their contreys vnder yt cloke & pretence of cōcience and religion. This decre alſo is made againſt the libertie

of going to the general counſell. The which he that gaue thē the aduiſe ſhould haue better marked. For if it be ſayd that in thys realme ſuche confeſſion of faythe as they require ſhall be made with declaracion of maintenaunce of the doctryne and ceremonyes of the churche of Rome, it is a ſentence geuen againſt them of the refourmed churche. wherfore neyther our miniſters nor the miniſters of other nations muſte not go to the generall counſel, ſeing they are condemned before they be hearde. But before that the ſaide duke of Guiſe and the Cardinall his brother can ſette foorth this decree of confeſſion they muſte renounce a number of artycles of the confeſſion of Auguſt which they agreed vpon at Sauerne and promiſed a great prince of Almaine that they would cauſe theym to be obſerued in Fraunce. And if they wil denie this let them put it in writinge and they ſhal be anſwered by them vnto whom they made the promiſe. The ſaide Cardinall muſt alſo put in writinge that it may be ſen and publiſſhed whether he remaine in the ſame minde the whiche he ones hertofore declared vnto the quene in the preſence of a great ſorte of honeſt
                  •
                men touching the articles of tranſubſtanciacion, of the keeping and bearing of the

holy ſacrament of Iuſtification, of the innocation of Saintes, of purgatorye, of Images, of al whiche articles he ſpoke contrary to the opinion of his catholike, apoſtolike Romiſhe Churche.
            ¶ In the requeſt not muche after thys is made mencion of the breakynge of Images. And requeſte is made by theym that preſented it that the damages ſhoulde be recompenſed and the offendors puniſhed. Where vnto I will aunſwere this worde that the bloudde of them who breoke the foreſayde Images the whiche was ſhedde by the handes of certayne of oure retinue who woulde haue ſtayed them and ſyth by auctoritie of iuſtice in the ſame place of Orleans, wyll beare wytneſſe euermore before god and before men, howe greatly ſuche executions done by the ignoraunte people alwayes myſlyked me for manye reſpectes, and ſpecially becauſe the ſame was contrary to the decree of Ianuary, & alſo to an aſſoſiatiō which we had cauſed be publiſhed a fewe dayes before. But if the breakynge of Images deſerne any reſtitution and puniſhemente (becauſe it is done contrary to the kynges ordynaunce) what puniſhement loke they for who garnyſhe them ſelues ſo well with the name

of the kyng: for the murthers the which partely by thē ſelues, and partely by their example and motion haue ben committed at Uaſſy, at Sens, at Caſteſna de Arry, and at Angiers. In whiche places it is well knowen that betwixt men & women there haue ben ſlayne aboue. v. hundreth perſones for none other occaſiō but for religion. He who made the requeſt ſhould haue examyned his owne conſcience and haue acknowledged that it is not found yt the deade image did euer crye vengeaunce but the bloude of man (which is the liuely image of god) requireth it in heauen, & as it were pullith & cauſith it to come at yt lēgth although it be for a time let paſſe.
            ¶ Than the peticioners or (that I may ſpeake more truely) the commaunders require that their armure ſhalbe taken from them who haue borne the ſame withoute the expreſſe commaundement of the kinge of Nauarre, and that they whyche haue worn armure in that manner be declared rebelles and ennemyes to the kynge and realme. Now would I aſke of theſe lords who ſay they are ſo wiſe & ſo gret frendes of the common wealth. If their requeſte tende not to take a waye all hope of agrement, Seing they require that I and they

whiche be with mee be declared rebelles & ennemies to the kinge and realme. For they ſay not that they which will not leaue of their armoure, but that they which be in that ſorte armed, ſhalbe declared rebelles. Which is an article that deſerueth an other maner of anſweare than by writinge, wherfore I truſt within fewe daies to go and meete with theym, and diſpute with them with the ſworde whether it be meete that an outelandiſhe manne with a couple of meane mates ſuch as they are to pronounce a prince of the bloudde royall and the two partes of the nobilitye of this realme rebelles and ennemyes to the king. Neyther behoueth it them to vſe the name and authoritie of the kinge of Nauarre, to whom they haue bene continually deadly ennemies euen from the time of other kings. They haue thruſt him backe and kept him behind ſo muche as poſſibly they mighte, yea in ſoo muche that they wold not make mention of him ne of hys rightes at ſuch time as queſtion hath ben as concerninge the concluſion of a treatie of peace. They cannot ſay that he euer obtayned at their hande any thing which he requyred, whether it were for him ſelfe or for an other. They can not ſay but that

when ſoeuer occaſion ſerued they put him beſide the place which of duetie he oughte to haue commaunded were it in tyme of warre or peace. And for to make vp the matter, in the time of king Frauncis laſt deceaſſed they made as little count of him as if he had bene the pooreſt gentilman in this realme, and ſince they cauſed him by threatnings to come vnto them, they cauſed that no man durſt be ſo bolde as to go out of Orleans to mete him. They forbed all knightes of the order and other gentilmen to vyſite hym or communycate with him in any wiſe. They ſent a marſhall of Fraunce with a bande of horſemen & ſore men to ſeaſe vpon his whole landes, & called in ſtraungers to the ſpoile of the ſame as it is wel knowen to al the world. And ſeing their enterpriſe broken by the death of the forſayd late kyng Fraūcis it is welknowen what counſelles they helde to be faite him all together.
            They continually ſo withſtode him that he neuer could haue authority to cōmand The foreſaide prince of Guiſe by the coū
               ſaile of the Conſtable, ſaide nowe a yeare ago that he woulde not departe from the court neyther at the requeſt nor comman̄
               demente of the kinge of Nauarre. The

marſhal of S. Andre ſaid vnto him in full coūſel. I wil obey the king and the quene & none other. And nowe they wyl vſe his name for their profyte. Whome in times paſte they haue ſo naughtely entreated. And they intende to vſe the auctoritie of his name, therby to deſtroy his owne brother. And where as the foreſaid lord king of Nauarre was ſo wel loued (as euer he was) they ſeeke meanes to make him hated of the moſte parte of the nobilitie and people hoping that if they can wholly put him out of conceyte with them who haue ſo long and faithfully loued him, thē they may well inough ſet him at naughte and handle him at their pleaſure as they haue done in times paſt: but the deceipt wherby they thought to come to their purpoſe is diſcloſed and wel knowen & ſhal ſhortly be ſet forth and publiſhed throughoute all chriſtendome, to the ſhame and confuſion of ſuche as haue bene the mynyſters thereof.
            As touching their requeſt that the king of Nauarre maye aſſemble force to put in execution the things before reherſed, they therin ſhewe euidently eyther great folye or a great deſire that we neuer come toany agremente. For ſeynge they haue determined

to conſtrayne by force of armes them of the reformed religion, to do that which they require they ſhoulde not haue tolde vs ſo before we had laide apart oure armes. For ſeinge they haue ſo plainely geuen vs to vnderſtande their purpoſe we wil take hede that we be not deceiued and wil not lay of our harneſſe (but with very good tokens.)
            ¶ Theye require alſo that certaine other articles whiche ſhalbe geuen by the court of parleament of Paris may be receaued, wherin they declare the littel regard that they haue to the queene and king of Nauarre & the kynges counſell. And I maruaile greatly that at the leaſt they had no reſpect to the ſixe great wiſe perſonages which they placed in the coūſel, at whoſe handes I doubt not but a man might eaſelye receiue good and notable aduertiſement. And I doubt not at all but that in the ſaide parlemente there be many good men, who in vertue and knowledge, repreſent the auncient integritie of the Senate. Howebeit the thre peticioners haue taken ſo good order therin that partly by benefices, partly by offices ſome ſold and ſome halfe geuen and by other vnlawfull meanes, and not to be ſuffered in this realme,

they haue made ſuche a number of friendes, that the good mē be many times ouerlaide by the badde. And concernynge this matter it ſhalbe ſufficient to all edge that the legation hath ben twiſe refuſed, folowing the edicte made and confirmed at the requeſte of the ſtates, publiſhed and proclaymed in all the courtes of this realme. And (that whiche is more) their refuſall was grounded vpon their conſciences and the conſcience of the kynge. And yet without loking for any other cōmandement but of a ſymple letter of the ſeale they haue receiued & approued it through the ſollicitation and practiſes of theſe. iii. and their miniſters. Loo what hope we haue that wee ſhall there fynde good aduiſe and counſell.
            ¶ By a remēbraunce preſented with their requeſte they deſire that the townes may be rendred into the kinges handes with newe othe of fidelitye. And they woulde gladlye (as they dyd in the tyme of kynge Frauncis lately deceaſſed) perſwade the world that al they which will not endure their tirannie are the kinges enemies. It myghte ſuffice the duke of Guiſe and hys brethern that they haue ones already had the vſe of thys craftye inuencion, to the

greate diſpleaſure of a number of honeſt
                  •
                men. Whereas to defende them ſelues againſt ſuche as ought them euil will they couered theyr priuate quarell with the kynges. If anye manne were eyther by priuate or publicke iniury ſuſſpected onely to haue ſpoken euyl of anie of them, he was ſtreight waye empriſoned, perſecuted, and by letters patentes declared ennemie to the kynge and to the eſtate. And bycauſe this goodlye inuencion of theirs hathe once hadde good ſucceſſe (wherwith they hadde brought to paſſe greater matters if god hadde not put to hys helpinge hande) they would nowe returne agayne to the ſame and although there be at this day no manne within this realme (at the leaſte emongeſt thē whiche be of our ſide) which is not readie to endaunger his lyfe and goodes in the ſeruice of the kinge, yet for al that they call vs rebelles. There is no man of oure parte (as god is oure witneſſe who woulde not with all hys heart hazarde his lyfe) to ſaue and preſerue hys maieſtie from harme or daunger, whome we loue derely and honoure as a ſinguler and preciouſe gift whiche god hath geuen vs. There is none emongeſt vs whyche hathe taken armes to aſke anye thinge at

all at the kinges hande ne at the queene
                  •
                hys mother, ne yet at the kynges of Nauarre. Wee require to haue none other king ne other prince but him who is oure naturall lorde. We deſire not to haue the cuſtodie of his perſonne, neyther any aucthoritie of rule and gouernaunce. Wee require not the diminiſhing or releaſinge of anye taxes, ſubſides or other ryght appertayninge vnto hym, but contra
                  〈…〉
               wiſe our men haue neuer murniured what but then ſo euer haue bene layed vpon them. And they haue offered and preſently offer, that they wyll wyth all their harte agree vnto al that it ſhal pleaſe him to require, ſo farre as their goodes and landes wyll ſtretche. The townes which are named to be rebelliouſe, haue not chaunged their maiſter ne lorde, but acknowledge more gladly than euer heretofore the obedience whyche they ought vnto oure kinge. And who ſo ſhal ſe the Aunſwere whiche they haue made, ſhal eaſely perceiue that their armes were not takē in hand againſt the kinge. They ſhall perceaue that we haue not required any thing which concerneth the perſon aucthority the gouernaunce or life of hys maieſtee. They ſhall perceaue that oure armes are borne againſte the

houſe of Guiſe, the Couſtable and Marſhall S. Andre. And that doone with ſuch modeſtie that wee ſeeke not their goodes their liues nor their eſtates. Wherfore he that wil ſay that we beare armes againſt the kinge (as they woulde make men beleue) muſte needes confeſſe that hee is a ſlaunderour, or rather that he is willinge to helpe theym forwarde to vſurpe thys realme, and to take vppon them the name and doynges of the kinge. And thoſe that ſhall counſell the kynge to receaue their protection, to graunte vnto them the vſe of his name and aucthoritie, to lend them men and money againſt vs as though we made warre againſte hys maieſtye: ſuche counſellours I ſay (chaunce whan it wil) ſhal one day be called to iudgement wher they muſt declare howe they coulde ioyne the quarell of three priuate perſons wyth the quarrell of hys Maieſtye and of the whole realme. They muſte alſo make accomptes of the money which ſhalbe ſpent in thys warre, agaynſte the decree of the eſtates and of the kynges counſel, to defende that which pleaſeth theſe three priuate perſons: for it is none other but their pleaſure, that is to ſay, to be at the court or at home at theyr houſes. And if ſuche

counſaylours haue goodes wherewith to make aunſwere. I truſte that at the endethe warre ſhalbe made vppon their charges and the charges of ſuch as be principall authours therof. Upon whoſe goodes I hope to take ſo much as ſhalbe ſpēt and to reſtore the ſame vnto the kynges treaſure to the comfort of the people.
            ¶ For thend & concluſion of their requeſt they proteſt that if that which they deſire be fully executed, they are ready to withdrawe them ſelues home to their houſes. Yea (if nede be) to go to the worlds end. So that we nowe vnderſtande when we may truſt that they wyl withdrawe them ſelues. Than (ſay they) when the thynges beforeſaid ſhalbe done, accompliſhed, and executed. That is to ſaye, when the decree of Ianuary ſhal by their auctoritie be broken, when by their ordynances all the miniſters ſhall be banyſſhed, when they which be of the reformed religiō ſhal not be ſuffered to heare any ſermon, nor to receiue the ſacrament but of theym of the churche of Rome. When all that be of the foreſaid religion ſhalbe depriued of their eſtates, of their charges, of their offyces, and moreouer ſpoyled & ſent home to their houſes in open danger of the rage

of them who wyll deuoure them, & cauſe them to leſe their lyfe with their libertie if they incurre any offence. Interpreting offence (as they haue in tymes paſt done) not to come to the maſſe, the aſſembly of neyghbours together to make their prayers to god. Lo this is it that they call an offence. When we ſhalbe proclaymed rebelles and ennemies to the kynge and realme, becauſe we haue borne armoure and whē thei haue taken away the ſame from vs, and that no man maye beare it but in the execution of their determinations. Loo theſe be the conditions whiche we may loke for at theſe noble mens handes. Lo this is the moſte honeſt pourpoſe that they pretend. But they are wiſer thē to declare to what pas they purpoſe after warde to attaine. Nowe let my requeſte be reported and ſet in compariſon againſt theirs. I require the maintenance of the decree of Ianuary, and they wyl by their auctoritie breake it and diſanull it. They require the decay and ruine of an infinite number of houſes, as well of the nobylitie as of the thirde eſtate. I require & deſire that all the kynges ſubiectes of what ſorte ſo euer they be, may be mainteyned and kept in their eſtate and goodes, & defended

frō all iniurie and violence. They purpoſe to baniſhe all them that be of the reformed religion: And I deſire that we may be reſerued til the time that the king be come to full age, at what time we wil be ready to obey al that it ſhal pleaſe him to commaunde vs: & in the meane ſeaſon that thei which be of the Romiſhe church be not troubled, moleſted, ne hindred, neither theyr goodes, nor in the exercyſe of their charges. They require an armye, wherwith to execut that which they haue taken in hand, and conſider not that they ſhal conſtrain an infinite number of good men to defende them ſelues. They conſyder not the lacke of expenſes: neyther the incommodities and ruines whiche ciuile warre bringeth with it. And (that which is the worſt of all) they haue ſent for and haue agreed together to cauſe forrain ſoldiours to come into the countrey, whiche is to ſay in plaine language, to geue this realme in praye vnto forayners. On the contrary parte I require not to haue men of warre remaine with mee. I ſpende not the kynges money, I call not ſtraungers into my countrey: but haue refuſed to receaue ſuche as were offered me, as god is my witneſſe. I prayed them that

they ſhulde not come, and that they wold let others to comme eyther with me or agaynſt me. And I require (as I haue done euer heretofore) that we may put awaye our armes as wel on the one parte as the other, beinge aſſured that on oure parte there ſhall neyther be rebellion ne diſobedience, & that on our behalfe armes ſhall neuer be of ſuch force and efficacie as the loue, the fidelitie, the obedience whiche we ought vnto our kynge, for whoſe ſake we will neuer ſticke to haſarde our lyues and goodes. And we haue geuen to vnder ſtande that we are not Ideotes, as it was reported, and that we are more hable to do hym ſeruice in his nede than they who wolde banyſſhe vs, with all their trayne and practiſes. They require that we may be proclaimed rebelles, they require oure lyues, our honours and conſciences. We require nothing at al parteyning to their lyues, to their honours, to their goodes, nor to their conſciences: neyther do wee wyſhe thē any more harme than that whiche we will binde our ſelues vnto, which is that they and we withdraw our ſelues home to our houſes, folowing wholly the conditions which are written at large in oure declaration and proteſtations made

heretofore, and ſent to the kyng & queene. And thei can not ſay that their honour is therin any thinge touched at all. For ſeinge we alſo accept the ſame condicions, there remayneth no place for them to cō
               plaine or diſcontent them ſelues. Our requeſt is iuſt, for ſo much as they came to their kynge (as hath ben ofte reheried) otherwiſe than accordynge to their duety, and with ſuche purpoſes as haue ben the cauſes of the troubles which we preſently ſe. And they haue required and ſought the vndoynge of ſo many good men, that notwithſtandinge our requeſte were not vpon ſo good a grounde as we ſuppoſe it is, yet ought we rather to diſpleaſe. v. or vi. (for ſo many they be) than offende th
                  •
                two parts of the whole realme. And they whiche be of the lyke ſorte and force as be they them ſelues, who wolde baniſhe thē acknowledge and confeſſe this daye that there is no way to aſſault thē, much leſſe to ouercome theym, without the ayde of forraines and ſtraungers.
            ¶ And although ther be no like cōpariſon of the on requeſt vnto thother, forſomuch as the one is ful of iuſtice and equitie, the other of vniuſtice, tiranny and crueltie. And that they who preſente the blouddy &

violent requeſte, meane for their pleaſure & to bryng their purpoſes to paſſe to trouble this royalme: The other require nothing elles but a common reſt and quietnes, and haue not taken armes but vpon conſtraynt and for to defende their lyues, their honours and their conſciences. The queene may iudge which of yt two requeſtes oughte to be receaued or denied. And wheras preſently either becauſe ſhe is not at lybertye (as ſhee is not in deede at thys time) or for ſome other conſideration ſhee can not gyue iudgemente hereof, neyther would diſpleaſe them who haue preſented thē. May it pleaſe her maieſtie, that theſe troubles may the rather be brought to an end, to cauſe the foreſaid two requeſtes to be regiſtred in the court of parlemente at Paris. That the decree of Ianuary bee mayntayned and kepte, and that the one parte and the other lay away their armes and withdrawe them ſelues to their howſes till the kynge be come to ful age, that he may iudge who hathe done well & who euyll. Orelles that the queenes maieſtie will geue iudgement herein with the aduiſe of the eſtates whiche ſhall for this intent be caulled together. This remedy is common to vs all, and no man ſhall haue

occaſiō to complaine or diſcontēt him ſelf therwith. And may ſoo eaſely and readely be executed that he who wil not agre therunto, cannot deny but that he is ennemie vnto the kyng and realme. And it is not to be iudged that there is any man in the world (if he be not caried away
                  •
                wyth ſome pryuate affectyon) but he wyll condempne all them that myght and woulde not ſlake this fire and flame which threateneth vs ſo many euilles and inconuenience. Moreouer euery man maye iudge who is the rebell and enemy to the kyng, whether he that offerethe to leaue hys armes & to withdrawe himſelf to his houſe, or he that will rather loſe all then to lette go the praye whych he hath of the kinges perſon. And for ſo muche as in all ciuill war none other ende can be loked for, but ſuch as is full of all miſery and calamity, and that it is a harde matter to ſtape the handes and affections of Souldiours being prouoked againſt them who would become tirannes ouer them. I proteſt before god and before al men, that I am greatly ſory & agreued to take armes and to leade theym who beare the ſame. And that I would wyth my bloud if I coulde take awaye the myſerable effectes wherewyth

the warre threateneth vs. But ſyth my requeſte is not regarded, ſithe mine ennemies will be my iudges and commaunde nowe adaies vnder the name and authoritie of the kinge. I proteſt that my purpoſe tendeth to none other ende but to ſet the king at ſuch liberty as he was in now ſixe monethes paſſed, to reſtore the gouermente to the queenes handes with the aſſiſtence of the king of Nauarre as was cō
               cluded by the eſtates. And to keepe & preſerue the nobilitie and people from all tiranny & oppreſſion of ſuche as be not called to rule & commaund theim. And that of thys whole enterpryſe I looke not for nor wyll loke for (but had rather die) any priuate profite, neyther any purpoſe that tendeth to couetouſeneſſe & ambition.
            But I wyll referre all my doinges and the grace whiche god wyll geue me, vnto the honoure of god, to the ſeruyce of the kyng, and to the quietneſſe and comforte of all his ſubiectes.
            
               Ended at Orleans the. 
                     19. of May. 1562.
                   thus ſubſcribed. Lois d' Bourbon.
            
            
         
      
   