
      
         
            
            
            BRIEFLY DE
                  •
               SCRIBING THE Vertuous Reigne, and happy (though immature) Death of the most Mightie and renowmed Prince, King EDVVARD the sixth, King of England, France and IRELAND, &c.
            WHO DIED IN THE Sixteenth yeere of his age, and in the seuenth yeere of his Reigne.
            Written by Sir IOHN CHEKE, Knight, Anno 1553.
            Neuer before published, but most worthy. to be Read of all Estates in these our dayes.
            
               BREVIS VITA LEVIS CVLPA.
            
            Imprinted at London for H. Holland, and are to be sold at Christ Church-doore. 1610.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE CONDIGNE PRAISE, AND MEMORIAL OF THE THRISE NOBLE AND MVCH HONOVRED LADY, THE LADY BARBARA VICOVNTESSE L'ISLE; THIS PRINCELY POEME BE CONSECRATED; BY HIM VVHO UNFAINEDLY VVISHETH VNTO HER LADYSHIP, AND HER WORTHIEST FIRST-BORNE DAVGHTER, THE LADY WROTH, HEAVEN ON EARTH, AND EVERLASTING HAPPINESSE IN THE HIGHEST HEAVEN.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               A ROYALL ELEGIE, OF THE MOST NOBLE AND RIGHT EXCELLENT PRINCE KING EDVVARD THE SIXTH.
            
               WHen bitter Winter forced had the Sun,
               Froth'horned Goat to Pisces ward to run:
               And liuely sap that greeneth Gardens soot,
               To flie the stocke to saue his Nource the root:
               And stormie Chore that blow'th by North fro East,
               Decayd the health and wealth of man and beast.
               Th' Almightie minde that raigneth three in one,
               Disposing all things from his stable Throne;
               Beheld the Earth, and man amongst the rest,
               Mou'd by the crie of such as were opprest,
               But when he had the continent through view'd,
               VVith Mawmetrie and Idoll blood embrew'd:
               
                  
Where through his Law and Gospell were defil'd,
               His Loue, his Aw, his worship quite exil'd.
               He turn'd his face fro that so soule a sight,
               And toward the Isles he cast his looke aright,
               In hope that where Religion did abound,
               He should some louelier sight haue quickly found;
               But when he saw all sinnes most vile and naught,
               Most rifely swarme where most his Word was taught:
               In England chiefe which he of speciall grace,
               Had chose to be his Church and Gospell place:
               And had for that cause pour'd on it such store
               Of wealthy gifts, as none could wish for more:
               Ioyn'd with a King of such a godly mind,
               As neuer erst he elsewhere had assign'd:
               All woe and wrath he turn'd away his face,
               And with him selfe he thus bewail'd our case;
            
            
               
                  I' haue look't so long vntill mine eyes do ake,
                  In hope to see they should their sinnes for sake,
                  To hide their mischieues waxing more and more,
                  I' haue wink't so long vntill mine eyes before.
                  My throat is hoarse, my tongue hath lost the skin,
                  Through feruent crie to fray them fro their sin.
                  If gentle meanes might moue them to relent,
                  
                     
What haue they wisht that hath not straight beene sent
                  Sith then they passe for neither threats nor loue,
                  Nor easie plagues, whereby I do them proue:
                  What else remain's but to confound them all,
                  Both young and old the mightie with the small.
               
            
            
               CHRIST hearing this and moued with the teares
               Of vertuous folke (for whose sake God forbeares
               The wicked sort although their sinnes be great)
               For his elect, began thus to intreat,
            
            
               
                  Deare Father, if iust Iustice should take place,
                  I know it bootlesse now to sue for grace:
                  But though their sins all measure do exceed,
                  With-hold thy wrath, grant mercie yet at need:
                  And sith through faith the better sort be mine,
                  Giue leaue to weed and water once thy vine:
                  That done, if so their fruits doe not amend,
                  As barraine Brambles bring them to an end;
               
            
            
               VVhen this our Sauiours mercifull request,
               VVas sunke into his Fathers heauie brest:
               He neither graunted it nor yet deny'd,
               But Father-like thus to his Sonne he sayd;
            
            
               To sue for mercie I maruaile what you meane,
               
                  
For such a sort as doreiect vs cleane:
               Behold the Heads, what els do they deuise
               Saue vnder vs to cloke their couetise,
               Thine heritage, they haue the whole bereft,
               Except thy shirt, lets see what haue they left.
               They spoyle, they spill, they wast vpon their pride,
               That which was giuen thy needy corps to hide.
               Thy gold thy plate thy houses with the lands,
               That were the poores are in the rich mens hands.
               And thou lyest naked begging at their dores,
               Whiles they consume thy substance with their whores.
               And as for Law whereby men should haue right,
               It's wholy rul'd by money and by might:
               And where the rich the needie should relieue,
               Their study is to begg'rie them to driue:
               What Titles forge they falsely to their lands,
               Vntill at length they wring them fro their hands:
               How ioyne they house to house, how farme to farme,
               And lease to lease, the silly poore to harme.
               How raise they rents, what incomes, yea what fines,
               Exact they still, though all the world repines:
               How suffer they their graine to rot and hore,
               To make things deere, when I giue plentie store?
               And where they brag they do our word aduance,
               
                  
Haue not they spoyl'd or fleest all maintenance,
               That thereto seru'd? what kind of Clergie land
               Is free this day out of the Lay-mans hand?
               What Gentleman, what Merchant, yea what Swaine,
               Doth not, or may not part thereof retaine,
               I cannot name the vilenesse of the rest,
               So sore my heart their robberie doth detest:
               Is this the way our Honour to defend?
               No, no, we seee right well what they intend:
               I loath to thinke vpon their wicked liues,
               How ill they keepe their dueties to their wiues?
               For what respect do they their mariage make,
               Saue riches, Honour, or promotion sake?
               Alas how are our Orphanes bought and sold.
               Our widowes forc't to wed where they ne would,
               What vow, what oath, what bond so strongly knit,
               Doth hold, if gaine may grow by breaking it?
               And when my Preachers tell them ought hereof,
               How vexe they them with many a threat and scoffe,
               Which moueth such, as do thy manhood spoyle,
               And rob from thee the merite of thy toyle,
               To hate thy word and count thy Prophets euill,
               Wishing both it and them too at the Diuell.
               Are these thy flocke? thy Vine canst thou them call?
               
                  
That steale thy lands, thy goods, thy glory and all?
               When for these sins I sent them late the Sweat,
               How low they croucht, how hard they did intreat,
               What vowes they made, they would their liues amend.
               Whereas it seemes they did nought lesse pretend
               For I no sooner had withdrawne my curse,
               But they immediately grew worse and worse,
               For where they vow'd to flie and lay aside
               Their auarice, their gluttonie and pride.
               Haue not they rais'd their Rents and Marchandises,
               And sweld their guts with daintie wine and spices,
               And Idol-like with bossed silke and gold,
               Araid their wiues and children young and old?
               As for themselues, so gorgeously they tire,
               As Gods Eterne, more like than earthly mire:
               Shall wee then suffer so peruerse a Nation,
               To skorne and mocke their God in such a fashion?
               No sure my Son that were against all right,
               Yet for thy sake I will not stroy them quite:
               But for to proue them once at thy request,
               I'le onely touch their King, and warne the rest,
               T'amend their liues, if still they disobey,
               I'le take their King, their comfort ioy and stay.
               But if his death they cast eke at their heele,
               
                  
I'le poure downe plagues till euery one do feele.
               This said, he call'd his seruant Crazie Cold,
               Whom th'Icy King kept prisoner fast in hold,
               About the Poles where vnder he doth dwell,
               In g'rtsly darke like to most hideous hell.
               In Caues and Rockes of Snow and frozen Ise,
               That neuer thaw; and charg'd him in this wise.
            
            
               About three clymates henceward to the South,
               Betweene the maine-land and the Ocean mouth,
               Two Ilands lie skarce distant twentie mile,
               Of which the larger and the Eastward Iie,
               Cal'd Britannie, vntill the peoples sin,
               Draue forth themselues and brought strange Nations in,
               Is now diuided into portions three:
               And in the same as many peoples bee.
               Of whom the best and ciuil-like to sight
               (But worst indeed) the English Nation hight.
               And they dwell in the South part of the land,
               Frōth'mids whereof, thou shalt well vnderstand,
               A Riuer runneth Eastward to the maine
               Sea-arme, that parteth it and France in twaine
               About this Riuer many slately Towers,
               Are brauely built with Casties and with Bowers.
               
                  
Wherein the King and Princes commonly,
               In VVinter time with their whole housholds lie.
               To one of these I will thou hie in post,
               To that I meane whereas the King is most.
               I thought to bid thee marke the great resort,
               But do not so, for others beare a port,
               As great as he; and greater otherwhile:
               But marke well this, it will thee not beguile;
               The mournefull cheare of many a Sutors face,
               Will shew thee sure which is his biding place.
               And when thou hast his house, and person found,
               I will thou shalt his healthy Corps vnsound.
               But see thou hurt him not vnto the death,
               Thou shalt but stop his wind-pipe: that his breath
               Constrain'd, may cause the Cough rise in his brest,
               Else what shall cure or remedie the rest.
            
            
               But in this feat I charge thee, see thou looke,
               Thou harme him not whiles he is at his booke,
               Or other kind of honest exercise,
               Nor yet at Game, so it be void of vice.
               But if this VVinter time thou maiest him marke,
               To ride all day full arm'd about the Parke,
               Or else at Dice, or Tennis out of time,
               
                  
T'ore watch or toyle himselfe, for such a crime,
               Strike hardily, but not too hard I say,
               This is thy charge, about it, goe thy way.
            
            
               Skarce was this errand throughly to him told,
               But forth did come this shiuering crazie cold:
               VVith I sickles be bristled like a Beare,
               VVhich stucke about his head instead of haire.
               His skin was hard made all of glassie Ice,
               Couered with hoary frost like grayish frize,
               His armes and legs to keepe him warme, I trow,
               VVere plated ore with fleakes of frozen snow.
               And from his mouth there steam'd a breath so hot,
               As could touch nothing, it congealed not.
               But when he had arrous'd himselfe awhile,
               And stretch't his ioynts as stiffe as any stile,
               Because he would his charge no longer slacke,
               He got him vp on blustring Boreas backe.
               And forth he went, his horse so heauie troad,
               That all the world may know what way he road:
               For in his path there grew no kind of greene,
               That could in long time after well be seene.
               His breath and blustring was so sharpe and shrill,
               That flouds for feare congealed and stood still.
               
                  
The Holts, the Heaths, the Hils became all gray,
               The Trees did shrinke, so great was their affray:
               The frozen sheepe shooke feeding neere to fold,
               VVhiles clum sey shepheard blew his nailes for cold.
               VVild beasts, and foules, more fearefull than the mouse,
               Forsooke the woods, and tamely came to house.
            
            
               VVhen this fell horseman with his greisly steed,
               Had passed Island and made forth such speed:
               That many Scots bad, Foule-ill ta the Carle,
               
               That slew their sheepe and Cattle with his wharle:
               
               He passed Yorke, and came to London straight,
               And there he light to giue his horse a baite,
               VVhere, ere he had three dayes in stable stood,
               He eat so much, the poore could get no wood,
               Except they would pay after double prise,
               For Billet treble vnder common size.
            
            
               But crazie Cold watcht all this while at Court,
               To spie a time when he the King might hurt,
               For when he saw him in a morning sweat,
               And call for drinke to coole his Tenis heat,
               He closely crept and hid him in the cup:
               And when the King (alas) had drunke him vp,
               
                  
Straight to his stomacke downeward he him got:
               And there perceiuing all the intrails hot.
               And that each member greedily did plucke,
               To helpe it selfe, all succour it could sucke:
               He mark't the food that went vnto the lungs,
               And sliely mixt his vigour there-amongs,
               That cooling it, so stopt the pipes therewith,
               As to dissolue it; Nature had no pith.
            
            
               That done, to London straight from Court he came,
               And there infected diuers with the same,
               Whereof the most part who were charely tended,
               Recouered well, and throughly are amended,
               But some whose Nature Physicke ouer prest,
               Are gone to God and sleepe in quiet rest.
            
            
               When crazie cold this cruell feat had wrought,
               He tooke his Steed that had him hither brought,
               And forth he rode to him that sent him hither,
               And so forth home, or else I wote not whither.
            
            
               Straight after this within a day or twaine,
               The King being sicke did of his brest complaine,
               The cold congeal'd that in his Lungs lay raw,
               
                  
Did stop the pipes through which the wind should draw,
               By meanes whereof his stomacke waxed faint,
               Till Nature, help'd through Physicall constraint
               Did make a way by purging part thereof,
               VVhere through ensu'd a shrewd and vehement cough,
               VVith reaching oft as if the heart should breake,
               VVhich made the vitall power and bloud grow weake,
               For helpe whereof Physitians did repaire,
               And thought it best to keepe him from the aire.
               But when his Grace had long beene lack't abroad,
               His Louers mourn'd, the Preachers layd on load,
               VVho knowing the Prince was plagued for our sin,
               Did warne vs daily amendment to begin,
               VVith threats from God, if now we linger time,
               His Grace should die, and all we beare the crime.
               And after his death such worthy plagues ensue,
               As all should feele, and then too late might rue.
               The Magistrate was plainely told his fault,
               The man of Law, was warned not to hault.
               Request was made the Church-goods to restore,
               Or put to th'vses they were giuen for,
               Lease-mungers, Land-lords, such as raised rent,
               VVere mou'd t'abate their Lands to ancient stent.
               The wast of fare, the vainnesse of attire,
               
                  
Extortion, Malice, couetous desire;
               All Papistrie and fruitlesse Gospel-boast,
               Was cry'd against, and damn'd as wicked most,
               And finally fro the lowest to the highest:
               All were desir'd to loue the Law of Christ:
               With threats too true from God the liuing Lord,
               In whose iust eye all sin is sore abhor'd:
               That if wee would not these our sins repent,
               Our King should die and we too late lament.
               But yet, alas, how were these Prophets heard,
               The heads withdrew from hearing all afraid,
               Lest some good motion might corrupt their mind:
               By whose example the people nought by kind,
               Tooke hart-of-grace the Preachers to despise;
               With slaundrous words and shamelesse forged lies;
               Gods bitter threats they made a very mocke,
               His Preachers too a common iesting stocke:
               As for amendment, none at all was seene,
               But into worse all ils were turned cleane:
               When God had suffred all these things a space,
               And saw at last how all refus'd his grace:
               And that no threats might cause them to retire,
               To stay the stroke of his consuming i
                     •
                  e:
               He straight decreed to take the guiltlesse child,
               
                  
For speed whereof he vtterly exil'd
               All meanes whereby he might recouer force,
               And did permit all things to harme his corse.
            
            
               Then grew his griefe, his flesh began to swell,
               And long he lay in pangs like to the hell:
               Till at the last God, pitying the paine,
               Wherein so long the Innocent had laine.
               Which eke he knew quite destitute of aide,
               Did call for Death, and thus to him he saide;
            
            
               Dispatch at once, to Greenwich see thou hie;
               Whereas my seruant EDVVARD now doth lie.
               In painefull pangs which he hath long beene in,
               Not for his owne, but for his peoples sin.
               Enforce thine Arme and with thy piercing dart,
               Deuide in twaine that godly piteous heart:
               What weep'st thou Death? cease foole, and hold thy tong,
               What though he be so beautifull and yong;
               So godly a 'Prince, so manly and so meeke,
               As neuer Kingdome yet hath had his like:
               He is too good for that vngodly Realme,
               VVherefore I say, go strike the stroke extreame:
               Take no compassion on his tender youth,
               
                  
His wit, his Learning, nor his loue to truth:
               But wot'st thou what, let not thy forme be such
               An ougly shape as to the worldly rich.
               It oft appeares, but pleasant as it is
               To such as long for euerlasting blisse:
               With louely shape and smiling cheare I say,
               Goefetch my King, haue-done and goe thy way:
            
            
               When dolefull death had heard this hard deuise,
               He trim'd himselfe in his most godly guise,
               Like Mercurie in euery kind of grace,
               Saue that he had a much more louely face:
               And forth he flew till he came to the bed,
               Whereas this Prince lay neither quicke nor dead.
               But in a trance, for why his deadly griefe,
               With nature stroue to proue, who should be chiefe,
               But when weake Nature had consum'd her best,
               She yeelded streight and so the struggle ceast.
               VVhereby the King came to himselfe againe,
               And seeing Death he turn'd away amaine.
               For why? his youth and yet vnflowred breath,
               Could not consent to so vnripe a Death.
            
            
               Drie Death it selfe with pitie moued thoe,
               
                  
Had such a do to hide his inward woe.
               But seeing the louely Prince was so afraid,
               With smiling cheere to comfort him he said:
               Belou'd of God abash not but assent,
               For God th'Almightie hath me to you sent:
               Who ruing sore your griefe and wofull case,
               Would haue you come to solace with his grace,
               In ioy, and blisse and euerlasting glorie,
               From earthly things all vile and transitorie:
               From this your state vncertaine and vnsure,
               Unto a Reigne that shall for aye endure:
               No sooner had our Soueraigne heard of this,
               But that his spirit that much had long'd for blis,
               Would needs away; howbeit his carefull mind,
               For this his Realme which he must leaue behind,
               Enforc't his Grace to pray Death stay a while:
               To th'end he might himselfe both reconcile
               To God the Lord, and also recommend,
               His Realme to him, for euer to defend,
               And while that Death for this cause gladly stay'd,
               He sat him vp and thus deuoutly pray'd.
            
            
               HAue mercy on me Father deere, thou Lord and God of truth,
               O let thy mercy hide the sins and frailety of my youth:
            
            
               
                  
I haue transgrest thy Law too oft, full wo is me therefore:
               But for thy Son my Sauiours sake to mercy me restore.
            
            
               My flesh doth craue to keepe the life, full loth to leaue the light,
               But Lord do thou as shall seeme best in thy Almighty sight.
               (whelme,
            
            
               And when thou shalt receiue my soule which griefes now ouer-
               Be mercifull, most mercifull, to this my silly Realme.
            
            
               Preserue thy truth, maintaine thy word, poure plenty of thy grace
               On all their hearts whom thou shalt set to gouerne in my place.
            
            
               Thus Lord I render to thy hands my selfe, my flocke, my seat,
               Do with them all as thou think'st best, for Christs sake I intreat.
            
            
               AMEN (quoth death) and with his deadly dare
               Claue streight in twaine his feruent praying heart.
               But Lord how glad the Ghost was of the stroke?
               For when he saw his prison gate was broke,
               Fast forth he flew, and vp to heauen went
               To rest with Christ in ioy's that neuer stent:
               The dying body round about did sprall,
               While they about him on the King did call,
               Adawing him as if he were in swound,
               But all for nought, he had his mortall wound:
               And when the bloud which would haue holpe the hart,
               Had stifled it, and left each other part:
               Then wax't his face and hands all pale and wan.
               And when the bloudlesse parts to coole began,
               
                  
To heauen ward his hand and eyes he cast,
               Downe fell his Jaw, his heart-strings all to brast:
            
            
               Thus dy'd this King, this guiltlesse blessed child,
               In body and Soule a Uirgine vndefil'd:
               The sixteenth yeere of his vnperfect age.
               VVo worth vs men whose sins'let run at rage,
               Haue murdred him, wo worth vs wretches all,
               On whom the wreake of righteous bloud must fall,
               VVo worth our sins for they alas haue slaine,
               The Noblest Prince that euer yet did Raigne.
            
         
         
            
            AN EPITAPH OR DEATH DOLE, OF THE RIGHT Excellent Prince, King EDVVARD the sixth, who who died in the sixteenth yeere of his Age, and in the seuenth yeere of his Reigne; and was Buried at Westminster in the Tombe of his Grand-Father, the eighth of August. Anno Dom. 1553.
            
               THe noble hart which feare could neuer moue,
               In which a vertuous fraighted mind did rest,
               The face whose cheere allured vnto loue,
               All harts, through eyes, which pittie whole possest,
               The braine which wit & wisdome made their chest,
               Full stuft with all good gifts that man may haue,
               Rest with a Princely carcas here in graue.
            
            
               The vertuous gifts commixed with the mind,
               As godly feare, a zeale to further truth,
               Such skill of tongues, and arts of euery kind,
               With manhood, prudence, iustice ioynd with ruth,
               As age seld hath, thogh here they greed with youth:
               Are from their wemles vndefiled Ghost,
               Gone hence to Heauen with the godly host:
               
                  
Of which two parts fast link't in bonds of life,
               It pleas'd the Lord to lend vs late a King:
               But out, alas, our sins they were so rife,
               And we so worthlesse of so good a thing,
               That Atropos did cut in twaine the string,
               Long ere her sisters sixteene wharles had spun,
               Or we the gaine of seuen yeres Raigne throgh wun.
            
            
               Wo worth our sins, our sins, our sins I say,
               The wreake of them hath reft vs such an one,
               As neuer Realme the like recouer may,
               A peerelesse Prince, a Phoenix bird alone:
               Ah well is he, but we full wo begon,
               Our wicked liues haue lost this guiltlesse guide,
               Whose ghost the heauē, whose corse this herse doth
               (hide.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   