
      
         
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     OF WISDOME THREE BOOKES
                  
                  
                     WRITTEN IN FRENCH by PETER CHARRŌ
                      Doct of Lawe in Paris.
                  Translated by Samſon Lennard
                  
                     AT LONDON PRINTED For Edward Blount & Will Aſpley
                  Gulielmus Hole fecit
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
            The ſubiect and order of theſe three Books.
            THe First Booke teacheth the knowledge of our ſelues and our humane condition, which is the foundation of Wiſdome, by fiue great and principall conſiderations of man, and conteineth 62. Chapters.
            The Second conteineth the principall rules of Wiſdome, the priuileges and proper qualities of a wiſe man, and hath 12. Chapters.
            The Third, in a Diſcourſe of the foure Morall vertues, Prudence, Iuſtice, Fortitude, Temperance, ſetteth downe the particular inſtructions of Wiſdome in 43. Chapters.
         
         
            
            
               TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince, HENRY, Prince of GREAT BRITAINE, Sonne and Heire apparent to our Souereigne Lord the King.
            
            
               DEceit is in the heart of them that imagine euill, but to the Counſellers of peace ſhall be ioy. It is the ſaying (most excellent Prince) of the wiſest Prince: that euer liued; and it is the vnſpeakable happineſſe of vs that liue vnder the gratious gouernment of your renowmed Father,

that he doth not onely approoue what he ſayd, but practiſe it too, and in the whole courſe of his gouernment findes it to be true: for peace he counſelleth, and ioy, and peace, and content he enioyeth: nay, it is by his wiſdome and prouident care that we are all at peace with the whole world, and the whole world with vs: a bleſsing that few Kingdomes of the earth do truly enioy; and the greatneſſe whereof we know not becauſe we enioy it. Jt is an Argument vnto my ſelfe of that inward peace that his Highneſſe hath with God and his owne ſoule: for, Pax a nobis incipit, quia dum lex carnis repugnat legimentis, non modò alteri ſed nec nobis poſſumus eſſe pacifici: ſed poſtquam intus ſpiritus imperat vt totus homo ſpiritui ſeruiat, tunc pax ad alios deriuatur, vt pacem cum omnibus habeamus. And

he that neuer ſpake but wiſely ſayth, When the wayes of a man pleaſe the Lord, he will make all his enemies at peace with him. Euer may all his enemies be at peace with him, and he with his enemies: and let all that loue the peace of our Jeruſalem ſay, A men. This peace (right excellent Prince) whoſe nature it is to turne ſwords into mattocks, ſouldiers into husbandmen, (for aſ much as my education made mee not fit for that) hath turned my ſword into a penne. Then my profeſsion was armes, and J fought for peace; which ſince we now enioy, J thought J ſhould diſhonour ſo honourable a profeſsion too much, to be idle, and abuſe ſo excellent a bleſsing as peace is, by making it the mother of ſo vntoward a childe. Heerupon J hung vp my ſword to ruſt in the ſcabbard till good occaſion might draw it

forth againe; and long J had not thoght with my ſelfe which way I might ſerue my King and my Country in theſe peaceable times, but this booke fell into my hands; which when I had read, I thoght woorthy the tranſlation: and though I had no reaſon to thinke the tranſlation worthy your Highnes protection, yet the matter fitteſt for a Prince, and your Princely clemencie to others in the like kinde, haue emboldened me to become humble petitioner to your Highnes, that you would be pleaſed to honor the excellencie of the worke with your patronage, and protect my infirmities. The ſubiect of this worke is Wiſdome: And what fitter for a Prince? If you honor it, it will honor you as it hath done your royall Father, whom it hath crowned with honour as with a garland, made the mirrour of Princes, and the woonder of the world.

Long may you liue an heire apparent to his virtues and to his Kingdomes, and when God ſhall haue turned his earthly crowne into a crowne of glorie, long may you reigne a glorious Sonne of ſo glorious a Father.
            
               
                  Your HIGHNESSE in all humblenes of duty to be commanded, Samſon Lennard.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               I Doubt not (gentle Reader) but ſome there are that will not gently cenſure theſe my labours; for I am not ignorant how hard a thing it is to pleaſe all. Some are curious, whom if I ſhould endeuour to pleaſe, I ſhould diſpleaſe my ſelfe: Some are enuious, and thoſe I care not whether I pleaſe or no. As for the iudicious Reader, I confeſſe I would willingly content him, becauſe if he be truly iudicious he will iudge of my faults as if they were his own, and rather commend my good endeuors, than condemne my infirmities. This is the man whom I deſire to ſatisfie, and muſt giue to vnderſtand that I haue vſed a plaine Engliſh phraſe, becauſe the grauitie of the matter required it; and I loue not to ſmell of the inkhorne: and of all others I haue auoided the French, wherein it

was written, becauſe I would not haue it ſeeme to be a tranſlation. The Latine I haue left vntoucht; and if that be a fault, I disburden it vpon the Author: He did it; and why not I? And if hee thought all French men vnderſtood it; why ſhould not I haue as good a conceit of my Countreymen? If he thought none fit to reade his booke, but ſuch as vnderſtood it, it is no fault in me if I thinke ſo too. Howſoeuer, or whatſoeuer my ouerſights may be (which I doubt not but a curious eie may make too many) let it ſuffice that I acknowledge mine owne weakneſſe, and both in reſpect of the tongue and weight of the matter if ſelfe, ſhould not haue preſumed to haue vndergone ſo heauy a burden, had I not been encouraged by my learned, iudicious and honeſt friend M. Roger Webb, ſometime ſtudent and fellow of S. Iohns Colledge in Oxford; from whoſe fulneſſe I am not aſhamed to confeſſe I haue receiued that little ſufficiencie, whatſoeuer it be, that is in me, and whoſe learned aſſiſtance I haue vſed both in the cull, and altering of ſuch points as were either erroneous, or not otherwiſe fit to paſſe the preſſe. If any man ſhall thinke, that by this ingenious acknowledgment of his worthineſſe

I detract from mine owne ſufficiencie, it ſufficeth my turne, if I adde vnto mine owne honeſtie by yeelding this thankfull requitall of his loue towards me, and his labors beſtowed vpon me; which foraſmuch as they were not mercenarie, but friendly and neighbourly, they do binde me the rather with my labours to honour him. Touching the Authour of this Worke I can ſay little, becauſe I knew him not, let his worke commend him; and as for the worke, let it commend it ſelfe: for I had rather with ſilence paſſe that ouer which I can not ſufficiently commend, than derogate any thing from the worth thereof by ſpeaking too little. Let me only ſay, That if I haue any way wronged him in theſe my labors (by turning him out of his holy dayes ſute into his worky-dayes apparell) I am ſorie for it; it was not my purpoſe ſo to do, but to honor him. And howſoeuer our Engliſh attire may alter him in the outward appearance, yet my hope is, that he that prieth into him with a ſingle impartiall eye, ſhall finde him no changeling, but one and the ſame.
            
               S. L.
            
         
         
            
            A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS of theſe three Books of Wiſdome.
            THe Preface conteining a Diſcourſe of the name, ſubiect, purpoſe and method of this worke, with an aduertiſement vnto the Reader.
            
               The Firſt Booke, of the knowledge of our ſelues and humane condition.
               An exhortation to the ſtudie and knowledge of our ſelues.
               The Preface of the First Booke.
               The firſt Conſideration of man, which is naturall, by all the parts whereof he is compoſed.
                     CHAP. 1 OF the frame of man.
PAGE. 7 
                     
                     CHAP. 2 The firſt and generall diſtinction of man.
PAGE. 10 
                     
                     CHAP. 3 Of the body, & firſt, of all the parts therof with their places.
PAGE. 12 
                     
                     CHAP. 4 Of the ſingular properties of the body of man.
PAGE. 15 
                     
                     CHAP. 5 Of the goods of the body, Health, Beauty, &c.
PAGE. 16 
                     
                     CHAP. 6 Of the veſtments of the body.
PAGE. 20 
                     
                     CHAP. 7 Of the ſoule in generall.
PAGE. 22 
                     
                     CHAP. 8 Of the ſoule in particular, & firſt of the vegetatiue faculty.
PAGE. 34 
                     
                     CHAP. 9 Of the ſenſitine facultie.
PAGE. 35 
                     
                     CHAP. 10 Of the ſenſes of Nature.
PAGE. 37 
                     
                     CHAP. 11 Of Sight, Hearing, and Speech.
PAGE. 42 
                     
                     CHAP. 12 Of the other faculties, imaginatiue, memoratiue, appetitiue.
PAGE. 45 
                     
                     CHAP. 13 Of the intellectiue and truly humane facultie.
PAGE. 46 
                     
                     CHAP. 14 Of the humane ſpirit, the parts, functions, qualities, reaſon, inuention, veritie thereof.
PAGE. 54 
                     
                     
                     CHAP. 15 Of Memorie.
PAGE. 65 
                     
                     CHAP. 16 Of the imagination and opinion.
PAGE. 66 
                     
                     CHAP. 17 Of the Will.
PAGE. 69 
                        
                           Of Paſſions and Affection, with an Aduertiſement.
PAGE. 70 
                           
                        
                     
                     CHAP. 18 Of Paſſions in generall.
PAGE. 71 
                        
                           Of Paſſions in particular, with an Aduertiſement.
PAGE. 75
                           
                        
                     
                     CHAP. 19 Of Loue in generall.
PAGE. 75 
                     
                     CHAP. 20 Of Ambition.
PAGE. 76 
                     
                     CHAP. 21 Of Couetouſneſſe and her counterpaſſion.
PAGE. 80 
                     
                     CHAP. 22 Of carnall loue.
PAGE. 83 
                     
                     CHAP. 23 Deſires, Luſt, or Concupiſcence.
PAGE. 85 
                     
                     CHAP. 24 Hope, Deſpaire.
PAGE. 86 
                     
                     CHAP. 25 Of Choler.
PAGE. 87 
                     
                     CHAP. 26 Hatred.
PAGE. 90 
                     
                     CHAP. 27 Enuie.
PAGE. 91 
                     
                     CHAP. 28 Ielouſie.
PAGE. 91 
                     
                     CHAP. 29 Reuenge.
PAGE. 92 
                     
                     CHAP. 30 Crueltie.
PAGE. 94 
                     
                     CHAP. 31 Sadneſſe or heauineſſe of heart.
PAGE. 94 
                     
                     CHAP. 32 Compaſſion.
PAGE. 98 
                     
                     CHAP. 33 Feare.
PAGE. 99 
                     
                  
               
               CHAP. 34 The ſecond Conſideration of man, by comparing him with all other creatures.
PAGE. 101 
               
               The third Conſideration of man, which is by his life.
PAGE. 113 
                  
                     CHAP. 35 The eſtimation, breuitie, deſcription of the life of man, and the parts thereof.
PAGE. 113 
                     
                  
               
               The fourth Conſideration of man morall, by his maners, humours, conditions, very liuely and notable.
PAGE. 118
                  
                     The Preface.

                     CHAP. 36 Vanitie.
PAGE. 119 
                     
                     CHAP. 37 Weakneſſe or infirmitie.
PAGE. 124 
                     
                     CHAP. 38 Inconſtancie.
PAGE. 136 
                     
                     CHAP. 39 Miſerie.
PAGE. 137 
                     
                     CHAP. 40 Preſumption.
PAGE. 152 
                     
                  
               
               The fift and laſt Conſideration of man, by the great varieties and differences which are in him, and their compariſons.
PAGE. 161
                  
                     CHAP. 41 Of the difference and inequality of men in generall.
PAGE. 161
                     
                      
                        
CHAP. 42 The firſt naturall and eſſentiall difference of men, drawen from the diuerſitie of the ſite or ſituation of the world.
PAGE. 163 
                     
                     CHAP. 43 The ſecond diſtinction and more ſubtle difference of the ſpirits and ſufficiencies of men.
PAGE. 168 
                     
                     CHAP. 44 The third diſtinction and difference of men accidentall, of their degrees, eſtates, and charges.
PAGE. 171 
                        
                           Of the eſtates and degrees of men in particular, with an Aduertiſement.
PAGE. 173
                           
                        
                     
                      
                        
                           CHAP. 45 Of commanding and obeying.
PAGE. 174 
                           
                           CHAP. 46 Of Marriage.
PAGE. 175 
                           
                           CHAP. 47 Of Parents and Children.
PAGE. 184 
                           
                           CHAP. 48 Of Lords and ſlaues, Maſters and ſeruants.
PAGE. 187 
                           
                           CHAP. 49 Of the State, Souereigntie, and Soueraignes.
PAGE. 189 
                           
                           CHAP. 50 Of Magiſtrates.
PAGE. 196 
                           
                           CHAP. 51 Of Lawyers, Doctors and Teachers.
PAGE. 197 
                           
                           CHAP. 52 Of the people or vulgar ſort.
PAGE. 198 
                           
                        
                     
                     The fourth diſtinction & difference of men drawen from their diuers profeſſions and conditions of life. The Preface.
PAGE. 201
                        
                           CHAP. 53 A distinction and compariſon of the three ſorts and degrees of life.
PAGE. 202 
                           
                           CHAP. 54 A compariſon of the ciuill & ſociable life with the ſolitary.
PAGE. 203 
                           
                           CHAP. 55 A compariſon betwixt the life led in common and in priuate.
PAGE. 205 
                           
                           CHAP. 56 A compariſon betwixt the countrey life and the citizens.
PAGE. 206 
                           
                           CHAP. 57 Of the militarie profeſſion.
PAGE. 207 
                           
                        
                     
                     The fift and laſt diſtinction and difference of men drawen from the fauors and disfauors of Nature and Fortune. Preface.
PAGE. 209
                        
                           CHAP. 58 Of Libertie and ſeruitude.
PAGE. 209 
                           
                           CHAP. 59 Of Nobilitie.
PAGE. 210 
                           
                           CHAP. 60 Of Honour.
PAGE. 213 
                           
                           CHAP. 61 Of Science.
PAGE. 215 
                           
                           CHAP. 62 Of Riches and Pouertie.
PAGE. 217 
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THe Second Booke, conteining the inſtructions and generall rules of Wiſdome.
                  The Preface, wherin is conteined a generall deſcription of Wiſdome, and the ſumme of this Booke. 219
                  
                  
                  CHAP. 1 AN exemption and freedom from errors & the vices of the world & of paſſions. The firſt diſpoſition to wiſdom.
PAGE. 223 
                  
                  CHAP. 2 An vniuerſall and plaine libertie of ſpirit, both in iudgement and will. The ſecond diſpoſition vnto wiſdome.
PAGE. 230 
                  
                  CHAP. 3 A true and eſſentiall honeſtie, the firſt and fundamentall part of wiſdome.
PAGE. 252 
                  
                  CHAP. 4 To haue a certaine end and forme of life, the ſecond foundation of wiſdome.
PAGE. 271 
                  
                  CHAP. 5 To ſtudie true pietie, the firſt office of wiſdome.
PAGE. 274 
                  
                  CHAP. 6 To gouerne his deſires and pleaſures, the ſecond office of wiſdome.
PAGE. 290 
                  
                  CHAP. 7 To carrie himſelfe moderately and equally in proſperitie and aduerſitie, the third office of wiſdome.
PAGE. 296 
                  
                  CHAP. 8 To obey and obſerue the lawes, cuſtomes and ceremonies of the countrey, how and in what ſenſe, the fourth office of wiſdom.
PAGE. 305 
                  
                  CHAP. 9 To carrie himſelfe well with another, the fift office of wiſdom.
PAGE. 316 
                  
                  CHAP. 10 To carrie himſelf wiſely in his affaires, the ſixt office of wiſdom.
PAGE. 320 
                  
                  CHAP. 11 To keepe himſelfe alwayes ready for death, a fruit of wiſdom.
PAGE. 328 
                  
                  CHAP. 12 To maintaine himſelfe in true tranquillitie of Spirit, the fruit and crowne of wiſdom, and concluſion of this Booke.
PAGE. 346 
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THe Third Booke, wherein are handled the particular documents of wiſdome by the foure morall vertues.
                  The Preface. 349 
                  
                  Of Prudence, the firſt vertue.
                        CHAP. 1 OF Prudence in generall.
PAGE. 350 
                           
                              Of the politike Prudence of a Souereigne to gouerne a State. The Preface.
PAGE. 353 
                              
                           
                        
                        CHAP. 2 The firſt part of this politike Prudence and gouernment of a State, which is Prouiſion.
PAGE. 354 
                        
                        CHAP. 3 The ſecond part of this politike Prudence and gouernment of a State, which concerneth the action and gouernment of the Prince.
PAGE. 378 
                        
                        
                        CHAP. 4 Of that Prudence which is required in difficult affaires and ill accidents, publike and priuate. Preface.
PAGE. 403 
                           
                              
                                 1  Of the euils and accidents which threaten vs.
PAGE. 404 
                              
                              
                                 2  Of euils and accidents preſent, preſſing & extreame.
PAGE. 404 
                              
                              
                                 3  Doubtfull and ambiguous affaires.
PAGE. 406 
                              
                              
                                 4  Difficult and dangerous affaires.
PAGE. 406 
                              
                              
                                 5  Coniurations.
PAGE. 407 
                              
                              
                                 6  Treaſon.
PAGE. 409 
                              
                              
                                 7  Popular commotions.
PAGE. 410 
                              
                              
                                 8  Faction and confederacie.
PAGE. 411 
                              
                              
                                 9  Sedition.
PAGE. 412 
                              
                              
                                 10  Tyrannie and rebellion.
PAGE. 414 
                              
                              
                                 11  Ciuill warres.
PAGE. 415 
                              
                              
                                 12  Aduiſements for particular perſons touching the foreſayd publike diuiſions.
PAGE. 416 
                              
                              
                                 13  Of priuate troubles and diuiſions.
PAGE. 419 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Of Iuſtice the ſecond vertue.

                        CHAP. 5 Of Iuſtice in generall.
PAGE. 419 
                        
                        CHAP. 6 Of the Iuſtice and dutie of a man towards himſelfe.
PAGE. 422 
                           
                              Of the Iuſtice and dutie of a man towards man, with an Aduertiſement.
PAGE. 428 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        The firſt part, which is of the generall and common duties of all towards all, and firſt

                              CHAP. 7 Of Loue or friendſhip.
PAGE. 429 
                              
                              CHAP. 8 Of Faith, fidelitie, treacherie, ſecrecie.
PAGE. 436 
                              
                              CHAP. 9 Veritie and free admonition.
PAGE. 439 
                              
                              CHAP. 10 Of flattery, lying and diſſimulation.
PAGE. 441 
                              
                              CHAP. 11 Of benefits, obligation, and thankefulneſſe.
PAGE. 446 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        The ſecond part, which concerneth the ſpeciall duties of certeine men towards certeine men, by certeine and ſpeciall obligation.  
                              The Preface.
PAGE. 453
                              
                              CHAP. 12 The dutie of married folke.
PAGE. 454 
                              
                              CHAP. 13 Houſeholde huſbandrie.
PAGE. 456 
                              
                              CHAP. 14 The duty of Parents and children.
PAGE. 457 
                              
                              CHAP. 15 The duty of Maſters and ſeruants:
PAGE. 486 
                              
                              CHAP. 16 The duty of Soueraignes and ſubiects.
PAGE. 488 
                              
                              CHAP. 17 The duty of Magiſtrates.
PAGE. 491 
                              
                              CHAP. 18 The duty of great and ſmall.
PAGE. 497 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                  Of Fortitude, the third vertue. Preface.
PAGE. 498 
                     
                        CHAP. 19 Of Fortitude or valour in generall,
PAGE. 499  
                           
                              Of Fortitude or valour in particular.
PAGE. 503
                              
                           
                        
                        CHAP. 20 The firſt part of outward euils.
PAGE. 504 
                        
                        CHAP. 21 Of outward euils conſidered in their effects and fruits.
PAGE. 509 
                           
                              Of outward euils in themſelues and particularly. An Aduertiſement.
PAGE. 510 
                              
                           
                        
                        CHAP. 22 Of Sickneſſe and griefe.
PAGE. 511 
                        
                        CHAP. 23 Of Captiuitie and impriſonment.
PAGE. 513 
                        
                        CHAP. 24 Of Baniſhment and exile.
PAGE. 515 
                        
                        CHAP. 25 Of Pouertie, want, loſſe of goods.
PAGE. 516 
                        
                        CHAP. 26 Of Infamie.
PAGE. 518 
                           
                              
                                 27 Of the loſſe of friends.
PAGE. 519 
                              
                           
                        
                        CHAP.
Of Death.
PAGE. 520 
                        
                        The ſecond part of inward euils, &c.  
                              The Preface.
PAGE. 520
                              
                              CHAP. 28 Againſt Feare.
PAGE. 521 
                              
                              CHAP. 29 Againſt Sorrow.
PAGE. 522 
                              
                              CHAP. 30 Againſt Compaſſion and mercy.
PAGE. 523 
                              
                              CHAP. 31 Againſt Choler.
PAGE. 524 
                              
                              CHAP. 32 Againſt Hatred.
PAGE. 528 
                              
                              CHAP. 33 Againſt Enuie.
PAGE. 528 
                              
                              CHAP. 34 Againſt Reuenge.
PAGE. 529 
                              
                              CHAP. 35 Againſt Iealouſie.
PAGE. 530 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Of Temperance the fourth vertue.

                        CHAP. 36 Of Temperance in generall.
PAGE. 532 
                        
                        CHAP. 37 Of Proſperitie, and counſell thereupon.
PAGE. 533 
                        
                        CHAP. 38 Of Pleaſure, and aduice thereupon.
PAGE. 534 
                        
                        CHAP. 39 Of Eating and drinking, Abſtinence and ſobrietie.
PAGE. 539 
                        
                        CHAP. 40 Of Riot and exceſſe in apparell and ornaments, and of frugalitie.
PAGE. 541 
                        
                        CHAP. 41 Carnall pleaſure, chaſtitie, continencie.
PAGE. 542 
                        
                        CHAP. 42 Of Glory and ambition.
PAGE. 545 
                        
                        CHAP. 43 Of Temperancie in ſpeech, and of Eloquence.
PAGE. 547 
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The end of the Table.
            
         
      
      
         
            OF VVISDOME Three Books.
         
            THE PREFACE: VVhere the Name, Subiect, Purpoſe, and Method of this VVorke is ſet downe, with an Aduertiſement to the Reader.
            
            
               IT is required at the firſt entrie into 1 Of ye word Wiſdome. this Worke, that wee know what this Wiſdome is; and ſince it beareth that name and title, how we purpoſe to ſpeake thereof. All men in generall at the firſt view of the ſimple word it ſelfe, doe eaſily conceiue and imagine it to be ſome qualitie, ſufficiencie, or habit, not common or vulgar, but excellent, ſingular, and eleuated aboue that which is common and ordinarie, be it good or euill: For it is taken and vſed (though perhaps improperly) in both kinds: Sapientes ſunt vt faciant mala: and ſignifieth not 
                  Hierem. 4. Ariſt. lib. 5. Metaphy.
               
               
properly a good and laudable qualitie, but exquiſite, ſingular, excellent in whatſoeuer it be. And therefore we doe as well ſay, A wiſe Tyrant, Pirat, Theefe; as A wiſe King, Pilot, Captaine: that is to ſay, Sufficient, prudent, aduiſed; not ſimply and vulgarly, but excellently: For there is oppoſite vnto Wiſdome not onely follie, which is an irregularitie or looſeneſſe of life, and Wiſdome a regularitie or moderation, well meaſured and proportioned: but alſo common baſeneſſe and vulgar Simplicitie: For Wiſdome is high, ſtrong, and excellent; yea, whether it be in good or euill it conteineth two things: Sufficiencie, that is, Prouiſion or furnture for whatſoeuer is required and neceſſarie; and that it be in ſome high degree of excellencie. So that you ſee what the ſimpler ſort imagine Wiſdome to be at the firſt view and the ſimple ſound of the word; whereby they conclude, That there are few wiſe men, that they are rare as euery excellencie is; and that to them by right it apperteineth to command and gouerne others; that they are as Oracles: from whence is that ſaying, Beleeue others, and referre thy ſelfe to the wiſe. But well to define this thing and according to trueth, and to diſtinguiſh it into his true parts, all men know not, neither are they of one accord, nor is it eaſie; for otherwiſe doe the common people, otherwiſe the Philoſophers, otherwiſe the Diuines ſpeake thereof. Theſe are the three floores and degrees of the world. The two latter proceed by order, and rules, and precepts: the former confuſedly and very imperfectly.
            Now then we may ſay, That there are three ſorts 2 The diuiſion of Wiſdome. and degrees of wiſdome, Diuine, Humane, Mundane, which correſpond vnto God; Nature pure and entire;

Nature vitiated and corrupted. Of all theſe ſorts and euerie of them doe all theſe three orders of the world, which before we ſpeake of, write and diſcourſe, euerie one according to his owne maner and faſhion; but properly and formally the common ſort, that is to ſay, the world of worldly wiſdome, the Philoſopher of humane, the Diuine of diuine wiſdome.
            Worldly wiſdome, and of the three the more baſe, 3 Worldly wiſdome. (which is diuers according to the three great Captaines and Leaders of this inferiour world, Opulencie, Pleaſure, Glorie, or rather Auarice, Luxurie, Ambition: Quicquid est in mundo est concupiſcentia oculorum, 
               1. Iohn 3. 
               concupiſcentia carnis, ſuperbia vitae; for which cauſe it is called by S. Iames, Terrena, Animalis, Diabolica) 
               
                  Iames 3. is reprooued by Philoſophie and Diuinitie, which pronounceth it follie before God: Stultam fecit 
               1. Cor. 1. 
               Deus ſapientiam huius mundi. Of this wiſdome therefore we ſpeake not in this Booke, except it be to diſpraiſe and condemne it.
            Diuine wiſdome, and of the three the higheſt, is defined 4 Diuine wiſdome. and handled by Philoſophers and Diuines, but ſomewhat diuerſly. As for the common or worldly wiſdome I diſdaine it, and paſſe by whatſoeuer may be ſpoken thereof as prophane and too vnworthy in this Treatiſe to be read. The Philoſophers make it altogether Speculatiue, ſaying, That it is the knowledge of the principles, firſt cauſes, and higheſt power to iudge of all things, euen of the moſt Souereigne, which is God himſelfe: and this wiſdome is Metaphyſicall, and reſideth wholly in the vnderſtanding, as being the chiefe good and perfection thereof: it is the firſt and 
                  Thom. 1. 2. quaeſt. 57. 2. 2. q. 19. higheſt of the fiue intellectuall vertues, which may be without either honeſtie, action, or other morall vertue.

The Diuines make it not altogether ſo ſpeculatiue, but that it is likewiſe in ſome ſort Practique, for they ſay, That it is the knowledge of Diuine things, from which there ariſeth a iudgement and rule of humane actions; and they make it two-folde, The one acquired by ſtudie, and comes neere to that of the Philoſophers; which I am to ſpeake of: The other infuſed and giuen by God, De ſurſum deſcendens. This is the firſt of the ſeuen gifts of the Holy Ghoſt, Spiritus Domini, ſpiritus ſapientiae, which is not found but only in thoſe that are iuſt and free from ſinne, In maleuolam animam 
               
                  Sap. 1. 
               non introibit ſapientia. Of this Diuine wiſdome likewiſe our purpoſe is not heere to ſpeake, it is after ſome ſort and meaſure handled in my firſt Veritie, and in my Diſcourſes of Diuinitie.
            It followeth therefore, that it is Humane wiſdome 5 Humane. which in this Booke we are to deliuer vnto you, and whereof it takes the name, and of which in this place we muſt giue ſome briefe and generall view, which may be as an Argument and Summarie of this whole worke. The common deſcriptions are diuers and inſufficient; Wiſdome according to the cō
                  mon ſort. Some and the greateſt part thinke that it is only a wiſdome, diſcretion, and aduiſed carriage in a mans affaires and conuerſation. This may well be called common, as reſpecting nothing but that which is outward and in action, and conſidereth not at all any other thing than that which outwardly appeareth. It is altogether in the eyes and eares of men, without any reſpect or very little of the inward motions of the minde: ſo that according to their opinion wiſdome may be without eſſentiall pietie or probitie, that is, a beautifull cunning, a ſweet and modeſt ſubtiltie. Others thinke that it is a rude, vnreaſonable, rough ſingularitie,

a kinde of ſullen frowning and frampole auſteritie in opinions, maners, words, actions and faſhion of life; and therfore they call them that are wounded and touched with that humor Philoſophers, that is to ſay, in their counterfeit language, fantaſticall, diuers, different and declining from the cuſtomes of other men.
            Now this kinde of wiſdome according to the doctrine of our booke is rather a follie and extrauagancie. You muſt therefore know, that this wiſdome whereof we ſpeake is not that of the common people, but of Philoſophers and Diuines, whereof both haue written in their morall learnings. The Philoſophers more at According to Philoſophers and Diuines. large, and more profeſſedly as being their true and proper diſh they feed on, and formall ſubiect they write of, becauſe they applie themſelues to that which concerneth Nature and Action. Diuinitie mounteth A compariſon betwixt Diuinitie & Philoſophie. much higher, and is occupied about vertues infuſed, Contemplatiue and Diuine, that is to ſay, about Diuine wiſdome and Beleefe. So that Philoſophers are more ſtayed, diſperſed more certeine, and more common, ruling and inſtructing not onely the particular knowledge or actions of men, but the common and publike, teaching that which is good and profitable to Families, Corporations, Common-weales, Empires. Diuinitie is more ſparing and ſilent in this point, looking principallie into the eternall good and ſaluation of euery one. Againe, the Philoſopher handleth this ſubiect more ſweetly and pleaſingly, the Diuine more auſterely and drily. Againe, Philoſophie which is the elder (for Nature is more ancient than Grace, and the Naturall than the Supernaturall) ſeemeth to perſwade gratiouſly, as being willing to pleaſe in profiting, as the Poet ſpeaketh:
            
               
                  
Simul & iucunda & idonea dicere vita Horace.
               
               Lectorem delect ando, pariter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   monando.
            
            It is enriched with diſcourſes, reaſons, inuentions, examples, ſimilitudes, decked with ſpeeches, Apophthegmes, ſententious mots, adorned with Eloquence and Arte. Theologie, which came after, altogether auſtere, it ſeemeth to command and imperiouſly like a Maſter to enioyne. And to conclude, the vertue and honeſtie of Diuines is too anxious, ſcrupulous, deiect, ſad, fearefull and vulgar. Philoſophie, ſuch as this Booke teacheth, is altogether pleaſant, free, buckſom, and if I may ſo ſay, wanton too; and yet notwithſtanding, puiſſant, noble, generous, and rare. Doubtleſſe the Philoſophers haue heerin been excellent, not only in writing and teaching, but in the rich and liuely repreſentation thereof in their honourable and heroicall liues. I vnderſtand heere by Philoſophers and Wiſe men, not onely thoſe that haue carried the name of Wiſe men, ſuch as Thales, Solon, and the reſt of that ranke, that liued in the time of Cyrus, Creſus, Piſiſtrates; nor thoſe that came afterwards, and haue publikely taught it, as Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Aristippus, Zenon, Antisthenes, all chiefe Profeſſours apart, and many other their Diſciples different and diuided in ſects; but alſo all thoſe great men who haue made ſingular and exemplary profeſſion of vertue and wiſdome, as Phocion, Aristides, Pericles, Alexander, whom Plutarch called as well a Philoſopher as a King, Epaminondas, and diuers other Greeks: The Fabricij, Fabij, Camilli, Catoni, Torquati, Reguli, Lelij, Scipioni, Romans, who for the moſt part haue beene Generals in armies. And theſe are the reaſons why in this my Booke I doe more willingly and ordinarily follow

the aduice and ſayings of Philoſophers, not in the mean time omitting or reiecting thoſe of the Diuines: For both in ſubſtance they doe all agree, and are verie ſold me different, and Diuinitie doth nothing diſdaine to employ, and to make good vſe of the wiſe ſayings of Philoſophie. If I had vndertaken to inſtruct the cloiſter, and the retired life, that is, that profeſſion which attendeth the ſecrets Euangelicall, I muſt neceſſarily haue followed adamuſsim the aduice of the Diuines: but our Booke inſtructeth a ciuill life, formeth a man for the world, that is to ſay, to humane wiſdome, not diuine.
            We ſay then naturally and generally both with the 6 A generall deſcription of humane wiſdome. Philoſopher and the Diuine, that this humane wiſdome is a kinde of law or reaſon, a beautifull and noble compoſition of the entire man, both in his inward part and his outward, his thoughts, his words, his actions, and all his motions. It is the excellencie and perfection of man as he is man, that is to ſay, according to that which the firſt fundamentall and naturall law doth require; as wee ſay, That that worke is well wrought and excellent, that is compleat and perfectin all the parts thereof, and wherein all the rules of Arte haue beene obſerued; that man is accounted a wiſe man, that beſt knoweth after the beſt and moſt excellent maner to play the man, that is to ſay, (to giue a more particular picture thereof) that knowing himſelfe and the condition of man, doth keepe and preſerue himſelfe from all vices, errours, paſſions and defects as well inward and proper to himſelfe, as outward and common to other men, mainteining his ſpirit pure, free, vniuerſall, conſidering and iudging of all things without band or affection, alwayes ruling and

directing himſelf in all things according to nature, that is to ſay, that firſt reaſon and vniuerſall law and light inſpired by God, and which ſhineth in vs, vnto which he doth apply and accommodate his owne proper and particular light, liuing in the outward view of the world, and with all men according to their lawes, cuſtomes and ceremonies of the countrey where he is, without the offence of any, carrying himſelfe wiſely and diſcreetly in all affaires, walking alwaies vprightly, conſtant, comfortable, and content in himſelfe, attending peaceably whatſoeuer may happen, and at the laſt death it ſelfe. All theſe parts or qualities, which are many, for our better eaſe and facilitie may be drawen to foure principall heads; Knowledge of our ſelues, Libertie of ſpirit pure and generous, Imitation of Nature, (this hath a very large field, and alone might almoſt ſuffice) True contentment. Theſe can no where be found but in him that is wiſe: and he that wanteth any of theſe can not be wiſe. He that hath an erroneous knowledge of himſelfe, that ſubiecteth his minde to any kinde of ſeruitude, either of paſſions or popular opinions, makes himſelfe partiall; and by enthralling himſelfe to ſome particular opinion is depriued of the libertie and iuriſdiction of diſcerning, iudging and examining all things. Hee that ſtriueth againſt Nature, vnder what pretence ſoeuer it be, following rather opinion or paſſion than reaſon; he that carrieth himſelfe troubledly, diſquietly, malcontent, fearing death, is not wiſe. Beholde heere in a few words the picture of Humane wiſdome and folly, and the ſum of that which I purpoſe to handle in this Worke, eſpecially in the Second Booke, which expreſly containeth the rules, treatiſe, and offices of Wiſdome, which is more mine

than the other two, and which I once thought to haue publiſhed by it ſelfe. This verball deſcription of Wiſdome is repreſented vnto the eye euen at the entrance or threſhall of this Booke by a woman all naked, in a place void and empty, reſting her ſelfe vpon nothing, in her pure and ſimple nature beholding her ſelfe in a glaſſe, her countenance cheerefull, merry and manly, vpright, her feet cloſe ioyned, vpon a ſquare pillar, and imbracing herſelfe, hauing vnder her feet inchained foure other women as ſlaues vnto her, that is to ſay, Paſsion with a changed and hideous countenance; Opinion with wandering eyes, inconſtant, giddy, borne vpon the heads of the people; Superſtition, aſtoniſhed and in a trance, and her hands faſtened the one to the other; Vertue or Honeſtie and Pedanticall Science with a ſullen viſage, her eye-lids eleuated reading in a Booke, where was written, Yea, No. All this needs no other explication, than that which heereafter followeth, but heereof more at large in the Second Booke.
            To attaine vnto this wiſdome there are two meanes, 7 Two ways to attaine this wiſdome. the firſt is in the originall forming and firſt temper, that is to ſay, in the temperature of the ſeed of the Parents, the milke of the Nurſe, and the firſt education; whereby a man is ſayd to be either well borne, or ill borne, that is to ſay, either well or ill formed and diſpoſed vnto wiſdome. A man would little thinke of what power and importance this beginning is, for if men did know it, there would be more care taken, and diligence vſed therein than there is. It is a ſtrange and lamentable thing, that ſo reachleſſe a careleſneſſe ſhould be in vs of the life and good life of thoſe whom we deſire to make our other ſelues, when in matters of leſſe importance we take more care, vſe more diligence,

more counſell than we ſhould, neuer thinking of our greateſt affaires and moſt honourable, but by hazzard and peraduenture. Who is he that taketh counſell with himſelfe, or endeuoureth to do that which is required for the preſeruing and preparing of himſelfe as he ought to the generation of male-children, healthfull of ſpirit, and apt for wiſdome? For that which ſerueth for the one, ſerueth for the other, and Nature after one maner attendeth them all. This is that which men thinke of leaſt, yea little or not at all (in the act of generation) doth it enter into their thoughts to frame a new creature like themſelues, but only like beaſts to ſatisfie their luſtfull pleaſures. This is one of the moſt important faults and of greateſt note in a Common weale, whereof there is not one that thinketh or complaineth, neither is there concerning it either law, or rule, or publike aduice. It is moſt certeine, that if men did heerein carrie themſelues as they ought, we ſhould haue other men, of more excellent ſpirit and condition than we haue amongſt vs. What is required heerein, and to the firſt nouriſhment and education, is briefly ſet downe in our Third Booke, Chap. 14.
            The ſecond meanes to attaine wiſdome is the ſtudie 8 Acquired. of Philoſophie, I meane not of all the parts thereof, but Morall (yet not forgetting the Naturall) which is the light, the guide, the rule of our life, which explaineth and repreſenteth vnto vs the law of Nature, inſtructeth man vniuerſally in all things, both publike and priuate, alone and in companie, in all domeſticall and ciuill conuerſation, taketh away all that ſauage nature that is in vs, ſweetneth and tameth our naturall rudeneſſe, crueltie and wildneſſe, and worketh and faſhioneth it to wiſdome. To be briefe, it is the true ſcience

of man; all the reſt in reſpect of it is but vanitie, or at the leaſtwiſe not neceſſarie or little profitable: for it giueth inſtructions to liue and to die well, which is all in all; it teacheth vs perfect wiſdome, an apt iudicious well aduiſed honeſty. But this ſecond meane is almoſt as little practiſed and as ill employed as the firſt: for no man careth greatly for this wiſdome, ſo much are all giuen to that which is worldly. Thus you ſee the two principall meanes to attaine to wiſdome, the Naturall and Acquired. He that hath beene fortunate in the firſt, that is to ſay, that hath been fauourably formed by Nature, that is, of a good and ſweet temperature, which bringeth forth a great goodneſſe in nature, and ſweetnes in maners, hath made a faire march without great paine to the ſecond: But that man with whom it is otherwiſe, muſt with great and painfull ſtudie of the ſecond beautifie and ſupplie that which is wanting, as Socrates one of the wiſeſt ſayd of himſelfe, That by the ſtudie of Philoſophie he had corrected and reformed his naturall infirmities.
            There are contrariwiſe two formall lets or hinderances 9 The lets to Wiſdome, and means to folly are tvvo. to wiſdome, and two counter-meanes or powerfull wayes vnto follie, Naturall and Acquired. The firſt, which is naturall, proceedeth from the originall temper and temperature, which maketh the braine either too ſoft, moiſt, and the parts thereof groſſe and 1 Naturall. materiall, whereby the ſpirits remaine ſottiſh, feeble, leſſe capable, plaine diminiſhed, obſcure, ſuch as that is, for the moſt part, of the common ſort of people; or too hot, ardent, and drie, which maketh the ſpirits fooliſh, audacious, vitious. Theſe are the two extremes, Sottiſhneſſe and Follie, Water and Fire, Lead and Mercurie, altogether improper or vnapt to wiſdom, which

requireth a ſpirit full of vigor and generous, and yet ſweet, pliant, and modeſt: but the ſecond is more eaſily amended by diſcipline than the former.
            The ſecond, which is Acquired, proceedeth either 2 Acquired. from no culture and inſtruction, or from that which is euill, which amongſt other things conſiſteth in an obſtinate and ſworne preiudicate preuention of opinions, wherewith the minde is made drunken, and taketh ſo ſtrong a tincture, that it is made vnapt and vncapable to ſee or to finde better whereby to raiſe and inrich it ſelfe. It is ſayd of theſe kinde of men, That they are wounded and ſtricken, that they haue a hurt or blow in the head: vnto which wound if likewiſe learning be ioined, becauſe that puffeth vp, it bringeth with it preſumption and temeritie, and ſomtimes armes to maintaine and defend thoſe anticipated opinions: it altogether perfecteth the forme and frame of follie, and maketh it incurable. So that naturall weakneſſe, and acquired preuention are two great hinderances; but ſcience, if it do not wholly cure them, which ſeldome it doth, ſtrengtheneth them and maketh them inuincible, which turneth not any way to the diſhonour of learning (as a man may well thinke) but to the greater honour thereof.
            Science or Learning is a very good and profitable 10 Of Learning. ſtaffe or waſter, but which will not be handled with all hands; and he that knowes not well how to rule it, receiueth thereby more hurt than profit. It beſotteth and maketh fooliſh (ſaith a great learned writer) the weake See heerof Li. 3. ca. 14. and ſicke ſpirit, it poliſheth and perfecteth the naturally ſtrong and good. The feeble ſpirit knowes not how to poſſeſſe ſcience, how to handle it, and how to make vſe thereof as he ſhould; but contrariwiſe is poſſeſſed

and ruled by it, whereby he ſubmits himſelfe and remaines a ſlaue to it, like a weake ſtomacke ouercharged with more victuals than it can digeſt. A weake arme wanting power and skill well to weld a waſter or ſtaffe that is ſomewhat too heauie for it, wearieth it ſelfe and fainteth. A wiſe and courageous ſpirit ouermaſtereth his wiſdome, enioyeth it, vſeth it, and employeth it to his beſt aduantage, enformeth his owne iudgement, rectifieth his will, helpeth and fortifieth his naturall light, and maketh himſelfe more quicke and actiue; wheras the other is made thereby more ſottiſh, more vnapt, and therewithall more preſumptuous: ſo that the fault or reproch is not in learning, no more than that wine or other good drugge is faultie which a man knoweth not how to apply and accommodate to his owne needs: Non est culpa vini, ſed culpa bibentis. Now then againſt ſuch ſpirits weake by nature, preoccupated, puffed vp, and hindred by acquired wiſdome I make open warre in this Booke, and that often times vnder the word Pedante, not finding any other more Of ye vvord Pedante or Schoole-maſter. proper, and which by many good Authours is vſed in this ſenſe. In it owne Greeke Originall it was taken in the better ſenſe, but in other later languages, by reaſon of the abuſe, and bad carriage of ſuch men in the profeſſion of their learning, it is accounted baſe, vile, queſtuous, contentious, opinatiue, vain-glorious and preſumptuous, by too many practiſed, and vſed but by way of iniurie and deriſion, and is in the number of thoſe words that by continuance of time haue changed their ſignification, as Tyrant, Sophiſter, and diuers other. Le ſieur de Bellay, after the rehearſall of many notorious vices, concludeth as with the greateſt, But of all the reſt, Knowledge pedanticall I deteſt. And in another place:
            
               
                  
Sayd I thou didst liue but to eat and drinke,
               Then poore were my reuenge, thy faults ſcantie:
               But that which most doth make thy name to ſtinke,
               Is, to be ſhort, thou art a Pedantie.
            
            It may be ſome will take offence at this word, thinking An aduertiſement. it likewiſe toucheth them, and that I thereby haue a will to tax or ſcoffe the Profeſſors and Teachers of learning; but let them be pleaſed to content themſelues with this free and open declaration which I here make, That it is no part of my meaning to note by this word any gown-men or learned profeſſion whatſoeuer: yea I am ſo farre from it, that Philoſophers are in ſo high eſteeme with me, that I ſhould oppoſe my ſelfe againſt my ſelfe, becauſe I account my ſelfe one of them, and profeſſe the ſame learning: only I touch a certaine degree and qualitie of ſpirits, before deſciphered, that is, ſuch as haue naturall capacitie and ſufficiencie after a common and indifferent maner, but afterwards not well tilled, preoccupated, poſſeſſed with certaine opinions; and theſe are men of all fortunes, all conditions, and goe as well in ſhort garments as in long gownes: Vulgum tam chlamidatos, quàm coronam voco. If any man can furniſh me with any other word as ſignificant as this to expreſſe theſe kinde of ſpirits, I will willingly forgo this. After this my declaration, he that findeth himſelfe agrieued, ſhall but accuſe and ſhew himſelfe too ſcrupulous. It is true that a man may finde other oppoſites to a wiſe man beſides a Pedante, but it is in ſome particular ſenſe, as the common, prophane, vulgar ſort of people; and often times I vſe theſe oppoſits: but this is as the low is oppoſite to the high, the weake to the ſtrong, the valley to the hill, the common to the rare, the ſeruant to the maſter, the prophane to the

holy; as alſo a foole, which indeed according to the true ſound of the word, is his trueſt oppoſite: but this is a moderate man to an immoderate, a glorious opinatiue man to a modeſt, the part to the whole, the preiudicate and tainted to the neat and free, the ſicke to the ſound: but this word Pedante in that ſenſe we take it, comprehendeth all theſe and more too, for it noteth and ſignifieth him that is not only vnlike & contrary to a wiſe man, as thoſe before mentioned, but ſuch a one as arrogantly and inſolently reſiſteth it to the face, and as being armed on all ſides raiſeth himſelfe againſt it, ſpeaking out of reſolution and authoritie. And foraſmuch as after a ſort he feareth it, by reaſon that he ſeeth himſelfe diſcouered euen from the top to the bottome, and his ſport troubled by it, he proſecuteth it with a certaine inteſtine hatred, he taketh vpon him to cenſure it, to defame it, to condemne it, accounting and carrying himſelfe as the truely wiſe, though he be a foole without peere and an ignorant ſelfe-conceited Gull.
            After the purpoſe and argument of this Worke, we 11 The method of this book. come to the order and method thereof. There are three Books: The Firſt is wholly in the knowledge of our ſelues and humane condition, as a preparatiue vnto wiſdome, which is handled at large by fiue maine and principall conſiderations, ech one including in it diuers others. The Second Booke containeth in it the treatiſes, offices, and generall and principall rules of wiſdome. The Third, the particular rules and inſtructions of wiſdome, and that by the order and diſcourſe of foure principall and morall vertues, Prudence, Iuſtice, Fortitude, Temperance; vnder which foure is compriſed the whole inſtruction of the life of man, and all the

parts of dutie and honeſtie. Finally, I heere handle this matter, not Scholarlike or Pedantically, nor with enlarged diſcourſe, and furniture of Eloquence or other Arte; (For wiſdome (quae ſi oculis ipſis cerneretur mirabiles excitaret amores ſui) needs no ſuch helps to commend it ſelfe, being of it ſelfe ſo noble and glorious) but rudely, openly, and ingeniouſly, which perhaps will not pleaſe all. The propoſitions and verities are compact, but many times drie and ſower, like Aphoriſmes, ouertures and ſeeds of diſcourſe.
            Some thinke this Booke too foole-hardie and free 12 An Aduertiſement & Apologie to the Reader. to contradict and wound the common opinions, and are offended therewith, whom in foure or fiue words I thus anſwer: Firſt, that wiſdome which is neither common nor vulgar hath properly this libertie and authoritie, Iure ſuo ſingulari, to iudge of all, (it is the priuiledge  of a wiſe and ſpirituall man, ſpiritualis omnia dijudicat, & a nemine iudicatur) and in iudging to cenſure and condemne (as for the moſt part erroneous) common and vulgar opinions. What then ſhould ſhe doe? for the caſe ſtanding thus, it can not be, but ſhe muſt incurre the diſgrace and enuie of the world. In another place I complaine of theſe kinde of men, and reproue their popular weakneſſe and feminine daintineſſe  as vnworthy, being ouer-tender and delicate, to vnderſtand any thing of worth, and altogether vncapable of wiſdome. The hardeſt and hardieſt propoſitions are beſt befitting a hardie and eleuated ſpirit, and there can nothing ſeeme ſtrnage vnto him that doth but know what the world is. It is weakneſſe to be aſtoniſhed at any thing, we muſt rowze vp our hearts, confirme and ſtrengthen our mindes, harden and inure our ſelues to heare, to know, to vnderſtand, to iudge

of all things ſeeme they neuer ſo ſtrange. All things are agreeing and well befitting the palat of the ſpirit, ſo a man be not wanting vnto himſelfe, and neither do any thing, or yeeld his conſent to whatſoeuer is not good and truly faire, no though the whole world perſwade him vnto it. A wiſe man ſheweth equally in them both his courage, his delicates are not capable of the one or the other, there being a weakneſſe in them both.
            Thirdly, in all that I ſhall propoſe, my meaning is  not to binde any man vnto it, I only preſent things, and lay them out as it were vpon a ſtall; I grow not into choler with any man that giues me no credit, or diſlikes my ware, that were to play the Pedante. Paſsion witneſſeth that it is not reaſon ſo to do, and he that out of paſſion doth any thing out of reaſon can not doe it. But why are they angrie with me? Is it becauſe I am not altogether of their opinion? Why, I am not angry with them becauſe they are not of mine. Is it becauſe I ſpeake ſomething which is not pleaſing to their taſte, or to the palat of the vulgar ſort? Why therefore I ſpeake it. I ſpeake nothing without reaſon, if they knew how to vnderſtand it, how to reliſh it. If they can bring better reaſon to diſproue mine, I will hearken vnto it with delight and thanks to him that ſhall ſhew it me. But yet let them not thinke to beat me downe with authorities, multitudes, and allegations of other men, for theſe haue but ſmall credit in my iuriſdiction, ſaue in matter of Religion, where only authoritie preuailes without reaſon. This is authorities true Empire, reaſon onely bearing ſway in all other Arts without it, as S. Augustine doth very well acknowledge. For it is an vniuſt tyranny and an inraged

follie to ſubiect and in thrall our ſpirits to beleeue and to follow whatſoeuer our Anceſtours haue ſayd, and what the vulgar ſort holde to be true, who know neither what they ſay, nor what they do. There are none but fooles that ſuffer themſelues to be thus led by the noſes: and this Booke is not for ſuch, which if it ſhould popularlie be receiued and accepted of the common ſort of people, it ſhould faile much in it firſt purpoſe and deſignment. We muſt heare, conſider, make account of our ancient Writers, not captiuate our ſelues vnto them but with reaſon. And if a man would follow them, what ſhould he doe? for they agree not among themſelues. Aristotle who would ſeeme to be the moſt ſufficient amongſt them, and hath aduentured to challenge & to cenſure all that went before him, hath vttered more groſſe abſurdities than them all, and is at no agreement with himſelfe, neither doth he know many times where he is; witneſſe his Treatiſes of the Soule of man, of the Eternitie of the world, of the Generation of the windes and waters, and ſo forth. It is no cauſe of wonder or aſtoniſhment, that all men are not of one opinion; but it were rather ſtrange and woonderfull, that all men were of one opinion: for there is nothing more befitting Nature and the ſpirit of man than varietie. That wiſe Diuine S. Paul giueth vs this libertie, in that he 
                  Rom. 14. willeth euery man to abound in his owne vnderſtanding, not iudging or condemning that man that doth otherwiſe, or thinke otherwiſe. And he ſpeaketh it in a matter of greater moment and more tickliſh, not in that which conſiſteth in outward action and obſeruation, wherein we ſay we are to conforme our ſelues to the common ſort, and to that which is preſcribed and

accuſtomed to be done, but alſo in that which concerneth Religion, that is, the religious obſeruance of 
                  ••
               
               ands and dayes: whereas all that libertie and boldneſſe of ſpeech which I challenge vnto my ſelfe, is but in thoughts, iudgements, opinions, in which no man is quarter-maſter but he that hath them, euery man about himſelfe.
            Not withſtanding all this, many things which may  ſeeme too harſh and briefe, too rude and difficult for the ſimpler ſort (for the ſtronger and wiſer haue ſtomacks warme enough to concoct and digeſt all) I haue for the loue of them explicated, enlightned and ſweetned in this ſecond Edition, reuiewed, and much augmented.
            I would willingly aduertiſe the Reader that ſhall  vndertake to iudge of this Worke, to take heed that he fall not into any of theſe ſeuen ouerſights, as ſome others haue done; that is: To referre that vnto law and dutie, which is proper vnto action; that vnto action, which is onely to be cenſured; that to reſolution and determination, which is only propoſed, conſulted of, and problematically and Academically diſputed; that to me and mine opinions, which I deliuer from report, and is the opinion of another man; that to the outward ſtate, profeſſion, and condition, which is proper to the ſpirit and inward ſufficiencie; that to religion and faith, which is but the opinion of man; that to grace and ſupernaturall inſpiration, which is proper to naturall and morall vertue and action. All paſſion and preoccupation being taken away, hee ſhall finde in theſe ſeuen points well vnderſtood how to reſolue himſelfe in his doubts, how to anſwer all obiections, made by himſelfe or by others, and informe himſelfe

touching my intention in this worke. And if neuertheleſſe after all this, he will neither reſt ſatisfied and contented, nor approue what I haue written, let him boldly and ſpeedily diſproue it (for onely to ſpeake ill, to bite, to ſlander the name of another man, though it be eaſie enough, yet it is baſe and pedanticall) and he ſhall as ſpeedily receiue either a free confeſſion and aſſent, (for this Booke doth glory and feaſt it ſelfe in the truth and ingenuitie thereof) or an examination of the impertinencies and follies thereof.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            OF WISDOME, THE FIRST BOOKE, Which is the knowledge of our ſelues and our humane condition. An exhortation to the ſtudie and knowledge of our ſelues.
            
            
               THE PREFACE TO THE First Booke.
               
               
                  THE moſt excellent and diuine counſell, 1 The knowledge of our ſelues, the firſt thing.
                   the beſt and moſt profitable aduertiſement of all others, but the leaſt practiſed, is to ſtudy and learne how to know our ſelues: This is the foundation of Wiſdome and the high way to whatſoeuer is good; and there is no folly comparable to this, To be painfull and diligent to know all things els whatſoeuer rather than our ſelues: for the true ſcience and ſtudie of man, is man himſelfe.
               God, Nature, the wiſe, the world, preach man, and exhort 2 Enioyned to all by all reaſon.
                   him both by word and deed to the ſtudie and knowledge of himſelfe. God eternally and without intermiſſion beholdeth,

conſidereth, knoweth himſelfe. The world hath all the lights thereof contracted and vnited within it ſelfe, and the eies open to ſee and behold it ſelfe. It is as neceſſarie for man to learne how to know himſelfe, as it is naturall vnto him to thinke, or to be neere vnto himſelfe: Nature hath enioyned this worke vnto all. To meditate & to entertain our thoughts therein is a thing aboue all things eaſie, ordinarie, naturall; it is the food, ſuſtentation, life of the ſpirit, Cuius viuere est cogitare. Now where can a man begin, or continue his meditations more truly, more naturally than with himſelfe? Is there any thing that toucheth him more neerely? Doubtleſſe, to ſtudie other learnings, and to forget our ſelues, is a thing both vnnaturall and vniuſt. The true and principall vacation of euery man is to imploy his thoughts vpon himſelfe, and to tie himſelfe to himſelfe; for ſo doth euery thing els, ſetting bounds and limits to their other buſineſſe and deſires. And thou man which wilt ſeeme to containe the whole vniuers, to know all things, to controule, to iudge, neither knoweſt nor endeuoureſt the knowledge of thy ſelfe; and ſo going about to make thy ſelfe skilfull and a Iudge of Nature, thou prooueſt the only foole of the world: thou art of all other the moſt beggerly, the moſt vaine and miſerable; and yet moſt proud and arrogant. Looke therefore into thy ſelfe, know thy ſelfe, hold thy ſelfe to thy ſelfe; thy ſpirit and will which is els where imployed, reduce it vnto thy ſelfe. Thou forgetteſt thy ſelfe, and loſeſt thy ſelfe about outward things; thou betrayeſt and diſrobeſt thy ſelfe; thou lookeſt alwaies before thee; gather thy ſelfe vnto thy ſelfe, and ſhut vp thy ſelfe within thy ſelfe: examine, ſearch, know thy ſelfe.
               
                  Noſce teipſum: nec te quaeſiueris extra. Reſpue quod non es.
                  Tecum habita & noris quam ſit tibi curta ſupellex. Tu te conſule.
                  Teipſum concute, nunquid vitiorum
                  Inſeuerit olim natura, aut etiam conſuetudo mala.
               
               By the knowledge of himſelfe man ariueth ſooner and better 3 The ladder to the knowlege of the diuine nature.
                   to the knowledge of God, than by any other meanes, both becauſe he findeth in himſelfe better helps, more marks and footſteps of the diuine nature, than in whatſoeuer beſides he

can any way know, and becauſe he can better vnderſtand and know that which is in himſelfe than in another thing. Formasti me & poſuisti ſuper me manum tuam, ideo mirabilis 
                  Pſalm. 
                  facta est ſcientia tua, id est, tui, ex me: And therefore there was engrauen in letters of gold ouer the Porch of the Temple of Apollo the god (according to the Panims) of Knowledge and Light, this ſentence, KNOW THY SELFE, as a ſalutation and aduertiſement of God vnto all; ſignifying vnto them, that he that would haue acceſſe vnto that Diuinitie, and entrance into that Temple, muſt firſt know himſelfe, and could not otherwiſe be admitted. Si te ignoras ô pulcherrima 
                  Cantic. 
                  egredere, & abi post hoedos tuos.
               
               To become truly wiſe, and to leade a life more regular and 4 Diſpoſition vnto wiſedome.
                   pleaſant, there needs no other inſtruction but from our ſelues: and doubtleſſe, if we were good ſcholars, there are no books could better inſtruct vs, than we teach our ſelues. He that ſhall call to mind, and conſider the exceſſe of his paſſed choller, euen how farre this feuer and frenſie hath caried him, ſhall better be perſwaded of the foule deformitie of this paſſion, than by all the reaſon that Aristotle or Plato can alledge againſt it: and ſo of all other paſſions and motions of the ſoule whatſoeuer. He that ſhall call to minde how often he hath miſcaried in his iudgement, and been deceiued by his memorie, ſhall learne thereby to truſt it no more. He that ſhall note how often he hath held an opinion, and in ſuch ſort vnderſtood a thing euen to the engaging of his owne credit, and the ſatisfying of himſelfe and any other therein, and that afterwards time hath made him ſee the truth euen the contrarie to that he formerly held, may learne to diſtruſt his owne iudgement, and to ſhake off that importunate arrogancie and querulous preſumption; a capitall enemie to diſcipline & trueth. He that ſhall wel note and conſider all thoſe euils that he hath run into, that haue threatened him; the light occaſions that haue altered his courſes and turned him from one eſtate to another; how often repentances and miſlikes haue come into his head; will prepare himſelfe againſt future changes, learne to know his owne condition; will preſerue his modeſtie, containe himſelfe within his owne ranke, offend no man, trouble nothing, nor enterpriſe any thing that may paſſe his owne

forces: And what were this but to ſee iuſtice and peace in euery thing? To be briefe, we haue no cleerer looking glaſſe, no better booke than our ſelues, if as we ought we doe ſtudie our ſelues, alwayes keeping our eyes open ouer vs, and prying more narrowly into our ſelues.
               But this is that which we thinke leaſt of, Nemo in ſe tentat 
                  5 Againſt ſuch as misknow themſelues.
                   
                  deſcendere: whereby it commeth to paſſe that we fall many times to the ground, and tumble headlong into the ſame fault, neither perceiuing it, nor knowing to what courſe to betake vs: we make our ſelues fooles at our owne charges. Difficulties in euery thing are not diſcerned, but by thoſe that know them: and ſome degree of vnderſtanding is neceſſarie euen in the marking of our owne ignorance. We muſt knocke at the doore to know whether the doore be ſhut: for when men ſee themſelues reſolued & ſatisfied of a thing, and think they ſufficiently vnderſtand it, it is a token they vnderſtand nothing at all: for if we know our ſelues well, we would prouide farre better for our ſelues and our affaires; nay, we ſhould be aſhamed of our ſelues and our eſtate, and frame our ſelues to be others than we are. He that knowes not his owne infirmities, takes no care to amend them; he that is ignorant of his owne wants, takes as little care to prouide for them; he that feeles not his owne euils and miſeries, aduiſeth not with himſelfe of helps, nor ſeeks for remedies. Deprehendas te oportet priuſquam emendes: ſanitatis initium ſentire ſibi opus eſſe remedio. And heere beholde our vnhappineſſe: for we thinke all things goes well with vs, and we are in ſafetie, and we liue in content with our ſelues, and ſo double our miſeries. Socrates was accounted the wiſeſt man of the world, not becauſe his knowledge was more compleat, or his ſufficiencie greater than others, but becauſe his knowledge of himſelfe was better than others; in that he held himſelfe within his owne ranke, and knew better how to play the man. He was the king of men, as it is ſaid, that he that hath but one eye is a king in reſpect of him that hath neuer an eye; that is to ſay, doubly depriued of his ſenſe: for they are by nature weake and miſerable, and therewithall proud, and feele not their miſerie. Socrates was but purblind, for being a man as others were, weake and miſerable, he knew it, and ingeniouſly acknowledged his condition,

and liued, and gouerned himſelfe according vnto it. This is that which the Truth it ſelfe ſpake vnto thoſe which were full of preſumption, and by way of mockery ſaid vnto him, Are we blind alſo? If ye were blind, ſaith he, that is, if Ioh. 9. you thought your ſelues blind, you ſhould ſee, but becauſe ye thinke ye ſee, therefore you are blind; therefore your ſinne remaineth. For they that in their owne opinion ſee much, are in truth ſtarke blinde; and they that are blinde in their owne opinion ſee beſt. It is a miſerable thing in a man, to make himſelfe a beaſt by forgetting himſelfe to be a man. Homo enim cum ſis, id fac ſemper intelligas. Many great perſonages as a rule or bridle to themſelues haue ordained that one or other ſhould euer buz into their eares that they were men. O what an excellent thing was this, if it entred aſwel into their hearts, as it ſounded in their eares? That Mot of the Atheniens to Pompey the Great, Thou art ſo much a God, as thou acknowledgeſt thy ſelfe to be a man, was no ill ſaying: for at the leaſt to be an excellent man, is to confeſſe himſelfe to be a man.
               The knowledge of our ſelues (a thing as difficult and rare 6 Falſe means to know our ſelues.
                   as to miſdeeme and deceiue our ſelues eaſie) is not obtained by any other, that is to ſay, by the compariſon, rule, or example of another;
Plus alijs de te quam tu tibi credere noli.
much leſſe alſo by our ſpeech and iudgement, which oftentimes commeth ſhort to diſcerne, and we diſloyall and fearefull to ſpeake: nor by any ſingular act, which ſometimes vnawares hath eſcaped a man, pricked forward by ſome new, rare, and accidentall occaſion, and is rather a trick of Fortune, or an eruption of ſome extraordinary lunacy than any production of fruit truly ours. A man iudgeth not of the greatneſſe or depth of a riuer, by that water which by reaſon of ſome ſudden inundation of neighbour riuers ouerfloweth the bankes. One valiant act makes not a valiant man, nor one iuſt a iuſt man. The circumſtances and ſource of occaſions doth import much and alter vs, and oftentimes a man is prouoked to doe good by vice it ſelfe: So hard a thing is it for man to know man. Nor likewiſe by all thoſe outward things that are outwardly adiacent vnto vs, as offices, dignities, riches, nobilitie, grace, and applauſe of the greateſt

peeres and common people. Nor by the cariages of a man in publicke places is a man knowen; for as a king at cheſſe ſo he ſtandeth vpon his guard, he bridleth and contracteth himſelfe; feare, and ſhame, and ambition, and other paſſions make him play that part that you ſee: But truely to know him we muſt looke into his inward part, his priuy chamber, and there not how to day, but euery day he carieth himſelfe. He is many times a different man in his houſe from that he is in the countrey, in the palace, in the market place; another man amongſt his domeſticall friends from that he is amongſt ſtrangers: when he goeth foorth of his houſe into ſome publicke place, he goeth to play a Comedy, and therefore ſtay not thou there, for it is not himſelfe that plaieth, but another man, and thou knoweſt him not.
               The knowledge of a mans ſelfe is not acquired by all theſe 7 True means.
                   foure meanes, neither muſt we truſt them, but by a true, long, and daily ſtudy of himſelfe, a ſerious and attentiue examination not only of his words, and actions, but of his moſt ſecret thoughts (their birth, progreſſe, continuance, repetition) and whatſoeuer is in him, euen his nightly dreames, prying narrowly into him, trying him often and at all howres, preſſing and pinching him euen to the quicke. For there are many vices hid in vs and are not felt for want of force and meanes; ſo that the venemous ſerpent that is benummed with cold, ſuffereth himſelfe to be handled without danger: neither doth it ſuffice afterwards to acknowledge the fault by tale or peecemeale, and ſo thinke to mend it by marring it, but he muſt in generall reacknowledge his weakneſſe, his miſery, and come to a vniuerſall amendment and reformation.
               Now if we will know man we muſt take more than ordinary 8 The Propoſition & diuiſion of this Booke.
                   paines in this firſt booke, taking him in all ſenſes, beholding him with all viſages, feeling his poulſe, ſounding him to to the quicke, entring into him with a candle and a ſnuffer, ſearching and creeping into euery hole, corner, turning, cloſet, and ſecret place, and not without cauſe. For this is the moſt ſubtile and hypocriticall couert and counterfait of all the reſt, and almoſt not to be knowen. Let vs then conſider him after fiue manners ſet downe in this table, which is the ſumme of the booke:
               
                  
                  There are fiue conſiderations of man & humane condition:
                  
                     
                        The firſt, Naturall, of all the parts whereof he is compoſed, and their appurtinances.
                     
                     
                        The ſecond, Naturall and Morall, by compariſon of man with beaſts.
                     
                     
                        The third, of his life in declining ſtate.
                     
                     
                        The fourth, Morall, of his maners, humours, conditions, which are referred to fiue things:
                        
                           1 Vanity.
                           
                           2 Weakneſſe.
                           
                           3 Inconſtancie.
                           
                           4 Miſery.
                           
                           5 Preſumption.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        The fift, Naturall and Morall, of the differences that are betweene men in their
                        
                           1 Natures.
                           
                           2 Spirits and ſufficiencies.
                           
                           3 Charges and degrees of ſuperiority, inferiority.
                           
                           4 Profeſſions and conditions of life aduantages and diſaduantages
                              
                                 
                                    Naturall.
                                 
                                 
                                    Acquired.
                                 
                                 
                                    Caſuall.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The firſt Conſideration of Man, which is naturall, by all the parts and members whereof he is compoſed.
               
                  CHAPTER I. Of the frame or formation of Man.
                  
                  
                     IT is twofold and to be conſidered after a twofold maner, the firſt and originall, once immediately by God in his ſupernaturall creation, the ſecond and ordinary in his naturall generation. According to that deſcription which Moyſes ſetteth downe touching the workmanſhip and creation of the world (the boldeſt 
                        1 Man made laſt.
                        
                        Gen. 1. 2. &c.
                      and richeſt peece of worke that euer man brought vnto light, I meane the hiſtorie of the nine firſt chapters of Geneſis, which is of the world newly borne and reborne) man

was made of God not onely after all other creatures as the moſt perfect, the maſter and ſuperintendent of all, Vt praeſit piſcibus maris, volatilibus coeli, be ſtijs terrae. And in the ſelfe ſame day wherein the fowre-footed beaſts of the earth that come neereſt vnto him were created (although thoſe two that reſemble him moſt are for the inward parts the Swine, for the outward the Ape) but alſo after all was done and ended, as the cloſing vp, ſeale, and ſigne of his workes, he hath alſo there imprinted his armes, and his pourtrait, Exemplumque Dei quiſquis eſt in imagine parua. Signatum eſt ſuper nos lumen vultus tui, As a Summary recapitulation of all things, and an Epitome of the world, which is all in man, but gathered into a ſmall volume, whereby he is called the little world, as the whole vniuers may be called the great man: as the tie and ligament of Angels and beaſts, things heauenly and earthly ſpirituall and corporall: and in one word, as the laſt hand, the accompliſhment, the perfection of the worke, the honor and miracle of Nature. The reaſon is becauſe God hauing made him with deliberation, counſell and preparation, & dixit faciamus hominem ad imaginem & ſimilitudinem noſtram, he reſted. And this reſt alſo was made for man, Sabbathum propter hominem, non contra. And afterwards he had nothing to make new, but to make himſelfe man, and that he did likewiſe for the loue of man, propter nos homines & proter noſtram ſalutem. Whereby wee ſee that in all things God hath aimed at man, finally in him and by him, breui manu, to accommodate all vnto himſelfe, the beginning and end of all.
                  Secondly, he was created all naked, becauſe more beautifull 2 Naked.
                      than the reſt, being pure, neat, and delicate, by reaſon of his thin humours well tempered and ſeaſoned.
                  Thirdly vpright, but little touching the earth, his head 3 Vpright.
                      directly tending vnto heauen, whereon he gazeth, and ſees and knowes himſelfe as in a glaſſe, quite oppoſite vnto the plant, which hath it head and root within the earth, ſo that man is a diuine plant that flouriſheth & growes vp vnto heauen: a beaſt as in the middle betwixt a man and a plant, goes as it were athwart hauing his two extreames towards the bounds or extremities of the Horizon more or leſſe. The cauſe of this vprightneſſe in man beſides the will of his Maſterworkman,

is not properly the reaſonable ſoule, as we ſee in thoſe that are crookbacked, crupſhouldered, lame, nor in the ſtraight line of the back-bone, which is likewiſe in ſerpents, nor in the naturall or vitall heat, which is equalled or rather greater in diuers beaſts, although all theſe may perhaps ſerue to ſome purpoſe; but this vpright gate is due and belonging to man, both as he is man the holieſt & diuineſt creature,
Sanctius his animal mentiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         capacius altae:
and as king in this lower region. To ſmall and particular roialties there belong certaine markes of Maieſty, as we ſee in the crowned Dolphin, the Crocadile, the Lion with his coller, the colour of his haire, and his eies; in the Eagle, the king of the Bees: ſo man the vniuerſall king of theſe lower parts walketh with an vpright countenance as a maſter in his houſe ruling, and by loue or force taming euery thing.
                  His body was firſt framed of virgin earth, and red, from whence he tooke his proper name, Adam for the appellatiue 4 How framed. Gen. 2. was Is: And that being not yet moiſtned with raine, but with the water of the fountaine
                  
                     —Mixtam fluuialibus vndis
                     Finxit in effigiem.
                  
                  By reaſon the body is the firſt born or elder than the ſoule, as the matter than the forme; the houſe muſt bee made and trimmed before it be inhabited, the ſhoppe before the workman can vſe it. Afterwards the Soule was by diuine inſpiration infuſed, and ſo the body by the ſoule made a liuing creature, inſpirauit infaciem eius ſpiraculum vitae &c.
                  
                  In that ordinary and naturall generation and formation, which is made of the ſeed in the wombe of the woman, the 5 He is made in the matrix. ſelfe ſame order is obſerued: The body is firſt formed as well by the elementary force of the Enargie and forming vertue which is in the ſeed, aiding in ſome ſort the heat of the matrix, as the celeſtiall, which is the influence and vertue of the Sunne, Sol & homo generant hominem, In ſuch order that the Conceiued of coagulated ſeed. ſeuen firſt daies the ſeed of the father and mother do mingle, vnite, and curdle together like creame, and are made one body, which is the conception, Nonne ſicut lac mulſiſti me, & ſicut caſeum me coagulaſti. The next ſeuen daies this ſeed is concocted, Changed. thickned, and changed into a maſſe of fleſh and indigeſted

formleſſe blood, which is the proper matter of a humane bodie. The third ſeuen dayes following, of this maſſe or lumpe is made and faſhioned the bodie in groſſe; ſo that Formed in groſſe. about the twentieth day are brought foorth the three noble and heroicall parts, the Liuer, Heart, Braine, diſtant an ouall length, or as the Hebrewes ſay, holding themſelues by thin commiſures or ioynts, which afterwards fill themſelues with fleſh after the faſhion of an ant, where there are three groſſer parts ioyned by two thin. The fourth ſeuen dayes which end neere thirtie, the whole body is ended, perfected, ioynted, organized; and ſo it beginnes to be no more an Embrion, 
                     Iointed, organized. Firſt furniſhed with fit inſtruments for ſenſe. that is, vnperfect in ſhape, but capable, as a matter prepared to it forme, to receiue the ſoule; which faileth not to inſinuate and inueſt it ſelfe into the bodie towards the ſeuen and thirtieth or fortieth day after the fiue weeks ended. Doubling this terme, that is to ſay, at the third moneth, this infant indowed with a ſoule, hath motion and ſenſe, the haire Indowed with ſoule, motion. Brought forth. and nailes begin to come. Tripling this terme, which is at the ninth moneth, he commeth foorth, and is brought into the light. Theſe termes or times are not ſo iuſtly prefixed, but that they may either be haſtened or prolonged according to the force or feebleneſſe of the heat both of the ſeed and of the matrix; for being ſtrong it haſteneth, being weake it ſloweth: whereby that ſeed that hath leſſe heat and more moiſture, where of women for the moſt part are conceiued, requireth longer time, and is not endowed with a ſoule vntill the fortieth day or after, and mooueth not till the fourth moneth, which is neere by a quarter more late than that of the male children.
               
               
                  CHAP. II. The firſt and generall diſtinction of man.
                  
                  MAn as a prodigious creature is made of parts quite contrarie 1 The diuiſion of man in two parts.
                      and enemies to themſelues. The ſoule is a little god, the bodie as a beaſt, as a dunghill. Neuertheleſſe, theſe two parts are in ſuch ſort coupled together, haue ſuch need the one of the other to performe their functions, Alterius ſic altera poſcit opem res, & coniurat amicè, and do ſo with all their

complaints embrace ech other, that they neither can continue together without warres, nor ſeparate themſelues without griefe and torment; and as holding the Woolfe by the eares, ech may ſay to other, I can neither liue with thee nor without thee, Nec tecum nec ſine te.
                  
                  But againe, foraſmuch as there are in this ſoule two parts  very different, the high, pure, intellectuall, and diuine, wherein the beaſt hath no part, and the baſe, ſenſitiue, and brutiſh, which hath bodie and matter, and is as an indifferent meane betwixt the intellectuall part and bodie; a man may by a diſtinction more morall and politike, note three parts and degrees Into three parts. in man: The Spirit, the Soule, the Fleſh: where the Spirit and Fleſh holde the place of the two extreames, as heauen and earth; the Soule the middle region, where are ingendred the Metheors, tumults and tempeſts. The Spirit the higheſt and moſt heroicall part, a diminutiue, a ſparke, an image, and deaw of the Diuinitie, is in man as a King in his Commonweale, it breatheth nothing but good, and heauen to which it tendeth; the Fleſh contrariwiſe as the dregs of a people beſotted and common ſinke of man tendeth alwaies to the matter and to the earth; the Soule in the middle, as the principall of the people betwixt the beſt and the worſt, good and euill, is continually ſollicited by the ſpirit and the fleſh, and according vnto that part towards which it applieth it ſelfe, it is either ſpirituall and good, or carnall and euill. Heere are lodged all thoſe naturall affections, which are neither vertuous nor vicious, as the loue of our parents and friends, feare of ſhame, compaſſion towards the afflicted, deſire of good reputation.
                  This diſtinction will helpe much to the knowledge of 3 The vtilitie thereof.
                      man, and to diſcerne his actions, that he miſtake not himſelfe as it is the maner to doe, iudging by the barke and outward appearance, thinking that to be of the Spirit which is of the Soule, nay, of the fleſh; attributing vnto vertue that which is due vnto nature, nay, vnto vice. How many good and excellent actions haue beene produced by paſſion, or at leaſt by a naturall inclination, Vt ſeruiant genio, & ſuo indulgeant animo?
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. III. Of the bodie, and firſt of all the parts thereof and their places.
                  
                  THe body of man conſiſteth of a number of parts inward 1 The diuiſion of the body.
                      and outward, which are all for the moſt part round and orbicular, or comming neere vnto that figure.
                  The inward are of two ſorts: the one in number and quantitie 2 Inward and many.
                      ſpread thorow the whole body, as the bones, which are as the baſes and vpholding pillars of the whole building, and within them for their nouriſhment the marow; the muſcles for motion and ſtrength; the veines iſſuing from the liuer as chanels of the firſt and naturall blood; the arteries comming from the heart as conduits of the ſecond blood more ſubtile and vitall. Theſe two mounting higher than the liuer and the heart their originall ſources, are more ſtrait than thoſe that go downwards, to the end they ſhould helpe to mount the bloud, for that narrowneſſe more ſtraitned, ſerues to raiſe the humours, the ſinewes proceeding by couples, as inſtruments of ſenſe, motion, and ſtrength of body, and conduits of the animall ſpirits, whereof ſome are ſoft, of which there are ſeuen paires which ſerue the ſenſes of the head, Sight, Hearing, Taſte, Speech; the other are hard, whereof there are thirtie couples, proceeding from the reines of the backe to the muſcles; The Tendrels, Ligaments, Griſtels; The foure Humours, Blood, Choler which worketh, prouoketh, penetrateth, hindreth obſtructions, caſteth forth the excrements, bringeth cheerefulneſſe; Melancholy which prouoketh an appetite to euery thing, moderateth ſudden motions; Fleame which ſweetneth the force of the two Cholers, and all other heats; The Spirits which are as it were the fumigations that ariſe from the naturall heat and radicall humor, and they are in three degrees of excellencie, the Naturall, Vitall, Animall; The Fat which is the thickeſt and groſſeſt part of blood.
                  The other are ſingular (ſaue the kidneys and ſtones, which are double) and aſſigned to a certaine place. Now there are 3 Singular. Foure regions of the bodie.
                      foure places or regions, as degrees of the bodie, ſhops of nature, where ſhe exerciſeth her faculties and powers. The firſt and loweſt is for generation, in which are the priuy parts 
                     
ſeruing thereunto. The ſecond neere vnto that, in which are  the intralles, viſcera, that is to ſay, the ſtomacke yeelding more to the left ſide, round, ſtraiter in the bottome than at top, hauing two orifices or mouthes, the one aboue to receiue, the other beneath, which anſwereth the bowels, to caſt forth and diſcharge it ſelfe. It receiueth, gathereth together, mingleth, concocteth the victuals and turnes them into Chyle, that is to ſay, a kinde of white Suc fit for the nouriſhment of the bodie, which is likewiſe wrought within the Meſeraique veines by which it paſſeth vnto the Liuer. The Liuer hot and moiſt inclining towards the right ſide, the ſtore-houſe of blood, the chiefe or rather fountaine of the veines, the ſeat of the naturall nouriſhing faculty, or vegetatiue ſoule, made and ingendred of the blood of that Chyle, which it draweth from the Meſeraique veines, and receiueth into it lap by the vena porta, which entreth into the concauities thereof, and afterwards is ſent and diſtributed thorow the whole body by the helpe of the great vena caua, which ariſeth from the bunch and branches thereof, which are in great number as the riuers of a fountaine. The Spleene towards the left ſide which receiueth the diſcharge and excrements of the Liuer: The Reines, the Entralles which though they are all in one, yet are diſtinguiſhed by ſix differences and names, equalling ſeuen times the length of a man, as the length of a man is equalled by ſeuen foot. In theſe two firſt parts or degrees which ſome take to be but one (although there are two faculties very different, the one generatiue for the continuance of the kinde, the other nutritiue for euery particular perſon, and they make it to anſwer to the loweſt and elementary part of the world, the place of generation and corruption) is the concupiſcible ſoule.
                  The third degree compared to the Aetherian region, ſeparated  from the former by the Diaphragma or Midrife, and from that aboue by the narrowneſſe of the throat; in which is the iraſcible ſoule, and the pectorall parts Praecordia, that is to ſay, the Heart, very hot, placed about the fift rib, hauing his point vnder the left pap or dug, the originall fountaine of the Arteries, which are alwayes mooued, and cauſe the Pulſe to beat, by which as by channels it ſendeth and diſtributeth

thorow the whole bodie the vitall blood which it hath concocted, and by it the ſpirit and vertue vitall. The Lungs, of ſubſtance very ſoft and ſpongeous, ſupple to draw to and inforce forth like a paire of bellowes, inſtruments both of reſpiration whereby the heart is refreſhed, drawing vnto it the blood, the ſpirits, the aire, and disburthening it ſelfe of thoſe fumes and excrements which oppreſſe it, and of the voice by meane of the rough Arterie.
                  
                  The fourth and higheſt, which anſwereth to the celeſtiall region, is the head which conteineth the Braine, colde and  ſpongeous, wrapped within two skinnes, the one more hard and thicke which toucheth the brainpan, Dura mater; the other more eaſie and thin which includeth the Braine, Pia mater: from it do iſſue & are deriued the Smowes and marow that deſcendeth and falleth downe into the reines of the backe. This Braine is the ſeat of the reaſonable ſoule, the ſource of ſenſe and motion, and of the moſt noble animall ſpirits, compoſed of the vitall, which being raiſed from the heart by the Arteries vnto the braine are concocted and reconcocted, elaborated and made ſubtile by the helpe of the multiplicitie of ſmall Arteries, as fillets diuerſly wouen and interlaced by many turnings and windings, like a labyrinth or double net, Rete mirabile; within which this vitall ſpirit being retained and ſoiourning, often times paſſing and repaſſing, is refined and perfected, and becomes a creature, ſpirituall in an excellent degree.
                  The outward and viſible parts, if they be ſingle, are in the middle as the Noſe which ſerueth for reſpiration, ſmell, 3 Outward parts ſingular.
                      and the comfort of the braine, and the disburthening thereof, in ſuch ſort that by it the aire entereth and iſſueth both downe into the lungs and vp into the braines. The Mouth which ſerueth to eat and to ſpeake, and therefore hath many parts ſeruice-able thereunto; without, the lips; within, the tongue ſoft and very ſubtile which iudgeth of ſauors; the Teeth which bruiſe and grinde the victuals; the Nauell, the two ſinks or wayes to eaſe and disburden the bodie.
                  If they be double and alike, they are collaterals and equall, as the two eyes, planted in the higheſt ſtage as centinels, compoſed 4 Double and equall.
                      of many and diuers parts; three humors, ſeuen tunicles,
                     
ſeuen muſcles, diuers colours, of many faſhions and much art. Theſe are the firſt and moſt noble outward parts of the bodie, in beautie, vtilitie, mobilitie, actiuitie, yea in the action of loue 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , they are to the viſage that which the viſage is to the bodie, they are the face of the face: and becauſe they are tender, delicate and precious, they are fenced and rampaired on all parts with skinnes, lids, browes, haire. The eares in the ſelfe ſame height that the eyes are, as the ſcouts of the body, Porters of the ſpirit, the Receiuers and Iudgers of ſounds which alwayes aſcend; they haue their entrance oblique and crooked, to the end the aire and the ſound ſhould not enter at once, whereby the ſenſe of hearing might be hindered and iudge the woorſe. The armes and hands, the worke-maſters of all things and vniuerſall inſtruments. The legs and feet, the props and pillars of the whole building.
               
               
                  CHAP. IIII. Of the ſingular properties of the body of man.
                  
                  THe body of man hath many ſingularities, and ſome peculiar 1 Peculiar properties in the body of man.
                      and proper vnto themſelues, not common with other creatures. The firſt and principall are ſpeech, vpright ſtature, the forme or feature, the port or cariage, whereof the wiſe, yea the Stoicks themſelues made ſuch account, that they were wont to ſay, That it was better to be a foole in a humane ſhape, than wiſe in the forme of a beaſt. The hand is a miracle (that of the Ape is not to be termed a hand.) His naturall nakedneſſe, laughter, crying. The Senſe of tickling, haire on the lower lid of the eye, a viſible nauell, the point of the heart on the left ſide. The toes of the feet not ſo long as the fingers of the hand. Bleeding at noſe, a ſtrange thing conſidering that he carieth his head vpright, and a beaſt downwards. To bluſh for ſhame, wax pale for feare. To be an ambidexter; diſpoſed at all times to the ſports of Venus. Not to moue the eares, which bewrayeth in beaſts the inward affections, but man doth ſufficiently make them knowen, by his bluſhing, paleneſſe, motion of the eyes and noſe.
                  The other properties are likewiſe peculiar vnto man, but 2 Peculiar properties by way of excellency.
                      not wholly but by way of excellencie; for they are alſo in

beaſts, but in a leſſe degree, that is to ſay, multitude of muſcles and haire in the head. The pliant facility of the body and the parts thereof to all motion and euery ſenſe. The eleuation of the breaſts. The great abundance of the braine. The greatneſſe of the bladder. The forme of the foot long forward, ſhort backward. The quantity and pure ſubtility of the blood. The mobility and agility of the tongue. The multitude and variety of dreames, inſomuch that he ſeemeth the only dreamer. Sneeſing. And to be ſhort, the many motions of the eyes, the noſe, the lips.
                  There are alſo habits proper and peculiar, but different; ſome are geſtures, motions, and artificiall and affected countenances 3 Diuers habits.
                     ; others are ſo proper and naturall, that they that haue them neither feele them nor know them in themſelues, as to go ſtooping: but all haue that which proceedeth not ſo much from reaſon, as a pure, naturall and ready impulſion, that is, to put forth a mans hands before him when he falleth.
               
               
                  CHAP. V. Of the goods of the bodie: Health, Beautie, &c:
                  
                  THe goods of the body are Health, Beauty, Cheerfulnes, 1 The praiſe of Health.
                      Srength, Vigor, a prompt readineſſe and diſpoſition: but of all theſe Health is the firſt, and paſſeth all the reſt. Health is the moſt beautifull and rich preſent that Nature can beſtow vpon vs, and aboue all other things to be preferred, not only Science, Nobility, Riches, but Wiſdome it ſelfe, which the auſtereſt amongſt the wiſe doe affirme. It is the only thing that deſerueth our whole imploiment, yea our life it ſelfe to attaine vnto it; for without it life is no life, but a death, vertue and wiſdome grow weake and faint. What comfort can all the wiſdome of the world bring to the greateſt man that is, if he be thorowly ſtricken with an Apoplexie? Doubtleſſe there is nothing to be preferred before this bodily health, but Honeſtie which is the health of the Soule. Now it is common vnto vs with beaſts, yea many times it is greater and far more excellent in them than in vs: and notwithſtanding it be a gift of Nature, gaudeant bene nati, giuen in the firſt formation, yet that which afterward followeth, The

milke, Good gouernment, which conſiſteth in ſobrietie and moderate exerciſes, lightneſſe of heart, and a continuall auoidance of all paſſions do preſerue it much. Griefe and ſickeneſſe are the contraries vnto it, which are the greateſt if not the only euils that follow man, whereof we ſhall ſpeake hereafter. But in the preſeruation hereof, beaſts likewiſe ſimply following nature which hath giuen them health do farre exceed men, they often times forgetting themſelues, though afterwards they pay dearly for it.
                  Next followeth Beautie, a good of great account in the ſociety 2 Beautie.
                      of men. It is the firſt meane of reconciling or vniting one to another, and it is very likely that the firſt diſtinction that hath beene of one man from another, and the firſt conſideration that giueth preheminence to one aboue another, hath beene the aduantage of beauty. It is likewiſe a powerfull quality, there is none that ſurmounteth it in credit, or that hath ſo great a part in the ſocietie of men; for there is none ſo barbarous, none ſo reſolute, that hath not been beaten by it. It preſenteth it ſelfe vnto the view, it ſeduceth and preoccupateth the iudgement, it makes deepe impreſſions, and preſſeth a man with great authority; and therefore Socrates called it a ſhort tyranny, and Plato the priuiledge of Nature: for it ſeemeth that he that carieth in his countenance the fauours of Nature imprinted in a rare and excellent beautie, hath a kinde of lawfull power ouer vs, and that we turning our eies towards him, he likewiſe turneth our affections, and enthrawleth them in deſpight of our ſelues. Ariſtotle ſayth that it apperteineth to thoſe that are beautifull to command; that they are venerable next to the gods themſelues; that there are none, but ſuch as are blinde, but are touched with it. Cyrus, Alexander, Caeſar, three great Commanders, haue made great vſe thereof in their greateſt affaires, yea Scipio the beſt of them all. Faire and good are neere neighbours, and are expreſſed by the ſelfe ſame words both in Greeke and in the Scriptures. Many great Philoſophers haue attained to their wiſdome, by the aſſiſtance of their beauty. It is likewiſe conſiderable and much required in beaſts themſelues. 3 The diſtinction of Beauty.
                     
                  
                  There are in Beauty diuers things to be conſidered: That of men is properly the forme and feature of the bodie, as for

other beauties they belong vnto women. There are two ſorts of beauties, the one ſetled which moueth not at all, and it conſiſteth in the due proportion and colour of the members, a body that is not ſwolne or puffed vp, wherein the ſinewes and veines appeare not from far, nor the bones preſſe not the skin, but full of bloud and ſpirits, and in good ſtate, hauing the muſcles eleuated, the skin ſmooth, the colour vermillion: the other moueable, which is called a good grace, and is the true guiding or cariage of the motion of the members, and aboue all, the eyes. The former beauty of it ſelfe is as it were dead, this actiue and full of life. There are beauties that are rude, fierce, ſowre, others that are ſweet, yea though they be fading.
                  Beauty is properly to be conſidered in the viſage. There 4 Of the viſage.
                      is nothing more beautifull in man than his ſoule; and in the body of man than his viſage, which is as it were the ſoule abreuiated, that is, the paterne or image of the ſoule, that is, her Eſcuchion with many quarters, repreſenting the collection of all her titles of honour, planted and placed in the gate and forefront, to the end that men may know that heere is her abode and her palace. By the countenance it is that we know the perſon of a man; and therefore arte which imitateth nature, takes no care to repreſent the perſon of man, but only to paint or carue the viſage.
                  There are many ſpeciall ſingularities in the viſage of man, which are not in beaſts (for to ſay the truth they haue no viſage) 5 Seuen ſingularities in the viſage of man.
                      nor in the reſt of the body of man; As the number and diuerſitie of the parts and formes of them, in beaſts there is neither chin, nor cheeks, nor forehead, much leſſe any forme or faſhion of them. Variety of colours, as in the eye onely  there is blacke, white, greene, blew, red, cryſtaline. Proportion,  for the ſenſes are there double, anſwering the one to the  other, and in ſuch a maner, that the greatneſſe of the eye is the greatneſſe of the mouth, the largeneſſe of the forehead the length of the noſe, the length of the noſe that of the chin and lips. An admirable diuerſitie of countenances, and ſuch, that there are hardly found two faces in all reſpects like one  another: this is a chiefe point of workmanſhip, which in no other thing can be found. This variety is very profitable,

yea neceſſary for humane ſociety; firſt to know one another, for infinite euils, yea the diſſipation of humane kinde muſt needs follow, if a man ſhould miſtake himſelfe by the ſemblance and ſimilitude of diuers viſages, yea it would be a confuſion worſe than that of Babel. A man would take his daughter for his ſiſter, for a ſtranger, his enemy for his friend. If our faces were all alike, we ſhould not diſcerne a man from a beaſt; and if they were not all vnlike one another, we could not know how to diſcerne a man from a man. Beſides, it was an excellent arte of Nature to place in this part ſome ſecret that might giue contentment to one another thorow the whole world: for by reaſon of this varietie of faces, there is not a perſon that in ſome part is not beautifull. The dignity and honour of it round figure, forme vpright and eleuated  on high, naked and vncouered without haire, feathers, ſcales, as in other creatures, looking vp vnto heauen. Grace, ſweetneſſe,  a pleaſant and decent comlineſſe, euen to the giuing vp of a mans Soule, and the rauiſhing of his will, as hath beene ſhewed before. To be briefe, the viſage is the throne of beautie and loue; the ſeat of laughter and kiſſing, two things very proper and agreeable vnto man, the true and moſt ſignificant ſymboles of amitie and good diſcretion. Finally, it is apt for  all alterations, to declare the inward motions and paſſions of the ſoule, as Ioy, Heauineſſe, Loue, Hatred, Enuie, Malice, Shame, choler, Iealouſie, & ſo forth. It is as the hand of a diall, which noteth the houres and moments of time, the wheeles and motions themſelues being hid within. And as the aire which receiueth all the colours & changes of the time, ſheweth what the weather is, ſo ſaith one, the aire of a mans countenance. Corpus animum tegit & detegit, in facie legitur homo.
                  
                  The beauty of the face conſiſteth in a large, ſquare, well 6 A deſcription of the beautie of the face.
                      extended and cleere front, eye-browes well ranged, thin and ſubtile, the eye well diuided, cheerefull, ſparkling: as for the colour I leaue it doubtfull, the noſe leane, the mouth little, the lips coraline, the chinne ſhort and dimpled, the cheekes ſomewhat riſing and in the middle the pleaſant gelaſin, the eares round and well compact, the whole countenance with a liuely tincture white and vermilion. Neuertheleſſe, this deſcription of Beauty is not generally receiued, the opinions

of Beauty are different according to the diuerſity of nations. With the Indians the greateſt Beautie conſiſteth in that which we account the greateſt deformitie, that is, in a tawny colour, thicke and ſwollen lips, a flat and large noſe, teeth ſpotted with blacke or red, great eares and hanging, a little low forehead, dugs great and pendant, to the end they may giue their little ones ſucke ouer their ſhoulders, and to attaine to this forme of beautie, they vſe all maner of arte. But not to wander ſo farre, in Spaine the chiefeſt beautie is leane and neatly compt; in Italie fat, corpulent and ſolid: the ſoft, and delicate, and flattering pleaſe the one; the ſtrong, vigorous, fierce, and commanding the other.
                  The Beauty of the body, eſpecially the viſage, ſhould in 7 The beautie of the ſoule and body.
                      all reaſon demonſtrate and witneſſe the beauty of the ſoule, (which is a qualitie and rule of opinions and iudgements, with a certaine ſtedfaſtneſſe and conſtancie) for there is nothing that hath a truer reſemblance, than the conformity and relation of the body to the ſpirit: and when this is not, wee muſt needs thinke, that there is ſome accident that hath interrupted the ordinary courſe, as it comes to paſſe, and wee often times ſee it: for the milke of the Nurſe, the firſt inſtitution, conuerſation bring great alterations to the originall nature of the ſoule, whether in good or euill. Socrates confeſſed that the deformitie of his bodie did iuſtly accuſe the naturall deformitie of his ſoule, but that by induſtrie and inſtitution he had corrected that of the ſoule. This outward countenance is a weake and dangerous ſuretie, but they that belie their owne phyſiognomie, are rather to be puniſhed than others, becauſe they falſifie and betray that good promiſe that Nature hath planted in their front, and deceiue the world.
               
               
                  CHAP. VI. Of the veſtments of the Bodie.
                  
                  THere is great likelihood that the cuſtome or faſhion of Nakedneſſe is naturall. going naked, as yet continued in a great part of the world, was the firſt and originall amongſt men, and that of couering and adorning the bodie with garments was artificiall, and inuented to helpe and inlarge nature, as they which

by artificiall light goe about to increaſe the light of the day: for Nature hauing ſufficiently prouided for all other creatures a couering, it is not to be beleeued that ſhe hath handled man worſe than the reſt, and left him only indigent, and in ſuch a ſtate that he could not helpe himſelfe without forren ſuccours, and therefore thoſe reproches that are made againſt Nature as a ſtepmother, are vniuſt. If men from the beginning had beene clothed, it is not likely that they would euer haue diſrobed themſelues and gone naked, both in regard of their health, which could not but be much offended with that change, and ſhame it ſelfe: and neuertheleſſe, it is done and obſerued amongſt many nations. Neither can it be alledged that we clothe our ſelues either to couer our nakedneſſe or priuy parts, or to defend vs againſt colde (for theſe are the two reaſons pretended; for againſt heat there is no appearance of reaſon) becauſe Nature hath not taught vs, that there is any thing in our nakedneſſe that we ſhould be aſhamed of; it is we that by our owne fault and fale haue tolde it our ſelues: Quis indicauit tibi quod nudus eſſes, niſi quod ex ligno quod praeceperam tibi ne comederes comediſti: and Nature hath already ſufficiently hid them, put them farre from our eies, and couered them. And therefore it is leſſe needfull to couer thoſe parts only, as ſome doe in thoſe countreys where they goe all naked, and ordinarily are not couered: for why ſhould he that is the lord of all other creatures, not daring to ſhew himſelfe naked vnto the world, hide himſelfe vnder the ſpoiles of another, nay adorne himſelfe? As for colde and other particular and locall neceſſities, wee know that vnder the ſelfe ſame aire, the ſelfe ſame heauen, one goes naked, another apparelled; and we haue all the moſt delicate part vncouered: and therefore a wandring perſon being asked, How he could go ſo naked in Winter, anſwered, That our faces are alwayes naked, and he was all face: Yea, many great perſonages haue euer gone with their heads vncouered, Maſſiniſſa, Caeſar, Hanibal, Seuerus, and many nations there are, which go to the warres and fight all naked: and the counſell that Plato giueth for the continuance of health is, neuer to couer either head or feet. And Varro ſayth, That when it was firſt ordained that men ſhould vncouer their heads in the

preſence of the gods and of the magiſtrate, that it was rather for healths ſake, and to harden themſelues againſt the iniuries of the times, than for reuerence. Laſtly, the inuention of couers and houſes againſt the iniuries of heauen and men, is more ancient, more naturall, more vniuerſall, than of garments, and common with many creatures, but an induſtrious ſearch for victuall more naturall than either. Of the vſe of garmens and aliment heereafter. Lib. 3. c. 43.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. VII. Of the Soule in generall.
                  
                  BEholde here a matter of all others moſt difficult, handled The Preface. and diſcourſed by the wiſeſt of all Nations, eſpecially Egyptians, Greeks, Arabians and Latines, by our latter Writers more ſhallowly as all other Philoſophy, but with great diuerſitie of opinions, according to the diuerſitie of Nations, Religions, Profeſſions, without any certaine accord or reſolution. The generall knowledge and diſcourſe thereof may be referred to theſe ten points: The Definition, Eſſence or Nature, Faculties and Actions, Vnitie or Pluralitie, Source, Entrance into the bodie, Reſidence therein, Seat, Sufficiencie to exerciſe her functions, the End and Separation from the bodie.
                  It is firſt very hard to define, or truly to ſay what the ſoule 1 The Definition verie difficult.
                      is, as generally all other formes becauſe they are things relatiue which ſubſiſt not of themſelues, but are parts of a whole: and this is the reaſon why there is ſuch and ſo great diuerſity of definitions of them, whereof there is not any receiued without contradiction. Ariſtotle hath confuted twelue that were before him, and could hardly make good his owne.
                  It is eaſie to ſay what it is not: That it is not Fire, Aire, 
                     2 Eaſie to ſay what it is not.
                      
                     Water; Nor the temperature of the foure Elements, or qualities, or humors, which is alwaies changeable, without which a creature is and liues; and beſides that, this is an accident, the Soule a ſubſtance. Againe, Mettals and things inanimate haue likewiſe a temperature of the foure Elements and firſt qualities. Neither is it blood, (for there are many things animate and liuing without blood, and many creatures die without the ſhedding of a drop of blood.) Nor the beginning and

cauſe of motion (for diuers things inanimate mooue, as the adamant moues the iron, amber or iet ſtraw; medicins and roots of trees being cut and dried draw and moue.) Neither is it the act, or life, or Enargie, or perfection (for that word Entelechia is diuerſly taken and interpreted) of a liuing body: for all this is but the effect or action of the Soule, and not the Soule it ſelfe, as to liue, to ſee, to vnderſtand is the action of the Soule. And it would likewiſe follow, that the Soule ſhould be an accident not a ſubſtance, and could not ſubſiſt without that bodie whereof it is the act and perfection, no more than the couer of an houſe may be without the houſe, and a relatiue without his correlatiue. To be briefe, it is to ſay what the ſoule doth and is to another, not what it is in it ſelfe.
                  But to ſay what the Soule is, is very difficult: A man may 3 Hard to ſay what it is.
                      ſimply ſay that it is an eſſentiall quickning forme, which giueth to the plant the vegetatiue or growing life; to a beaſt a ſenſible life, which comprehendeth the vegetatiue; to a man an intellectuall life, which comprehendeth the other two, as in numbers the greater conteines the leſſe, and in figures the Pentagone conteines the Tetragone, & this the Trigone. I call it the intellectiue ſoule rather than the reaſonable, which is comprehended in the intellectiue as the leſſe in the great: for the reaſonable in ſome ſenſe and meaſure, according to the opinion of the greateſt Philoſophers and experience it ſelfe, is likewiſe in beaſts, but not the intellectiue as being more high. Sicut equus & mulus in quibus non est intellectus. The Soule then is not the beginning or ſource, that word doth properly belong to the ſoueraigne firſt author, but an inward cauſe of life, motion, ſenſe, vnderſtanding. It moueth the body, & it ſelfe is not moued; as contrarily, the body is moued, and moueth not at al: it moueth I ſay the body, & not it ſelfe, for nothing but God moueth it ſelfe; and whatſoeuer moueth it ſelfe is eternall and Lord of it ſelfe: and in that it mooueth the bodie it hath it not of it ſelfe, but from an higher cauſe.
                  Concerning the nature and eſſence of the Soule, I meane a humane Soule (for the Soule of a beaſt is without all doubt 4 The nature and eſſence of the ſoule.
                      corporall, materiall, bred and borne with the matter, and with it corruptible) there is a queſtion of greater importance than it ſeemeth: for ſome affirme it to be corporall, ſome incorporall:

and this is very agreeable to reaſon, if a man be not opinatiue. That it is corporall, ſee what the grounds are; Spirits and Diuels, good and ill, which are wholly ſeparated from all matter are corporall, according to the opinion of all Philoſophers and our greateſt Diuines, Tertulltan, Origen, S. 
                     In homil. l. de ſpir. l 3. de lib. arb. Hom. de Epith. 
                     Baſil, Gregorie, Auguſtine, Damaſcene; how much more the Soule of man, which hath ſocietie and is vnited to a matter? Their reſolution is, that whatſoeuer is created, being compared vnto God, is groſſe, corporall, materiall, and only God is incorporall; that euery ſpirit is a bodie and hath a bodily nature. Next vnto authoritie almoſt vniuerſall the reaſon is irrefragable. Whatſoeuer is included in this finite world is finite, limited both in vertue and ſubſtance, bounded with a ſuperficies, incloſed and circumſcribed in a place, which are the true and naturall conditions of a bodie: for there is nothing but a bodie which hath a ſuperficiall part, and is barred and faſtened in a place. God only is wholly infinite, incorporall, the ordinarie diſtinctions, circumſcriptiuè, definitiuè, effectiuè, are but verball, and in nothing either helpe or hurt the cauſe: for it alwayes ſtands good that ſpirits are in ſuch ſort in a place, that at the ſelfe ſame time that they are in a place they can not be elſwhere; and they are not in a place either infinite, or very great, or very little, but equall to their limited and finited ſubſtance and ſuperficies. And if it were not ſo, ſpirits could not change their place, nor aſcend or deſcend, as the Scripture affirmeth that they doe: and ſo they ſhould be immooueable, indiuiſible, indifferently in all. Now if it appeare that they change their place, the change conuicteth that they are mooueable, diuiſible, ſubiect vnto time and to the ſucceſſion thereof, required in the motion and paſſage from one place to another, which are all the qualities of a bodie. But becauſe many ſimple men vnder this word corporall, do imagine viſible, palpable, and thinke not that the pure aire, or fire without the flame or coale are bodies, haue therefore likewiſe affirmed, That ſpirits both ſeparated and humane are not corporall, as in trueth they are not in that ſenſe: for they are of an inuiſible ſubſtance, whether airie as the greateſt part of Philoſophers and Diuines affirm, or celeſtiall as ſome Hebrewes and Arabiques teach, calling

by the ſelfe ſame name both the heauen and the ſpirit an eſſence proper to immortalitie; or whether (if they will haue it ſo) of a ſubſtance more ſubtile and delicate, yet they are alwayes corporall, ſince limited by place, mooueable, ſubiect to motion and to times. Finally, if they were not corporall, they ſhould not be paſſible and capable of ſuffering as they are: the humane receiueth from his bodie pleaſure and diſpleaſure, ſorrow and delight in his turne, as the bodie from the ſpirit and his paſſions many good qualities, many bad, vertues, vices, affections, which are all accidents: and all as well the ſpirits ſeparated and Diuels, as humane, are ſubiect to puniſhment and torments. They are therefore corporall: for there is nothing paſſible, that is not corporall, and it is only proper vnto bodies to be ſubiect to accidents.
                  Now the Soule hath a great number of vertues and faculties, as many almoſt as the body hath members: There are 3 The faculties and actions of the Soule.
                      ſome in plants, more in beaſts, moſt in man, to know, to liue, to feele, to mooue, to deſire, to allure, to aſſemble, to retaine, to concoct, to digeſt, to nouriſh, to grow, to reiect, to ſee, to heare, to taſte, to ſmell, to ſpeake, to breath, to ingender, to thinke, to reaſon, to contemplate, to conſent, diſſent, to remember, iudge; all which are no parts of the Soule: for ſo it ſhould be diuiſible, and ſhould conſiſt vpon accidents, but they are her naturall qualities. The actions come after and follow the faculties, and ſo there are three degrees, according to the doctrine of great S. Denys followed of all, that is, we muſt conſider in ſpirituall creatures three things, Eſſence, Facultie, Operation: By the latter which is the action we know the facultie, and by it the eſſence. The actions may be hindred and wholly ceaſe without any preiudice at all vnto the ſoule, and her faculties, as the Science and facultie of Painting remaineth entire in the Painter, although his hands be bound, and ſo be made vnable to paint: But if the faculties themſelues periſh, the Soule muſt needs be gone, no otherwiſe then Fire is no longer fire hauing loſt the facultie of warming.
                  The eſſence and nature of the Soule being after a ſort explicated, The vnitie of the ſoule. one of the buſieſt queſtions that belongeth vnto the Soule offereth it ſelfe to our conſideration, that is, whether

there be in a creature eſpecially in man one ſoule or manie? Touching which point there are diuers opinions, but may be reduced into three. Some of the Greekes, and almoſt all the Arabiques imitating them, haue thought (not onely in euery particular man, but generally in all men) that there was but one immortall Soule. The Egyptians for the moſt part held an opinion quite contrarie, that there was a pluralitie of ſoules in euery creature, all diuers and diſtinct, two in euerie beaſt, and three in man, two mortal, the vegetatiue & ſenſible, and the third intellectiue, immortall. The third opinion as the meane betwixt the two former, and moſt followed, being held by many of all nations is, that there is but one Soule in euery creature, not more. In euery of theſe opinions there is ſome difficultie. I leaue the firſt as being already ſufficiently confuted and reiected. The pluralitie of ſoules in euerie creature and man, on the one ſide ſeemeth verie ſtrange and abſurd in Philoſophie, for that were to giue many formes to one and the ſame thing, and to ſay that there are many ſubſtances and ſubiects in one, two beaſts in one, three men in one; on the other ſide it giueth credit and helpeth much our beleefe touching the immortalitie of the intellectuall Soule; for there being three ſoules, there can follow no inconuenience, that two of them ſhould die, and the third continue immortall. The vnitie of the Soule ſeemeth to reſiſt the immortalitie thereof; for how can one and the ſame indiuiſible, be in a mortall part and an immortall? as neuertheleſſe Ariſtotle would haue it. Doubtleſſe it ſeemeth that of neceſſitie the Soule muſt be either altogether mortall, or altogether immortall, which are two very foule abſurdities. The firſt aboliſheth all religion and ſound Philoſophy: the ſecond maketh beaſts likewiſe immortall. Neuertheleſſe it ſeemes to be more true that there is but one Soule in euery creature, for the pluralitie and diuerſitie of faculties, inſtruments, actions, neither derogateth any thing at all, nor multiplieth in any thing this vnitie, no more than the diuerſitie of riuers the vnitie of one ſpring or fountaine, nor the diuerſitie of effects in the Sunne, to heat, to enlighten, to melt, to drie, to whiten, to make blacke, do diſſipate the vnitie and ſimplicitie of the Sunne; for ſhould they, there would be a great

number of ſoules in one man and Sunnes in one world. Neither doth this eſſentiall vnitie of the Soule any thing hinder the immortalitie of the humane Soule in her eſſence, notwithſtanding the vegetatiue and ſenſitiue faculties, which are but accidents, die, that is to ſay, cannot be exerciſed without the body, the Soule not hauing a ſubiect or inſtrument whereby to doe it, but the third intellectuall Soule is alwaies well, becauſe for it there is no need of the bodie, though whileſt it is within it, it make vſe thereof to exerciſe it ſelfe; inſomuch that if it did returne vnto the bodie, it were onely againe to exerciſe hir vegetatiue and ſenſitiue faculties, as we ſee in thoſe that are raiſed vnto life to liue heere below, not in thoſe that are raiſed to liue elſewhere, for ſuch bodies need not to liue by the exerciſe of ſuch faculties: Euen as there is no want or decay in the Sunne, but it continueth in it ſelfe wholly the ſame, though during a whole ecclips it neither ſhine nor warme, nor performe his other effects in thoſe places that are ſubiect vnto it.
                  Hauing ſhewed the vnitie of the ſoule in euery ſubiect, let The ſource of the ſoule. vs ſee from whence it commeth, and how it entreth into the body. The originall beginning of ſoules is not held to be the ſame of all, I meane of humane ſoules; for the vegetatiue and ſenſitiue, of Plants and Beaſts, is by the opinion of all, altogether materiall, and in the ſeed, for which cauſe it is likewiſe mortall. But concerning the Soule of man there are foure celebrated opinions. According to the firſt which is of the Stoicks, held by Philo Iudeus, and afterward by the Maniches, Priſcilianiſts, and others, it is transferred and brought foorth as a part or parcell of the ſubſtance of God, who inſpireth it into the bodie, alleaging to their beſt aduantage the words of Moyſes, Inſpirauit in faciem eius ſpiraculum vitae: The ſecond opinion, held by Tertullian, Apollinaris, the Luciferians and other Chriſtians, affirmeth that the Soule proceedeth and is deriued from the ſoules of our parents with the ſeed, as the Soule of a beaſt. The third opinion which is that of the Pythagorians and Platoniſts held by many Rabins and Doctors of the Iewes, and afterwards by Origen and other Doctors, teacheth that the ſoules of men haue beene from the beginning all created of God, made of nothing and

reſerued in heauen, afterwards to be ſent into the lower parts, as need ſhould require, and that the bodies of men are formed and diſpoſed to receiue them; and from hence did ſpring the opinion of thoſe that thought that the ſoules of men heere below, were either well or ill handled, and lodged in bodies either ſound or ſicke, according to that life which they had led aboue in heauen, before they were incorporate. And truely the maſter of Wiſdome himſelfe ſheweth, that the Soule, of the two, was the elder, and before the bodie, Eram puer, bonam indolem ſortitus, imo bonus cum eſſem, corpus incontaminatum reperi. The fourth opinion receiued and held through all Chriſtendome is, that they are all created of God, and infuſed into bodies prepared, in ſuch maner that the creation and infuſion is done at one and the ſame inſtant. Theſe foure opinions are all affirmatiue, but there is a fift much reteined which determineth nothing, and is content to ſay, that it is a ſecret vnknowen vnto men; of which opinion was S. Austin, Greg. and others, who neuertheleſſe De orig. Epl. 28. 157. thought the two latter affirmatiue opinions more like to be true than the former.
                  Let vs now ſee when and how the Soule entreth into the 6 The entrāce of the ſoule into the bodie.
                      bodie, whether altogether at one inſtant, or ſucceſſiuely; I meane the humane Soule: for of that of a beaſt there is no doubt, ſince it is naturall in the ſeed, according to Aristotle (whom moſt do follow) that is by ſucceſſion of times and by degrees, as an artificiall forme which a man maketh by pieces, the one after the other; the head, afterwards the throat, the bellie, the legs: inſomuch that the vegetatiue and ſenſitiue Soule altogether materiall and corporall, is in the ſeed, and with the deſcent of the parents, which faſhioneth the bodie in the matrix: and that done, the reaſonable Soule arriueth from without. And therefore there are neither two nor three ſoules; neither together nor ſucceſſiuely, neither is the vegetatiue corrupted by the arriuall of the ſenſitiue, nor the ſenſitiue by the arriuall of the intellectuall; but it is but one Soule which is made, finiſhed and perfected in that time which nature hath preſcribed. Others are of opinion, that the ſoule entreth with all her faculties at one inſtant, that is to ſay then, when all the bodie is furniſhed with organs, formed, and

wholly finiſhed, and that vntill then there was no Soule, but only a naturall vertue and Enargie, an eſſentiall forme of the ſeed, which working by the ſpirits which are in the ſayd ſeed, with the heat of the matrix and materiall blood, as with inſtruments, do forme and build vp the body, prepare all the members, nouriſh, mooue, and increaſe them: which being done, this Enargie and ſeminall forme vaniſheth, and is quite loſt, ſo that the ſeed ceaſeth to be ſeed, loſing it forme, by the arriuall of another more noble, which is the humane Soule, which cauſeth that which was ſeed, or an Embryon, that is, a ſubſtance without ſhape, to be no longer ſeed but a man.
                  The Soule being entred into the bodie, we are likewiſe to 7 The reſidence of the Soule in the Bodie.
                      know what kinde of exiſtence therein it hath, and how it is there reſident. Some Philoſophers not knowing what to ſay, or how to ioyne and vnite the Soule with the bodie, make it to abide and reſide therein, as a Maſter in his houſe, a Pilot in his ſhip, a Coach-man in his coach: but this were to deſtroy all, for ſo the Soule ſhould not be the forme, nor inward and eſſentiall part of a creature, or of a man, it ſhould haue no need of the members of the bodie to abide there, nor any feeling at all of the contagion of the bodie, but it ſhould be a ſubſtance wholly diſtinct from the bodie, of it ſelfe ſubſiſting, which at it pleaſure might come and goe, and ſeparate it ſelfe from the body, without the diſtinction, and diminution of all the functions thereof, which are all abſurdities. The Soule is in the bodie as the forme in the matter, extended and ſpred thorowout the body, giuing life, motion, ſenſe to all the parts thereof, and both of them together make but one Hypoſtaſis, one intire ſubiect, which is the creature, and there is no mean or middle that doth vnite and knit them together: for betwixt the matter and the forme, there is no middle, according to all Philoſophie. The Soule then is all, in all the bodie; I adde not (though it be commonly ſayd) and all in euery part of the bodie: for that implieth a contradiction, and diuideth the Soule.
                  
                  Now notwithſtanding the Soule, as it is ſayd, be diffuſed 8 The ſeat & inſtruments of the ſoule.
                      and ſpred thorow the whole bodie, yet neuertheleſſe, to excite and exerciſe it faculties, it is more ſpecially and expreſly in ſome parts of the bodie, than in others; in which it is ſayd

to haue place, yet not to be wholly there, leſt the reſt ſhould be without Soule without forme. And as it hath foure principall and chiefe faculties, ſo men giue it foure ſeats, that is, thoſe foure regions, which we haue noted before in the compoſition of the body, the foure firſt principall inſtruments of the ſoule, the reſt referre themſelues vnto them, as alſo all the faculties to theſe, that is to ſay, the engendring faculty to the ingendring parts, the naturall to the liuer, the vitall to the heart, the animall and intellectuall to the braine.
                  We are now come to ſpeake in generall of the exerciſe of 9 The ſufficiency of the Soule for the exerciſe of hir faculties.
                      the faculties of the Soule, whereunto the ſoule of it ſelfe is wiſe and ſufficient, inſomuch that it faileth not to produce that which it knoweth, & to exerciſe it functions, as it ought, if it be not hindered, and that the inſtruments thereof be well diſpoſed. And therefore it was well and truly ſaid of the wiſe, that Nature is wiſe, diſcreet, induſtrious, a ſufficient miſtriſſe which maketh a man apt to all things: Inſita ſunt nobis omnium artium, ac virtutum ſemina, magiſterque ex occulto Deus producit ingenium: which is eaſily ſhewed by induction. The vegetatiue ſoule without inſtruction formeth the body in the matrix with excellent arte, afterwards it nouriſheth it, and makes it grow, drawing the victuall vnto it, retaining and concocting it, afterwards caſting out the excrements, it ingendreth and reformeth the parts that faile; theſe are things that are ſeene in plants, beaſts, and men. The ſenſitiue Soule of it ſelfe without inſtruction, maketh both beaſts and men to moue their feet, their hands, and other members, to ſtretch, to rub, to ſhake, to moue the lips, to preſſe the dug, to crie, to laugh. The reaſonable of it ſelfe, not according to the opinion of Plato by the remembrance of that which it knew before it entred into the body, nor according to Ariſtotle by reception and acquiſition, comming from without by the ſenſes, being of it ſelfe, as a white paper void of impreſſion, although that ſerue to good purpoſe, but of it ſelfe without inſtruction, imagineth, vnderſtandeth, retaineth, reaſoneth, diſcourſeth. But becauſe this of the reaſonable Soule ſeemeth to be more difficult than the other, and woundeth in ſome ſort Ariſtotle himſelfe, it ſhall be handled again in his place, in the diſcourſe of the intellectuall Soule.
                  
                  
                     
It remaineth that wee ſpeake of the laſt point, that is, of 10 The ſeparation of the body twofold.
                      the ſeparation of the Soule from the body, which is after a diuers ſort and maner; the one, and the ordinarie is naturall by death, and this not the ſame in beaſts and men: for by the death of beaſts, the Soule dieth, and is annihilated, áccording vnto that rule, by the corruption of the ſubiect the forme periſheth, 1. Naturall and ordinary.
                      the matter remaineth: by the death of man the Soule is ſeparated from the body, but is not loſt, but remaineth inaſmuch as it is immortall.
                  The immortalitie of the Soule is a thing vniuerſally, religiouſly, 2. The immortalitie of the Soule.
                      (for it is the principall foundation of all religion) and peaceably receiued and concluded vpon throughout the world, I meane by an outward and publique profeſſion; ſeriouſly and inwardly, not ſo, witneſſe ſo many Epicures, Libertines, and mockers in the world: yea the Saduces, the greateſt Lordes of the Iewes, did not ſticke with open mouth to denie it; though a thing profitable to be beleeued, and in ſome ſort proued by many naturall and humane reaſons, but properly and better eſtabliſhed by the authority of religion than any other way. It ſeemeth that there is in a man a kinde of inclination and diſpoſition of nature to beleeue it, for man deſireth naturally to continue and perpetuate his being, from whence likewiſe proceedeth that great, yea furious care and loue of our poſterity and ſucceſſion. Againe two things there are that giue ſtrength thereunto, and make it more plauſible, the one is the hope of glory and reputation, and the deſire of the immortalitie of our name, which how vaine ſoeuer it be, carrieth a great credit in the world: the other is an impreſſion, that vice which robbeth a man of the view and knowledge of humane iuſtice, remaining alwaies oppoſite to the diuine iuſtice, muſt thereby be chaſtiſed, yea after death: ſo that beſides that a man is altogether carried and diſpoſed by nature to deſire it, and conſequently to beleeue it, the Iuſtice of God doth conclude it.
                  From hence we are to learne that there are three differences 3 The proofe.
                      and degrees of Soules, an order required euen to the perfection of the vniuerſe. Two extreames, the one is that which being altogether materiall, is plunged, and ouerwhelmed in the matter, and inſeparable from it, and therewithall

corruptible, which is the Soule of a beaſt: the other quite contrary, is that which hath not any commerce, or ſocietie with the matter or body, as the ſoule of immortall Angels or Diuels. In the middle as the meane betwixt theſe two, is the humane ſoule, which is neither wholly tied to the matter, nor altogether without it, but is ioyned with it, and may likewiſe ſubſiſt and liue without it. This order and diſtinction is an excellent argument of immortalitie; for it were a vacuum, a defect, a deformitie too abſurd in nature, diſhonourable to the authour, and a kinde of ruine to the world, that betwixt two extreames, the corruptible and incorruptible, there ſhould be no middle; that is, partly the one and partly the other: there muſt needs be one that ties and ioynes the two ends or extreames together, and that can be none but man. Below the loweſt and wholly materiall, is that which hath no Soule at all, as ſtones; aboue the higheſt and immortall, is the eternall only God.
                  The other ſeparation not naturall nor ordinary, and which 4 2. Not naturall.
                      is done by ſtrange impulſions and at times, is very difficult to vnderſtand, and perplex. It is that which is done by extaſies and rauiſhments, which is diuers and done by different meanes: for there is a ſeparation that is diuine, ſuch as the Scripture reporteth vnto vs, of Daniel, Zachary, Eſdras, Ezechiel, S. Paul. There is another that is demoniacall, procured by diuels, and good ſpirits and bad, as we reade of many, as of Iohn D'vns, called Leſcot, who being in his extaſie a long time held for dead, was carried into the aire, and caſt downe vpon the earth; but ſo ſoone as he felt the blow that he receiued by the fall, he came to himſelfe: but by reaſon of the great ſtore of blood which he loſt, his head being broken, he died outright. Cardan telleth it of himſelfe, and of his father, and it continueth autentiquely verified in many and diuers parts of the world, of many, and thoſe for the moſt part of the vulgar ſort, weake and women poſſeſſed, whoſe bodies remaine not only without motion, and the beating of the heart and arteries, but alſo without any ſenſe or feeling of the greateſt blowes, either with iron or fire, that could be giuen them, and afterwards their ſoules being returned they haue felt great paine in their limmes, and recounted that

which they haue ſeene and done in places far diſtant. Thirdly, there is a humane ſeparation, which proceedeth either from that maladie which Hipocrates calleth Sacer, commonly called The falling ſicknes, Morbus comitialis, the ſigne whereof is a foming at the mouth, which is not in thoſe that are poſſeſſed; but in ſtead thereof they haue a ſtinking ſauor, or it is occaſioned by ſtiptickes, ſtupifying and benumming medicines; or ariſeth from the force of imagination, which enforcing and bending it ſelfe with too deepe an attention about a thing, carrieth away the whole ſtrength and power of the Soule. Now in theſe three kindes of extaſies or rauiſhments, Diuine, Diabolicall, Humane, the queſtion is, Whether the Soule be truely and really ſeparated from the body; or if remaining in it, it be in ſuch ſort employed and buſied about ſome outward thing which is foorth of the bodie, that it forgetteth it owne bodie; whereby followeth a kinde of intermiſſion and vacation of the actions and exerciſe of the functions thereof. Touching the diuine extaſie, the Apostle ſpeaking of himſelfe and his owne act; dares not define any thing, Si in corpore vel extra corpus neſcio, Deusſcit. An inſtruction that may ſerue for all others, and for other ſeparations of leſſe qualitie. Touching the Demoniacall extaſie, as not to feele a blow be it neuer ſo great, to report what hath been done two or three hundred leagues off, are two great and violent coniectures of a true ſeparation from the bodie, but not altogether neceſſarie: for the diuell can ſo alienate and occupie the ſoule within the body, that it ſhall not ſeeme to haue any action or commerce with the bodie for ſome certaine time, and in that time ſo beforteth the ſoule by preſenting things vnto the imagination that haue beene done afarre off, that a man may ſpeake and diſcourſe thereof: for to affirme that certainly the Soule doth wholly depart and abandon the bodie, Nature is too bolde and foole-hardie: to ſay that it doth not wholly depart, but that the imaginatiue or intellectuall is caried out, and that the vegetatiue ſoule remaineth, were more to intangle our ſelues; for ſo the Soule in it eſſence ſhould be diuided, or the accident only ſhould be carried out, and not the ſubſtance. Touching the humane extaſie, doubtleſſe there is no ſeparation of the Soule, but only a ſuſpenſion

of the patent and outward actions thereof.
                  What becomes of the Soule, and what the ſtate thereof is 11 The eſtate of the Soule after death.
                      after the naturall ſeparation by death, diuers men thinke diuerſly: and this point belongeth not to the ſubiect of this booke. The Metempſychoſe and tranſanimation of Pythagoras hath in ſome ſort been embraced by the Academicks, Stoicks, Aegyptians, and others; but yet not of all in the ſame ſenſe: for ſome doe admit it only for the puniſhment of the wicked, as we reade of Nebuchadnezar, who was changed into a beaſt by the iudgement of God. Others, and ſome great, haue thought that good ſoules, being ſeparated, become Angels, the wicked, Diuels. It had beene more pleaſing to haue ſayd Like vnto them; Non nubent, ſed erunt ſicut Angeli. Some haue affirmed, that the ſoules of the wicked, at the end of a certaine time, were reduced to nothing. But the trueth of all this we muſt learne from Religion and Diuines, who ſpeake heereof more cleerely.
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII. Of the Soule in particular; and first of the vegetatiue facultie.
                  
                  AFter this generall deſcription of the Soule, in theſe ten points we muſt ſpeake thereof more particularly, according 1 The faculties of the Soule.
                      to the order of the faculties thereof, beginning at the baſeſt, that is, the Vegetatiue, Senſitiue, Apprehenſible or Imaginatiue, Appetible, Intellectiue, which is the ſoueraign Soule and truly humane. Vnder euery one of theſe there are diuers others which are ſubiect vnto them, and as parts of them, as we ſhall ſee, handling them in their ranke.
                  Of the vegetable and baſeſt Soule, which is euen in plants, I will not ſpeake much; it is the proper ſubiect of Phyſitians, 2 Of the vegetable & her ſubalternals.
                      of health and ſickneſſe. Let me only ſay, that vnder this there are conteined other three great faculties, which follow one the other: for the firſt ſerueth the ſecond, and the ſecond the third; but the third neither of the former. The firſt then is the nouriſhing facultie, for the conſeruation of the Indiuiduum or particular perſon, which diuers others doe ſerue, as the Attractiue of the victuall, the Concoctiue, the Digestiue,
                     
ſeparating the good & proper, from the naught and hurtfull; the Retentiue and the Expulſiue of ſuperfluities: The ſecond, the increaſing or growing facultie, for the perfection and due quantitie of the Indiuiduum: The third, is the Generatiue, for the conſeruation of the kinde. Whereby we ſee, that the two firſt are for the Indiuiduum, and worke within in the bodie; the third is for the kinde, and hath it effect and operation without in another bodie, and therefore is more worthy than the other, and commeth neerer to a faculty more high, which is the Senſitiue. This is a great height of perfection, to make another thing like it ſelfe.
               
               
                  CHAP. IX. Of the Senſitiue facultie.
                  
                  IN the exerciſe of this facultie and function of the Senſes Six things required to the exerciſe of this facultie. theſe ſix things do concurre, whereof foure are within and two without. That is to ſay, the Soule, as the firſt efficient cauſe. The facultie of Senſe (which is a qualitie of the Soule, and not the Soule it ſelfe) that is, of perceiuing and apprehending  outward things; which is done after a fiue-folde maner,  which we call The fiue Senſes (of this number we ſhall ſpeake hereafter) that is to ſay, Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Tasting, Touching. The corporall inſtrument of the Senſe, whereof  there are fiue, according to the number of the Senſes; the Eye, the Eare, the high concauitie of the Noſe, which is the entrance to the firſt ventricles of the braine, the Tongue, the whole Skin of the bodie. The Spirit which ariſeth from the  braine the fountaine of the ſenſitiue Soule, by certaine ſinewes in the ſayd inſtruments, by which ſpirit and inſtrument the ſoule exerciſeth her facultie. The ſenſible Species, or obiect  offered vnto the inſtruments, which is different according to the diuerſitie of the ſenſe. The obiect of the eye or ſight according to the common opinion is colour, which is an adherent quality in bodies, whereof there are ſix ſimple, as White, Yellow, Red, Purple, Greene and Blew; ſome adde a ſeuenth, which is blacke; but to ſay the trueth, that is no colour, but a priuation, being like vnto darkeneſſe, as the other colours more or leſſe vnto the light. Of compound colours the number

is infinite: but to ſpeake more truely, the true obiect is light, which is neuer without colour, and without which the colours are inuiſible. Now the light is a qualitie which commeth forth of a luminous body, which makes both it ſelfe viſible and all things els; and if it be terminated and limited by ſome ſolide bodie, it reboundeth and redoubleth it beames: otherwiſe if it paſſe without any ſtop or termination, it can not be ſeene except it be in the root of that light or luminous bodie from whence it came, nor make any thing els to be ſeene. Of the Eare or Hearing, the obiect is a ſound, which is a noiſe proceeding from the encounter of two bodies, and it is diuers: the pleaſant and melodious ſweeteneth and appeaſeth the ſpirit, and for it ſake the bodie too, and driues away maladies from them both: the ſharpe and penetrant doth contrariwiſe trouble and wound the ſpirit. Of Taſting, the obiect is a fauour or ſmacke, whereof there are ſix diuers ſimple kindes, Sweet, Sowre, Sharpe, Tart, Salt, Bitter; but there are many compounds. Of Smell, the obiect is an odour or ſent, which is a fume riſing from an odoriferous obiect aſcending by the noſe to the firſt ventricles of the braine: the ſtrong and violent hurteth the braine, as an ill ſound the eare: the temperate and good doth contrariwiſe reioyce, delight and comfort. Of the ſenſe of Touching, the obiect is heat, colde, drouth, moiſture either pleaſant and polite, or ſharpe and ſmarting, motion, reſt, tickling.
                  The middle or ſpace betwixt the obiect and the inſtrument,  which is the Aire neither altered nor corrupted, but ſuch as it ought to be.
                  So that ſenſe is made, when the ſenſible ſpecies preſenteth  it ſelfe by the middle to an inſtrument ſound and well diſpoſed, and that therein the ſpirit aſſiſting, receiueth it and apprehendeth it in ſuch ſort, that there is there both action and paſſion; and the ſenſes are not purely paſſiue: for notwithſtanding they receiue, and are ſtricken by the obiect, yet neuertheleſſe in ſome ſenſe and meaſure they doe worke or react in apprehending the ſpecies and image of the obiect propoſed.
                  In former times and before Aristotle, they did make a difference betwixt the ſenſe of Seeing and the reſt of the ſenſes, 
                     
and they all held, that the ſight was actiue, and was made by emitting or ſending forth of the eye, the beames thereof vnto the outward obiects, and that the other ſenſes were paſſiue, receiuing the ſenſible obiect: but after Ariſtotle, they are made all alike, and all paſſiue, receiuing in the organ or inſtrument, the kindes and images of things, and the reaſons of the Ancients to the contrary are eaſily anſwered. There is more and more excellent matter to be deliuered of the ſenſes hereafter.
                  Now beſides theſe fiue particular ſenſes which are without,  there is within, the common ſenſe; where all the diuers obiects apprehended by it, are aſſembled and gathered together, to the end they may afterward be compared, diſtinguiſhed, and diſcerned the one from the other, which the particular ſenſes could not doe, being euery one attentiue to his proper obiect, and not able to take knowledge thereof, of his companion.
               
               
                  CHAP. X. Of the ſenſes of Nature.
                  
                  ALl knowledge is begun in vs by the ſenſes; ſo ſay our 1 The importance of the naturall ſenſes.
                      Schoole-men: but it is not altogether true, as we ſhall ſee heereafter. They are our firſt maſters: it beginneth by them, and endeth with them: they are the beginning and end of all. It is not poſſible to recoile farther backe: euery one of them is a captaine and ſoueraigne lord in his order, and hath a great command, carrying with it infinite knowledges. The one dependeth not, or hath need of the other, ſo are they equally great, although the one haue a farre greater extent, and traine, and affaires, than the other, as a little king is as well a ſoueraigne in his little narrow command, as a great in his great eſtate.
                  It is an opinion amongſt vs, that there are but fiue ſenſes of Nature, becauſe wee marke but fiue in vs; but yet there 2 The number.
                      may very well be more, and it is greatly to be doubted that there are; but it is impoſſible for vs to know them, to affirme them, or to denie them, becauſe a man ſhall neuer know the want of that ſenſe which he hath neuer had. There are many

beaſts which liue a full and perfect life, which want ſome one of our fiue ſenſes; and a creature may liue without the fiue ſenſes, ſaue the ſenſe of Feeling, which is only neceſſary vnto life. We liue very commodiouſly with fiue, and yet perhaps we do want one, or two, or three, and yet it can not be knowen. One ſenſe can not diſcouer another: and if a man want one by nature, yet he knowes not which way to affirme it. A man borne blinde can neuer conceiue that he ſeeth not, nor deſire to ſee, nor delight in his ſight: it may be he will ſay that he would ſee, but that is becauſe he hath heard ſay and learned of others, that it is to be deſired: the reaſon is becauſe the ſenſes are the firſt gates, and entrances to knowledge. So man not being able to imagine more than the fiue that he hath, he can not know how to iudge whether there be more in Nature; yet he may haue more. Who knoweth whether the difficulties that we finde in many of the works of Nature, and the effects of creatures, which we can not vnderſtand, doe proceed from the want of ſome ſenſe that wee haue not? Of the hidden properties which we ſee in many things, a man may ſay that there are ſenſible faculties in Nature proper to iudge and apprehend them; but yet he muſt confeſſe that we haue them not, and that the ignorance of ſuch things proceedeth from our owne default. Who knoweth whether it be ſome particular ſenſe, that diſcouereth in the Cocke the houre of mid-night and morning, and that moues him to crow? Who taught ſome beaſts to chuſe certaine herbes for their cure, and many ſuch like woonders as theſe are? No man can affirme or denie, ſay this it is, or that it is.
                  Some haue aſſayed to giue a reaſon of this number of the fiue ſenſes, and to prooue the ſufficiencie of them, by diſtinguiſhing 3 Their ſufficiencie.
                      and diuerſly comparing their outward obiects; which are, either all neere the bodie or diſtant from it: if neere but yet remaining without, it is the ſenſe of Touching; if they enter, it is Taſte; if they be more diſtant and preſent by a right line, it is the Sight; if oblique and by reflexion, it is the Hearing. A man might better haue ſayd thus, That theſe fiue ſenſes being appointed for the ſeruice of an entire man, ſome are entirely for the bodie, that is to ſay, Taste and

                     Touching; that, in that it entreth; this, in that it remaines without. Others firſt and principally for the ſoule, as ſight and hearing: the Sight for inuention, the Hearing for acquiſition and communication, and one in the middle, for the middle ſpirits, and ties of the ſoule and body, which is the Smell. Againe, they anſwer to the foure Elements, and their qualities: The ſenſe of Feeling to the earth; of Hearing to the aire; of Taſte to the water and moiſture; the Smell to the fire. The Sight is a compound, and partakes both of water and fire, by reaſon of the bright ſplendor of the eie. Againe they ſay that there are ſo many ſenſes, as there are kinds of ſenſible things, which are colour, ſound, odour, taſte or ſauour, and the fift which hath no proper name, the obiect of Feeling, which is heat, cold, rough, plaine, and ſo foorth. But men deceiue themſelues, for the number of the ſenſes is not to be iudged by the number of ſenſible things, which are no cauſe that there are ſo many. By this reaſon there ſhould bee many more, and one and the ſame ſenſe ſhould receiue many diuers heads of obiects, and one and the ſame obiect be apprehended by diuers ſenſes: ſo that the tickling of a feather, and the pleaſures of Venus are diſtinguiſhed from the fiue Senſes, and by ſome comprehended in the ſenſe of Feeling: But the cauſe is rather, for that the ſpirit hath no power to attaine to the knowledge of things, but by the fiue Sences, and that Nature hath giuen it ſo many, becauſe it was neceſſary for it end and benefit.
                  Their compariſons are diuers in dignity and nobility. The 4 Compariſon.
                      
                     Senſe of Seeing excelleth all the reſt in fiue things: It apprehendeth farther off, and extendeth it ſelfe euen to the fixed ſtarres. It hath more variety of obiects, for to all things & generally in all there is light and colour the obiects of the eie. It is more exquiſit, exact and particular euen in the leaſt and fineſt things that are. It is more prompt and ſudden, apprehending euen in a moment and without motion, euen the heauens themſelues: in the other ſenſes there is a motion that requireth time. It is more diuine, and the markes of Diuinity are many. Liberty incomparable aboue others, whereby the eie ſeeth, or ſeeth not, and therefore it hath lids ready to open and to ſhut: power not to turmoile it ſelfe, and not to ſuffer it ſelfe to bee

ſeene; Actiuitie and abilitie to pleaſe or diſpleaſe, to ſignifie and inſinuate our thoughts, willes and affections: for the eye ſpeaketh and ſtriketh, it ſerueth for a tongue and a hand; the other Senſes are purely paſſiue. But that which is moſt noble in this Senſe is, that the priuation of the obiect thereof, which is darkneſſe, brings feare, and that naturally; and the reaſon is, becauſe a man findeth himſelfe robbed of ſo excellent a guide: and therefore whereas a man deſireth company for his ſolace, the Sight in the light is in place of companie. The ſenſe of Hearing hath many excellent ſingularities, it is more ſpirituall, and the ſeruice thereof more inward. But the particular compariſon of theſe two, which are of the reſt the more noble, and of ſpeech, ſhall be ſpoken in the Chapter following. As for pleaſure or diſpleaſure, though all the Senſes are capable thereof, yet the Senſe of Feeling receiueth greateſt griefe, and almoſt no pleaſure; and contrarily the Taſte great delight, and almoſt no griefe. In the organ and inſtrument, the Touch is vniuerſall, ſpred thorow the whole bodie, to the end the bodie ſhould feele heat and colde; the organs of the reſt are aſſigned to a certaine place & member.
                  From the weakneſſe and incertitude of our ſenſes comes ignorance, errour and miſtakings: for ſithens that by their 5 The weakeneſſe and vncertainneſſe of the Senſes. meanes and mixture we attaine to all knowledge, if they deceiue vs in their report, we haue no other helpe to ſticke vnto. But who can ſay, or accuſe them, that they do deceiue vs, conſidering that by them we begin to learne and to know? Some haue aſſirmed that they do neuer deceiue vs, and when they ſeeme to doe it, the fault proceedeth from ſome thing els; and that wee muſt rather attribute it to any other thing than to the ſenſes. Others haue ſayd cleane contrarie, that they are all falſe, and can teach vs nothing that is certaine. But the middle opinion is the more true.
                  Now whether the Senſes be falſe or not, at the leaſt it is 6 The mutuall deceit of the ſpirit and ſenſes. certaine that they deceiue, yea ordinarily enforce the diſcourſe, the reaſon, and in exchange are againe mocked by it. Do then but conſider what kinde of knowledge and certaintie a man may haue, when that within, and that without is full of deceit and weakeneſſe, and that the principall parts thereof, the eſſentiall inſtruments of ſcience do deceiue one

another. That the ſenſes doe deceiue and enforce the vnderſtanding, it is plaine in thoſe ſenſes whereof ſome do kindle with furie, others delight & ſweeten, others tickle the Soule. And why doe they that cauſe themſelues to be let blood, lanced, cauteriſed and burnt, turne away their eies, but that they do well know that great authoritie that the Senſes haue ouer their reaſon? The ſight of ſome bottomleſſe depth, or precipitate downfall, aſtoniſheth euen him that is ſetled in a firme and ſure place: and to conclude, doth not the Senſe vanquiſh and quite ouercome all the beautifull reſolutions of vertue, and patience? So on the other ſide, the ſenſes are likewiſe deceiued by the vnderſtanding, which appeareth by this, that the Soule being ſtirred with Choler, Loue, Hatred, or any other paſſion, our ſenſes doe ſee, and heare euery thing others then they are, yea ſometimes our ſenſes are altogether dulled by the paſſions of the Soule, and it ſeemeth that the Soule retireth and ſhutteth vp the operation of the Senſes, and that the ſpirit being otherwiſe employed, the eie diſcerneth not that which is before it, and which it ſeeth: yea the ſight and the reaſon iudge diuerſly of the greatneſſe of the Sunne, the ſtarres, nay of the figure of a ſtaffe any thing diſtant.
                  In the Senſes of Nature the beaſts haue as well part, as we, 7 The ſenſes common to man and beaſt, but diuerſly. and ſometimes excell vs: for ſome haue their hearing more quicke than man, ſome their ſight, others their ſmell, others their taſte: and it is held, that in the ſenſe of Hearing, the Hart excelleth all others; of Sight, the Eagle; of Smell, the Dogge; of Taſte, the Ape; of Feeling, the Tortuis: neuertheleſſe, the preheminence of that ſenſe of Touch is giuen vnto man, which of all the reſt is the moſt brutiſh. Now if the Senſes are the meanes to attaine vnto knowledge, and that beaſts haue a part therein, yea ſomtimes the better part, why ſhould not they haue knowledge?
                  But the Senſes are not the only inſtruments of knowledge, 8 The iudgement of the Senſes hard and dangerous.
                      neither are our Senſes alone to be conſulted or beleeued: for if beaſts by their Senſes iudge otherwiſe of things than we by ours, as doubtleſſe they do; who muſt be beleeued? Our ſpettle cleanſeth and drieth our wounds, it killeth the Serpent; What then is the true qualitie of our ſpettle? To dire

and to cleanſe, or to kill? To iudge well of the operation of the ſenſes, we muſt be at ſome agreement with the beaſts, nay with our ſelues: for the eie preſſed downe and ſhut, ſeeth otherwiſe than in it ordinary ſtate; the eare ſtopt, receiueth the obiects otherwiſe than when it is open: an infant ſeeth, heareth, taſteth, otherwiſe than a man; a man than an olde man; a ſound than a ſicke; a wiſe than a foole. In this great diuerſitie and contrarietie what ſhall we holde for certaine? Seeing that one ſenſe belieth another, a picture ſeemeth to be held vp to the view, and the hands are folded together.
               
               
                  CHAP. XI. Of Sight, Hearing and Speech.
                  
                  THeſe are the three moſt rich and excellent iewels of all thoſe that are in this muſter, and of whoſe preheminencie 1 A compariſon of the three.
                      it is diſputed. Touching their Organes, that of the Sight in it compoſition and forme is admirable, and of a liuely and ſhining beautie, by reaſon of the great varietie and ſubtiltie of ſo many ſmall parts or pieces; and therefore it is ſayd that the eye is one of thoſe parts of the bodie which doe firſt begin to be formed, and the laſt that is finiſhed: and for this verie cauſe it is ſo delicate, and ſaid to be ſubiect to ſix ſcore maladies. Afterwards comes that of Speech, which helpeth the ſenſe of Hearing to many great aduantages. For the ſeruice of the bodie, the Sight is moſt neceſſarie, and therefore doth more import a beaſt than Hearing. But for the ſpirit, the Hearing challengeth the vpper place. The Sight ſerueth well for the inuention of things, which by it haue almoſt all beene diſcouered, but it bringeth nothing to perfection. Againe, the Sight is not capable but of corporall things and particular, and that only of their cruſt or ſuperficiall part, it is the inſtrument of ignorant men and vnlearned, qui mouentur ad id quod adeſt, quodque praeſens eſt.
                  
                  The Eare is a ſpirituall Senſe, it is the Intermedler, and Agent 2 The preheminencie of hearing.
                      of the vnderſtanding, the inſtrument of wiſe and ſpirituall men, capable not only of the ſecrets and inward parts of particular bodies, whereunto the Sight arriueth not, but alſo of the generall kindes, and of all ſpirituall things and diuine,

in which the Sight ſerueth rather to diſturbe than to helpe: and therefore we ſee not only many blinde, great and wiſe, but ſome alſo that are depriued of their ſight to become great Philoſophers: but of ſuch as are deafe we neuer heard of any. This is the way by which a man entreth the fortreſſe, and makes himſelfe maſter of the place, and imploieth his ſpirit in good or ill; witneſſe the wife of King Agamemnon, who was conteined in her dutie of chaſtitie by the ſound of a Harpe: and Dauid by the ſelfe ſame meane chaſed away the euill ſpirit from Saul, and reſtored him to health: and that skilfull player on the Flute, that ſweetned the voice of that great Oratour Gracchus. To be briefe, Science, Trueth, and Vertue haue no other entrance into the Soule, but by the Eare: Chriſtianitie it ſelfe teacheth that faith and ſaluation commeth by Hearing, and that the Sight doth rather hurt, than helpe thereunto; that faith is the beliefe of thoſe things that are not ſeene, which beliefe is acquired by hearing; and it calleth ſuch as are apprentices or nouices therein, Auditors, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , catechiſed. Let me adde this one word, that the Hearing giueth ſuccour and comfort in darkneſſe, and to ſuch as are aſleepe, that by the ſound they may be awaked, and ſo prouide for their preſeruation. For all theſe reaſons haue the wiſeſt ſo much commended Hearing, the pure and virgin gardian from all corruption, for the health of the inward man, as for the ſafetie of a Citie, the gates and walles are garded that the enemie enter not.
                  Speech is peculiarly giuen vnto man, an excellent preſent and very neceſſary, in regard of him from whom it proceedeth 3 The force & authoritie of Speech.
                     : it is the interpreter and image of the ſoule, animi index, & ſpeculum, the meſſenger of the heart, the gate by which all that is within iſſueth foorth, and committeth itſelfe to the view, all things come foorth of darkneſſe and ſecret corners into the light, and the ſpirit itſelfe makes it ſelfe viſible: and therefore an ancient Philoſopher ſaid once to a child, Speake that I may ſee thee, that is to ſay, the inſide of thee. As veſſels are knowen whether they be broken or whole, full or emptie, by the ſound, and mettals by the touch; ſo man by his ſpeech. Of all the viſible parts of the body which ſhew themſelues outward, that which is neereſt the heart is the

tongue by the root thereof; ſo that which comes neereſt vnto our thought, is our ſpeech: for from the abundance of the heart the mouth ſpeaketh. In regard of him which receiueth it, it is a powerfull maſter, an imperious commander, which entreth the fortreſſe, poſſeſſeth it ſelfe of the poſſeſſor, ſtirreth him vp, animateth, exaſperateth, appeaſeth him, maketh him ſad, merrie, imprinteth in him whatſoeuer paſſion, it handleth and feedeth the Soule of the hearer, and makes it pliable to euery ſenſe; it makes him bluſh, waxpale, laugh, crie, tremble for feare, mad with choler, to leape for ioy, and pierceth him thorow with paſſion. In regard of all, Speech is the hand of the ſpirit, wherewith, as the bodie by his, it taketh and giueth, it asketh counſell and ſuccour and giueth it. It is the great Intermedler and Huckſter: by it we trafficke, Merx a Mercurio peace is handled, affaires are managed, Sciences and the goods of the ſpirit are diſtributed, it is the band and cement of humane ſociety (ſo that it be vnderſtood: For, ſaith one, a man were better to be in the companie of a dog that he knoweth, than in the companie of a man whoſe language he knoweth not, vt externus alieno, non ſit hominis vice.) To be briefe, it is the inſtrument of whatſoeuer is good or ill, vita & mors in manibus linguae: there is nothing better, Of a good & euill tongue. nothing worſe than the tongue. The tongue of a wiſe man is the doore of a royall Cabinet, which is no ſooner opened, but incontinently a thouſand diuerſities preſent themſelues to the eie, euery one more beautifull than other, come from the Indies, Peru, Arabia; So a wiſe man produceth and rangeth them in good order, ſentences, and Aphoriſmes of Philoſophie, ſimilitudes, examples, hiſtories, wiſe ſayings drawen from all the mines, and treaſuries olde and new, qui profert de theſauro ſuo noua & vetera, which ſerue for a rule of good maners, of policie, and all the parts both of life and of death, which being applied in their times and to good purpoſe, bring with it great delight, great beautie and vtilitie, mala aurea in lectis argenteis, verba in tempore ſuo. The mouth of a wicked man is a ſtincking and contagious pit, a ſlanderous Prouerb. tongue murdereth the honour of another, it is a ſea and Vniuerſitie of euils, woorſe than fetters, fire, poiſon, death, hell, Vniuerſitas iniquitatis, malum inquietum, venenum mortiferum,
                     
                     ignis incendens omnia, mors illius nequiſſima, vtilis potius infernus quàm illa.
                  
                  Now theſe two, Hearing and Speach anſwer and are accommodated the one to the other, there is a great alliance betwixt 4 The correſpondency of Hearing and Speach.
                      them, the one is nothing without the other, as alſo by nature in one and the ſame ſubiect, the one is not without the other. They are the two great gates, by which the ſoule doth trafficke, and hath her intelligence: By theſe two, the ſoules are powred the one into the other, as veſſels when the mouth of the one is applied to the enterie of the other: So that if theſe two gates be ſhut, as in thoſe that are deafe and dumbe, the ſpirit remaineth ſolitary and miſerable: Hearing is the gate to enter, by it the ſpirit receiueth all things from without, and conceiueth as the female: Speech is the gate to goe foorth, by it the ſpirit acteth and bringeth foorth as the male. From the communication of theſe two, as from the ſtroke of two flints or irons together, there comes foorth the ſacred fire of truth, for they rubbing and poliſhing the one the other, they ſhake off their ruſt, and purifie and cleanſe themſelues, and all maner of knowledge comes to perfection. But Hearing is the firſt, for there can nothing come foorth of the ſoule, but that which firſt entered, and therefore he that by nature is altogether deafe, is likewiſe dumbe. It is neceſſary that firſt the ſpirit be furniſhed with moueables and vtinſeles, by the ſenſe of Hearing, to the end it may by ſpeach diſtribute them, ſo that the good and ill of the tongue and almoſt of the whole man, dependeth vpon the eare: He that heares well, ſpeakes well, and he that heares ill ſpeakes ill. Of the vſe and gouernment of the tongue heereafter. Lib. 3. Chap. 43.
               
               
                  CHAP. XII. Of the other faculties, Imaginatiue, Memoratiue, Appetitiue.
                  
                  THE fantaſticke or imaginatiue facultie, hauing recollected, and withdrawne the kindes and images apprehended by the ſenſes, retaineth and reſerueth them; in ſuch ſort that the obiects being abſent and far diſtant, yea a man ſleeping, and his ſenſes being bound and ſhut vp, it preſenteth

them to the ſpirit and thought, Phantaſmata idola, ſeu imagines dicuntur, and doth almoſt worke that within in the vnderſtanding, which the obiect doth without in the ſenſe.
                  The memoratiue faculty is the Gardian and Regiſter of all  the ſpecies or kindes and images, apprehended by the ſenſe, retired and ſealed vp by the imagination.
                  The Appetitiue faculty ſeeketh and purſueth thoſe things, which ſeeme good and conuenient. 
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XIII. Of the Intellectiue faculty and truly humaine.
                  
                  TWO things are to be knowen, before we enter into this diſcourſe, the ſeat or inſtrument of this intellectiue faculty,  and the Action. The ſeate of the reaſonable ſoule, vbi ſedet pro tribunali, is the braine and not the heart, as before Plato and Hippocrates it was commonly thought, for the heart The ſeate and instrument of the reaſonable Soule. hauing feeling and motion, is not capable of wiſdome.
                  Now the braine which is farre greater in man then in all other creatures, if it be well and in ſuch maner made and diſpoſed, that the reaſonable, ſoule may worke and exerciſe it powers, it muſt come neere vnto the forme of a ſhip, and muſt not be round, nor too great nor too little, although the greater be leſſe vitious. It muſt be compoſed of a ſubſtance and parts ſubtile, delicate and delicious, well ioyned and vnited without ſeparation, hauing foure little chambers or ventricles, whereof three are in the middle, ranged in front, and collaterals betweene and behinde them, drawing towards the hinder part of the head; the fourth is alone, wherein is framed the preparation and coniunction of the vitall ſpirits, afterwards to be made animall and caried to the three ventricles before, wherein the reaſonable ſoule doth exerciſe it faculties, which are three, Vnderſtanding, Memory, Imagination, which doe not exerciſe their powers apart and diſtinctly, each one in each ventricle, as ſome haue commonly thought, but in common all three together in all three, and in euery of them, according to the maner of the outward ſenſes, which are double and haue two ventricles, in each of which the ſenſes

do wholly worke; whereby it comes to paſſe that hee that is wounded in one or two of theſe ventricles (as he that hath the palſie) ceaſeth not neuertheleſſe to exerciſe all the three; though more weakly, which he could not doe, if euery facultie had his chamber or ventricle apart.
                  Some haue thought that the reaſonable Soule was not organicall, 2 The reaſonable Soule is organicall.
                      that is, had no need of any corporall inſtrument to exerciſe it functions, thinking thereby the better to proue the immortality of the Soule: But not to enter into a labyrinth of diſcourſe, ocular and ordinarie experience diſproueth this opinion, and conuinceth the contrary; For it is well knowen that all men vnderſtand not, nor reaſon not alike and after one maner, but with great diuerſitie; yea one and the ſame man, may bee ſo changed, that at one time hee may reaſon better than at another; in one age, one eſtate and diſpoſition better than in another; ſuch a one better in health than in ſickneſſe, and another better in ſickeneſſe than in health; one and the ſame man, at one and the ſame time, may bee ſtrong in iudgement and weake in imagination. From whence can theſe diuerſities and alterations proceed, but from the change and alteration of the ſtate of the organ or inſtrument? From whence commeth it that drunkennes, the bite of a mad dog, a burning feuer, a blow on the head, a fume riſing from the ſtomacke, and other accidents peruert and turne topſie turuy the iudgement, intellectuall ſpirit, and all the wiſedome of Greece, yea conſtraine the Soule to diſlodge from the body? Theſe accidents being purely corporall cannot touch nor ariue to this high ſpirituall facultie of the reaſonable ſoule, but only to the organs or inſtruments, which being corrupted, the Soule cannot well and regularly act & exerciſe it functions, & being violently inforced, is conſtraind either to abſent it ſelfe, or depart from the body. Againe, that the reaſonable ſoule ſhould haue need of the ſeruice of the inſtruments, doth no way preiudice the immortality thereof: for God maketh vſe therof, & accommodates his actions; & as according to the diuerſitie of the aire, region and climate, God brings foorth men very diuers in ſpirit and naturall ſufficiency, as in Greece and Italy men more ingenious, than in Muſcouy and Tartarie: So the ſpirit according to the diuerſitie of the organicall

diſpoſitions, and corporall inſtruments, diſcourſeth better or worſe. Now the inſtrument of the reaſonable Soule, is the braine, and the temperature thereof, whereof wee are to ſpeake.
                  Temperature is the mixture and proportion of the foure firſt qualities, Hot, Cold, Dry, Moiſt, and it may be a fift beſides, 3 Of the Temperature of the braine, and the faculties thereof.
                      which is the Harmonie of theſe foure. Now from the Temperature of the braine proceedeth all the ſtate and action of the reaſonable Soule, but that which is the cauſe of great miſery vnto man, is, that the three faculties of the reaſonable Soule, Vnderſtanding, Memorie, Imagination, do require and exerciſe themſelues by contrarie temperatures. The temperature which ſerueth, and is proper to the vnderſtanding is drie, whereby it comes to paſſe that they that The vnderſtanding dry. Old age. are ſtriken in yeeres, doe excell thoſe in their vnderſtanding that are yoong, becauſe in the braine as yeeres increaſe, ſo moiſture decreaſeth. So likewiſe melancholicke men, ſuch as are afflicted with want, and faſt much (for heauineſſe and faſting are driers) are wiſe and ingenious, Splendor ficcus, animus ſaptentiſſimus, vexatio dat intellectum: And beaſts that are of a drie temperature, as Ants, Bees, Elephants, are wiſe and ingenious, as they that are of a moiſt temperature are ſtupid and without ſpirit, as Swine: And the Southerne people Southernes. of the world are drie, and moderate in the inward heat of the braine, by reaſon of their violent outward heat.
                  The temperature of the memorie is moiſt, whereof it is 2 The Memorie moist. Infancie. Septentrionals.
                      that infants haue better memorie than old men, and the morning after that humidity that is gotten by ſleepe in the night, is more apt for memorie, which is likewiſe more vigorous in Northerne people. I heere vnderſtand a moiſture that is not wateriſh or diſtilling, wherein no impreſſion may bee made, but airie, viſcous, fat, and oilly, which eaſily receiueth, and ſtrongly retaineth, as it is ſeene in pictures wrought in oile.
                  The temperature of the imagination is hot, from whence it commeth that franticke men, and ſuch as are ſicke of burning 3 The imagination hot Youth.
                      maladies, are excellent in that that belongs to imagination, as Poetry, Diuination, and that it hath greateſt force in yoong men, and of middle yeeres (Poets and Prophets haue

flouriſhed in this age) and in the middle parts betwixt North The middle region. and South.
                  By this diuerſitie of temperatures it commeth to paſſe, 4 A compariſon of the temperatures.
                      that a man may be indifferent in all the three faculties, but not excellent; and that he that is excellent in any one of the three, is but weake in the reſt: that the temperatures of the memorie and vnderſtanding are very different and contrary, it is cleere, as drie and moiſt; as for the imagination, it ſeemth not to be ſo contrary from the others, becauſe heat is not incompatible with drouth and moiſture: and yet notwithſtanding experience ſheweth, that they that excell in imagination, are ſicke in vnderſtanding and memorie, and held for fooles and madde men: but the reaſon thereof is, becauſe the great heat that ſerueth the imagination, conſumeth both the moiſture which ſerueth the memorie, and the ſubtilitie of the ſpirits and figures which ſhould be in that drineſſe which ſerueth the vnderſtanding, and ſo it is contrary, and deſtroyeth the other two.
                  By that which hath beene ſpoken it appeareth, that there 5 Three only temperatures.
                      are but three principall temperatures, which ſerue and cauſe the reaſonable Soule to worke, and diſtinguiſh the ſpirits, that is to ſay, Heat, Drineſſe, Moiſture: Colde is not actiue, nor ſerueth to any purpoſe, but to hinder all the motions and functions of the Soule: and when we finde in ſome authors, that Colde ſerueth the vnderſtanding, and that they that haue colde braines, as Melancholike men and the Southerne, are wiſe and ingenious; there Colde is taken not ſimply, but for a great moderation of heat: for there is nothing more contrary to the vnderſtanding and to wiſdome, than great heat, which contrariwiſe ſerueth the imagination. According to the three temperatures, there are three faculties of the reaſonable Soule; but as the temperatures, ſo the faculties receiue diuers degrees, ſubdiuiſions and diſtinctions.
                  There are three principall offices and differences of vnderſtanding, 6 Subdiuiſion of the faculties.
                      to Infer, to Diſtinguiſh, to Chaſe: theſe Sciences which appertaine to the vnderſtanding, are Schoole-Diuinitie, the Theorike of Phyſicke, Logicke, Philoſophie naturall and morall. There are three kindes of differences of memorie, eaſily to receiue and loſe the figures, eaſily to receiue and

hardly to loſe, hardly to receiue and eaſily to loſe. The Sciences of the memory are Grammar, the Theorike of the Law, Poſitiue Diuinitie, Coſmographie, Arithmeticke. Of the imagination there are many differences, and a farre greater number than either of the memorie or vnderſtanding: to it doe properly appertaine, Inuentions, Merry-conceits and Ieſts, Tricks of ſubtilty, Fictions and Lies, Figures and compariſons, Neatneſſe, Elegancie, Gentilitie: becauſe to it appertaine, Poetrie, Eloquence, Muſicke, and generally whatſoeuer conſiſteth in Figure, Correſpondencie, Harmonie and Proportion.
                  Hereby it appeareth that the viuacitie, ſubtiltie, promptitude, and that which the common ſort call wit, belongs to a 7 The proprietie of the faculties and their order.
                      hot imagination; ſoliditie, maturitie, veritie, to a drie vnderſtanding. The imagination is actiue and ſtirring, it is it that vndertaketh all, and ſets all the reſt a worke: the vnderſtanding is dull and cloudie: the memorie is purely paſſiue, and ſee how: The imagination firſt gathereth the kinds and figures of things both preſent, by the ſeruice of the fiue ſenſes, and abſent by the benefit of the common ſenſe: afterwards it preſenteth them, if it will, to the vnderſtanding, which conſidereth of them, examineth, ruminateth, and iudgeth; afterwards it puts them to the ſafe cuſtodie of the memorie, as a Scriuener to his booke, to the end he may againe, if need ſhall require, draw them forth (which men commonly call Reminiſcentia, Remembrance) or els, if it will, it commits them to the memorie before it preſents them to the vnderſtanding: for to recollect, repreſent to the vnderſtanding, commit vnto memorie, and to draw them foorth againe, are all works of the imagination; ſo that to it are referred, the common Senſe, the Fantaſie, the Remembrance, and they are not powers ſeparated from it, as ſome would haue it, to the end they may make more than three faculties of the reaſonable Soule.
                  The common ſort of people, who neuer iudge aright, doe 8 Their compariſon in dignitie.
                      more eſteeme of memorie, and delight more in it, than in the other two, becauſe they haue much vſe of counting, and it makes greater ſhew and ſtirre in the world; and they thinke, that to haue a good memorie is to be wiſe, eſteeming more of

Science than of Wiſdome; but yet of the three it is the leaſt, being ſuch as may be euen in fooles themſelues: for very ſeldome is an excellent memorie ioyned with vnderſtanding and wiſdome, becauſe their temperatures are contrary. From this error of the common people comes that ill courſe, which euery where we ſee, in the inſtruction of our youth, who are alwayes taught to learne by heart (ſo they terme it) that which they reade in their books, to the end they may afterwards 
                        See of this lib. 3. c. 14. be able to repeat it; and ſo they fill and charge the memorie with the good of another, and take no care to awaken and direct the vnderſtanding, and to forme the iudgement, whereby he may be made able to make vſe of his owne proper good, and his naturall faculties, which may make him wiſe and apt to all things: ſo that wee ſee that the greateſt ſcholars, that haue all Ariſtotle and Cicero in their heads, are the verieſt ſots, and moſt vnskilfull in publike affaires, and the world is gouerned by thoſe that know nothing. It is the opinion of all the wiſeſt, that the vnderſtanding is the firſt, the moſt excellent and principall piece of harneſſe: if that ſpeed well, all goes well, and a man is wiſe; and contrariwiſe, if that miſcarrie, all goes acroſſe. In the ſecond place is the imagination: the memorie is the laſt.
                  All theſe differences, it may be, will be better vnderſtood 9 An image of the three faculties of the Soule.
                      by this ſimilitude, which is a picture or imitation of the reaſonable Soule. In euery Court of iuſtice there are three orders or degrees; the higheſt are the Iudges, with whom there is little ſtirre but great action, for without the mouing or ſtirring of themſelues, they iudge, decide, order, determine of all things: this is the image of iudgement the higheſt part of the Soule. The ſecond are the Aduocates and Procters, in whom there is great ſtirre and much adoe, without action, for it lies not in their power to diſpatch or order any thing, only they hatch and prepare the buſineſſe: this is the picture of the imagination, an vndertaking, vnquiet facultie, which neuer reſteth, no not in the profoundeſt ſleepe; and it makes a noiſe in the braine, like a pot that ſeetheth, but neuer ſetleth. The third and laſt degree is the Scribe or Regiſter of the Court, with whom there is no ſtirre nor action, but pure

paſſion, as the Gardian or Cuſtos of all things: and this repreſenteth the memorie.
                  The action of the reaſonable Soule is the knowledge and 10 The action of the reaſonable Soule.
                      vnderſtanding of all things: The Spirit of man is capable of vnderſtanding all things, viſible, muiſible, vniuerſall, particular, ſenſible, inſenſible, intellectus eſt omnia: but it ſelfe either it vnderſtands not at all, as ſome are of opinion (witneſſe ſo great and almoſt infinite diuerſitie of opinions thereof, as wee haue ſeene before by thoſe doubts and obiections that haue alwayes croſſed it) or very darkly, imperfectly, and indirectly, by reflexion of the knowledge of things vpon themſelues, by which it perceiueth and knoweth that it vnderſtandeth, and hath power and facultie to vnderſtand: this is the maner whereby the ſpirit knowes it ſelfe. The firſt ſoueraigne Spirit, GOD, doth firſt know himſelfe, and afterwards in himſelfe all things; the latter Spirit, Man, quite contrarie, all other things rather than himſelfe, and is in them as the eye in a glaſſe: how then ſhould it act or worke in it ſelfe without meane, and by a ſtrait line?
                  But the queſtion is concerning the meane whereby it 11 The meane whereby it worketh.
                      knoweth and vnderſtandeth things. The common receiued opinion that came from Aristotle himſelfe is, that the Spirit knoweth and vnderſtandeth by the helpe and ſeruice of the Senſes; that it is of it ſelfe as a white emptie paper, that nothing commeth to the vnderſtanding, which doth not firſt paſſe the Senſes, Nil est in intellectu, quod non fuerit prius in ſenſu. But this opinion is falſe: firſt becauſe (as all the wiſeſt haue affirmed, and hath beene before touched) the ſeeds of all ſciences and vertues are naturally diſperſed and inſinuated into our ſpirits, ſo that they may be rich and merry with their owne: and though they want that tillage that is fit, yet then they ſufficiently abound. Beſides it is iniurious both to God and Nature: for this were to make the ſtate of the reaſonable Soule worſe than that of other things, than that of the vegetatiue and ſenſitiue, which of themſelues are wiſe enough to exerciſe their functions, as hath beene ſayd; for beaſts without the diſcipline of the ſenſes know many things, the vniuerſals by the particulars, by the fight of one man they know

all men, and are taught to auoid the danger of things hurtfull, and to ſeeke and to follow after that which is fit for them and their little ones. And it were a thing ſhamefull and abſurd, that this ſo high and ſo diuine a facultie ſhould begge it good of things ſo vile and corruptible as the ſenſes, which do apprehend only the ſimple accidents, and not the formes, natures, eſſence of things, much leſſe things vniuerſall, the ſecrets of Nature, and all things inſenſible. Againe, if the Soule were made wiſe, by the aide of the ſenſes, it would follow, that they that haue their ſenſes moſt perfect and quicke, ſhould be moſt wittie, moſt wiſe; whereas many times we ſee the cleane contrary, that their ſpirits are more dull, and more vnapt, and that many haue of purpoſe depriued themſelues of the vſe of ſome of them, to the end the ſoule might better, and more freely execute it owne affaires. And if any man ſhall obiect, that the ſoule being wiſe by nature, and without the helpe of the ſenſes, all men muſt neceſſarilie be wiſe, and alwayes vnderſtand and reaſon alike: which being ſo, how commeth it about that there are ſo many dull pates in the world, and that they that vnderſtand, exerciſe their functions more weakly at one time than at another, the vegetatiue ſoule farre more ſtrongly in youth, the reaſonable ſoule more weakly than in olde age, and in a certaine ſtate of health or ſickneſſe than at another time? I may anſwer, that the argument is not good: for as touching the firſt, that is, That all men muſt be wiſe: I ſay that the facultie and vertue of vnderſtanding is not giuen alike vnto all, but with great inequalitie, and therefore it is a ſaying as ancient as honorable, euen of the wiſeſt, that the acting vnderſtanding was giuen but to few; and this inequalitie proueth that Science comes not of ſenſe: for as it hath been ſayd, they that excell others in their ſenſes, come ſhort of others in their vnderſtanding and Science. Touching the ſecond, The reaſon why a man doth not exerciſe his functions alwayes after one maner, is becauſe the inſtruments whereby the Soule muſt neceſſarily worke, can not alwayes be diſpoſed as they ſhould; and if they be for ſome ſpeciall kinde of faculties or functions, yet not for others. The temperature of the braine, by which the Soule worketh, is diuers and changeable; being hot and moiſt, in

youth it is good for the vegetatiue, naught for the reaſonable; and contrarily, being colde and drie, in olde age it is good for the reaſonable, ill for the vegetatiue. The braine by a hot and burning maladie being heated and purified, is more fit for inuention and diuination, vnfit for maturitie and ſoundneſſe of iudgement and wiſdome. By that which hath beene ſpoken let no man thinke, that I affirme that the ſpirit hath no ſeruice from the ſenſes, which I confeſſe to be great eſpecially in the beginning, in the diſcouerie and inuention of things: but I ſay in the defence of the honor of the ſpirit, that it is falſe that it dependeth vpon the ſenſes, and that we can not know any thing, vnderſtand, reaſon, diſcourſe without the ſenſe: for contrariwiſe all knowledge comes from it, and the ſenſes can do nothing without it.
                  The Spirit in this vnderſtanding facultie proceedeth diuerſly,  and by order: It vnderſtandeth at the firſt inſtant, ſimply and directly a Lion to be a Lion, afterwards by conſequents that hee is ſtrong: for ſeeing the effects of his ſtrength, it concludeth that he is ſtrong. By diuiſion or negatiue, it vnderſtandeth a Hare to be fearefull; for ſeeing it flie and hide it ſelfe, it concludeth that a Hare is not ſtrong, becauſe fearefull. It knoweth ſome by ſimilitude, others by a collection of many things together.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIIII. Of the humane Spirit, the parts, functions, qualities, reaſon, inuention, veritie thereof.
                  
                  THis humane Spirit, and Oeconomie of this great and high intellectuall part of the ſoule, is a depth of obſcuritie, full of creeks and hidden corners, a confuſed and inuolued labyrinth, and bottomleſſe pit, conſiſting of many parts, faculties, actions, diuers motions, hauing many names, doubts and difficulties.
                  The firſt office thereof, is ſimply to receiue and apprehend the images and kindes of things, which is a kinde of paſſion  and impreſſion of the Soule, occaſioned by the obiects and the preſence of them: this is imagination and apprehenſion.
                  The force and power thereof, to feed, to handle, to ſtirre, 
                     
to concoct, to digeſt the things receiued by the imagination, this is reaſon, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  The action and office, or exerciſe of this force and power,  which is to aſſemble, conioyne, ſeparate, diuide the things receiued, and to adde likewiſe others: this is diſcourſe, reaſoning, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , quaſi 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  The ſubtile facilitie, and cheerefull readineſſe to doe all  theſe things, and to penetrate into them, is called Spirit, Ingenium; and therefore to be ingenious, ſharpe, ſubtile, piercing, is all one.
                  The repetition and action of ruminating, reconcocting,  trying by the whetſtone of reaſon, and reworking of it, to frame a reſolution more ſolide: this is iudgement.
                  The effect in the end of the vnderſtanding: this is knowledge,  intelligence, reſolution.
                  The action that followeth this knowledge and reſolution,  which is to extend it ſelfe, to put forward, and to aduance the thing knowen: this is will. Intellectus extenſus & promotus.
                  
                  Wherefore all theſe things, Vnderstanding, Imagination, 
                      
                     Reaſon, Diſcourſe, Spirit, Iudgement, Intelligence, Will, are one and the ſame Eſſence, but all diuers in force, vertue and action: for a man may be excellent in one of them, and weake in another: and many times he that excelleth in Spirit and ſubtiltie, may be weake in iudgement and ſoliditie.
                  I let no man to ſing, and ſet forth the praiſes and greatneſſe 2 The generall deſcription & commendation of the Spirit.
                      of the Spirit of man, the capacitie, viuacitie, quickeneſſe thereof: let it be called the image of the liuing God, a taſte of the immortall ſubſtance, a ſtreame of the Diuinitie, a celeſtiall ray, whereunto God hath giuen reaſon, as an animated ſterne to moue it by rule and meaſure, and that it is an inſtrument of a compleat harmonie; that by it there is a kinde of kindred betwixt God and man, and that he might often remember him, he hath turned the root towards the heauens, to the end he ſhould alwayes looke towards the place of his natiuitie: to be briefe, that there is nothing great vpon the earth but man, nothing great in man but his ſpirit: if a man aſcend to it, he aſcendeth aboue the heauens. Theſe are all pleaſing and plauſible words whereof the Schooles do ring.
                  
                     
But I deſire that after all this we come to ſound and to ſtudy 3 The diſpraiſe.
                      how to know this ſpirit, for wee ſhall finde after all this, that it is both to it ſelfe and to another a dangerous inſtrument, a ferret that is to be feared, a little trouble-feaſt, a tedious and importune paraſite, and which as a Iugler & plaier at faſt and looſe, vnder the ſhadow of ſome gentle motion, ſubtile and ſmiling, forgeth, inuenteth, and cauſeth all the miſchiefs of the world: & the truth is, without it there are none.
                  There is farre greater diuerſitie of ſpirits than of bodies, 4 Diuerſitie of diſtinctions of the ſpirit. See hereof more Chap. 39. ſo is there likewiſe a larger field to enter into, more parts and more formes or faſhions to be ſpoken of: we may make three claſſes or formes, wherof each one hath many degrees: The firſt which is the loweſt are thoſe weake, baſe, and almoſt brutiſh ſpirits, neere neighbours to beaſts themſelues, whether by reaſon of the firſt temper, that is to ſay, of the ſeede and temperature of the braine, either too cold or too moiſt, as amongſt other creatures fiſhes are the loweſt, or by reaſon that they haue not been in ſome ſort remoued and reviewed, but ſuffered to ruſt, and grow dull and ſtupid. Of theſe wee make no great account, as being vnfit to be ordered and ſetled into any certaine and conſtant ſocietie; becauſe both for their owne particular they cannot poſſibly endure it, and it were neceſſary they ſhould alwaies be vnder the tuition of another, this is the common and baſe people, qui vigilans ſtertit; mortua cui vita est; prope iam viuo atque videnti; which vnderſtands not, iudgeth not it ſelfe. The ſecond which is the higheſt, are thoſe great and rare ſpirits, rather diuels than ordinary men, ſpirits well borne, ſtrong and vigorous. Of theſe kinde of people, there was neuer age yet could tell how to build a common-weale. The third which is the middle, are all thoſe indifferent ſpirits, whereof there are infinite degrees: of theſe almoſt is the whole world compoſed. Of this diſtinction and others, heereafter more at large. But we are to touch more particularly the conditions and nature of this ſpirit, as hard to be knowne, as a countenance 
                        5 The particular deſcription.
                        
                        
                           Agent perpetuall.
                        
                      to be counterfeited to the life, which is alwaies in motion.
                  Firſt therefore it is a perpetuall agent, for the ſpirit cannot be without action, but rather then it will, it forgeth falſe and

phantaſticall ſubiects, in earneſt deceiuing it ſelfe, euen to it owne diſcredit. As idle and vnmannured grounds, if they be fat and fertile, abound with a thouſand kinds of wilde and vn. profitable hearbs, vntill they be ſowed with other ſeeds; and women alone without the company of men, bring foorth ſometimes great abundance of vnformed, indigeſted lumps of fleſh: ſo the Spirit, if it be not buſied about ſome certaine obiect, it runnes riot into a world of imaginations, and there is no folly nor vanity that it produceth not; and if it haue not a ſetled limit, it wandreth and loſeth it ſelfe. For to be euery where is to be no where. Motion and agitation is the true life and grace of the Spirit, but yet it muſt proceed from elſewhere, than from it ſelfe. If it be ſolitary, and wanteth a ſubiect to worke on, it creepeth along and languiſheth; but yet it muſt not be enforced. For too great a contention and intention of the Spirit ouer bent, and ſtrained, deceiueth and troubleth the Spirit.
                  
                  It is likewiſe vniuerſall, it medleth and mingleth it ſelfe with all, it hath no limited ſubiect or iuriſdiction. There is 6 Vniuerſall.
                      not any thing wherewith it plaieth not his part, as well to vaine ſubiects and of no account, as high and weighty, as well to thoſe we can vnderſtand, as thoſe we vnderſtand not: For to know that we cannot vnderſtand, or pierce into the marrow or pith of a thing, but that we muſt ſticke in the bone and barke thereof, is an excellent ſigne of iudgement; for ſcience, yea truth it ſelfe, may lodge nere vs without iudgement, and iudgement without them, yea to know our owne ignorance, is a faire teſtimony of iudgement.
                  Thirdly, it is prompt and ſpeedy running in a moment 7 prompt and ſudden.
                      from the one end of the world to the other, without ſtay or reſt, ſtirring it ſelfe and penetrating through euery thing, Nobilis & inquieta mens homini data eſt, nunquam ſe tenet; ſpargitur vaga, quiet is impatiens, nouitate rerum laetiſſima. Non mirum ex illo caeleſti ſpiritu deſcendit, caeleſtium autem naturaſemper in motueſt. This great ſpeed and quickneſſe, this agility, this twinkling of the eie, as it is admirable, and one of the greateſt wonders that are in the ſpirit, ſo it is a thing very dangerous, a great diſpoſition and propenſion vnto folly and madneſſe, as preſently you ſhall heare.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     
By reaſon of theſe three conditions of the ſpirit, that is, a perpetuall agent without repoſe, vniuerſall, prompt and ſudden, it hath beene accounted immortall, and to haue in it ſelfe ſome marke, and ſparkle of diuinitie.
                  The action of the Spirit is alwayes to ſearch, ferret, contriue 8 The action of the Spirit.
                      without intermiſſion; like one famiſhed for want of knowledge, to enquire and ſeeke, and therefore Homer calles men 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . There is no end of our inquiſitions: the purſuites of the ſpirit of man are without limits, without forme: the food thereof is double ambiguitie; it is a perpetuall motion without reſt, without bound. The world is a ſchoole of inquiſition; agitation and hunting is it proper diſh: to take, or to faile of the pray, is another thing.
                  But it worketh and purſueth it enterprices, raſhly, and irregularly, without order, and without meaſure, it is a wandring 9 It worketh raſhly.
                      inſtrument, mooueable, diuerſly turning; it is an inſtrument of leade and of wax, it boweth and ſtraitneth, applieth it ſelfe to all, more ſupple and facill than the water, the aire, flexibilis omni humore obſequentior, & vt ſpiritus qui omni materia facilior vt tenuior; it is the ſhoo of Theramenes, fit for all. The cunning is to finde where it is, for it goes alwayes athwart, and croſſe, as wel with a lie, as with a truth: it ſporteth it ſelfe and findeth a ſeeming reaſon for euery thing; for it maketh that 10 Reaſon hath diuers faces.
                      which is impious, vniuſt, abominable in one place, pietie, iuſtice and honour in another: neither can we name any law or cuſtome, or condition, that is either generally receiued of all, or reiected; the marriage of thoſe that are neere of blood, the murther of infants, parents, is condemned in one place, lawfull in another. Plato refuſed an embrodered and perfumed robe offered him by Dionyſius, ſaying that he was a man, and therefore would not adorne himſelfe like a woman. Ariſtippus accepted of that robe, ſaying the outward acoutrement can not corrupt a chaſte minde. Diogenes waſhing his colewarts and ſeeing Ariſtippus paſſe by, ſayd vnto him, If thou kneweſt how to liue with colewarts, thou wouldeſt neuer follow the Court of a Tyrant. Ariſtippus anſwered him, If thou kneweſt how to liue with Kings, thou wouldeſt neuer waſh colewarts. One perſwaded Solon to ceaſe from the bewailing the death of his ſonnes, becauſe his teares did neither profit

nor helpe him. Yea therefore, ſayth he, are my teares iuſt, and I haue reaſon to weepe. The wife of Socrates redoubled her griefe, becauſe the Iudges put her husband to death vniuſtly: What, ſaith he, wouldeſt thou rather I were iuſtly condemned? There is no good, ſayth a wiſe man, but that, to the loſſe whereof a man is alwayes prepared, In aequo enim est dolor amiſſae rei, & timor amittendae. Quite contrary, faith another, we embrace and locke vp that good a great deale the more carefully, which we ſee leſſe ſure, and alwaies feare will be taken from vs. A Cynique Philoſopher demanded of Antigonus the King, a dram of ſiluer. That, ſayth he, is no gift fit for a King. Why then giue me a talent, ſayth the Philoſopher. And that, ſaith the King, is no gift fit for a Cynique. One ſayd of a King of Sparta that was gentle and debonaire, Hee is a good man euen to the wicked. How ſhould hee be good vnto the wicked, ſaith another, if he be not wicked with the wicked. So that we ſee that the reaſon of man hath many viſages: it is a two-edged ſword, a ſtaffe with two pikes, Ogni medaglia ha il ſuo riuerſo. There is no reaſon but hath a contrary reaſon, ſayth the ſoundeſt and ſureſt Philoſopher.
                  Now this volubilitie and flexibilitie proceedeth from many  cauſes; from the perpetuall alteration and motion of the bodie, which is neuer twice in a mans life in one and the ſame eſtate; from the obiects which are infinite, the aire it ſelfe, and the ſerenitie of the heauen,

                        Tales ſunt hominum mentes quali pater ipſe
                        Iuppiter auctiferas luſtrauit lampide terras,
                     
and all outward things: inwardly from thoſe ſhakings and tremblings which the Soule giues vnto it ſelfe by the agitation, and ſtirreth vp by the paſſions thereof: inſomuch that it beholdeth things with diuers countenances; for whatſoeuer is in the world hath diuers luſtures, diuers conſiderations. Epictetus ſayd it was a pot with two hands. He might better haue ſayd with many.
                  The reaſon heereof is, becauſe it entangleth it ſelfe in it 12 The reaſon of this intanglement.
                      owne worke like the Silke-worme: for as it thinketh to note from farre, I know not what appearance of light, and imaginarie truth, and flies vnto it: there are many difficulties that

croſſe the way, new ſents that inebriate and bring it forth of the way.
                  The end at which it aimeth is twofold, the one more common and naturall, which is Trueth, which it ſearcheth and 13 The end is verity which it can neither attaine nor finde.
                      purſueth; for there is no deſire more naturall than to know the trueth: we aſſay all the meanes we can to attaine vnto it, but in the end all our endeuours come ſhort; for Truth is not an ordinarie bootie, or thing that will ſuffer it ſelfe to be gotten and handled, much leſſe to be poſſeſſed by any humane Spirit. It lodgeth within the boſom of God, that is her chamber, 
                        Reade before Chap. 9. her retiring place. Man knoweth not, vnderſtandeth not any thing aright, in puritie and in trueth as he ought: appearances doe alwayes compaſſe him on euery ſide, which are as well in thoſe things that are falſe as true. We are borne to ſearch the truth, but to poſſeſſe it, belongeth to a higher and greater power. Truth is not his that thruſts himſelfe into it, but his that runnes the faireſt courſe towards the marke. When it falles out that he hits vpon a trueth, it is by chance and hazzard, he knowes not how to holde it, to poſſeſſe it, to diſtinguiſh it from a lie. Errours are receiued into our ſoule, by the ſelfe ſame way and conduit that the truth is; the ſpirit hath no meanes either to diſtinguiſh or to chuſe: and as well may he play the ſot, that telles a trueth as a lie. The meanes that it vſeth for the diſcouerie of the truth, are reaſon and experience, both of them very weake, vncertaine, diuers, wauering. The greateſt argument of truth, is the generall conſent of the world: now the number of fooles doth farre exceed the number of the wiſe, and therefore how ſhould that generall conſent be agreed vpon, but by corruption and an applauſe giuen without iudgement and knowledge of the cauſe, and by the imitation of ſome one that firſt began the dance.
                  The other end leſſe naturall, but more ambitious, is Inuention, 14 The ſecond end Inuention.
                      vnto which it tendeth as to the higheſt point of honor, to the end it may raiſe it ſelfe and preuaile the more: this is that which is in ſo high account, that it ſeemeth to be an image of the Diuinitie. From the ſufficiencie of this inuention, haue proceeded all thoſe works, which haue rauiſhed the whole world with admiration; which if they be ſuch as are

for the publike benefit, they haue deified their Authours. Thoſe works that ſhew rather fineneſſe of wit than bring profit with them, are painting, caruing, Architecture, the art Perſpectiue, as the vine of Zeuxis, the Venus of Apelles, the image of Memnon, the horſe of A
                           ••
                        ain, the woodden pigeon of Architas, the cow of Myron, the flie and the eagle of Montroyall, the ſpheare of Sapor King of the Perſians, and that of Archimides with his other engins. Now art and inuention The praiſe of inuention. ſeeme not onely to imitate Nature, but to excell it, and that not only in the indiuiduum or particular (for there is not any bodie either of man or beaſt, ſo vniuerſally well made, as by art may be ſhewed) but alſo many things are done by art, which are not done by nature: I meane beſides thoſe compoſitions and mixtures, which are the true diet, and proper ſubiect of art, thoſe diſtillations of waters and oiles, made of ſimples, which Nature frameth not. But in all this there is no ſuch cauſe of admiration as we thinke; and to ſpeake properly and truly, there is no inuention but that which God reuealeth: for ſuch as we account and call ſo, are but obſeruations of naturall things, arguments and concluſions drawen from them, as Painting and the art Opticke from ſhadowes, Sundials from the ſhadowes of trees, the grauing of ſeales from precious ſtones.
                  By all this that hath before beene ſpoken, it is eaſie to ſee 15 The Spirit very dangerous.
                      how raſh and dangerous the ſpirit of man is, eſpecially if it be quicke and vigorous: for being ſo induſtrious, ſo free and vniuerſall, making it motions ſo irregularly, vſing it libertie ſo boldly in all things, not tying it ſelfe to any thing; it eaſily ſhaketh the common opinions, and all thoſe rules whereby it ſhould be bridled and reſtrained as an vniuſt tyranny: it will vndertake to examine all things, to iudge the greateſt part of things plauſibly receiued in the world, to be ridiculous and abſurd; and finding for all an appearance of reaſon, will defend it ſelfe againſt all, whereby it is to be feared that it wandreth out of the way and loſeth it ſelfe: and we can not but ſee that they that haue any extraordinary viuacity and rare excellency (as they that are in the higheſt roofe of that middle Claſſis before ſpoken of) are for the moſt part lawleſſe both in opinions and maners. There are very few of

whoſe guide and conduct a man may truſt, and in the libertie of whoſe iudgements a man may wade without temeritie, beyond the common opinion. It is a miracle to finde a great and liuely ſpirit, well ruled and gouerned: it is a dangerous ſword which a man knowes not well how to guide; for from whence come all thoſe diſorders, reuolts, hereſies and troubles in the world, but for this? Magni errores non niſi ex magnis ingenijs: nihil ſapientiae o dioſius acumine nimio. Doubtleſſe that man liues a better time, and a longer life, is more happie and farre more fit for the gouernment of a Common-wealth, ſayth Thucydides, that hath an indifferent ſpirit, or ſomewhat beneath a mediocritie, than he that hath a ſpirit ſo eleuated and tranſcendent, that it ſerues not for any thing but the torment of himſelfe and others. From the firmeſt friendſhips do ſpring the greateſt enmities, and from the ſoundeſt health the deadlieſt maladies: and euen ſo, from the rareſt and quickeſt agitation of our ſoules the moſt deſperate reſolutions and diſorderly frenſies. Wiſdome and follie are neere neighbors; there is but a halfe turne betwixt the one and the other; which we may eaſily ſee in the actions of madde men. Philoſophie teacheth, that Melancholy is proper to them both. Whereof is framed the fineſt follie, but of the fineſt wit? And therefore, ſayth Ariſtotle, there is no great ſpirit without ſome mixture of follie. And Plato telleth vs, that in vaine a temperate and ſound ſpirit knocketh at the doore of Poetrie. And in this ſenſe it is, that the wiſeſt and beſt Poets doe loue ſometimes to play the foole, and to leape out of the hindges. Inſanire iucundum eſt, dulce deſipere in loco: non poteſt grande & ſublime quidquam niſi mota mens, & quamdiu apud ſe est.
                  
                  And this is the cauſe why man hath good reaſon to keepe it within narrow bounds, to bridle and binde it with Religions, 16 It must be bridled, & why.
                     , Lawes, Cuſtomes, Sciences, Precepts, Threatnings, Promiſes mortall and immortall, which notwithſtanding yet we ſee, that by a lawleſſe kinde of libertie it freeth it ſelfe, and eſcapeth all theſe; ſo vnruly is it by nature, ſo fierce, ſo opinatiue: and therefore it is to be led by art, ſince by force it can not. Natura contumax eſt animus humanus, in contrarium at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         arduum nitens, ſequitur
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         faciliùs quam ducitur, vt generoſi 
                     Seneca.
                     
                     & nobiles equi melius facili fraeno reguntur. It is a ſurer way gently to tutor it, and to lay it aſleepe, than to ſuffer it to wander at it owne pleaſure: for if it be not well and orderly gouerned, (as they of the higheſt claſſis which before we ſpake of) or weake, and ſoft and pliant (as thoſe of the lower ranke) it will loſe it ſelfe in the libertie of it owne iudgement: and therefore it is neceſſary that it be by ſome meanes or other held backe, as hauing more need of lead than wings, of a bridle than of a ſpurre; which the great Lawyers and Founders of States did eſpecially regard, as well knowing, that people of an indifferent ſpirit, liued in more quiet and content, than the ouer-quicke and ingenious. There haue been more troubles and ſeditions in ten yeeres in the only citie of Florence, than in fiue hundred yeeres in the countreys of the Heluetians and the Retians. And to ſay the trueth, men of a common ſufficiencie are more honeſt, better citizens, more pliant, and willing to ſubmit themſelues to the yoke of the lawes, their ſuperiours, reaſon it ſelfe, than thoſe quicke and cleere ſighted men, that can not keepe themſelues within their owne skinnes. The fineſt wits are not the wiſeſt men.
                  The Spirit hath it maladies, defects, tares or refuſe as well 17 The defect of the ſpirit.
                      as the body and much more, more dangerous and more incurable: but that wee may the better know them, we muſt diſtinguiſh them: Some are accidentall, and which come from Accidentall proceeding from three cauſes. elſewhere, and thoſe ariſe from three cauſes; the diſpoſition of the bodie, for it is manifeſt that the bodily maladie which alter the temperature thereof, do likewiſe alter the ſpirit and iudgement; or from the ill compoſition of the ſubſtance of 1. The body.
                      the braine, and organs of the reaſonable Soule, whether it be by reaſon of their firſt formation, as in thoſe that haue their heads ill made, either too round, or too long, or too little, or by accident of ſome blow or wound. The ſecond is the vniuerſall contagion of vulgar and erroneous opinions in the 2. The world.
                      world, wherewith the Spirit being preoccupated, tainted, and ouercome, or which is worſe, made drunken, and manacled with certain fantaſticall opinions, it euer afterwards followeth & iudgeth according to them, without regard either of farther enquiry, or recoiling backe: from which dangerous

deluge all ſpirits haue not force and ſtrength to defend themſelues.
                  The third much more neere, is the maladie and corruption 3. The paſſions.
                      of the will, and the force of the paſſions, this is a world turned topſie turuy: the wil is made to follow the vnderſtanding as a guide and lampe vnto it; but being corrupted and ſeaſed on by the force of the paſſions (or rather by the fall of our firſt father Adam) doth likewiſe perhaps corrupt the vnderſtanding, and ſo from hence come the greateſt part of our erroneous iudgements: Enuie, Malice, Hatred, Loue, Feare, make vs to reſpect, to iudge, to take things others than they are, & quite otherwiſe than we ought, from whence commeth that common crie, Iudge without paſſion. From hence it is that the beautifull and generous actions of another man are obſcured by vile and baſe miſconſtructions, that vaine and wicked cauſes & occaſions are feined. This is a great vice and a proofe of a malignant nature and ſicke iudgement, in which there is neither great ſubtiltie nor ſufficiencie, but malice enough. This proceedeth either from the enuy they beare to the glorie of another man, or becauſe they iudge of others according to themſelues, or becauſe they haue their taſte altered and their ſight ſo troubled, that they cannot diſcerne the cleere ſplendour of vertue in it natiue purity. From this ſelfe ſame cauſe and ſource it commeth, that we make the vertues and vices of another man to preuaile ſo much, and extend them farther than we ought, that from particularities wee draw conſequents and generall concluſions: if he be a friend, all ſits well about him, his vices ſhall be vertues: if he be an enemie or of a contrary faction, there is nothing good in him: inſomuch that we ſhame our owne iudgement, to ſmooth vp our owne paſſions. But this reſts not heere, but goeth yet farther; for the greateſt part of thoſe impieties, hereſies, errours in our faith and religion, if we looke well into it, is ſprung from our wicked and corrupt willes, from a violent and voluptuous Exod. 31. 2. Paral. 15. 3. Reg. 15. Auguſt. lib. 2. De ciuitate Dei. paſſion, which afterwards draweth vnto it the vnderſtanding it ſelfe, Sedit populus manducare & bibere &c. quod vult non quod est credit, qui cupit errare: in ſuch ſort that what was done in the beginning with ſome ſcruple and doubt, hath

beene afterwards held and maintained for a veritie and reuelation from heauen: that which was onely in the ſenſualitie, hath taken place in the higheſt part of the vnderſtanding: that which was nothing els but a paſſion and a pleaſure, hath beene made a religious matter and an article of faith: ſo ſtrong and dangerous is the contagion of the faculties of the Soule amongſt themſelues. Theſe are the three outward cauſes of the faults and miſcariages of the Spirit, iudgement and vnderſtanding of man, The body, eſpecially the head, ſicke, or wounded, or ill faſhioned; The world with the anticipated opinions and ſuppoſitions thereof; The ill eſtate of the other faculties of the reaſonable Soule, which are all inferiour vnto it. The firſt are pitifull, and ſome of them to be cured, ſome not: the ſecond are excuſable and pardonable: the third are accuſable and puniſhable for ſuffring ſuch a diſorder ſo neere them as this is; thoſe that ſhould obey the law, to take vpon them to giue the law.
                  There are other defects of the Spirit, which are more naturall vnto it, and in it. The greateſt and the root of all the reſt 18 Naturall.
                      is pride and preſumption (the firſt and originall fault of all the world, the plague of all ſpirits, and the cauſe of all euils) by which a man is only content with himſelfe, will not giue place to another, diſdaineth his counſels, repoſeth himſelfe in his owne opinions, takes vpon him to iudge and condemne others, yea euen that which he vnderſtands not. It is truly ſaid, that the beſt and happieſt diſtribution that God euer made, is of iudgement, becauſe euery man is content with his owne, and thinkes he hath inough. Now this malady proceedeth from the ignorance of our ſelues. We neuer vnderſtand ſufficiently and truly the weakneſſe of our ſpirit: but the greateſt diſeaſe of the ſpirit is ignorance, not of Arts and Sciences, and what is included in the writings of others, but of it ſelfe, for which cauſe this firſt booke hath beene written.
               
               
                  CHAP. XV. Of Memory.
                  
                  MEmory is many times taken by the vulgar ſort for the ſenſe and vnderſtanding, but not ſo truly and properly:

for both by reaſon (as hath beene ſaid) and by experience, the excellency of the one is ordinarily accompanied with the weakneſſe of the other, and to ſay the truth it is a faculty very profitable for the world, but yet comes far ſhort of the vnderſtanding and of all the parts of the Soule is the more delicate, and moſt fraile. The excellency thereof is not very requiſite, but to three ſorts of people: Merchants or men of Trade, great talkers, (for the ſtorehouſe of the memory is more full and furniſhed, than that of inuention, for hee that wants it comes ſhort, and muſt be faine to frame his ſpeech out of the forge of his owne inuention) and liars, mendacem oportet eſſe memorem. From the want of memory proceed theſe commodities: to lie ſeldome, to talke little, to forget offences. An indifferent memory ſufficeth for all.
               
               
                  CHAP. XVI. Of the imagination and opinion.
                  
                  THe imagination is a thing very ſtrong and powerfull, it  is it that makes all the ſtirre, all the clarter, yea the perturbation of the world proceeds from it (as we haue ſayd before, it is either the onely, or at leaſt the moſt actiue and ſtirring The effects of the imagination maruellous. facultie of the Soule). The effects thereof are maruellous and ſtrange: it worketh not only in it owne proper bodie and Soule, but in that of another man, yea it produceth contrary effects: it makes a man bluſh, wax pale, tremble, dote, to wauer; theſe are the leaſt and the beſt: it takes away the power and vſe of the ingendring parts, yea when there is moſt need of them, and is the cauſe why men are more ſharpe and auſtere, not only towards themſelues but others, witneſſe thoſe ties and bands whereof the world is full, which are for the moſt part impreſſions of the apprehenſion and of feare. And contrariwiſe, without endeuor, without obiect, & euen in ſleepe it ſatisfieth the amorous deſires, yea changeth the ſex, witneſſe Lucius Coſſitius, whom Pliny affirmeth to haue ſeene to be changed from a woman to a man, the day of his mariag; and diuers the like: it marketh ſometimes ignominiouſly, yea it killeth and makes abortiue the fruit within the wombe; it takes away a mans ſpeech, and giues it to him that

neuer had it, as to the ſonne of Croeſus: it taketh away motion, ſenſe, reſpiration. Thus we ſee how it worketh in the bodie. Touching the Soule: it makes a man to loſe his vnderſtanding, his knowledge, iudgement; it turnes him foole and mad-man, witneſſe Gallus Vibius, who hauing ouer-bent his ſpirits in comprehending the eſſence and motions offollie, ſo diſlodged and diſiointed his owne iudgement, that he could neuer ſettle it againe: it inſpireth a man with the foreknowledge of things ſecret and to come, and cauſeth thoſe inſpirations, praedictions, and maruellous inuentions, yea it rauiſheth with extaſies: it killeth not ſeemingly but in good earneſt, witneſſe that man whoſe eyes being couered to receiue his death, and vncouered againe to the end he might reade his pardon, was found ſtarke dead vpon the ſcaffold. To be briefe, from hence ſpring the greateſt part of thoſe things which the common ſort of people call miracles, viſions, enchantments. It is not alwayes the diuell, or a familiar ſpirit, as now adaies the ignorant people thinke, when they can not finde the reaſon of that they ſee; nor alwayes the ſpirit of God (for theſe ſupernaturall motions we ſpeake not of heere) but for the moſt part it is the effect of the imagination, or long of the agent who ſayth & doth ſuch things; or of the patient and ſpectator, who thinks he ſeeth that he ſeeth not. It is an excellent thing and neceſſary in ſuch a caſe, to know wiſely how to diſcerne the reaſon thereof, whether it be naturall or ſupernaturall, falſe or true, Diſcretio ſpirituum, and not to precipitate our iudgements, as the moſt part of the common people do by the want thereof.
                  In this part and facultie of the ſoule doth opinion lodge, which is a vaine, light, crude and imperfect iudgement of things drawen from the outward ſenſes, and common report, ſetling and holding it ſelfe to be good in the imagination, and neuer arriuing to the vnderſtanding, there to be examined, ſifted, and laboured; and to be made reaſon, which is a true, perfect and ſolide iudgement of things: and therefore it is vncertaine, inconſtant, fleeting, deceitfull, a very ill and dangerous guide, which makes head againſt reaſon, whereof it is a ſhadow and image, though vaine and vntrue. It is the mother of all miſchiefs, confuſions, diſorders: from

it ſpring all paſſions, all troubles. It is the guide of fooles, ſots, the vulgar ſort, as reaſon of the wiſe and dexterious.
                  It is not the trueth and nature of things which doth thus 3 The world is lead by opinion.
                      ſtirre and moleſt our ſoules, it is opinion, according to that ancient ſaying; Men are tormented by the opinions that they haue of things, not by the things themſelues. Opinione ſaepiùs, quàm re laboramus: plura ſunt quae nos tenent, quàm quae premunt. The veritie and Eſſence of things entreth not into vs, nor lodgeth neere vs of it ſelfe, by it owne proper ſtrength and authoritie: for were it ſo, all things ſhould be receiued of all, all alike, and after the ſame faſhion; all ſhould be of like credit, and truth it ſelfe, which is neuer but one and vniforme, ſhould be embraced thorowout the whole world. Now foraſmuch as there is ſo great a varietie, yea contrarietie of opinions in the world, and there is not any thing concerning which all doe generally accord, no not the wiſeſt and beſt borne and bred; it giueth vs to vnderſtand, that things enter into vs by compoſition, yeelding themſelues to our mercie and deuotion, and lodging themſelues neere vnto vs, according to our pleaſure, and humour and temper of our ſoules. That which I beleeue, I can not make my companion beleeue; but, which is more, what I doe firmly beleeue to day, I can not aſſure my ſelfe that I ſhall beleeue to morrow: yea it is certaine that at another time I ſhall iudge quite otherwiſe. Doubtleſſe euery thing taketh in vs ſuch place, ſuch a taſte, ſuch a colour, as wee thinke beſt to giue vnto it, and ſuch as the inward conſtitution of the ſoule is, omnia munda mundis, immunda immundis. As our apparell and accoutrements do as well warme vs, not by reaſon of their heat, but our owne, which they preſerue, as likewiſe nouriſh the coldneſſe of the ice and ſnow; we doe firſt warme them with our heat, and they in recompence thereof preſerue our heat.
                  Almoſt all the opinions that wee haue, wee haue not but from authoritie: we beleeue, we iudge, we worke, we liue, we die and all vpon credit, euen as the publike vſe and cuſtome teacheth vs; and we doe well therein: for we are too weake to iudge and chuſe of our ſelues; no the wiſe do it not, 
                        Lib. 1. chap. 1. & 2. as ſhall be ſpoken.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XVII.
                  
                     Of the Will.
                     THe Will is a great part of the reaſonable ſoule, of verie The preheminence and importance of the will. great importance, and it ſtandeth vs vpon aboue all things to ſtudie how to rule it, becauſe vpon it dependeth almoſt our whole eſtate and good.
                     It only is truly ours, and in our power; all the reſt, vnderſtanding, The compariſon thereof with the vnderſtanding. Doubtfull, if not erroneous. memorie, imagination may be taken from vs, altered, troubled with a thouſand accidents: not the will.
                     Secondly, this is that, that keepeth a man intire, and importeth him much: for he that hath giuen his will, is no more his owne man, neither hath he any thing of his owne.
                     Thirdly, this is it whereby we are made and called good or wicked, which giueth vs the temper and the tincture.
                     As of all the goods that are in man, vertue or honeſtie is the firſt and principall, and which doth farre excell knowledge, dexteritie; ſo wee can not but confeſſe, that the will where vertue and goodneſſe lodgeth, is of all others the moſt excellent: and to ſay the trueth, a man is neither good nor wicked, honeſt nor diſhoneſt, becauſe he vnderſtandeth and knoweth thoſe things that are good, and faire, and honeſt, or wicked and diſhoneſt; but becauſe he loueth them, and hath deſire and will towards them. The vnderſtanding hath other preheminences: for it is vnto the will as the husband to the wife, the guide and light vnto the traueller, but in this it giueth place vnto the will.
                     The true difference betwixt theſe faculties is, in that by the vnderſtanding things enter into the ſoule, and it receiueth  them (as thoſe words, to apprehend, conceiue, comprehend, the true offices thereof doe import) but they enter not entire and ſuch as they are, but according to the proportion and capacitie of the vnderſtanding: whereby the greateſt and the higheſt do recoile and diuide themſelues after a ſort, by this entrance, as the Ocean entreth not altogether into the Mediterrane ſea, but according to the proportion of the mouth of the Strait of Gibraltar. By the will, on the other ſide, the ſoule goeth foorth of it ſelfe, and lodgeth and liueth elſwhere in the thing beloued, into which it transformeth it

ſelfe; and therefore beareth the name, the title, the liuerie, being called vertuous, vitious, ſpirituall, carnall: whereby it followeth, that the will is enobled by louing thoſe things that are high and woorthy of loue; is vilified, by giuing it ſelfe to thoſe things that are baſe and vnwoorthy; as a wife honoureth or diſhonoureth her ſelfe by that husband that ſhe hath taken.
                     Experience teacheth vs, that three things do ſharpen our will, Difficultie, Raritie, and Abſence, or feare to loſe the thing; as the three contrary dull it, Facilitie, Abundance, or Satietie, and dayly preſence or aſſured fruition. The three former giue price and credit to things, the three latter ingender contempt. Our will is ſharpened by oppoſition, it oppoſeth it ſelfe againſt deniall. On the other ſide, our appetite contemneth and letteth paſſe that which it hath in poſſeſſion, and runnes after that which it hath not, permiſſum fit vile nefas: quod licet ingratum eſt, quod non licet acrius vrit: yea it is ſeene in all ſorts of pleaſures, omnium rerum voluptas ipſo quo debet fugare periculo creſit: inſomuch that the two extreames, the defect and the abundance, the deſire and the fruition do put vs to like paine. And this is the cauſe why things are not truely eſteemed as they ought, and that there is no Prophet in his owne countrey.
                     How we are to direct and rule our willes, ſhall be ſayd heereafter.
                  
                  
                     PASSIONS and AFFECTIONS. An aduertiſement.
                     
                     THe matter of the paſſions of the minde is very great and 
                           Lib. 2. cap. 6. & 7. lib. 3. in the vertues of fortitude and temperance.
                         plentifull, and takes vp a great roome in this doctrine of Wiſdome. To learne how to know them, and to diſtinguiſh them, is the ſubiect of this booke. The generall remedies to bridle, rule, and gouerne them, the ſubiect of the ſecond booke. The particular remedies of euery one of them, of the third booke, following that method of this booke, ſet downe in the Preface. Now that in this firſt booke we may attaine the knowledge of them, we will firſt ſpeake of them in generall in this firſt Chapter, afterward in the Chapters following

particularly of euery one of them. I haue not ſeene any that painteth them out more richly, and to the life, than Le Sieur du Vair in his little morall books, whereof I haue made good vſe in this paſſionate ſubiect.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                     Of the paſſions in generall.
                     PAſſion is a violent motion of the Soule in the ſenſitiue 1 The deſcription of paſſions.
                         part thereof, which is made either to follow that which the Soule thinketh to be good for it, or to flie that which it takes to be euill.
                     But it is neceſſarie that we know how theſe motions are  made, how they ariſe and kindle themſelues in vs; which a man may repreſent by diuers meanes and compariſons: firſt in regard of their agitation and violence. The Soule which 1. Their agitation.
                         is but one in the bodie hath many and diuers powers, according to the diuers veſſels wherein it is retained, the inſtruments whereof it maketh vſe, and the obiects which are preſented vnto it. Now when the parts wherein it is incloſed, doe not retaine and occupie it, but according to the proportion of their capacitie, and as farre forth as it is neceſſarie for their true vſe; the effects thereof are ſweet, benigne, and well gouerned: but when contrariwiſe the parts thereof haue more motion and heat than is needfull for them, they change and become hurtfull; no otherwiſe than the beames of the Sunne, which wandering according to their naturall libertie, do ſweetly and pleaſingly warme; if they be recollected and gathered into the concauities of a burning glaſſe, they burne and conſume that they were woont to nouriſh and quicken. Againe, they haue diuers degrees in their force of agitation; and as they haue more or leſſe, ſo they are diſtinguiſhed; the indifferent ſuffer themſelues to be taſted and digeſted, expreſſing themſelues by words and teares; the greater and more violent aſtoniſh the ſoule, oppreſſe it, and hinder the libertie of it actions. Curae leues loquuntur, ingentes ſtupent.
                     
                     Secondly, in regard of the vice, diſorder, and iniuſtice that is in theſe paſſions, we may compare man to a Commonweale, 3 2. Of their vice and irregularitie.
                         and the ſtate of the ſoule to a ſtate royall, wherein the

Soueraigne for the gouernment of ſo many people hath vnder-magiſtrates, vnto whom for the exerciſe of their charges he giueth lawes and ordinances, reſeruing vnto himſelfe the cenſuring of the greateſt and moſt important occurrents. Vpon this order dependeth the peace and proſperitie of the ſtate: and contrariwiſe, if the magiſtrates, which are as the middle ſort betwixt the Prince and the people, ſhall ſuffer themſelues either to be deceiued by facilitie, or corrupted by fauour; and without reſpect either of their Soueraigne, or the lawes by him eſtabliſhed, ſhall vſe their owne authoritie in the execution of their affaires, they fill all with diſorder and confuſion. Euen ſo in man, the vnderſtanding is the Soueraigne, which hath vnder it a power eſtimatiue, and imaginatiue, as a magiſtrate, both to take knowledge, and to iudge by the report of the ſenſes of all things that ſhalbe preſented, and to moue our affections, for the better execution of the iudgements thereof: for the conduct and direction whereof in the exerciſe of it charge, the law and light of Nature was giuen vnto it: and moreouer, as a helpe in all doubts, it may haue recourſe vnto the counſell of the ſuperiour and ſoueraigne, the vnderſtanding. And thus you ſee the order of the happie ſtate heereof: but the vnhappie is when this power which is vnder the vnderſtanding, and aboue the ſenſes, whereunto the firſt iudgement of things appertaineth, ſuffereth it ſelfe for the moſt part to be corrupted and deceiued, whereby it iudgeth wrongfully and raſhly, and afterwards manageth and mooueth our affections to ill purpoſe, and filleth vs with much trouble and vnquietneſſe. That which moleſteth and corrupteth this power, are firſt the ſenſes, which comprehend not the true and inward nature of things, but only the face and outward forme, carrying vnto the ſoule the image of things, with ſome fauourable commendation, and as it were a fore-iudgement and preiudicate opinion of their qualities, according as they finde them pleaſing and agreeable to their particular, and not profitable and neceſſarie for the vniuerſall good of man: and ſecondly, the mixture of the falſe and indifferent iudgement of the vulgar ſort. From theſe two falſe aduiſements and reports of the Opinion. Senſes, and vulgar ſort, is formed in the ſoule an inconſiderate

opinion, which we conceiue of things, whether good or ill, profitable or hurtfull, to be followed or eſchewed; which doubtleſſe is a very dangerous guide, and raſh miſtreſſe: for it is no ſooner conceiued, but preſently without the committing of any thing to diſcourſe and vnderſtanding, it poſſeſſeth it ſelfe of our imagination, and as within a Citidell, holdeth the fort againſt right and reaſon, afterwards it deſcendeth into our hearts, and remooueth our affections, with violent motiues of hope, feare, heauineſſe, pleaſure. To be briefe, it makes all the fooles, and the ſeditions of the ſoule, which are the paſſions, to ariſe.
                     I will likewiſe declare the ſame thing, by another ſimilitude of military policy. The Senſes are the Sentinels of the Soule, watching for the preſeruation thereof, and meſſengers or ſcouts to ſerue as miniſters and inſtruments to the vnderſtanding the ſoueraigne part of the Soule. And for the better performance heereof, they haue receiued power to apprehend the things, to draw the formes, and to embrace or reiect them, according as they ſhall ſeeme agreeable or odious vnto their nature. Now in exerciſing their charge, they muſt bee content to know, and to giue knowledge to others of what doth paſſe, not enterpriſing to remoue greater forces, leſt by that meanes they put all into an alarum and confuſion. As in an army, the Sentinels many times by want of the watch word, and knowledge of the deſſeigne and purpoſe of the Captaine that commandeth, may be deceiued, and take for their ſuccor their enemies diſguiſed which come vnto them, or for enemies thoſe that come to ſuccour: So the Senſes by not apprehending whatſoeuer is reaſon, are many times deceiued by an appearance, and take that for a friend which is our enemy. And when vpon this thought and reſolution, not attending the commandement of reaſon, they go about to remoue the power concupiſcible and iraſcible, they raiſe a ſedition and tumult in our ſoules, during which time, reaſon is not heard, nor the vnderſtanding obeied. 4 The distinction of the Paſſions according to their obiect and ſubiect.
                        
                     
                     By this time we ſee their regiments, their rankes, their generall kindes and ſpeciall. Euery paſſion is moued by the appearance and opinion, either of what is good, or what is ill. If by that which is good, and that the ſoule do ſimply ſo conſider

of it, this motion is called Loue. If it be preſent and ſuch whereof the Soule in it ſelfe taketh comfort, it is called pleaſure Of the concupiſcible ſix. and ioy: if it be to come, it is called deſire: if by that which is euill, it is hate: if it be preſent in our ſelues, it is ſorrow and griefe: if in another, it is pity: if it bee to come, it is feare. And theſe which ariſe in vs by the obiect of an apparant euill, which we abhor and flie from, deſcend more deeply into our hearts, and ariſe with greater difficulty. And this is the firſt band of that ſeditious rowt, which trouble the reſt and quiet of our ſoules, that is, in the concupiſcible part, the effects whereof notwithſtanding they are very dangerous, yet they are not ſo violent as thoſe that follow them: for theſe firſt motions formed in this parte, by the obiect which preſenteth it ſelfe, do paſſe incontinently into the iraſcible part, that is to ſay, into that compaſſe where the ſoule ſeeketh the meanes to obtaine or auoid that which ſeemeth vnto it either good or ill. And then euen as a wheele that is alreadie in motion, receiuing another motion by a new force, turnes with farre greater ſpeede; ſo the Soule being already mooued by the firſt apprehenſion, ioining a ſecond endeuour to the firſt, carrieth it ſelfe with farre more violence than before, and is ſtirred vp by paſſions more puiſant and difficult to be tamed; inaſmuch as they are doubled, and now coupled to the former, vniting themſelues, and backing the one the other by a In the iraſcible fiue. mutuall conſent: for the firſt paſſions, which are formed vpon an obiect of an appearing good, entring into conſideration of meanes whereby to obtain it, ſtirre vp in vs either hope or deſpaire. They that are formed vpon an obiect of an euill to come, ſtirre vp in vs either feare, or the contrarie, which is audacitie; of a preſent euill, choler and courage: which paſſions are ſtrangely violent, and wholly peruert the reaſon which they finde already ſhaken. Thus you ſee the principall windes from whence ariſe the tempeſts of our Soule, and the pit whereout they riſe is nothing elſe but the opinion (which commonly is falſe, wandring, vncertaine, contrary to nature, veritie, reaſon, certaintie) that a man hath, that the things that preſent themſelues vnto vs, are either good or ill: for hauing conceiued them to be ſuch, we either folow them, or with violence flie from them. And theſe are our paſſions.
                  
                  
                     
                     OF PASSIONS IN PARTICVLAR. An Aduertiſement.
                     
                     WE wil entreat of their natures, that we may thereby ſee their follies, vanitie, miſery, iniuſtice, & that foulneſſe that is in them, to the end we may know & learne how iuſtly to hate them. The counſell that is giuen for the auoidance of them is in the bookes following. Theſe are the two parts of 
                           Lib. 3. in the vertue of Fortitude & Temperance.
                         phyſicke, to ſhew the maladie, and to giue the remedy. It remaineth therefore that heere we firſt ſpeake of all thoſe that reſpect the appearing good, which are loue and the kindes thereof, deſire, hope, deſpaire, ioy; and afterwards all thoſe that reſpect the ill, which are many, choler, hatred, enuie, iealouſie, reuenge, crueltie, feare, ſadneſſe, compaſſion.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XIX. Of Loue in generall.
                  
                  THe firſt and chiefe miſtreſſe of all the paſſions is Loue, The diſtinction of loue and compariſon. which conſiſteth of diuers ſubiects, and whereof there are diuers ſorts and degrees. There are three principall kinds vnto which all the reſt are referred (we ſpeake of the vitious and paſſionate loue, for of the vertuous, which is Amitie, Charitie, Dilection, we will ſpeake in the vertue of Iuſtice) 
                        Lib. 3. that is to ſay, Ambition or Pride, which is the loue of greatneſſe and honour; Couetouſneſſe, the loue of riches; and voluptuous or carnall loue. Beholde heere the three gulfes, and precipitate ſteepes, from which, few there are that can defend themſelues: the three plagues and infections of all that we haue in hand, the minde, bodie and goods: the armories of thoſe three captaine enemies of the health and quiet of mankinde, the Diuell, the fleſh, the world. Theſe are in truth three powers, the moſt common and vniuerſall paſſions: and therefore the Apoſtle hath diuided into theſe three, whatſoeuer is in the world, Quicquid eſt in mundo, eſt concupiſcentia oculorum, aut carnis, aut ſuperbia vitae. Ambition, as more ſpirituall, ſo it is more high and noble than the others. Voluptuous loue, as more naturall and vniuerſall (for it is euen in beaſts themſelues, where the reſt are not) ſo it is more violent,

and leſſe vitious: I ſay ſimply violent, for ſometimes Ambition excelles it: but this is ſome particular maladie. Couetouſneſſe of all the reſt is the ſickeſt and moſt ſottiſh.
               
               
                  CHAP. XX. Of Ambition.
                  
                  AMbition (which is a thirſt after honour and glorie, a 1 The deſcription.
                      gluttonous and exceſſiue deſire of greatneſſe) is a ſweet and pleaſing paſſion, which diſtilleth eaſily into generous ſpirits, but is not without paine got forth againe. We thinke it is our dueties to embrace what is good, and amongſt thoſe good things, we account of honour more than them all. See heere the reaſon, why with all our ſtrength wee run vnto it. An ambitious man will alwayes be the firſt, he neuer lookes backward, but ſtill forward to thoſe that are before him: and it is a greater griefe vnto him to ſuffer one to go beyond him, than it is pleaſure vnto him, to leaue a thouſand behind him. Habet hoc vitium omnis ambitio, non reſpicit. It is twofolde: Seneca. the one of glory and honor, the other of greatneſſe and command: that is profitable to the world, and in ſome ſenſe permitted, as ſhall be proued: this pernitious.
                  The ſeed and root of ambition is naturall in vs. There is a 2 It is natural.
                      prouerbe that ſaith, That Nature is content with a little: and another quite contrarie, That Nature is neuer ſatisfied, neuer content: but it ſtill deſireth, hath a will to mount higher, and to enrich it ſelfe, and it goeth not a ſlow pace neither, but with a looſe bridle it runneth headlong to greatneſſe and glorie. Natura noſtra imperij eſt auida, & ad implendum cupiditatem praeceps. And with ſuch force and violence doe ſome men runne, that they breake their owne necks, as many great men haue done, euen at the dawning as it were, and vpon the point of entrance and full fruition of that greatneſſe which hath coſt them ſo deare. It is a naturall and very powerfull paſſion, and in the end is the laſt that leaueth vs: and therefore one calleth it, The ſhirt of the ſoule: becauſe it is the laſt vice it putteth off. Etiam ſapientibus cupido gloriae nouiſſima 
                     Tacitus. 
                     exuitur.
                  
                  Ambition, as it is the ſtrongeſt and moſt powerfull paſſion 
                     
that is, ſo is it the moſt noble and haughty; the force and puiſſance The force and primacy thereof. thereof is ſhewed, in that it maſtereth and ſurmounteth all other things, euen the ſtrongeſt of the world, yea all other paſſions and affections, euen loue it ſelfe, which ſeemeth neuertheleſſe to contend with it for the Primacy. As we may ſee in all the great men of the world, Alexander, Scipio, Pompey, and many other, who haue couragiouſly refuſed to touch the moſt beautifull damoſels, that were in their power, burning neuertheleſſe with ambition; yea that victory they had ouer loue, ſerued their ambition, eſpecially in Caeſar: For neuer was there a man more giuen to amorous delights, euen of all ſexes, and all ſorts of people, witneſſe ſo many exploits both at Rome and in ſtrange countries, nor more carefull and curious in adorning his perſon; yet ambition did alwaies ſo carry him, that for his amorous pleaſures hee neuer loſt an houre of time which he might employ to the inlargement of his greatneſſe, for ambition had the ſoueraigne place in him, and did fully poſſeſſe him. We ſee on the other ſide that in Marcus Antonius and others, the force of loue hath made them to forget the care and conduct of their affaires. But yet both of them being weighed in equall ballance, ambition carieth away the price. They that hold that loue is the ſtronger, ſay that both the ſoule and the body, the whole man, is poſſeſſed by it, yea that health it ſelfe dependeth thereupon. But contrariwiſe it ſeemeth that ambition is the ſtronger, becauſe it is altogether ſpirituall. And in as much as loue poſſeſſeth the body, it is therefore the more weake, becauſe it is ſubiect to ſaciety, and therefore capable of remedies, both corporall, naturall and ſtrange, as experience ſheweth of many, who by diuers meanes haue alaied, yea quite extinguiſhed the force and fury of this paſſion; but ambition is not capable of ſaciety, yea it is ſharpned by the fruition of that it deſireth, and there is no way to extinguiſh it, being altogether in the ſoule it ſelfe and in the reaſon.
                  It doth likewiſe vanquiſh loue and robbeth it, not onlie of it health and tranquillity (for glory & tranquillity are things 4 The care of life.
                      that cannot lodge together) but alſo of it owne proper life, as Agrippina the mother of Nero doth plainly proue, who deſiring and conſulting with others to make hir ſonne Emperour,

and vnderſtanding that it could not bee done, but with the loſſe of her owne life, ſhe anſwered, as if ambition it ſelfe had ſpoken it, Occidar modò imperet.
                  
                  Thirdly, Ambition enforceth all the lawes, and conſcience it ſelfe; the learned haue ſaid of ambition, that it is the part 5 The lawes.
                      of euery honeſt man alwaies to obey the lawes, except it bee in a caſe of ſoueraignty for a kingdome which only deſerueth a diſpenſation, being ſo dainty a morſell, that it cannot but breake a mans faſt, Si violandum est ius, regnandi cauſſa violandum est, in caeteris pietatem colas.
                  
                  It likewiſe trampleth vnder foote and contemneth the reuerence 6 Religion.
                      & reſpect of religion, witneſſe Ieroboam, Mahumet, who neuer tooke thought for religion, but tolerated all religions ſo he might raigne: and all thoſe arch-hereticks who haue liked better to be chiefe leaders in errours and lies with a thouſand diſorders, than to be diſciples of the trueth: and therfore ſaith the Apoſtle, that they that ſuffer themſelues to 1. Tim. 6. bee puffed vp with this paſſion and affection, make ſhipwracke, and wander from the faith, piercing themſelues thorow with many ſorowes.
                  To be ſhort, it offereth violence euen to the lawes of Nature it ſelfe. This hath beene the cauſe of ſo many murders 7 It enforceth Nature.
                      of parents, infants, brothers; witneſſe Abſalon, Abimelech, Athalias, Romulus, Sei King of the Perſians, who killed both his father and brother, Soliman the Great Turke his two brothers. So that nothing is able to reſiſt the force of ambition, it beats all to the ground, ſo high and haughtie is it. It lodgeth only in great mindes, euen in the Angels themſelues.
                  Ambition is not the vice or paſſion of baſe companions, 8 It is a lofty paſſion.
                      nor of common or ſmall attempts, and dayly enterpriſes: Renowne and glorie doth not proſtitute it ſelfe to ſo baſe a price; it purſueth not thoſe things that are ſimply and ſolely good and profitable, but thoſe that are rare, high, difficult, ſtrange and vnuſuall. That great thirſt after honour and reputation, that caſts downe a man, and makes him a begger, and to ducke and ſtoop to all ſorts of people, & by all means, yea the moſt abiect, at what baſe price ſoeuer, is vile and diſhonourable: it is a ſhame and diſhonour ſo to be honoured. A man muſt not be greedie of greater glorie than he is capable

of; and to ſwell and to be puffed vp for euery good and profitable action, is to ſhew his taile while hee lifts vp his head.
                  Ambition hath many and diuers waies, and is practiſed by diuers meanes: there is one way ſtrait and open, ſuch as 9 It hath diuers waies.
                      
                     Alexander, Caeſar, Themiſtocles tooke; there is another oblique and hidden, which many philoſophers and profeſſors of pietie haue taken, who goe forwards by going backward, goe before others by going behind them, not vnlike to wierdrawers, who draw and goe backward; they would faine be glorious by contemning glory. And to ſay the trueth, there is greater glory in refuſing and trampling glory vnder foot, than in the deſire and fruition thereof, as Plato told Diogenes. And ambition is neuer better caried, better guided, than by wandering, and vnuſuall wayes.
                  Ambition is a follie and a vanitie, for it is as much as if a 10 It is a folly.
                      man ſhould run to catch the ſmoake in ſtead of the light, the ſhadow in ſtead of the bodie, to faſten the contentment of his minde vpon the opinion of the vulgar ſort, voluntarily to renounce his owne libertie, to follow the paſſions of others, to enforce himſelfe to diſpleaſe himſelfe; for the pleaſure of the beholders, to let his owne affections depend vpon the eyes of another; ſo farre foorth to loue vertue as may be to the liking of the common ſort; to doe good not for the loue of good, but reputation. This is to be like vnto veſſels when they are pierced, a man can draw nothing foorth before hee giue thm a vent.
                  Ambition hath no limits, it is a gulfe that hath neither 11 It is inſatiable.
                      brinke nor bottome; it is that vacuitie which the Philoſophers could neuer finde in Nature; a fire which encreaſeth by that nouriſhment that is giuen vnto it. Wherein it truly paieth his maſter: for ambition is only iuſt in this, that it ſufficeth for his owne puniſhment, and is executioner to it ſelfe. The wheele of Ixion is the motion of his deſires, which turne and returne vp and downe, neuer giuing reſt vnto his minde.
                  They that will flatter ambition, ſay it is a ſeruant or helpe vnto vertue, and a ſpurre to beautifull actions; for it quitteth 12 The excuſes of ambition vaine.
                      a man of all other ſinnes, and in the end, of himſelfe too; and all for vertue: but it is ſo farre from this, that it hideth ſometimes

our vices, but it takes them not away, but it couereth or rather hatcheth them for a time vnder the deceitfull cinders of a malicious hypocriſie, with hope to ſet them on fire altogether, when they haue gotten authoritie ſufficient to raigne publikely and with impietie. Serpents loſe not their venim, though they be frozen with colde, nor an ambitious man his vices though with a colde diſſimulation hee couer them: for when he is arriued to that pitch of height that he deſired, he then makes them feele what he is. And though ambition quit a man of all other vices, yet it neuer taketh away it ſelfe. An ambitious man putteth himſelfe foorth to great and honourable actions, the profit whereof returneth to the publike good, but yet he is neuer the better man that performes them, becauſe they are not the actions of vertue but of paſſion, no though that ſaying be often in his mouth, We are not borne for our ſelues but the weale publike. The meanes men vſe to mount themſelues to high eſtate, and their carriages in their ſtates and charges, when they are arriued thereunto, do ſufficiently ſhew what men they are, and their owne conſciences telles the moſt that follow that dance, that howſoeuer the publike good be their outward colour, yet their owne particular is that they intend.
                  Particular aduiſements and remedies againſt this euill you ſhall finde Lib. 3. cap. 42.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXI. Of Couetouſneſſe and her counter-paſſion.
                  
                  TO loue and affect riches is couetouſneſſe; not only the 1 What it is.
                      loue and affection, but alſo euery ouer-curious care and induſtrie about riches; yea their diſpenſations themſelues and libertie, with art and too much attention procured, haue a ſent of couetouſneſſe: for they are not woorthie an earneſt care and attention.
                  The deſire of goods and the pleaſure we take in poſſeſſing 2 The force thereof.
                      of them is grounded only vpon opinion. The immoderate deſire to get riches is a gangreene in our ſoule, which with a venimous heat conſumeth our naturall affections, to the end it might fill vs with virulent humours. So ſoone as it is lodged

in our hearts, all honeſt and naturall affection which we owe either to our parents or friends, or our ſelues, vaniſheth away. All the reſt in reſpect of our profit ſeemeth nothing, yea we forget in the end, and contemne our ſelues, our bodies, our mindes, for this tranſitory traſh, and as the Prouerbe is, We ſell our horſe to get vs hay.
                  Couetouſneſſe is the vile and baſe paſſion of vulgar fooles, 3 The follie & miſerie of couetouſneſſe in fine points
                      who account riches the principall good of man, and feare pouertie as the greateſt euill; and not contenting themſelues with neceſſarie meanes, which are forbidden no man, weigh that is good in a Goldſmiths ballance, when nature hath taught vs to meaſure it by the ell of neceſſitie. For what greater follie can there be, than to adore that which Nature it ſelfe hath put vnder our feet, and hidden in the bowels of the earth as vnworthy to be ſeene, yea rather to be contemned, and trampled vnder foot? This is that that the only ſinne of man hath torne out of the intrailes of the earth, and brought vnto light, to kill himſelfe. In lucem propter quae pugnaremus excutimus: nonerube ſcimus ſumma apud nos haberi, quae fuerunt ima terrarum. Nature ſeemeth euen in the firſt birth of golde, and wombe from whence it proceedeth, after a ſort to haue preſaged the miſerie of thoſe that are in loue with it: for it hath ſo ordered the matter, that in thoſe countreys where it groweth, there growes with it neither graſſe, nor plant, nor other thing that is woorth any thing, as giuing vs to vnderſtand thereby, that in thoſe mindes where the deſire of this mettall growes, there can not remaine ſo much as a ſparke of true honour and vertue: for what thing can be more baſe, than for a man to diſgrade, and to make himſelfe a ſeruant and a ſlaue to that, which ſhould be ſubiect vnto him? Apud ſapientem diuitiae ſunt in ſeruitute, apud ſtultum in imperio. For a couetous man ſerues his riches, not they him, and he is ſayd to haue goods as he hath a feuer, which holdeth and tyranniſeth ouer a man, not he ouer it. What thing more vile than to loue that which is not good, neither can make a good man, yea is common, and in the poſſeſſion of the moſt wicked of the world, which many times peruert good maners, but neuer amend them? Without which ſo many wiſe men haue made themſelues happy, and by which many wicked men

haue come to a miſerable end. To be briefe, what thing more miſerable than to binde the liuing vnto the dead, as Mezentius did, to the end their death might be languiſhing and the more cruell; to tie the ſpirit to the excrement and ſcumme of the earth; to pierce throw his owne ſoule with a thouſand torments, which this amourous paſſion of riches brings with it; and to intangle himſelfe with the ties and cords of this malignant thing, as the Scripture calleth them, which doth likewiſe terme them thornes, and theeues which ſteale away the heart of man, ſnares of the Diuell, idolatrie, and the root of all euill. And truly he that ſhall ſee the Catalogue of thoſe enuies and moleſtations which riches ingender within the heart of man, as their proper thunder-bolt and lightning, they would be more hated than they are now loued. Deſunt inopiae multa, auaritiae omnia: in nullum auarus bonus eſt, in ſe peſſimus.
                  
                  There is another contrary paſſion to this, and vicious, to hate riches, and to ſpend them prodigally; this is to refuſe 4 The counterpaſſion to couetouſneſſe.
                      the meanes to doe well, to put in practiſe many vertues, and to flie that labour which is farre greater in the true command and vſe of riches, than in not hauing them at all; to gouerne himſelfe better in abundance than in pouertie. In this there is but one kinde of vertue, which is, not to faint in courage, but to continue firme and conſtant. In abundance there are many, Temperance, Moderation, Liberalitie, Diligence, Prudence, and ſo forth. There, more is not expreſſed, but that he looke to himſelfe: heere, that he attend firſt himſelfe, and then the good of others. He that is ſpoiled of his goods hath the more libertie to attend the more weightie affaires of the ſpirit: and for this cauſe many, both Philoſophers and Chriſtians, out of the greatneſſe of their courage, haue put it in practiſe. He doth likewiſe diſcharge himſelfe of many duties and difficulties that are required in the good and honeſt gouernment of our riches, in their acquiſition, conſeruation, diſtribution, vſe and emploiment: but he that quitteth himſelfe of his riches for this reaſon, ſlieth the labour and buſineſſe that belongs vnto them; and quite contrary doth it not out of courage, but cowardize: and a man may tell him, that he ſhakes off his riches, not becauſe they are not profitable,

but becauſe he knoweth not how to make vſe of them, how to vſe them. And not to be able to endure riches, is rather weakneſſe ofminde, than wiſdome, ſayth Seneca.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXII. Of carnall Loue.
                  
                  CArnall Loue is a feuer and furious paſſion, and very dangerous 1 It is ſtrong, naturall and common.
                      vnto him that ſuffereth himſelfe to be carried by it: For what becomes of him? He is no more himſelfe; his bodie endureth a thouſand labours in the ſearch of his pleaſure; his minde a thouſand helles to ſatisfie his deſires, and deſire it ſelfe increaſing, growes into furie. As it is naturall, ſo is it violent and common to all, and therefore in the action thereof it equalleth and coupleth fooles and wiſe men, men and beaſts together. It maketh all the wiſdome, reſolution, contemplation & operation of the ſoule beaſtly and brutiſh. Hereby, as likewiſe by ſleepe, Alexander knew himſelfe to be a mortall man, becauſe both theſe ſuppreſſe the faculties of the ſoule.
                  Philoſophie ſpeaketh freely of all things, that it may the better finde out their cauſes, gouerne and iudge of them; ſo 2 Why ignominious.
                      doth Diuinitie, which is yet more chaſte and more ſtrait. And why not, ſince that all things belong vnto the iuriſdiction and knowledge thereof? The Sunne ſhines on the dunghill, and is neither infected, nor annoyed therewith. To be offended with words is a token either of great weakneſſe, or ſome touch or guilt of the ſame maladie. Thus much be ſpoken for that which followeth, or the like if it ſhall happen. Nature on the one ſide with violence thruſteth vs forward vnto this action; all the motion of the world reſolueth and yeeldeth to this copulation of the male and female: on the other ſide it cauſeth vs to accuſe, to hide our ſelues, to bluſh for ſhame, as if it were a thing ignominious and diſhoneſt. We call it a ſhamefull act, and the parts that ſerue thereunto our ſhamefull parts. But why ſhamefull, ſince naturall, and (keeping it ſelfe within it owne bounds) iuſt, lawfull, and neceſſarie? Yea, why are beaſts exempted from this ſhame? Is it becauſe the countenance ſeemes foule and deformed? Why

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
foule, ſince naturall? In crying, laughing, champing, gaping, the viſage is more diſtorted: Is it to the end it may ſerue as a bridle and a ſtay to ſuch a kinde of violence? Why then doth Nature cauſe ſuch a violence? Or contrariwiſe: Is it becauſe ſhame ſerueth as a ſpurre, and as ſulfure; or that the inſtruments thereof mooue without our conſent, yea againſt our willes? By this reaſon beaſts likewiſe ſhould be baſhfull: and many other things moue of themſelues in vs without our conſent, which are neither vicious nor ſhamefull; not only inward and hidden (as the pulſe & motion of the heart, arteries, lungs, the inſtruments and parts that ſerue the appetite, of eating, drinking, diſcharging the braine, the bellie, and their ſhuttings and openings, are beſides, nay many times, againſt our willes, (witneſſe thoſe ſneeſings, yawnings, teares, hoquets and fluxions, that are not in our owne power, and this of the bodie: the ſpirit forgetteth, remembreth, beleeueth, misbeleeueth, and the will it ſelfe, which many times willeth that which we would it willed not) but outward and apparant: the viſage bluſheth, waxeth pale, wanne, the bodie groweth fat, leane, the haire turneth gray, blacke, white, growes, ſtands on end, without and againſt our conſent. Is it that hereby the pouertie and weakneſſe of man may be the more truely ſhewed? That is as well ſeene in our eating and drinking, our griefs, wearineſſe, the disburdening of our bodies, death, whereof a man is not aſhamed. Whatſoeuer the reaſon be, the action in it ſelfe and by nature is no way ſhamefull, it is truely naturall; ſo is not ſhame: witneſſe the beaſts. Why ſay I beaſts? The nature of man, ſayth Diuinitie, mainteining it ſelfe in it firſt originall ſtate, had neuer knowen what ſhame was, as now it doth; for from whence commeth ſhame but from weakneſſe, and weakneſſe but from ſinne, there being nothing in nature of it ſelfe ſhamefull? The cauſe then of this ſhame not being in nature, we muſt ſeeke it elſwhere. It is therefore artificiall. It is an inuention forged in the cloſet of Venus to giue the greater priſe to the buſineſſe, and to inkindle the deſire thereof the more. This is with a little water to make the fire burne the cleerer, as Smithes vſe to doe, to inflame the deſire to ſee what it is that is hidden; to heare and know what it is that is muttered

and whiſpered. For to handle things darkly as if they were myſteries, and with reſpect and ſhame, giueth taſte and eſtimation vnto them. Contrariwiſe, a looſe, free and open permiſſion and commoditie, derogateth from the worth, and taketh away the true reliſh and delight thereof.
                  This action then in it ſelfe, and ſimply taken, is neither 3 In what ſenſe vitious.
                      ſhamefull nor vitious, ſince it is naturall and corporall, no more than other the like actions are: yea, if it be well ordered, it is iuſt, profitable, neceſſarie, at the leaſt, as it is to eat and drinke. But that which doth ſo much diſcredit it, is, that moderation is ſeldome kept therein; and that to attaine thereunto, we make great ſtirres; and many times vſe bad meanes, whereby it draweth after it, if it go not before, many euils all worſe than the action it ſelfe. The charge riſeth aboue the principall, and this is to fiſh (as it is ſayd) with threeds of golde and purple. And all this is purely humane. Beaſts that follow ſimple nature, are quit from all theſe troubles. But the art of man on the one ſide ſets a ſtrait gard about it, planteth at the gate ſhame to giue it a reliſh: on the other ſide (ô the couſinage of men!) it inflameth and ſharpneth the deſire, it deuiſeth, remoueth, troubleth, turneth all topſie turuie to attaine vnto it, (witneſſe Poetrie, which ſportteh not it ſelfe in any thing ſo much as in this ſubiect) and findeth euery entrance vnto it to be better, than by the gate, and the lawfull way, and followeth euery wandring way, rather than the common way of marriage.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIII. Deſires, Concupiſcence.
                  
                  THere ariſe not ſo many billowes and waues in the ſea, as 1 The bottomleſſe depth of deſire.
                      deſires in the heart of man: it is a bottomleſſe depth, it is infinite, diuers, inconſtant, confuſed, and irreſolute, yea many times horrible and deteſtable, but ordinarily vaine, and ridiculous in it owne deſires.
                  But firſt it ſhall not be amiſſe to diſtinguiſh them. Some 2 Their diſtinction. Naturall neceſſarie. lib. 2. cap. 6. are naturall, and they are iuſt and lawfull: they are likewiſe in beaſts, they haue their limits and bounds, a man may ſee the end of them; and liuing according to thoſe, there is no

man a begger. Of theſe ſhall be ſpoken heereafter more at large: for (to ſay the trueth) theſe are not paſſions. Others Not naturall. are beſides nature proceeding from our opinion and fantaſie, artificiall, ſuperfluous, which we may, for diſtinctions ſake, call Concupiſcences or Luſts. Theſe are purely humane, beaſts know not what they are, only man is immoderate in his appetites: theſe are without limits, without end, and are naught els but confuſion. Deſideria naturalia finita ſunt, ex falſa opinione naſcentia, vbi deſinant non habent. Nullus enim 
                     Seneca. 
                     terminus falſo est: via eunti aliquid extremum eſt error immenſus est. And therefore liuing according to theſe, there is no man can be rch and contented. Of theſe it is properly that wee haue ſpoken in the beginning of this Chapter, and that we farther intend in this matter of the paſſions. It is for theſe that a man ſweats, and trauels, ad ſuperuacua ſudatur, that a man iourneyeth by ſea and by land, goeth to warre, killes himſelfe, drownes, betrayes, loſeth himſelfe: and therefore it was well ſayd, That concupiſcence is the root of all euill. Now it falleth out many times (a iuſt puniſhment) that when a man ſeeketh how to ſatisfie his deſires, and to glut himſelfe with the goods and pleaſures of Fortune, he loſeth and is depriued of thoſe of Nature: and therefore Diogenes hauing refuſed that money that Alexander offered him, deſired him to giue him that he had taken from him, to go out of the Sunne.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIIII. Hope, Deſpaire.
                  
                  OVr deſires and concupiſcences gather heat and redouble their force by hope, which inflameth with the ſoft and gentle aire thereof our fooliſh deſires, kindleth in our mindes a fire, from whence ariſeth a thicke ſmoake, which blindeth our vnderſtanding; carrieth with it our thoughts, holds them hanging in the clouds, makes vs dreame waking. So long as our hopes endure, or deſires endure with them: it is a play-game wherewith Nature buſieth our mindes. Contrariwiſe, when deſpaire is once lodged neere vs, it tormenteth our ſoules in ſuch ſort, with an opinion of neuer obteining that we deſire, that all buſineſſe beſides muſt yeeld

vnto it. And for the loue of that which wee thinke neuer to obteine, wee loſe euen the reſt of whatſoeuer wee poſſeſſe. This paſſion is like vnto little children, who to be reuenged of him that hath taken one of their play-games from them, caſt the reſt into the fire. It is angry with it ſelfe, and requireth of it ſelfe the puniſhment of it owne follie and infelicitie. After thoſe paſſions that reſpect the apparent good, come we to thoſe that reſpect the euill.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXV. Of Choler.
                  
                  CHoler is a fooliſh paſſion which putteth vs wholly out 1 The deſcription.
                      of our ſelues, and with ſeeking the meanes to withſtand and beat backe the euill which it threatneth vs, or hath already procured vs, maketh the blood to boile in our hearts, and ſtirreth vp furious vapors in our ſpirits, which blinde vs and caſt vs headlong to whatſoeuer may ſatisfie the deſire which we haue of reuenge. It is a ſhort furie, a way to madneſſe: by the prompt and readie impetuoſitie and violence thereof, it carrieth and furmounteth all paſſions. Repentina & vis vniuerſa eius est.
                  
                  The cauſes that diſpoſe and mooue vnto choler are firſt 2 The cauſes thereof.
                      weakneſſe of ſpirit, as we ſee by experience in women, olde men, infants, ſcke men, who are commonly more cholericke than others. Inualidum omne, natura quaerulum est. A man  deceiueth himſelfe to thinke that there is courage where there is violence: violent motions are like the endeuours of children and olde men, who runne when they thinke to goe: for there is nothing more weake than an immoderate motion: and a great imbecillitie is it in a man to be cholericke. Secondly,  the maladie of the minde, whereby it is made ouertender to beare blowes, as the vlcerate parts of the bodie, where the ſound being intereſſed therein, are aſtoniſhed and wounded with light matters. Nuſquam ſine quaerela aegra tanguntur. The loſſe of a penie, or the omiſſion of a gaine, puts into choler a couetous man; a laughter or glance of his wife ſtirres this paſſion in a iealous man. Thirdly, luſt, vaine niceneſſe, ſelfe-loue, which makes a man anxious and angry, puts 
                     
him into choler for the leaſt cauſe that may be. Nulla res magis iracundiam alit quam luxuria. This loue of triſles, of a glaſſe, a dogge, a bird, is a kinde of follie that troubleth vs much, and ſtirres vp this cholericke paſſion in vs. Fourthly, too much curioſitie, qui nimis inquirit, ſeipſum inquietat. This  is to ſeeke occaſions, and out of the lightneſſe of the heart to caſt a man into choler, not attending any cauſe thereof. Saepe ad nos ira venit, ſaepius nos ad illam. Fiftly, lightneſſe in beleeuing what comes firſt to the eare. But the principall and formall  cauſe is, an opinion of contempt and miſuſage, either by  word, deed, countenance. Theſe are the reaſons whereby we pretend to iuſtifie our choler.
                  The ſignes and ſymptomes are very manifeſt, and more than of any other paſſion; and ſo ſtrange, that they alter and 3 The ſignes.
                      change the whole eſtate of man, they transforme and disfigure him, vt ſit difficile vtrum magis deteſtabile vitium, aut deforme. Some of them are outward, the face red and deformed, the eyes firie, the looks furious, the eare deafe, the mouth foaming, the heart panting, the pulſe beating, the veines ſwollen, the tongue ſtammering, the teeth gnaſhing, the voice loud and hoarſe, the ſpeech imperfect, and to be briefe, it puts the whole body into a fire and a feuer. Some haue broken their veines, ſuppreſt their vrine, whereby preſent death hath enſued. What then can the eſtate of the ſpirit be within, when it cauſeth ſo great a diſorder without. Choler at the firſt blow driueth away and baniſheth reaſon and iudgement, to the end it may wholly poſſeſſe the place; afterwards it filles all with fire, and ſmoake, and darkneſſe, and noiſe, like vnto him that puts the maſter out of the houſe, and then ſets fire and burnes himſelfe aliue within; or like vnto a ſhip, that hath neither ſterne, nor Pilot, nor ſailes, nor oares, which commits it fortune to the mercie of the waues, windes, and tempeſt in the middeſt of a furious ſea.
                  The effects thereof are great, many times miſerable and lamentable. Choler firſt enforceth vs to iniuſtice, for it is kindled 4 The effects.
                      and ſharpned by a iuſt oppoſition, and by the knowledge that a man hath of the little reaſon he hath to be angry. Hee that is moued to anger vpon a falſe occaſion, if a man yeeld him any good reaſon why he ſhould not be angry, he is preſently

more incenſed euen againſt the truth and innocency it ſelfe, Pertinaciores nos facit iniquitas irae, quaſi argumentū ſit iuſtè iraſcendigrauiter iraſci. The example of Piſo is very notable and prooues this true, who excelling otherwiſe in vertue (the hiſtory is very well knowen) being mooued to choler, did vniuſtly put three to death, and by a ſubtile accuſation cauſed them to be found guilty, only becauſe they acquited one as vnguilty whom hee by his former ſentence had condemned. It is likewiſe ſharpned by ſilence and cold replie, as gathering thereby that it proceedeth out of a contempt both of him and his choler; which is proper vnto women, who many times are angrie to the end they may ſtirre vp that paſſion in another, and increaſe their choler euen to fury, when they ſee that a man vouchſafeth not to nouriſh that humour in them, by chiding with them. So that Choler ſheweth it ſelfe to bee more ſauage than a beaſt, ſince neither by defence or excuſe, nor by ſilence and patience without defence, it will not bee woon nor pacified. The iniuſtice thereof is likewiſe in this, that it wil be both a iudge and a party, that it will that all take part with it, and growes to defiance with as many as will ſeeme to contradict it. Secondly, foraſmuch as it is inconſiderate and heady, it caſteth vs headlong into great miſchiefs, and ſometimes euen into thoſe which moſt flie, and doe wiſh and would willingly procure another man, dat poenas dum exigit, or farre worſe. This paſſion is fitly compared to great ruines, which burſt themſelues in pieces vpon that which they fall, it purſueth with ſuch violence the ill of another, that it heeds not the auoiding of it owne. It intrappeth and intangleth vs, makes vs to ſpeake and to do things, ſhamefull, vncomely, vnworthy our ſelues. Laſtly, it carrieth vs ſo beyond our ſelues, that it makes vs to doe things ſcandalous, dangerous, and irreuocable, murders, poiſonings, treaſons, whereby follow great and too late repentances: witneſſe Alexander the great after he had ſlaine Clytus, and therefore Pythagoras was wont to ſay, that the end of Choler was the beginning of repentance.
                  This paſſion feedes vpon it ſelfe, flattereth and tickleth it  ſelfe, with a perſwaſion that it hath reaſon, that it is iuſt, excuſing it ſelfe vpon the malice and indiſcretion of another,

but the iniuſtice of another cannot make that iuſt; nor the loſſe that wee receiue by another make that profitable vnto vs: it is too raſh and inconſiderat to do any thing that is good: it would cure an euill with an euill; for to yeeld the correction of an offence to Choler, is to correct a vice by it ſelfe. Reaſon which ſhould haue the command ouer vs, needs no ſuch officers as of their owne heads execute lawes, not attending her ordinance; ſhe would haue all things done according to nature by meaſure, and therefore violence doth no way befit it. But what, ſhall vertue ſee the inſolencie of vice and not be angry with it? ſhall the libertie therof be ſo bridled as not to dare to bee moued againſt the wicked? vertue deſires no indecent libertie, it needes not turne it owne ſtrength againſt it ſelfe, nor that the wickedneſſe of another ſhould trouble it: a wiſe man muſt as well beare the vices of a wicked man without choler, as his proſperitie without enuie. Hee muſt endure the indiſcretions of raſh and inconſiderate men, with the ſelfe ſame patience that Phyſitians do the iniuries of mad men. There is no greater wiſedome, nor more profitable in the world, than to endure the follie of another, for otherwiſe by not ſuffering it with patience, we make it our owne. That which hath heeretofore beene ſpoken touching Choler, may likewiſe be ſpoken of theſe paſſions following, hatred, enuie, reuenge, which are made or formed Cholers.
                  
                  Particular aduiſements and remedies againſt this euill are Lib. 3. cap. 31.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXVI. Hatred.
                  
                  HAtred is a ſtrange paſſion, which ſtrangely and without reaſon troubleth vs: and to ſay the truth, what is there in the world that tormenteth vs more? By this paſſion we put our ſelues into the power of him that we hate, to afflict and vex vs; the ſight of him mooueth our ſenſes, the remembrance ſtirreth our ſpirits both waking and ſleeping; yea we neuer preſent him to our memories but with deſpight and gnaſhing of teeth, which puts vs beſides our ſelues, and teares our owne hearts; whereby we ſuffer in our ſelues, the puniſhment

of that euill we wiſh vnto another. He which hateth is the patient, he that is hated, the agent: contrary to the ſound of the words, the hater is in torment, the hated in eaſe. But what do we hate? Men, or their matters and affaires? Doubtleſſe wee hate nothing that wee ſhould; for if there be any thing to be hated in this world, it is hate it ſelfe, and ſuch like paſſions, contrary to that which ſhould command in vs.
                  Particular conſiderations and remedies againſt this euill, are Lib. 3. cap. 32.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXVII. Enuie.
                  
                  ENuie is couſen-germaine to Hatred; a miſerable paſſion and outragious beaſt, which in torment excelleth hell it ſelfe. It is a deſire of that good that another poſſeſſeth, which gnaweth our heart, and turneth the good of another man to our owne hurt. But how ſhould it torment vs, ſince it is as well againſt that which is ill, as that which is good? Whileſt an enuious man looketh obliquely vpon the goods of another man, he loſeth what is good in himſelfe, or at leaſtwiſe takes no delight in it.
                  Particular aduiſements and remedies againſt this euill, are Lib. 3. cap. 33.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXVIII. Iealouſie.
                  
                  IEalouſie is a paſſion like almoſt, both in nature and effect, 1 What it is.
                      vnto Enuie, but that it ſeemeth that Enuie conſidereth not what is good, but in as much as it is in the poſſeſſion of another man, and that we deſire it for our ſelues; and Iealouſie concerneth our owne proper good, whereof wee feare another doth partake.
                  Iealouſie is a weake maladie of the ſoule, abſurd, vaine, 2 The weaknes thereof.
                      terrible and tyrannicall, it inſinuateth it ſelfe vnder the title of amitie; but after it hath gotten poſſeſſion, vpon the ſelfeſame foundation of loue and good will, it buildeth an euerlaſting hate. Vertue, health, merit, reputation, are the incendiaries

of this rage, or rather the fewell vnto this furie.
                  It is likewiſe the Gaule that corrupteth all the Hony of 3 The venim thereof.
                      our life: it is commonly mingled with the ſweeteſt and pleaſantſt actions, which it maketh ſo ſharpe and ſower as nothing more: it changeth loue into hate, reſpect into diſdaine, aſſurance into diffidence: it ingendreth a pernitious curioſity and deſire in a man to cleere himſelfe of that euill, which being paſt remedie, by too much ſtirring ſtinketh the more: For what doth he but publiſh, put out of all doubt, bring into the light, ſound with a trumpet his owne ſhame and miſerie, and the diſhonour of his owne children?
                  Particular conſiderations and remedies againſt this euill, are Lib. 3. cap. 35.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIX. Reuenge.
                  
                  THe deſire of Reuenge is firſt a cowardly and effeminate 1 A cowardly paſſion.
                      paſſion, proceeding from a baſe, weake and abiect mind, which experience telleth vs to be true: for we commonly ſee the weakeſt mindes the moſt malicious and reuengefull, as women and children. The valiant and generous mind doth little feele this paſſion, but contemneth and diſdaineth it, either becauſe the iniurie toucheth him not, or becauſe he that offereth the iniurie is not worthy his reuenge, as not daining ſo farre to debaſe himſelfe: indignus Caeſaris ira. The haile, thunder, and tempeſts, and thoſe fearefull motions that are in the aire, doe neither trouble nor touch the ſuperior celeſtiall bodies, but only the weake and inferior: and euen ſo the indiſcretions and childiſh brawles of fooles wound not great and high minds. All the great men of the world, Alexander, Caeſar, Epaminondas, Scipio, haue been ſo farre from reuenge, that quite contrarie, they haue done good vnto their enemies.
                  Secondly, it is a boiling and biting paſſion, and like a 2 Biting.
                      worme it gnaweth the hearts of thoſe that are infected with it; it moleſteth them by day, and by night keepes them awaked.
                  It is likewiſe full of iniuſtice, for it tormenteth the innocent, 3 Vniuſt.
                     
                     
and addeth affliction. It is to make the party offending, to feele that euill and puniſhment, which the deſire of reuenge giueth to a mans heart; and the partie offended goes to lay on the burthen, as if he had not already hurt enough by the iniurie receiued; in ſuch ſort, that many times and ordinarily, whileſt he tormenteth himſelfe to ſeeke meanes of reuenge, he that hath committed the offence laughs and makes himſelfe merrie with it. But it is alſo farre more vniuſt in the meanes of the execution, which many times is wrought by treaſons and villanous practiſes.
                  Laſtly, the execution is not only painfull but dangerous 4 Dangerous.
                      too; for experience telleth vs, that he that ſeeks to be reuenged, doth not that which he would, and what his blow intendeth, but commonly that which he would not comes to paſſe, and thinking to put out the eye of his enemy, he putteth out both his owne. The feare of iuſtice tormenteth him, and the care to hide him thoſe that loue him.
                  Againe, to kill and to make an end of his enemy, is not reuenge, but meere crueltie, which proceedeth from cowardlineſſe 5 To kill is not to reuenge.
                      and feare. To be reuenged is to beat his enemie, to make him ſtoope; not to kill him: for by killing hee feeles not the power of his wrath, which is the end of reuenge. And this is the reaſon why a man cares not to be reuenged vpon a dogge or a beaſt, becauſe he can no way taſte or conceit his reuenge. In true reuenge there muſt be a kinde of pleaſure and delight in the reuenger; and he vpon whom he is reuenged muſt feele the weight of his diſpleaſure, ſuffer paine, & repent him of the cauſe, which being kild he cannot do: yea he is rather freed thereby from all miſerie, and contrariwiſe he that is the reuenger endureth many times that torment & feare which he wiſhed to his enemie. To kill then is a token of cowardlineſſe and feare, leſt his enemie feeling the force of his reuenge ſhould liue to requite him with the like; which though it make an end of the quarrell, yet it woundeth his reputation, it is a tricke of precaution and not of courage, and is the way to proceed ſafely but not honorably. Qui occidit longe non vlciſcitur, nec gloriam aſſequitur.
                  
                  Particular aduiſements and remedies againſt this euill, are Lib. 3. cap. 34.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXX. Crueltie.
                  
                  CRueltie is a villanous and deteſtable vice, and againſt nature, and therefore it is likewiſe called Inhumanitie. It proceedeth from weakneſſe, omnis ex infirmitate feritas est, and it is the daughter of cowardlineſſe: for a valourous man doth alwayes exerciſe his ſtrength againſt a reſiſting enemie, whom he hath no ſooner at his mercie, but he is ſatisfied: Romana virtus, parcere ſubiectis, debellare ſuperbos. Foraſmuch therefore as cowardly weakneſſe can not be of this ranke, to the end it may yet get the name of valour, it makes blood and maſſacres the proofe thereof. Murders in victories are commonly executed by common people, and the officers of the baggage. Tyrants are bloody, becauſe they feare, not knowing how to ſecure themſelues, but by rooting out thoſe that may offend them; and therefore they exerciſe their crueltie againſt all, euen women too, becauſe they feare all, cuncta ferit, dum cuncta timet. Cowardlie dogges bite and teare with their teeth, within the houſe, the skinnes of thoſe wild beaſts, which in the open field they durſt not looke vpon. What makes ciuill warres ſo cruell, but that tie wherewith the common people are led and linked, who like dogs that are backt by their maſter backe one another? The Emperour Mauritius being tolde that one Phocas a ſouldier ſhould kill him, enquired what he was, and of what nature and condition; and being tolde by his ſonne in law Philip that he was a baſe cowward: Why then, ſaith he, no maruell if he be a murderer and cruell. It proceedeth likewiſe from the inward malignitie of the ſoule, which feedeth and delighteth it ſelfe with the hurt of another. Monſters, like Caligula.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXI. Sadneſſe, or Heauineſſe of heart.
                  
                  SAdneſſe is a languiſhing feebleneſſe of the ſpirit, and a 1 The deſcription.
                      kinde of diſcouragement ingendered by the opinion that we haue of the greatneſſe of thoſe euils that afflict vs. It is a dangerous enemie to our reſt, which preſently weakeneth

and quelleth our ſoules, if we take not good heede; and taketh from vs the vſe of reaſon and diſcourſe, and the means wherby to prouide for our affaires, and with time it ruſteth and fenoweth the ſoule, it corrupteth the whole man, brings his vertues aſleepe, euen then when he hath moſt need to keepe them awaked, to withſtand that euil which oppreſſeth them: but we muſt diſcouer the foulneſſe and follie, the pernicious effects, yea the iniuſtice that is in this cowardly, baſe, and feeble paſſion, to the end wee may learne with all our might to flie and auoid it, as moſt vnworthy the wiſeſt men, according to the doctrine of the Stoicks; which is not ſo eaſy to be done, becauſe it excuſeth and couereth it ſelfe with many beautifull colours of nature, pietie, goodneſſe, yea the greateſt part of the world it drawes to honour and fauour it, making it an ornament to wiſedome, vertue, conſcience.
                  Firſt then it is ſo farre from being naturall (as it would 2 Not naturall. Publike mournings,
                      make men beleeue) that it is formall, and an enemie to nature, as may eaſily be prooued. Touching ceremonious ſorrowes and publike mournings, ſo much affected and practiſed in former times, and likewiſe at this preſent (my meaning is not to touch the honeſtie and moderation of obſequies and funeralls, nor that ſorrow that belongs to piety and religion) what greater impoſture or deceitfull couſenage can there be in any thing beſides? How many fained and artificiall counterfeit couſenages are there with no ſmall coſt and charges, both in thoſe whom it concerneth, the authors of the ſport, and thoſe whoſe offices they make vſe of in that buſineſſe? For to giue the better credit to their iugling tricks they hire people to lament, and to ſend vp their ſhreeking cries and lamentations, which all men know to bee fained and extorted for mony, teares that are not ſhed but to bee ſeene, and ſo ſoone as they are out of ſight are dried vp; where is it that nature hath taught vs this? Nay what is there that nature doth more abhorre and condemne? It is a tyrannicall, falſe and vulgar opinion (the worſt, as hath beene ſaid, almoſt of all the paſſions) that teacheth vs to weepe and lament in ſuch a caſe. And if a man cannot finde occaſion of teares & a heauy countenance in him ſelfe, he muſt buy it at a deare price in another, in ſuch ſort that to ſatisfie this opinion, hee muſt enter into a great

charge whereof nature if we would credit it, would willingly diſcharge vs. Is not this willingly and publikely to betray reaſon, to enforce and to corrupt nature, to proſtitute his owne manhood, to mocke both the world and himſelfe, to ſatisfie the vulgar ſort, which produce nothing but errour, and account of nothing that is not counterfeit and diſguiſed? Neither are thoſe more particular ſorrowes naturall, as it ſeemes to many; for if they did proceed from nature, they ſhould Particular. bee common to all men, and almoſt touch all men alike. Now wee ſee that the ſelfe ſame things that are cauſes of ſorrow to ſome, giue occaſion of ioy vnto others, that one Prouince, one perſon laugheth at that whereat another weepeth; that they that are conuerſant with thoſe that lament, exhort them to reſolution, and to quit themſelues of their teares. Yea the greateſt part of thoſe that thus torment themſelues, when you haue talked with them, or that themſelues haue had the leaſure but to diſcourſe vpon their owne paſſions, they confeſſe that it is but a folly thus to afflict themſelues, and praiſe thoſe who in the like aduerſities, haue made head againſt fortune, and with a manly and generous courage haue withſtood their afflictions. And it is certaine that men do not accommodate their mourning to their cauſe of ſorrow, but the opinion of thoſe with whom they liue. And if a man marke them well, he ſhall finde that it is opinion, which the more to annoy vs preſenteth the things vnto vs which torment vs either more than they ſhould, or by anticipation, feare, and preuention of that which is to come, ſooner than they ſhould.
                  But it is againſt nature, inaſmuch as it polluteth and defaceth 3 Againſt nature.
                      whatſoeuer nature hath made beautifull and amiable in vs, which is drowned by the force of this paſſion, as the beautie of a pearle is diſſolued in vineger. Wee make our ſelues heerby ſpectacles of pity, we go with our heads hanging, our eies faſtned on the earth, our mouthes tongueleſſe, our members immooueable, our eies ſerue for no other vſe than to weepe, that you may ſay wee are nothing but ſweating ſtatues, turned (as the Poets faine) like Niobe into a ſtone by the power of this paſsion.
                  Now it is not only contrary and an enemy vnto nature, but 4 Iniuſt and impious.
                      God himſelfe: for what other thing is it, but a raſh and outragious

complaint againſt the Lord and common law of the whole world, which hath made all things vnder the Moone changeable and corruptible? If we know this law, why do we torment our ſelues? If we know it not, whereof doe we complaine, but of our owne ignorance, in that we know not that which Nature hath written in all the corners and creatures of the world? We are heere not to giue a law, but to receiue it, and to follow that which we find eſtabliſhed: for to torment our ſelues by contradicting it, doth but double our paine.
                  Beſides all this, it is pernicious and hurtfull vnto man, and by ſo much the more dangerous, becauſe it killeth when we 5 Pernitican.
                      thinke it comforts, hurteth vnder the colour of doing good; vnder a falſe pretence of plucking the iron out of the wound, it driues it to the heart: and the blowes thereof are ſo much the more hardly auoided, and the enterpriſes broken, becauſe it is a domeſticall enemy brought vp with vs, which we haue engendred for our owne puniſhment.
                  Outwardly, by a deformed and new countenance wholly 6 Outwardly.
                      altered and counterfeited; it diſhonoreth and defameth man. Doe but conſider when it entreth into vs, it filleth vs with ſhame, in ſuch ſort, that wee dare not to ſhew our ſelues in publike place, no not priuatly to our deareſt friends; and after we are once poſſeſſed of this paſſion, we doe nothing but ſeeke corners to hide our ſelues from the ſight of men. What is this to ſay, but that it condemneth it ſelfe, and acknowledgeth how indecent it is? For it is for a woman that is taken in her wantonneſſe to hide herſelfe, and to feare to be knowen. Againe, do but conſider the veſtments and habits of ſorrow, how ſtrange and effeminate they are; which ſheweth, that it taketh away whatſoeuer is manly and generous in vs, and puts vpon vs the countenances and infirmities of women: and therfore the Thratians adorned thoſe men that mourned, like women. And ſome ſay, that ſorow makes men eunuches. The firſt and more manly and generous lawes of the Romans forbad theſe effeminate lamentations, finding it an horrible thing, that men ſhould ſo degenerate from their owne natures, and do things contrary to manhood; allowing only of thoſe firſt teares, which proceed from the firſt encounter of a freſh and new griefe, which may fall euen from the eyes of

Philoſophers themſelues, who keepe with their humanitie their dignitie: and may fall from the eyes, vertue not falling from the heart.
                  Now it doth not only alter the viſage, change, and diſhoneſtly 7 Inwardly.
                      diſguiſe a man outwardly, but piercing euen to the marrow of the bone, Triſtitia exſiecat oſſa, it weakeneth likewiſe the ſoule, troubleth the peace thereof, makes a man vnapt to good and honourable enterpriſes, taking away the taſte, the deſire, and the diſpoſition to doe any thing that is profitable either to himſelfe or to another, and not only to do good but to receiue it: For euen thoſe good fortunes that light vpon him diſpleaſe him; euery thing is tart vnto his ſoule, as victuals to a corrupted ſtomacke: and laſtly, it maketh bitter our whole life, and poiſoneth all our actions.
                  It is twofolde, great and extreame, or at leaſtwiſe, though 8 The diſtinction.
                      not great in it ſelfe, yet great when by reaſon of a ſudden ſurpriſe, and furious vnexpected alarum it ſeiſeth vpon the hart of a man, pierceth it thorow, depriueth him of motion and ſenſe, like a ſtone, & not vnlike that miſerable mother Niobe,
                  
                  
                     Diriguit viſu in medio, calor oſſa reliquit,
                     Labitur, & longo vix tandem tempore fatur.
                  
                  And therfore the Painter diuerſly and by degrees preſenting vnto vs the ſorrow and miſerable eſtate of the parents and friends of Iphygenia when ſhe was ſacrificed, when he came to her father, he painted him with his face couered, as confeſſing his art not ſufficient to expreſſe in the viſage a griefe of that degree. Yea, ſometimes a ſorrow may be ſuch, that it killeth outright. The ſecond degree is the indifferent ſorrow, which though perhaps it may be greater than the former, yet in time it is leſſened and eaſed, and is expreſſed by teares, ſobs, ſighs and lamentations: Curae leues loquuntur, ingentes ſtupent.
                  
                  Particular aduiſements and remedies againſt this euill, are Lib. 3. cap. 29.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXII. Compaſſion.
                  
                  WE ſigh with thoſe that are afflicted, and with a fellowlike feeling pitie their miſeries, either becauſe by a ſecret

conſent we participate one the others euils, or becauſe we feare that in our ſelues, which hath happened to others. But this is done two wayes, whereby there is likewiſe a twofolde compaſſion; the one good, when a man with a good will, not troubling or afflicting himſelfe, not effeminating his owne nature, and without impeachment of equitie or honor, doth freely and effectually ſuccour thoſe that are afflicted. This is that vertue ſo much commended in religion, found in the holieſt and wiſeſt in the world: the other is a paſſion of a feeble minde, a ſottiſh and feminine pitie, which proceedeth from a delicate tenderneſſe, a troubled ſpirit, proper to women, infants, and to cruell and malicious mindes (which are conſequently baſe and cowardly, as hath beene prooued in the Chapter of Crueltie) who pitie the puniſhments of offenders, which produceth vniuſt effects, not reſpecting the depth and merit of the cauſe, but the preſent fortune, ſtate and condition.
                  Aduiſements and remedies againſt this euill, you ſhall find Lib. 3. cap. 30.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXIII. Feare.
                  
                  FEare is the apprehenſion of an euill to come, which holdeth 1 The deſcription.
                      vs in a continuall care, and runnes before thoſe euils that fortune threatneth vs.
                  Wee ſpeake not heere of that feare of God ſo much commended in Scripture, nor of that feare which proceedeth from loue, and is a ſweet reſpect towards the thing beloued, commendable in ſubiects and all inferiours towards their ſuperiours; but of that vitious feare that troubleth and afflicteth, which is the ſeed of ſinne, the twinne of ſhame, both of one wombe, ſprung from that cloſe and curſed marriage of the ſpirit of man with a diabolicall perſwaſion. Timeo, eò quòd nudus eſſem, & abſcondi me.
                  
                  It is a deceitfull and malicious paſſion, and hath no other power ouer vs, but to mocke and ſeduce vs: it ſerues it turne 2 The malice and tyranny thereof.
                      with that which is to come, where though we ſeeme to foreſee much, we ſee nothing at all; and in that doubtfull darkeneſſe

it holdeth vs, as in a darke place, as theeues do by night, to the end they may robbe a man and not be knowen, and giue a great and ſudden affright with a ſmall number. And therefore it tormenteth vs with masks and ſhewes of euils, as men feare children with bug-beares; euils that haue nothing but a ſimple appearance, and haue nought in themſelues whereby to hurt vs, yea, are not euils, but that wee thinke them ſo. It is the only apprehenſion which we haue, which makes that euill to vs which is not ſo, and draweth euill euen from our owne good to afflict vs withall. How many do we ſee euery day, that with feare to become miſerable, become that they feare, and turne their vaine feare into certaine miſeries? How many haue loſt their friends, by diſtruſting their friends; haue got diſeaſes, by fearing them? One hath in ſuch ſort conceiued an opinion that his wife hath plaied falſe play with him, that for griefe he languiſheth; another hath in ſuch ſort apprehended ſuch a conceit of pouertie, that he falleth ſicke: and to be briefe, ſome haue died for feare to die. And euen ſo may a man ſay almoſt of whatſoeuer we feare: for feare ſeemeth not to other end, than to make vs finde that which we flie from. Doubtleſſe, feare is of all other euils the greateſt and moſt tedious: for other euils are no longer euils than they continue, and the paine endureth no longer than the cauſe; but feare is of that which is, and that which is not, and that perhaps which neuer ſhall be, yea ſometimes of that which can not poſſible be. Beholde then a paſſion truly malicious and tyrannicall, which draweth from an imaginarie euill true and bitter ſorrowes, and is ouer-greedie by thought and opinion to ouertake, nay out-run them.
                  Feare doth not only fill vs with euils, and many times by falſe appearances, but it likewiſe ſpoileth all the good that  we haue, and all the pleaſure of our life, as an enemie to our reſt. A man can take no delight in the fruition of that good which he feareth to loſe; life it ſelfe can not be pleaſant, if a man feare to die. Nothing good (ſaith an ancient writer) can bring pleaſure with it, but that againſt the loſſe whereof a man is alwayes prepared.
                  It is alſo a ſtrange paſſion, indiſcreet and inconſiderate, and  proceeds as often from the want of iudgement, as of heart.

It ariſeth from dangers, and many times caſteth vs into dangers; for it ingendreth in vs ſuch an inconſiderate deſire to get out, that it aſtoniſheth, troubleth, and hindereth vs from taking that order that is fit to get out. It bringeth a violent kinde of trouble, whereby the ſoule being affrighted, withdraweth it ſelfe into it ſelfe, and debateth with it ſelfe how to auoid that danger that is preſented. Beſides that great diſcouragement that it bringeth, it ſeizeth on vs with ſuch an aſtoniſhment, that we loſe our iudgement, & there is no longer reaſon or diſcourſe in vs: it maketh vs to flie when no man purſueth, yea many times our owne friends and ſuccours: adeo pauor etiam auxilia formidat. Many haue run mad heerewith, yea the ſenſes themſelues haue heereby loſt their vſe: we haue our eyes open, and ſee not; one ſpeaks to vs, and we hearken not vnto him; we would flie, and we can not go.
                  An indifferent feare puts wings to our heeles; a great nailes faſt our feet, and intangles them. Feare peruerteth and corrupteth the intire man, both the ſpirit, Pauor ſapientiam omnem mihi ex animo expectorat, and the bodie, Obſtupui ſteterunt
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         comae, vox hauſibus haeſit. Sometimes it makes vs deſperate, and therefore reſolute, like that Romane Legion vnder the conduct of the Couſull Sempronius againſt Hannibal, Audacem fecerat ipſe timor. There are feares and affrightments without any apparent cauſe, and as it were by ſome celeſtiall impulſion, which they call Panique terrours, Terrores de coelo, 
                     Luc. 21. 
                     areſcentibus hominibus prae timore, ſuch as once happened in the citie of Carthage, and wherewith whole people and armies haue beene confounded.
                  Particular aduiſements and remedies againſt this euill, are Lib. 3. cap. 28.
               
            
            
               The ſecond Conſideration of Man, by comparing him with all other creatures.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXIIII.
                  VVEe haue conſidered man whollie and ſimplie in 1 A profitable and difficult compariſon, wherein man is ſuſpected.
                      himſelfe: now let vs conſider him by comparing him with other creatures, which is an excellent meanes to know him. This compariſon hath a large extent,

and many parts that bring much knowledge of importance, and very profitable, if it be well done. But who ſhall doe it? Shall man? He is a partie and to be ſuſpected; and to ſay the truth, deales partially therein: which may eaſily be proued, becauſe he keepes neither meaſure nor mediocritie. Sometimes he placeth himſelfe farre aboue all, he tearmes himſelfe a Maſter, and diſdaineth the reſt; diuides vnto them their morſels, diſtributeth ſuch a portion of faculties and powers vnto them as ſhall ſeeme good vnto him. Sometimes as it were in deſpight, he debaſeth himſelfe beneath all; he murmureth, complaineth, wrongeth Nature as a cruell ſtepmother, makes himſelfe the outcaſt and moſt miſerable of the world. Now both theſe extreames are equally againſt reaſon, veritie, modeſtie. But how would you haue him to walke vprightly & euenly with all other creatures, when he doth it not with man his companion, nor with God himſelfe, as ſhall be ſhewed? This compariſon is alſo difficult to do; for how In the chap. of preſumption. can a man know the inward and ſecret carriages of creatures, that which moueth within them? But yet let vs do our endeuour to do it without paſſion.
                  Firſt, the policie of the world is not ſo vnequall, ſo deformed  and irregular, neither is there ſo great a diſproportion between the parts thereof, but that they that are neere neighbours and touch one another haue a reſemblance, ſome more, ſome leſſe. So is there a great vicinitie and kindred betwixt man and other creatures: they haue many things alike and common to each other, and they haue differences likewiſe, but not ſo farre diſtant and vnlike, but that they may holde together. Man is neither altogether aboue, nor beneath the reſt: All that is vnder heauen, ſaith the Wiſdome of God, Eccleſiaſt. runnes the ſame fortune.
                  Let vs firſt ſpeake of thoſe things that are common to all, and almoſt alike, which are to ingender, nouriſh, to do, moue, 3 Things common.
                      liue, die: Idem interitus hominis & iumentorum, & aequa vtriuſque conditio. And this is againſt thoſe that finde themſelues agrieued, ſaying, that man is the moſt contemptible creature of Nature, abandoned, left naked vpon the naked earth, Eccleſ. 4. without couert, without armor, bound, ſwadled, without inſtruction of what is fit for him: whereas all other creatures

are clothed and couered with ſhels, husks, haire, wooll, feathers, ſcales: armed with teeth, horns, tallants, both to aſſaile and to defend: taught to ſwim, to runne, to flie, to ſing, to ſeeke their releefe, and man knowes neither how to go, nor to ſpeake, nor to eat, nor any thing but crie, without an apprentiſhip and much labour. All theſe complaints to him that conſidereth the firſt compoſition and naturall condition, are vniuſt and falſe: our skinne is as ſufficiently prouided againſt 1. Nakedneſſe. cap. 5. the iniuries of times and ſeaſons as theirs, witneſſe many nations (as hath beene ſaid) that neuer knew what garments meant: yea thoſe parts that we thinke good we keepe vncouered, yea the moſt tender and ſenſible, as the face, the hands, the ſtomacke, and the delicateſt damoſels their breaſts. Bands and ſwadling clothes are not neceſſarie, witneſſe the 2. Swadling clothes.
                      
                     Lacedemonians, and in theſe daies the Switzers, Almaines, which dwell in cold countries, the Biſques & vagabonds that are called Egyptians. Crying is likewiſe common vnto beaſts: all creatures almoſt complain, and grone for a time after they 3. Crying.
                      come into the world. As for armour, we want not that which 4. Armes.
                      is naturall, and haue more motion of our members, vſe their ſeruice more naturally and without inſtruction. If ſome beaſts excell vs in this, wee in the ſame excell diuers others. The vſe of eating is both in them and in vs naturall and without 5. Eating.
                      inſtruction. Who doubteth that an infant, being once able to feede himſelfe, knowes how to ſeeke his ſuſtenance? And the earth likewiſe bringeth foorth and offereth enough vnto him for his neceſſitie, without other culture or Art, witneſſe ſo many nations, which without labour, induſtrie and care liue plenteouſly. As for ſpeech, a man may well ſay that 6. Speech.
                      if it be not naturall, it is not neceſſarie: but it is common to man with other creatures. What elſe but ſpeech is that facultie we ſee in them of complaining, reioicing, of calling others to their ſuccour, of making loue? And as wee ſpeake by geſtures and motion of the eies, the head, the ſhoulders, the hands (wherein deafe men are very cunning) ſo beaſts, as we ſee in thoſe which haue no voice, who neuertheleſſe do enterchange their mutuall offices; and as in ſome kinde of meaſure beaſts vnderſtand vs, ſo we them. They flatter vs, threaten vs, intreat vs and we them, we ſpeake to them, and they to

vs, and if we perfectly vnderſtand not one another, where is the fault? in vs or in them? That is to be determined. They may as well account vs beaſts by that reaſon, as we them, yea they reproch vs for that we our ſelues vnderſtand not one another. We vnderſtand not the Biſques, the Britons, and they all vnderſtand the one the other, not onely of the ſame, but which is more of a diuers kinde. By a certaine barking of the dog, the horſe knoweth that he is in choler, and by another voice he knoweth he is not.
                  Againe they haue their intelligence with vs. In the warres 7. Mutuall intelligence.
                      in the middeſt of the fight, Elephants, Dogs, Horſes vnderſtand with vs, they frame their motions according to the occaſion, they purſue, they make their ſtand, they retire, nay they haue their pay, and diuide the booty with vs, as it hath been practiſed in the new conqueſts of the Indies. And theſe are thoſe things that are common to all, and alike.
                  Let vs now come to thoſe differences and aduantages that 4 Differences and aduantages.
                      the one hath ouer the other. Man is ſingular and excellent in ſome things aboue other creatures, and in others, beaſts haue the ſuperiority, to the end that all things might thereby bee knit and enchained together in this generall policy of the world and of nature. The certaine aduantages or excellencies of man, are thoſe great faculties of the ſoule; the ſubtilitie, viuacitie, Of man. & ſufficiency of the ſpirit to inuent, to iudge, to chuſe, ſpeech to demand and to offer aid and ſuccour, the hand to execute that the ſpirit hath inuented either of it ſelfe, or learned from another. The forme alſo of the body, the great diuerſity of the motions of the members, whereby his body doth him better ſeruice.
                  The certaine aduantages that beaſts haue ouer men, and 5 Of Beaſts generall.
                      ſuch as are paſt all doubt, are either general or particular. The generall are health, and ſtrength of body farre more perfect, conſtant, & ſtrong in them, among whom there are no blind, deafe, lame, mute, diſeaſed, defectiue, and ill born, as amongſt men. The Sereno hurts them nor, they are not ſubiect to rheumes frō whence proceed almoſt all other diſeaſes; from which man though he couer his head with a hat and a houſe too, can hardly defend himſelfe. Moderation in diet and other actions, innocency, ſafety, peace and tranquillity of life,

a plaine and entire liberty without ſhame, feare, or ceremony in things naturall and lawfull (for it is onely man that hath cauſe to hide himſelfe in his actions, and whoſe faults and imperfections offend others). Exemption from ſo many vices and diſorders, ſuperſtition, ambition, auarice, enuie, yea mightie dreames trouble not them as they doe men, nor ſo many thoughts and fantaſies. The particular aduantages are the pure, high, healthfull, pleaſant habitation, and abode of Particular. birds in the aire. Their ſufficiencie in ſome arts, as the ſwallow  and other birds in building, the Spider in ſpinning and  weauing, diuers beaſts in Phyſicke, and the Nightingale in Muſicke. Maruellous effects and properties, not to be imitated,  no not imagined, as the propertie of the fiſh Remora to ſtay the greateſt veſſels of the ſea, as we reade of the chiefe galley of Marcus Antonius, and the ſelfe ſame of Caligula; of the Torpedo or Crampe-fiſh, to benum and dead the members of another, though farre diſtant, and not touching him; of the Hedgehog, to foreſee the windes; of the Chameleon, to change his colours. Prognoſtications, as of birds in their paſſages from countrey to countrey, according to the diuerſitie of the ſeaſons; of all beaſts that are dammes, in knowing which of their yoong is the beſt; for ſome happe falling out of defending them from danger, or conueying them to their neſts, they alwayes begin with that they know and foreſee to be the beſt. In all theſe things man is farre their inferior, and in ſome of them he hath no skill at all. A man may adde vnto this, if hee will, the length of their liues, which in ſome beaſts doth ſeuen or eight times exceed the longeſt terme of the life of man.
                  Thoſe aduantages that man pretendeth to haue aboue beaſts, but are yet diſputable, and perhaps as well in beaſts 6 Diſputable aduantages.
                      as men, are many: Firſt, the reaſonable faculties, diſcourſe, reaſoning, diſcipline, iudgement, prudence. There are heere 1 Reaſon.
                      two things to be ſpoken, the one of the veritie of the thing it ſelfe. It is a great queſtion, whether beaſts be depriued of all theſe ſpiritual faculties. The opinion that they are not depriued but haue them, is the more true and the more authentike. It is defended by many great Philoſophers, eſpecially by Democritus, Anaxagoras, the Stoicks, Galen, Porphyry, Plutarch,
                     
and mainteined by this reaſon. The compoſition of the braine, which is that part which the ſoule makes vſe of, and whereby it reaſoneth, is all alike as the ſame in beaſts and men, confirmed by experience. Beaſts from particulars conclude generals, by the ſight of one only man they know all men, they know how to ioyne, and diuide, and diſtinguiſh the good from the ill, for the ſafegard of their liues, libertie, and little ones. Yea, we reade and ſee, if we would but marke and conſider it, many things done by beaſts, that doe farre excell the ſufficiencie, ſubtiltie, and all the wit and cunning of the common ſort of men: ſome of thoſe that are beſt woorth the noting, I will note vnto you. The Fox being to paſſe ouer a riuer that is frozen with ice, applieth his eare vnto the ice, to finde whether he can heare any noiſe, and that the water doe runne vnder it, that thereby he may reſolue either to go forward, or to retire backe; of whom the Thraſians haue learned the ſame cunning, being to paſſe their frozen riuers. A Dogge, to the end hee may know which way of three either his maſter or that beaſt he hunteth is gone, hauing aſſured himſelfe by ſenting them, that he hath not paſſed by two of them, becauſe he findes not the trace, without the ſetting of his noſe to the ground or farther trauerſing, he runneth mainly into the third. The Mule of the Philoſopher Thales croſſing a riuer with a ſacke of ſalt on his backe, and being plunged into the deepe with his burthen, his ſalt diſſolued in the water, and made his burthen the lighter; which the Mule (falling into the deepe by chance) hauing found, being afterwards loaden with wooll, vſed the ſame remedie, and ſunke the more. Plutarch reporteth, that he ſaw a Dog in a ſhip caſting ſtones into a pipe of oile, to make the oile to mount, that hee might the better come at it. As much is reported of the Crowes of Barbarie, who by that meanes raiſe the water when it is too low, that they may drinke. So likewiſe Elephants gather ſtones and ſticks, and caſt them into that ditch whereinto their companion is fallen, to helpe him to get out. The Oxen of the Kings gardens of Suze being taught to go in a wheele a iuſt hundred turnes, to draw water to water the gardens, they would neuer exceed that iuſt number, and were neuer deceiued in their account. All theſe

thnigs, how can they be done, without diſcourſe and reaſon, addition and diuiſion? To ſay they know not this, were to denie that we ſee they doe. What ſhould we thinke of that dexteritie that is in the Elephant in plucking thoſe darts and iauelins foorth of his bodie with little or no paine at all? of the Dogge that Plutarch ſpeaketh of, which in a publike play vpon a ſcaffold counterfeited death, drawing towards his end, trembling, afterwards growing ſtiffe, and ſuffering himſelfe to be caried foorth, by little and little comming to himſelfe, and lifting vp his head counterfeited a new reſurrection? of ſo many apiſh imitations and ſtrange tricks that the dogs of Players and Iuglers doe? of the policies and inuentions wherewith beaſts defend themſelues againſt the aſſaults we make vpon them? of the husbandrie and great prouidence of the Ant in laying abroad his graine to drie, leſt it take moiſture and ſo corrupt, in nipping the ends thereof that it grow not? of the policie of the Bee, where there is ſuch diuerſitie of offices and charges ſo firmly eſtabliſhed?
                  To beat downe all this, ſome doe maliciouſly attribute theſe things to a naturall, ſeruile and forced inclination; as if 7 An oppoſition of the naturall inſtinct.
                      beaſts did performe their actions by a naturall neceſſitie, like things inanimate, as the ſtone falleth downward, the fire mounteth vpward. But beſides that, that can not be, nor enter into our imagination; for there muſt be a numbring of the parts, compariſon, diſcourſe by addition and diuiſion, and conſequents; they likewiſe know not what this naturall inclination and inſtinct is; they be words which they abuſe to ſmall purpoſe, that they may not be deafe and mute altogether. Againe, this ſaying is retorted againſt them: for it is beyond all compariſon more noble, honourable, and reſembleth more the Diuinitie to worke by nature than by art and apprentiſhip; to be led and directed by the hand of God, than by our owne; regularly to act by a naturall and ineuitable condition, than regularly by a raſh and caſuall libertie.
                  By this obiection of the naturall inſtinct, they would likewiſe depriue them of inſtruction and diſcipline both actiue and paſſiue, but experience giues them the lie; for they doe both receiue it: witneſſe the Pie, the Parret, the Black-bird, the Dogge, the Horſſe, as hath beene ſaid, and they giue it,

witneſſe the Nightingale, and aboue all other the Elephant, which excelleth all other beaſts in docilitie, and all kinde of diſcipline and ſufficiencie.
                  As for this facultie of the ſpirit whereof man doth ſo much glorie, which is to ſpiritualize things corporall and abſent,  robbing them of all accidents, to the end it might conceiue them after it owne maner, nam intellectum eſt in intelligente ad modum intelligentis; beaſts themſelues do the like. The Horſe accuſtomed to the warres ſleeping in his ſtable, trembleth and groaneth as if he were in the middeſt of the fight; conceiueth the ſound of the drumme, the trumpet, yea an armie it ſelfe. The Hare in her ſleepe panting, lifteth vp her ſcut, ſhaking her legs, conceiueth a ſpirituall Hare. Dogs that are kept for gard, in their ſleepe do ſnarre, and ſometimes barke outright, imagining a ſtranger to be come. To conclude this firſt point, we muſt confeſſe that beaſts doe reaſon, haue the vſe of diſcourſe and iudgement, but more weakly and imperfectly than man; they are inferiour vnto men in this, not becauſe they haue no part therein at all; they are inferiour vnto men, as amongſt men ſome are inferiour vnto others; and euen ſo amongſt beaſts there is ſuch a difference: but yet there is a greater difference betweene men; for (as ſhall be ſaid heereafter) there is a greater diſtance betweene a man and a man, than a man and a beaſt. But for all this we muſt not heereby inferre, a kinde of equalitie or paritie betwixt a beaſt and a man (though as Ariſtotle ſayth, there are ſome men ſo weake and blockiſh, that they differ from a beaſt only in figure) and that the ſoule of a beaſt is immortall as that of a man, or the ſoule of a man mortall as that of a beaſt: for theſe are but malicious illations. For beſides that in this reaſoning facultie, man hath a verie great aduantage aboue beaſts, ſo hath the other faculties more high and wholly ſpirituall, whereby he is ſayd to be like vnto God himſelfe, and is capable of immortalitie, wherein beaſts haue no part, and are ſignified by that vnderſtanding, which is more than a ſimple diſcourſe. Nolite fieri ſicut equus & mulus in quibus non est intellectus.
                  
                  The other point which we are to ſpeake of in this matter is, that this preheminence and aduantage of vnderſtanding, 
                     
and other ſpirituall faculties that man pretendeth, is ſold him at a deare rate, and brings with it more hurt than good: for it is the principall ſource of all thoſe euils that oppreſſe him; of vices, paſſions, maladies, irreſolution, trouble, deſpaire, which beaſts want, by the want of this great aduantage: witneſſe the Hogge of Pyrrho, which did eat his meat peaceably in the ſhippe in the middeſt of a great tempeſt, when all the men were almoſt dead for feare. It ſeemeth that theſe great parts of the ſoule haue beene denied vnto beaſts, or at leaſtwiſe leſſened, and giuen them more feeble, for their great good and quiet, and beſtowed vpon man for his torment: for it is long of them that he toileth and trauelleth, tormenteth himſelfe with what is paſt, and that which is to come; yea he imagineth, apprehendeth, and feareth thoſe euils that are not, nor euer ſhall be. Beaſts apprehend nothing that is ill vntill they feele it; and being eſcaped, they are preſently in ſecuritie and at peace. So that we ſee that man is moſt miſerable euen in that wherin he thought himſelfe moſt happy: whereby it ſeemeth that it had beene better for man, not to haue beene indued and adorned with all thoſe beautifull and celeſtiall armes, ſince he turneth them againſt himſelfe, euen to his owne deſtruction. And to ſay the trueth, we ſee thoſe that are moſt ſtupid and feeble of ſpirit, liue at beſt content, and feele not their euill accidents in ſo high a degree, as thoſe that are more ſpirituall.
                  Another aduantage that man pretendeth aboue beaſts is a ſignorie and power of commanding, which he thinketh hee 10 2. Signorie and command.
                      hath ouer beaſts: but beſides, that it is an aduantage that men themſelues haue and exerciſe the one ouer the other, this is not true. For where is this command of man, this obedience of the beaſts? It is a monſter that was neuer ſeen, yea men do more feare beaſts, than beaſts them. It is true that man hath a great preheminence ouer beaſts, vt praeſit piſcibus maris, volatilibus coeli, beſtijs terrae. And this by reaſon of his beautifull Gen. 1. and vpright forme, of his wiſdome and the prerogatiue of his ſpirit: but not that hee ſhould either command, or they obey.
                  There is likewiſe another aduantage, neere neighbour to 11. 3. Libertie.
                      this, pretended by man, which is a plaine libertie, reproching

beaſts with their ſeruitude, captiuitie, ſubiection: but this is to ſmall purpoſe. There is farre greater reaſon why man ſhould reproch man; witneſſe thoſe ſlaues, not only made by force, and ſuch as deſcend from them, but alſo thoſe that are voluntarie, who either ſell for money their libertie or giue it, out of the lightneſſe of their hearts, or for ſome commoditie, as the ancient fenſers ſolde outright women to their miſtreſſes, ſouldiers to their captaines. Now there is none of all this in beaſts, they neuer ſerue one another, nor yeeld themſelues to any ſeruitude either actiue or paſſiue, either to ſerue or to be ſerued, and are in euery thing more free than men. And as man goeth to the chaſe, taketh, killeth, eateth the beaſts; ſo is he taken, killed, eaten by them in his turne, and more honourably too, by maine ſtrength, not by wit and art, as man doth: and not only by them is he killed, but by his companion, by another man, a thing baſe and diſhonorable. Beaſts aſſemble not themſelues in troops to go to kill, to deſtroy, to ranſacke, to inthrall another troope of their kinde, as men do.
                  The fourth and greateſt aduantage pretended by man, is in vertue; but of morall it is diſputable (I meane morall materially 12 4. Vertue.
                      by the outward action): for formallie the moralitie good or euill, vertue and vice, can not be in a beaſt. Kinde acknowledgement, officious amitie, fidelitie, magnanimitie, and many other vertues, which conſiſt in ſocietie and conuerſation, are more liuely, more expreſſe and conſtant, than can be in the common ſort of people. Hircanus the dogge of Lyſimachus continued vpon the bed of his dead maſter, refuſing all kinde of ſuſtenance, and afterwards caſt himſelfe into that fire wherein his maſter was burnt, and there died with him. The ſelfe ſame did another belonging to one Pyrrhus. That dogge of wiſe Heſiodus diſcouered the murther of his maſter. Another in like ſort in the preſence of King Pyrrhus, and his whole armie. Another which neuer ceaſed, as Plutarch affirmeth, going from citie to citie, vntill that ſacrilegious Robber of the Temple of Athens was apprehended and brought to iudgements That hiſtorie is famous, of the lion that was hoſt and nurſe to Androdus the ſlaue and his Phyſitian, which would not touch him being caſt out vnto him: which Appion affirmeth to haue ſeene at Rome. An Elephant

hauing in choler killed his gouernour, repenting himſelfe of it, refuſed any longer to eat, drinke, or liue. Contrariwiſe, there is not a creature in the world, more vniuſt, vnthankfull, traiterous, perfidious, lying and deceitfull, than man. Againe, foraſmuch as vertue conſiſteth in the moderation of our appetites, and the bridling of our pleaſures, beaſts are much more moderate therein than wee, and doe better containe themſelues within the limits of nature. For they are not only not touched with vnnaturall, ſuperfluous and artificiall paſſions and deſires, which are all vitious and infinite, as men who for the moſt part are plunged in them; but alſo in the naturall, as eating and drinking, the acquaintance betwixt the male and the female, they are farre more moderate and ſtaied. But that we may ſee which is the more vertuous or vitious a man or a beaſt, and in good earneſt to ſhame a man more than a beaſt, let vs take the vertue moſt proper and agreeable vnto man, that is, as the word it ſelfe importeth, humanity: as the moſt ſtrange and contrary vice is cruelty. Now heerin beaſts Humanity. Cruelty. haue aduantage enough euen to make men bluſh for ſhame. They neuer aſſaile, and ſeldome offend thoſe of their kind, maior ſerpentum ferarumque concordia quàm hominum: They neuer fight but for great and iuſt cauſes, as the defence and preſeruation of their liues, liberty, and their little ones: and that they doe with their naturall and open armes, by their only force and valour, and that one to one, as in ſingle combates, and not in troupes, nor by deſignements. Their combates are ſhort and ſoone ended, vntill one of them be either wounded or yeeldeth, and the combate ended, the quarrell, hatred, and choler is likewiſe at an end. But man hath no quarrell but againſt man, for not only light, vaine and friuolous cauſes, but many times vniuſt, with artificiall and traiterous armes, by deceits and wicked meanes, in troupe and aſſembly gathered by aſſignement; and laſtly his wars are long and neuer ended but with death, and when he is able no longer to hurt, yet the hatred and choler endureth.
                  The concluſion of this compariſon is, that vntruely and 12 The concluſion of this ſecond conſideration.
                      vainly doth man glorifie himſelfe aboue beaſts. For if man haue in him ſomething more than they, as eſpecially the viuacity of the ſpirit and vnderſtanding, and thoſe great faculties

of the ſoule; ſo likewiſe in exchange is hee ſubiect to a thouſand euils from which the beaſts are freed, inconſtancie, irreſolution, ſuperſtition, a painfull care of things to come, ambition, auarice, enuie, curioſitie, detraction, lying, and a world of diſordered appetites, diſcontentments, emulations. This ſpirit wherewith man maketh himſelfe ſo mery, brings him a thouſand inconueniences, and then moſt, when it is moſt ſtirred and enforced. For it doth not only hurt the body, trouble, breake and weaken the bodily forces and functions, but alſo it hurts and hindereth it ſelfe. What caſteth man into follie and madneſſe, but the ſharpeneſſe, agility, and proper force of the ſpirit? The moſt ſubtile follies and excellent lunacies proceede from the rareſt and quickeſt agitations of the ſpirit, as from greateſt amities ſpring greateſt enmities, and from ſoundeſt healths mortall maladies. Melancholie men, ſaith Plato, as they are more capeable of knowledge and wiſedome, ſo likewiſe of folly. And hee that well marketh it, ſhall finde, that in thoſe eleuations and ſalies of a free ſoule, there is ſome mixture of folly; for to ſay the truth, theſe things are neere neighbours.
                  Touching a ſimple life and ſuch as is according to nature, beaſts do farre exceede men; they liue more freely, ſecurely, 13 An exhortation.
                      moderately, contentedly. And that man is wiſe that conſidereth heereof, and benefiteth himſelfe by making them an inſtruction vnto himſelfe, which doing, he frameth himſelfe to innocencie, ſimplicitie, libertie, and that naturall ſweetneſſe which ſhineth in beaſts, and is wholly altered and corrupteth in vs by our artificiall inuentions, and vnbridled licentiouſneſſe, abuſing that wherein we ſay we excell them, which is the ſpirit and iudgement. And therefore God doth many times ſend vs to ſchoole, to birds, beaſts themſelues, to the kite, the graſhopper, the ſwallow, the turtle, the ant, the ox, the aſſe, and diuers others. Laſtly, we muſt remember that there is a kind of commerce betwixt beaſts & vs, a certain relation & mutuall obligation, whereof there is no other reaſon, but that they belong to one & the ſame maſter, and are of the ſame family that we are. It is an vnworthy thing to tyranniſe ouer them, we owe iuſtice vnto men, and pitie and gentleneſſe to ſuch other creatures as are capeable thereof.
               
            
            
               
               The third Conſideration of Man, which is by his life.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXV. The eſtimation, breuitie, deſcription, of the life of man, and the parts thereof.
                  
                  IT is a great and principall point of wiſdome, truly to know 1 Of the estimation and woorth of life.
                      how to eſteeme of life, to holde and preſerue it, to loſe or to take it away, to keepe and direct it, as much as after ſuch a maner as is fit; there is not perhaps any thing wherein a man faileth more, or is more hindred. The vulgar vnlearned ſot accounteth it a ſouereigne good, and preferreth it aboue all things; yea he will not ſticke to redeeme and prolong it by all the delayes that may be, vpon what conditions ſoeuer, thinking it can neuer be bought too deare: for it is all in all with him, his motte is Vita nihil carius. He eſteemeth and loueth his life for the loue of it ſelfe: he liues not but to liue. It is no maruell if hee faile in all the reſt, if hee be wholly compounded of errours, ſince from his very entrance, and in this fundamentall point he miſtakes himſelfe ſo groſly. It may be likewiſe with ſome leſſe eſteemed, and more baſely accounted of than it ſhould, either by reaſon of ſome inſufficiencie in iudgement, or a proud misknowledge thereof: for falling into the hands of thoſe that are good and wiſe, it may be a profitable inſtrument both to themſelues and others. And I can not be of their opinion (as it is ſimply taken) that ſay it is beſt of all, not to be at all; and that the beſt is the ſhorteſt life: optimum non naſci aut quàm citiſſimè aboleri. And it is neither well nor wiſely ſayd, What hurt or what matter had it beene if I had neuer beene? A man may anſwer him with the like queſtion: Where had that good beene which is come, and being not come, had it not beene euill not to haue beene? It is a kinde of euill that wanteth good, whatſoeuer it be, yea though not neceſſarie. Theſe extremities are too extreame and vitious, though not equally: but that ſeemes true that a wiſe man ſpake, That life is ſuch a good as a man would not take, if he knew well what it were before he tooke it: Vitam 
                     Seneca.
                     
                     nemo acciperet, ſi daretur ſcientibus. It is well that men are within before they ſee the entrance, and that they are carried hudwinckt into it. Now when they are within, ſome doe ſo cocker and flatter themſelues therein, that vpon what condition ſoeuer they will not go forth againe; others do nothing but murmure and vex themſelues: but the wiſer ſort ſeeing it to be a market that is made without themſelues (for a man neither liues nor dies when and how he will) and that though the way be rough and hard, yet neuertheleſſe it is not alwaies ſo, without winſing, or ſtriuing and troubling any thing, they accomodate themſelues vnto it as they may, and ſo paſſe their life in quietneſſe, making of neceſſitie a vertue; which is a token of wiſdome and induſtrie: and ſo doing, they liue as long as they ſhould, and not like fooles, as long as they can. For there is a time to liue, and a time to die: and a good death is farre better than an ill life. A wiſe man liues no longer, than 
                        See heereof lib. 2. ca. 11. that his life may be woorth more than his death: for the longeſt life is not alwaies the better.
                  All men doe much complaine of the breuitie of the life of 2 Of the length and breuitie of life.
                      man; not only the ſimple vulgar ſort, who wiſh it would neuer haue end, but alſo (which is more ſtrange) the greateſt and wiſeſt make it the principall ground of their complaints. To ſay the truth, the greateſt part thereof being diuerted and otherwiſe employed, there remaines little or nothing for it ſelfe: for the time of our infancie, olde age, ſleepe, maladies of minde and bodie, and many other times, both vnprofitable and vnfit for any good, being taken away, that which remaineth is little or nothing at all. Neuertheleſſe, without oppoſing the contrarie opinion to them that holde a ſhort life to be a great good and gift of Nature, their complaint ſeemeth to haue little equitie and reaſon, and rather to proceed from malice. For to what end ſerueth a long life? Simplie to liue, to breathe, to eat, to drinke, to ſee this world: for all this what needs ſo long time? We haue ſeene, knowen, taſted all in a ſhort ſpace; and knowing it, to deſire ſo long a time to practiſe it, and ſtill to reiterate the ſame thing, to what end is it? Who will not be ſatisfied, nay wearied, to do alwaies one and the ſame thing? If it be not tedious and irkeſome, at the leaſt it is ſuperfluous: it is a turning wheele where the ſame

things come and go: it is alwaies to begin where we end, and to reſpinne the ſame webbe. But perhaps they will ſay they deſire a long life to learne and to profit the more, and to proceed to a greater perfection of knowledge and vertue. Alas good ſoules that wee are, what ſhould wee know, or who ſhould teach vs? We employ but badly that little which is giuen vs, not only in vanities and thoſe things that yeeld vs no profit, but in malice and ſinne; and then we crie out and complaine, that we haue not enough giuen vnto vs. And to ſay the truth, to what end ſerues ſo great ſtore of knowledge and experience, ſince in the end wee muſt leaue it and diſlodge it; and hauing diſlodged it altogether, forget and loſe it all, or know it better and otherwiſe? But you will ſay, that there are beaſts that do triple and quadruple the life of man. To omit thoſe fables that are tolde heereof; Be it ſo: but yet there are a number that liue not a quarter of that time that man doth, and few neither, that liue out their time. By what right or reaſon, or priuiledge, can man challenge a longer life than other creatures? Is it becauſe he doth better employ it in matters more high and more worthie life? By this reaſon he ſhould liue leſſe time than all other creatures; for there is none comparable to man in the ill emploiment of his life, in wickedneſſe, ingratitude, intemperance, and all maner of diſorder and immodeſtie in maners, as hath been ſhewed before in the compariſon of man with beaſts: ſo that as I asked euen now, to what end a long life ſerued; now I aske, what euils there would be in the world, if the life of man were long? What would he not enterpriſe, ſince the ſhortneſſe of life, which cuts off his way, and (as they ſay) interrupts his caſt, and the vncerteinty thereof, which takes away all heart and courage, can not ſtay him, liuing as if he ſhould liue euer? On the one ſide he feareth perceiuing himſelfe to be mortall, but notwithſtanding that, hee can not bridle himſelfe from not coueting, hoping, enterpriſing, as if he were immortall. Tanquam ſemper victuri viuitis, nunquam vobis fragilitas veſtra 
                     Seneca. 
                     ſuccurrit: omnia tanquam mortales timetis, tanquam immortales concupiſcitis. And to ſay the trueth, what need hath Nature of all theſe great and godly enterpriſes and imploiments, whereby man challengeth a longer life than other creatures?

Man therefore hath no ſubiect whereof to complaine, but to be angrie with himſelfe. We haue life enough, but we are not good husbands, we manage it not well; life is not ſhort, but we make it ſo; we are not in want, but prodigall; non inopes vitae, ſed prodigi: we loſe it, we diſſipate it, we vilifie it, as if it were nought worth, as if we had more than enough: we all fall into one of theſe three faults, either we employ it ill, or about nothing, or in vaine. Magna vitae pars elabitur male 
                     Seneca. Looke lib. 3. cap. 6. 
                     agentibus, maxima nihil agentibus, tota aliud agentibus. One man ſtudieth not to liue, but rather buſieth himſelfe in any other thing; he ſhall neuer know how to do a thing well by acquitting himſelfe of labour, but by care and attention. Others reſerue their liues vntill they can liue no longer, then take comfort in life when there is nothing left but the lees and dregs thereof. Oh what follie, what miſerie is this! Yea there are ſome that haue ſooner ended than begunne to liue, and life is paſt before they thought of it. Quidam viuere incipiunt, cùm deſinendum; quidam antè deſierunt, quàm inciperent. Inter caetera mala, hoc quoque habet ſtultitia, ſemper incipit viuere.
                  
                  Our preſent life is but the entrance and end of a Tragedie, 3 A deſcription of the life of man.
                      a perpetuall iſſue of errours, a web of vnhappie aduentures, a purſuit of diuers miſeries inchained together on all ſides; there is nothing but euill that it diſtilleth, that it prepareth; one euill driues forward another euill, as one waue another; torment is euer preſent, and the ſhadow of what is good deceiueth vs; blindneſſe and want of ſenſe poſſeſſeth the beginning of our life, the middle is euer in paine and trauell, the end in ſorrow; and beginning, middle, and end in errour.
                  The life of man hath many diſcommodities and miſeries common, ordinarie and perpetuall; it hath likewiſe ſome  particular and diſtinct, according to the diuerſitie of the parts, ages and ſeaſons; infancie, youth, virilitie, olde age, euery one haue their proper and particular diſcommodities.
                  The greateſt part of the world ſpeake more honorablie & 5 A compariſon betwixt youth and olde age.
                      fauorably of old age, as the more wiſe, ripe, moderat, accuſing and ſhaming youth as vitious, fooliſh, licentious, but very vniuſtly: for in trueth the infirmities and vices of old age are more in number, more great and troubleſome than thoſe of

youth, it filles the minde more with wrinckles, then the viſage; and there is not a ſoule growing olde, growes not ſower and rotten. With the body the ſpirit is vſed, and the worſe for the vſe; and at the laſt returns to infancy againe: bis pueri ſenes. Old age is a neceſſary and puiſſant malady, which loadeth vs inſenſibly with many imperfections. It were abſurd to tearme wiſdome a difficultie of humours, an anxietie and diſtaſte of things preſent, an impotencie to doe as in former times: wiſdome is too noble to be ſerued with ſuch officers. To wax olde is not to wax wiſe, nor to take away vices; but to change them into worſe. Olde age condemneth pleaſure, but it is becauſe it can not taſte or reliſh it aright, like Eſops dogge, it ſaith it will none of it, but it is becauſe it can not ioy in it: for olde age leaueth not pleaſure properly, but pleaſure diſdaines olde age; for it is alwayes wanton and ſporting: and it is no reaſon that impotencie ſhould corrupt iudgement, which ſhould in youth know vice in pleaſure, and in olde age pleaſure in vice. The vices of youth are temeritie, indiſcreet forwardneſſe, and vnbridled libertie and ouergreedie deſire of pleaſure; which are naturall things proceeding from the heat of the blood and naturall vigour, and therefore the more excuſable; but the vices of olde age are farre otherwiſe. The lighter are a vaine and fraile proteruitie, an enurous pratling, inſociable humours, ſuperſtition, care to get riches, euen then when the vſe of them is loſt, a ſottiſh auarice, and feare of death, which proceedeth properly, not from the want of ſpirit and courage, as they ſay, but becauſe olde men are long acquainted and as it were cockered in this world, whereby their affections are knit vnto it; which is not in yoong men: but beſides theſe they are enuious, froward, vniuſt: but that which is moſt ſottiſh and ridiculous in them, is that they would not only be reuerenced but feared, and therefore they put vpon them an auſtere looke and diſdainfull, thinking thereby to extort feare and obedience: but they are therein much deceiued, for this ſtately and furious geſture is receiued of youth with mockerie and laughter, being practiſed only to blinde their eyes, and of purpoſe to hide and diſguiſe the truth of things. There are in old age ſo many faults on the one ſide, and ſo many impotencies on the other, and

therefore ſo fit for contempt, that the beſt way to compaſſe their deſires is loue and affection: for command and feare are no longer fit armes for them. It ill befits them to make themſelues to be feared: and though they could doe it, yet loue and honour is a fairer purchaſe.
               
            
            
               The fourth Conſideration of Man, morall by his maners, humours, conditions, very liuely and notable. THE PREFACE.
               ALl the deſcriptions the wiſe, and ſuch as haue taken  greateſt paines in the ſtudie of humane knowledge, haue giuen vnto man, ſeeme all to note in man foure things, Vanitie, Weakneſſe, Inconſtancie, Miſerie; calling him the ſpoile of times, the play-game of Fortune, the image of inconſtancie, the example and ſpectacle of infirmitie, the ballance of enuie and miſerie, a dreame, a fantaſie, aſhes, a vapour, a morning deaw, a flower that preſently fadeth and withereth, a winde, graſſe, a bladder or bubble, a ſhadow, leaues of trees caried with the winde, vncleane ſeed in his beginning, a ſponge of ordures, a ſacke of miſeries in his middle age, a ſtench and meat for wormes in his end; and to conclude, the moſt miſerable and wretched thing in the world. Iob, one of the moſt ſufficient in this matter, as well in the practiſe as contemplation thereof, hath well and at large deſcribed him, and after him, Salomon, in their Books. To be ſhort, Plinie ſeemeth very properly to haue deſciphered him, in calling him the moſt miſerable, and yet the moſt arrogant creature of the world, Solum vt certum ſit nihil eſſe certi, nec miſerius quicquam homine aut ſuperbius. By the firſt word (miſerable) he comprehendeth all thoſe former deſcriptions, and as much as all the reſt haue ſayd; but by the other (the moſt proud) hee toucheth another chiefe point very important: and hee ſeemeth in theſe two words to haue vttered whatſoeuer can be ſayd. Theſe are thoſe two things that ſeeme to hurt and hinder one the other, Miſerie and Pride, Vanitie and Preſumption. See then how ſtrange and monſtrous a patch-coat man is.
               
                  
Foraſmuch as man is compoſed of two diuers parts, the  ſoule and the body, it is a matter of difficulty well to deſcribe him entire in his perfection and declining ſtate. Some refer vnto the body whatſoeuer ill can be ſpoken of man; they make him an excellent creature, and in regard of his ſpirit extoll him aboue all other creatures: but on the other ſide, whatſoeuer is ill, either in man, or in the whole world, is forged and proceedeth from this ſpirit of man, and in it there is farre more vanity, inconſtancy, miſery, preſumption, than in the body, wherein there is little matter of reproch in reſpect of the ſpirit, and therefore Democritus calleth it a world of hidden miſeries, and Plutarch prooueth it in a booke written of that ſubiect. Now let vs conſider man more according to the life, than heeretofore we haue done, and pinch him where it itcheth not, referring all to theſe fiue points, vanity, weakneſſe, inconſtancy, miſery, and preſumption, which are his more naturall and vniuerſall qualities, but the two latter touch him more neerely. Againe there are ſome things common to many of theſe fiue, which a man knowes not to which to attribute it, and eſpecially, imbecillity and miſery.
               
                  CHAP. XXXVI. 1. Vanity.
                  
                  VAnity is the moſt eſſentiall and proper quality of humane nature. There is nothing ſo much in man, bee it  malice, infelicity, inconſtancy, irreſolution (and of all theſe there is alwaies abundance) as baſe feebleneſſe, ſottiſhneſſe and ridiculous vanity. And therefore Democritus met better with it, with a kind of diſdaine of humane condition, mocking and laughing at it, than Heraclitus that wept and tormented himſelfe, whereby he gaue ſome teſtimony, that he made ſome account thereof; and Diogenes who ſcorned it, than Timon that hater and flier of the company of men. Pindarus hath expreſſed it more to the life than any other, by the two vaineſt things in the world, calling it the dreame of aſhadow, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  This is that, that hath wrought in the wiſeſt ſo great a contempt of man, that hearing of ſome great deſignment and honourable

enterpriſe, and iudging it ſuch, were wont neuertheleſſe to ſay that the world was not worthy a mans labour and paines, (ſo anſwered Statilius to Brutus, talking with him about the conſpiracie againſt Caeſar) and that a wiſe man ſhould doe nothing but for himſelfe, for it is not reaſon that wiſe men, and wiſedome ſhould put themſelues in danger for fooles.
                  This vanitie is ſhewed and expreſſed many waies, and after 2 Thoughts.
                      a diuers maner, firſt in our thoughts and priuate imaginations, which are many times more than vaine, friuolous, and ridiculous, wherein neuertheleſſe we ſpend much time, and yet perceiue it not. Wee enter into them, we dwell in them, and we come foorth againe inſenſibly, which is a double vanitie, and a great forgetfulneſſe of our ſelues. One walking in a hall conſidereth how he may frame his paces after a certaine faſhion vpon the boords of the floure: another diſcourſeth in his minde, with much time, and great attention, how he ſhould carry himſelfe if he were a king, a Pope, or ſome other thing that he is aſſured can neuer come to paſſe; and ſo hee feedeth himſelfe with winde, yea leſſe than winde, that, that neither is, nor euer ſhall be. Another dreameth how he ſhall compoſe his body, his countenances, his geſtures, his ſpeech after an affected faſhion, and pleaſeth himſelfe therein, as with a thing that wonderfully becomes him, and that euery man ſhould take delight in. But what a vanitie and ſottiſh weakeneſſe in our deſires is this, that brings forth beliefs and hopes farre more vaine? And all this falleth out not only when we haue nothing to doe, when we are ſwallowed vp with idleneſſe, but many times in the midſt of our moſt neceſſarie affaires: ſo naturall and powerfull is vanitie, that it robbeth and plucketh out of our hands, the truth, ſoliditie, and ſubſtance of things, and fills vs with winde, yea with nothing.
                  Another more ſottiſh vanitie is a troubleſome care of what ſhall heere fall out when we are dead. We extend our deſires 3 Care for times to come.
                      and affections beyond our ſelues, and our being; wee would prouide that ſome thing ſhould bee done vnto vs, when wee know not what is done vnto vs; owe deſire to be praiſed after our death, what greater vanitie? It is not ambition, as it ſeemeth

& a man may thinke it, for that is the deſire of a ſenſible and perceptible honor: if this praiſe of our ſelues when we are gone, might any way profit either our children, our parents, or our friends that ſuruiue vs, it were well, there were ſome benefit, though not to our ſelues; but to deſire that as a good, which ſhall no way touch vs, nor benefit others, is a meere vanitie, like that of thoſe who feare their wiues will marrie after their departure: and therefore they deſire them with great paſſion to continue vnmarried, and binde them by their willes ſo to do, leauing vnto them a great part of their goods vpon that condition. This is vanitie and many times iniuſtice. It was contrariwiſe a commendable thing in thoſe great men in times paſt, which dying exhorted their wiues to marry ſpeedily for the better increaſe of the Commonwealth. Others ordeine, that for the loue of them and for their ſakes a friend keepe ſuch and ſuch a thing, or that he do this or that vnto their dead bodies; which rather ſheweth their vanitie, than doth any good to ſoule or bodie.
                  See heere another vanitie, we liue not but by relation vnto another; we take not ſo much care what we are in our ſelues  in effect and truth, as what we are in the publike knowledge of men; in ſuch ſort, that we do many times deceiue and depriue our ſelues of our owne goods and commodities, and torment our ſelues, to frame our outward appearances to the common opinion. This is true, not onely in outward things and ſuch as belong to the bodie, and the expenſe and charge of our meanes, but alſo in the goods of the ſpirit, which ſeeme vnto vs to be without fruit, if others enioy them not, and they be not produced to the view and approbation of ſtrangers.
                  Our vanity is not only in our ſimple thoughts, deſires, and diſcourſes, but it likewiſe troubleth, ſhaketh and tormenteth 5 Agitations of the ſpirit. both ſoule and bodie. Many times men trouble and torment themſelues more for light occaſions and matters of no moment, than for the greateſt and moſt important affaires that are. Our ſoule is many times troubled with ſmall fantaſies, dreames, ſhadowes, fooleries, without bodie, without ſubiect; it is intangled and moleſted with choler, hatred, ſorow, ioy, building caſtles in Spaine. The remembrance of a farewell

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
of ſome particular grace or action afflicteth vs more than a whole diſcourſe of a matter of greater importance. The ſound of names and certaine words pronounced with a pitifull voice, yea with ſighs and exclamations pierceth euen to the quicke, as Oratours and Players, and other that ſell winde and ſmoake doe well know and practiſe. And this winde catcheth and carrieth away many times men that are moſt conſtant and ſetled, if they ſtand not vpon their gard: ſo puiſſant is vanitie ouer men. And not only light and little things doe ſhake and trouble vs, but alſo lies and impoſtures, euen thoſe we know to be ſuch (a ſtrange thing) in ſuch ſort, that we take pleaſure to deceiue our ſelues in good earneſt, to feed our fantaſies with tales, with nothing (ad fallendum noſmetipſos ingenioſiſſimi ſumus): witneſſe they that weepe and afflict themſelues hearing a relation, or ſeeing a Tragedie, which they know to be an inuention made for delight, euen of thoſe things that neuer were. I could tell you of one that was ſo beſotted, that he died for one whom he knew to be foule, olde, deformed, not becauſe he loued her, but becauſe ſhe was well painted, and plaſtered or coloured with other impoſtures, though he alwayes knew them to be ſuch.
                  Let vs come from the particular vanitie of euery particular 6 Viſitations and offices of courteſie.
                      man in his common life, to ſee how much this vanitie is tied to the nature of man, not onely as a priuate and perſonall vice. What vanitie and loſſe of time is there in thoſe viſitations, ſalutations, congies and mutuall enterteinments, thoſe offices of courteſie, orations, ceremonies, offers, praiſes, promiſes! How many hyperbolicall ſpeeches, hypocriſies and impoſtures are there in the ſight and knowledge of all, both of thoſe that giue them, that receiue them, that heare of them! inſomuch that it ſeemeth to be a match and market made together, to mocke, lie, and deceiue one another. And that which is woorth all the reſt, he that knowes that a man doth impudently lie vnto him, muſt yet giue him thanks; and he that knowes that when he lies he is not beleeued, ſets a bolde face vpon the matter, attending and obſeruing one the other, who ſhall firſt begin or end; when they could both be content they were both aſunder. What inconueniences doth man endure? He faineth, counterfeiteth, diſguiſeth himſelfe;

he endureth heat, colde, troubleth his reſt, afflicteth his life for thoſe courtly vanities, and leaueth his weightie affaires for the winde. We are vaine at the charge of our owne eaſe, yea of our health and of our life. The accidents and the lighter things trample vnder foot the ſubſtance, and the winde carrieth the bodie, ſo much is man a ſlaue to vanitie: and he that will do otherwiſe ſhall be held for a foole and a man that vnderſtands not the world. It is dexteritie well to play this Comedie, and folly not to be vaine. Being entred into ſpeech and familiar diſcourſe, how many vaine and vnprofitable, falſe, fabulous tales are there (not to ſay wicked and pernitious, which are not of this count) how many vaunts and vaine boaſtings! Man deſireth and delighteth to ſpeake of himſelfe and that which is his, and if he thinke he haue either done or ſaid, or poſſeſſe any thing that is worthie eſtimation, he is not at eaſe vntill he hath vttered it, and made it knowen to others: when a commoditie firſt commeth he entreth into an account thereof, he valueth it, he raiſeth the price, nay he will not ſeeme to attend his commoditie, though he ſeeke it with induſtrie; and then to heare what the ſpeech of the people is abroad, he thruſts himſelfe into companie, and it tickleth him at the heart to heare his happie ſucceſſe ſpoken of, and that men eſteeme of him the more, and of what hee eſteemes.
                  But better to make knowen what credit and command this vanitie hath ouer the nature of man, let vs call to minde that 7 Publike and vniuerſall agitations.
                      the greateſt alterations of the world, the moſt generall and fearefull agitations of States and Empires, armies, battels, murthers, haue riſen from light, ridiculous and vaine cauſes: witneſſe the warres of Troy and Greece, of Sylla and Marius, Caeſar and Pompey, Augustus and Antonie. The Poets ſignifie as much, when they ſet all Greece and Aſia on fire for an apple. The firſt occaſions and motiues ariſe of nothing, afterwards they grow and increaſe: a teſtimonie of the vanitie and follie of man. Many times the accident doth more than the principall, the leſſer circumſtances touch more to the quicke than the greateſt, nay the cauſes and ſubiects themſelues. The robe of Caeſar troubled Rome more than his death did, or thoſe 22 ſtabs with a poignard that were giuen him.
                  
                     
Laſtly, the crowne and perfection of the vanitie of man is 8 Felicitie and contentment.
                      ſhewed in that which he moſt affecteth and ſeeks after; he pleaſeth himſelfe and placeth his whole felicitie in thoſe vaine and friuolous goods, without which hee may well and commodiouſly liue, and takes not that care that he ſhould for the true and eſſentiall: his chance is winde, his whole good nothing but opinion and dreames, wherein he is matchleſſe. God hath all good things in eſſence, all euill in vnderſtanding; man quite contrarie poſſeſſeth his good things by fantaſie, his euill in eſſence. Beaſts content not, nor feed themſelues with opinions and fantaſies, but with that which is preſent, palpable and in veritie. Vanitie hath beene giuen vnto man as his proper part or condition; he runnes, he ſtirs, he hunts vp and downe, hee catcheth a ſhadow, hee adoreth the winde, he flies, he dies, and a mote at the laſt is the heire of his dayes worke. Vanitati creatura ſubiecta eſt etiam nolens, vniuerſa vanitas omnis homo viuens.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXVII. Debillitie or Infirmitie.
                  
                  BEholde heere the ſecond head of this Conſideration and humane knowledge: for how ſhould vanitie be other  than fraile and feeble? This weakneſſe is confeſſed, and proued by all that account many things eaſie to be vnderſtood of all, but is not taken to be ſuch in thoſe things it ſhould, as in ſuch wherein a man ſeemeth, to be moſt ſtrong, and leaſt weake; in deſiring, poſſeſſing, and vſing thoſe things that he hath and holdeth, and in euery good and euill; and to be ſhort, in ſuch wherein he glorieth moſt, wherein he thinketh to excell others, and to be ſome thing. Theſe are the true teſtimonies of his weakneſſe: but we ſhall ſee this better apart.
                  Firſt, touching deſire, a man can not ſettle his contentment in any thing, no not his owne deſire and imagination. It is 2 In deſiring & chuſing.
                      not in our power to chuſe that we ſhould: and whatſoeuer we haue deſired or obteined, it ſatisfies vs not: but we go bleating after things vnknowen and to come, becauſe things preſent content vs not, and wee more eſteeme of things abſent. If one ſhould put a man to his owne choiſe, make him his

owne caruer, it is not in his power ſo to chuſe, as that he repent not his choiſe, or which he will not adde vnto, or take from, or alter ſome way or other; for he deſires that which he knowes not how to expreſſe: and at the laſt nothing can content him, but he is angrie and falleth out with himſelfe.
                  The weakneſſe of man doth more appeare, and is greater 3 In poſſeſſing and vſing.
                      in the poſſeſſion and vſe of things, and that diuers wayes: firſt, in that he can not make vſe of any thing in it owne puritie and ſimple nature; but he muſt diſguiſe, alter and corrupt them before he can accommodate them to his vſe: the elements, mettals, and all things els in their owne nature are not fit for vſe. Good things, delights and pleaſures can not be enioyed without ſome mixture of euill and diſcommoditie: Medio de fonte leporum ſurgit amari aliquid, quod in ipſis floribus angat. The higheſt pleaſure that is hath a ſigh and a complaint to accompanie it; and being come to perfection is but debilitie, a deiection of the minde, languiſhment. An extreame and full contentment hath more moderate ſeueritie than wanton delight: Ipſa foelicitas, ſe niſi temperat, premit: and therefore it was well ſaid of him, That God ſelles vnto vs whatſoeuer good thing he ſends vs: that is to ſay, That he giueth nothing vnto vs purely good, but that we buy it at the ſcales with an addition of ſome euill to make vp weight. So likewiſe, ſorrow is neuer pure without the alliance of ſome pleaſure: Labor voluptaſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         diſſimillima natura, ſocietate quadam naturali inter ſe ſunt iuncta; est quaedam flere voluptas. So all things in this world are mingled and compounded with their contraries: thoſe motions and wrinckles in the viſage that ſerue to laugh, ſerue to weepe, as Painters teach vs: and we ſee that the extreamitie of laughter is mingled with teares. There is no good thing in vs that hath not ſome vitious tincture with it, omnes iuſtitiae noſtrae ſunt tanquam pannus menſtruatae, as anon ſhalbe ſhewed in his due place; nor no euil without ſome good: nullum ſine authoramento malum eſt. Miſerie it ſelfe alwayes ſerues to ſome end: for there is no euill without good, no good in man without euill: all is mingled, and there is nothing pure in our hands. Secondly, whatſoeuer happeneth vnto vs, we take and enioy with an ill hand; our taſte is vnreſolued and vncertaine, it knowes not how to hold

and poſſeſſe any thing after a good maner: and from thence ſprang that vndetermined queſtion of the ſouereigne good. The better things many times in our hands, by our infirmities, vice, inſufficiencie, are made woorſe, are corrupted, become nothing, are vnprofitable vnto vs, yea ſometimes hurtfull and contrary.
                  But humane imbecillitie is more richly diſplaied in good and euill, in vertue and vice: hence it is, that man can not be, 4 In good and euill.
                      when it ſeemes good vnto himſelfe, either wholly good or wholly wicked, but he hath his weakeneſſe, his impotencies in them both. Touching vertue, three points are to be conſidered: the firſt is, That it is not in the power of man to doe all good, to put in practiſe all vertues; inſomuch that many vertues are incompatible, and can not be together, at leaſt in one and the ſame ſubiect, as filiall or maidenly continencie and viduall, which are wholly different; the married and vnmarried ſtate; the two ſecond of widowhood and marriage, being more painfull and buſie, and hauing more difficultie and vertue than the two firſt of virginitie and the vnmarried eſtate, which haue more puritie, grace and eaſe: Virgo felicior, vidua laborioſior, in illa gratia, in iſta virtus coronatur: that Tertull. conſtancie which is in pouertie, want, aduerſitie, and that which is in abundance and proſperitie: patience in beggerie and liberalitie. And this is more true in vices, which are oppoſite one againſt the other.
                  The ſecond point is, That many times a man can not performe that which belongs to one vertue, without the ſcandall  and offence either of another vertue, or of it ſelfe; inſomuch that they hinder one the other: whereby it comes to paſſe that a man can not ſatisfie the one but at the charge of the other; which wee muſt not attribute vnto vertue, or thinke that the vertues croſſe and contrary one another, for they agree well enough; but vnto the weakeneſſe of our humane condition, all the ſufficiencie and induſtrie thereof being ſo ſhort and ſo feeble, that it can not finde any certaine, vniuerſall and conſtant rule, whereby to make an honeſt man: and ſuch order can not be taken, but that the meanes to doe well doe many times hinder one the other. Let vs take for example, Charitie and Iuſtice: if I encounter my father or my

friend in the warres, on the enemies part, in iuſtice I ought to kill him, but in charitie I ſhould ſpare and ſaue him. If a man be wounded to the death and paſt all remedie, and that there remaineth nothing but a grieuous languiſhment, it were a deed of charitie to make an end of him, as he did that killed Saul at his earneſt intreatie; but this charitie is puniſhed by iuſtice, as he was by Dauid, and that iuſtly, Dauid being the miniſter of publike iuſtice, not priuate charitie: yea, to be found neere vnto a man in ſuch a caſe, in a ſuſpicious place, and where there is doubt of the murderer, although hee be there to performe ſome office of humanitie, is very dangerous; and the beſt thing that can happen vnto him, is to be called into queſtion, and put to anſwer to that accident whereof he is innocent. So that we ſee that iuſtice doth not only offend charitie, but it hampereth and hindereth it ſelfe: and therefore it was very well ſayd and truly, Summum ius, ſumma iniuria.
                  
                  The third point and the moſt notable is, that a man is conſtrained  many times to vſe badde meanes for the better auoidance of ſome great euill, or the execution of what is good, in ſuch ſort that he muſt ſometimes approoue as lawfull, not onely thoſe things that are not good, but that are ſtarke naught; as if to be good, it were neceſſarie to be ſomewhat wicked. And this is ſeene in euery thing, in Policie, Iuſtice, Veritie, Religion.
                  
                  In Policy, how many euils are there permitted and publikly acted, not only by conniuence or permiſſion, but alſo by 7 Policy.
                      the approbation of the lawes themſelues? as ſhall heereafter be ſaid in his due place; ex ſenatuſconſultis & plebeſcitis ſcelera exercentur. To disburthen a State or Common-weale either of too great a number of people, or of ſuch as are inflamed with a deſire of warres, which the ſtate, like a body repleat with bad or abundant humours, cannot beare, it is the maner to ſend them elſewhere, and to eaſe themſelues at the charge or diſeaſe of another. As the French, Lombards, Gothes, Vandales, Tartarians, Turks haue beene accuſtomed to do. To auoid a ciuill war, it is the maner to entertaine a ſtrange war. To inſtruct others in the vertue of Temperance, Lycurgus cauſed the Ilotes their ſeruants to be made drunke, that by the

vgly deformity of their ſuperfluous inundation, others might grow into a horror and deteſtation of that ſinne. The Romanes to prepare their people to valour, and a contempt of the dangers of death, ordeined of purpoſe thoſe furious ſpectacles of the fencers, which at the firſt they ordained for offendors, afterwards for ſlaues or ſeruants, but innocents, and laſtly for freemen that gaue themſelues thereunto. Brothell houſes in great Cities, vſuries, diuorces, vnder the law of Moyſes, and in diuers other nations, and religions, haue beene permitted for the better auoiding of greater miſchiefes, ad duritiem cordis eorum.
                  
                  In Iuſtice, which cannot ſubſiſt, cannot be executed, without 8 Iuſtice.
                      the mixture of ſome wrong, not onely Iuſtice commutatiue, for that is not ſtrange: it is after a ſort neceſſarie, and men could not liue and traffique together, without mutuall dammage, without offence, and the lawes allow of the loſſe which is vnder the moiety of the iuſt price. But alſo Iuſtice diſtributiue, as it ſelfe confeſſeth: Summum ius, ſumma iniuria: & omne magnum exemplum habet aliquid ex iniquo, quod contra ſingulos, vtilitate publica rependitur. Plato alloweth, and it is not againſt the law, by deceits and falſe hopes of fauour and pardon, to draw the offender to confeſſe his fault. This is by iniuſtice, deceit and impudencie to doe iuſtice. And what ſhould we ſay of the inuention of tortures, which is rather Of tortures. a proofe of patience, than verity? For both hee that can ſuffer them, and cannot, will conceale the truth. For why ſhould griefe cauſe a man rather to ſpeake that which is, than that which is not? If a man thinke that an innocent is patient enough to endure torments, why ſhould not he that is guilty, being a meanes to ſaue his life? Illa tormenta gubernat dolor, moderatur natura, cuiuſque tum animi, tum corporis regit quaeſitor, flectit libido, corrumpit ſpes, infirmat metus, vt in tot rerum anguſtijs nil veritati loci relinquatur. In defence heereof it is ſaid, that tortures doe aſtoniſh and quell the guiltie, and extort from him a truth; and contrariwiſe ſtrengthen the innocent: but we doe ſo often ſee the contrarie, that this may be doubted; and to ſay the truth, it is a poore meanes full of vncertaintie, full of doubt. What will not a man ſay, what will he not doe, to auoid ſuch torment? etenim innocentes mentiri
                     
                     cogit dolor, in ſuch ſort that it falleth out that the iudge which giueth the torture, to the end an innocent ſhould not die, cauſeth him to die an innocent and tortured too. A thouſand and a thouſand haue falſely accuſed their owne heads, either to ſhorten their torments or their liues. But in the foot of this account is it not a great iniuſtice and crueltie to torment and to racke a man in pieces for that offence which is yet doubted of? To the end they may not kil a man without iuſt cauſe, they doe worſe than kill him: if he be innocent and beare the puniſhment, what amends is made him for his vniuſt torture? He ſhall be quit, a goodly recompence, and much reaſon he hath to thanke you. But it is the leſſer euill that the weakeneſſe of man could inuent.
                  If man bee weake in vertue, much more is hee in veritie, whether it be eternall and diuine, or temporall and humane. 9 Veritie.
                      That aſtoniſheth him with the lightning, & beats him downe with the thunder thereof, as the bright beames of the ſunne, the weake eie of the owle: if he preſume to behold it, being oppreſſed, he preſently fainteth, qui ſcrutator est maieſtatis, opprimetur a gloria: in ſuch ſort that to giue himſelfe ſome breath, ſome taſt, he muſt diſguiſe, temper, and couer it with ſome ſhadow or other. This, that is, humane veritie, offendeth and woundeth him, and he that ſpeakes it, is many times holden for an enemie, Veritas odium parit. It is a ſtrange thing, man deſireth naturally to know the truth, and to attaine thereunto he remooueth all lets whatſoeuer, and yet he can not attaine it: if it be preſent, he can not apprehend it; if he apprehend it, he is offended with it. The fault is not in the truth, for that is alwayes amiable, beautifull, worthie the knowledge; but it is humane imbecillitie that can not endure the ſplendour thereof. Man is ſtrong enough to deſire, but too weake to receiue and holde what he deſireth. The two principall means which he vſeth to attaine to the knowledge of truth, are Reaſon and Experience. Now both of them are ſo feeble & vncertaine (though Experience the more weake) that nothing certaine can be drawen from them. Reaſon hath ſo many formes, is ſo pliable, ſo wauering, as hath been ſaid, 
                        Cap. 14. and Experience much more, the occurrents are alwayes vnlike; there is nothing ſo vniuerſall in Nature as diuerſitie, nothing

ſo rare and difficult, and almoſt impoſſible, as the likeneſle and ſimilitude of things: and if a man can not note this diſſimilitude, it is ignorance and weakneſſe; I meane this perfect, pure, and entire ſimilitude and diſſimilitude: for to ſay the trueth, they are both whole and entire, there is no one thing that is wholly like or diſlike to another. This is an ingenious and maruellous mixture of Nature.
                  But after all this, what doth better diſcouer this humane imbecillitie than Religion? yea the very intention thereof is 10 Religion.
                      to make man feele his owne euill, his infirmitie, his nothing, and to make him to receiue from God his good, his ſtrength, his all things. Firſt it preacheth it vnto him, it beats it into our memorie, it reprocheth man, calling him duſt, aſhes, earth, fleſh, blood, graſſe. Afterwards it infinuateth it into him, and makes him feele it after an excellent and goodly faſhion; bringing in God himſelfe, humbled, weakened, debaſed for the loue of him, ſpeaking, promiſing, ſwearing, chiding, threatning; and to be briefe, conuerſing and working with man after a baſe, feeble humane maner, like a father that counterfeits his ſpeech, and playes the childe with his children. The weakneſſe of man being ſuch, ſo great, ſo inuincible, that to giue it ſome acceſſe and commerce with the Diuinitie, and to vnite it vnto God, it was neceſſary that God ſhould debaſe himſelfe to the bafeſt: Deus quia in altitudine ſua a nobis paruulis apprehendi non poterat, ideo ſe ſtrauit hominibus. Againe, it makes him ſee his owne weakneſſe by ordinarie effects; for all the principall and holieſt exerciſes, the moſt ſolemne actions of religion, are they not the true ſymptomes and arguments of humane imbecillitie and ſickneſſe? Thoſe ſacrifices that in former times haue been vſed thorowout Sacrifices. the world, and yet in ſome countreys continue, not only of beaſts, but alſo of liuing men, yea of innocents, were they not ſhamefull marks of humane infirmitie and miſerie? Firſt, becauſe they were ſignes and ſymboles of his condemnation and malediction (for they were as publike proteſtations, that he had deſerued death, and to be ſacrificed as thoſe beaſts were) without which there had neuer been any bloodie offerings or propitiatorie and expiatorie ſacrifices. Secondly, becauſe of the baſeneſſe of the purpoſe and intent, which

was to thinke to appeaſe, flatter and gratifie God by the maſſacre and blood of beaſts and of men: Sanguine non colendus Deus, quae enim ex trucidatione immerentium voluptas eſt? It is true, that God in thoſe firſt ages, yet the feeble infancie of the world and nature remaining ſimple, did well accept of them at the hands of religious men, euen for their deuotion, or rather Chriſt his ſake: Reſpexit Dominus ad Abel, & ad munera eius, taking in good part that which was done with an intent to honour and ſerue him: and alſo afterwards, the world being as yet in it apprentiſhip, ſub paedagogo, was wholly ſeaſoned in this opinion ſo vniuerſall, that it was almoſt thought naturall. I touch not heere that particular myſterie of the religion of the Iewes, who vſed them for figures (that is a point that belongs to religion) and with whom it was common to conuert that which was humane or naturall and corporall to a holy and ſacred vſe, and to gather from thence a ſpirituall fruit. But this was not becauſe God tooke pleaſure in them, nor becauſe it was by any reaſon in it ſelfe good: witneſſe the Prophets, and the cleereſt ſighted amongſt them, who haue alwayes freely ſayd, Sivoluiſſes ſacrificium dediſſem, vti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         holocauſtis non delectaberis, ſacrificium & oblationem noluisti, holocauſtum pro peccato non poſtulasti, non accipiam de domo tua vitulos &c. and haue called backe and inuited the world to another ſacrifice more high, ſpirituall and woorthie the Diuinitie, Sacrificium Deo ſpiritus: aures autem perforasti mihi vt facerem voluntatem tuam, & legem tuam in medio cordis mei: Immola Deo ſacrificium laudis: miſericordiam volo non ſacrificium. At the laſt, the ſonne of God, the Doctor of Truth, being come to ſecure and free-denize the world, did aboliſh them wholly: which he had not done, if it had beene a thing in it ſelfe and eſſentially good, and that it had pleaſed his father: for contrarily, Pater non tales quaerit, ſed tales qui adorent in ſpiritu & veritate. And to ſay the trueth, it is one of the goodlieſt effects and fruits of Chriſtianitie after the abolition of Idoles. And therefore Iulian the Emperour, his capitall enemy, as in deſpight of him, offered more ſacrifices than euer any other did in the world, attempting to ſet them vp againe with idolatrie. Wherefore let vs heere leaue them, and let vs ſee thoſe other principall parts of religion.
                  
                     
The Sacraments in a matter baſe and common, bread and Sacraments. wine, and an outward action as baſe, are they not teſtimonies of our pouertie and baſeneſſe? Repentance, the vniuerſall remendie Repentance of our maladies, is a thing in it ſelfe ſhamefull, feeble, yea euill: for to repent, to be ſorry, to afflict the ſpirit, is euil, though by conſequent it be good. An oath, what is it, but a An oath. ſymptome and ſhamefull marke of diſtruſt, infidelitie, ignorance, humane infirmitie, both in him that requires it, that giues it, that ordaines it? Quod amplius eſt a malo eſt. See then how religion healeth our euils by meanes not only ſmall and feeble, our weakneſſe ſo requiring, ſtulta & infirma mundi eligit Deus; but ſuch as by no meanes are of any value, nor are good in themſelues, but good in that they ſerue and are employed againſt euill, as medicines are: they ſprang from an ill cauſe, yet they driue away ill: they are good, as gibbets and wheeles are in a Common-wealth, as vomits and other diſcharges proceeding from ill cauſes are to the bodie: to be briefe, they are ſuch good things, as that it had beene farre better we had neuer had them; and neuer had we had them, if man had beene wiſe, and preſerued himſelfe in that eſtate wherein God had placed him; neither ſhall he haue them any more, ſo ſoone as he is deliuered from this captiuitie, and arriued to his perfection.
                  All this ſheweth how great this humane weakneſſe is to any 11 In euill.
                      thing that is good, in Policie, Iuſtice, Veritie, Religion towards God, but that which is more ſtrange is, that this weakneſſe is as great in what is euill: for man though hee be willing to be wicked, yet hee can not be wholly ſuch, but when he hath done his woorſt there will be more to doe. There is alwayes ſome remorſe and fearefull conſideration, that mollifieth the will and maketh it relent, and ſtill reſerueth ſomething to be done; which hath beene the cauſe of the ruine of many, although perhaps they made it a proiect for their ſafetie. This is imbecillitie and ſottiſhneſſe, and from hence did ariſe that Prouerbe at their coſt, That a man muſt not play the foole by halfes. A ſpeech vttered with iudgement, but that may haue both a good and an ill ſenſe. To ſay that a man, when hee is once in, muſt ſtill proceed to woorſe and woorſe, without any reſeruation or reſpect, it is a very pernitious

doctrine: and the Prouerbe ſaith well againſt it: The ſhorter follies are the better. But yet in ſome certaine caſes the middle way is verie dangerous, as when a man hath a ſtrong enemie by the throat, like one that holdeth a woolfe by the eares, he muſt either win him altogether by courteſie or vtterly vndo him & extinguiſh him; which was alwayes the practiſe of the Romans, and that very wiſely: among others, concerning the Latines or Italians, at the exhortation of Camillus, Pacem in perpetuum parere vel ſeruiendo vel ignoſcendo: for in ſuch a caſe to doe things by halfes, is to loſe all, as the Samnites did, who for want of putting in practiſe that counſell giuen them by an olde weather-beaten ſouldier, concerning the Romans, whom they had then encloſed and ſhut vp, payd dearly for it; aut conciltandus aut tollendus hoſtis. The former courſe of courteſie is the more noble, honourable, and rather to be choſen; and wee ought not come to the ſecond but in extremities, and then when the enemie is not capable of the firſt. By this that hath beene ſaid, is ſhewed the extreame imbecillitie of man in good and euill, and that good or euill which hee either doth or flieth, is not purely and entirely good or euill: ſo that it is not in his power to be wholly depriued of all good, nor altogether wicked.
                  Let vs likewiſe note many other effects and teſtimonies of 12 Reprehenſions and repulſes.
                      humane weakneſſe. It is imbecillitie and puſillanimitie not to dare or not to be able to reprehend another, or to be reprehended: hee that is feeble or courageous in the one, is ſo in the other. Now it is a ſtrange kinde of delicateneſſe, to depriue either himſelfe or another of ſo great a fruit, for ſo light and verball a wound, that doth onely touch and pierce the eare. Neere neighbour vnto this it is, not to be able to giue a deniall with reaſon, nor to receiue and ſuffer a repulſe with patience.
                  In falſe accuſations and wicked ſuſpitions, which are done 13 Falſe ſuſpitions and accuſations.
                      in place of iuſtice and iudgement, there is double imbecillitie; the one in thoſe that are accuſed and ſuſpected, and that is in iuſtifying and excuſing themſelues too carefully, and as it were ambitiouſly. Mendax infamia terret quem niſi mendacem? This is to betray their owne innocencie, to put their conſcience and their right to comprimiſe and arbitrement;

for by ſuch plea perſpicuitas argumentatione eleuatur. Socrates in iudgement it ſelfe would not do it, neither by himſelfe nor by another, refuſing to vſe the learned plea of great Lyſias, and choſe rather to die. The other is in a contrarie caſe, that is, when the accuſed is ſo couragious that he takes no care to excuſe or iuſtifie himſelfe, becauſe he ſcorneth the accuſation and accuſer, as vnwoorthy his anſwer and iuſtification; and he will not doe himſelfe that wrong to enter the liſts. This courſe hath been practiſed by generous men, by Scipio aboue all others, many times out of the maruellous conſtancie of his minde. Now others are offended heerewith, thinking it too great a confidence and pride, and it ſtingeth them, that hee hath too ſenſible a feeling of his innocency, and will not yeeld himſelfe; or imputing this ſilence and contempt to the want of heart, diſtruſt of the law, and inabilitie to iuſtifie himſelfe. O feeble humanitie! the accuſed or ſuſpected, whether hee defend or defend not himſelfe, it is imbecillitie and cowardneſſe. We wiſh a man courage to defend himſelfe, and when he hath done it, wee ſhew our owne weakneſſe by being offended with it.
                  Another argument of imbecillitie is, when a man ſhall ſubiect and addict himſelfe to a certaine particular forme of life; 14 Tenderneſſe & delicacie.
                      this is a baſe kinde of tenderneſſe, and effeminate delicacie, vnworthy an honeſt man, and makes vs vnprofitable, different in conuerſation, and may be hurtfull too in a caſe where change of maners and carriage is neceſſarie. It is likewiſe a ſhame, either not to dare or not to be able to doe that which hee ſeeth euery man to doe beſides himſelfe. It were fitteſt that ſuch people ſhould liue and hide themſelues in the chimney corner in their priuate houſes. The faireſt forme of liuing is to be pliable to all, euen to exceſſe it ſelfe, if need be; to be able, to dare, to know how to doe all things, and yet to doe nothing but what is good. It is good to know all, not to vſe all.
                  It is likewiſe imbecillity, and a great & vulgar ſottiſhnes, to run after ſtrange and ſcholaſticall examples, after allegations, 15 Search of bookes.
                      neuer to ſettle an opinion without teſtimonies in print, nor to beleeue men but ſuch as are in bookes, nor trueth it ſelfe but ſuch as is ancient. By this reaſon fooleries and toyes if they

once paſſe the preſſe, they haue credit and dignity enough. Now there are euery day many things done before our eies, which if we had but the ſpirit and ſufficiency well to collect, to ſearch with dexterity to iudge of, and to applie to their times, we ſhould frame and finde miracles and maruellous examples, which yeeld not in any thing to thoſe of times paſt, which we ſo much admire, and therefore we admire becauſe they are ancient and in print.
                  Againe another teſtimony of weakneſſe is, that man is not 16 Extremities.
                      capable but of indifferent things, and cannot endure extremities; for if they be ſmall and in outward ſhew baſe, he contemneth and diſdaineth them as vnworthy, and it is offenſiue vnto him to conſider of them: if they be very great and ouerſplendent, he feares them, he admires them, and is offended with them. The firſt doth principally concerne great and high minds: the ſecond as common with thoſe that are weake.
                  This weakneſſe doth likewiſe appeare in our hearing, 17 Sudden occurrents.
                      ſight, and in the ſudden ſtroke of a new vnexpected occurrent, which ſurpriſeth and ſeaſeth vpon vs vnawares. For they doe in ſuch ſort aſtoniſh vs, that they take from vs both our ſenſe and ſpeech,

                        Diriguit viſu in medio, calor oſſa reliquit,
                        Labitur & longo vix tandem tempore fatur,
                     
yea, ſometimes life it ſelfe: whether they be good, witneſſe that Romane dame, who died for ioy ſeeing hir ſonne returne ſafe from the warres; Sophocles and Dionyſius the tyrant: or whether they be euill, witneſſe Diodorus, who died in the field for ſhame, becauſe he was not able to reſolue a doubt, nor anſwer an argument.
                  Yet there is another imbecillity, and it is twofold, and after 18 Braueries and ſubmiſſions.
                      two contrary maners. Some yeeld and are ouercome by the teares and humble ſupplcations of another, and their courage & gallantry is wounded with their words: others quite contrarie are not mooued by all the ſubmiſſions and complaints that may be, but are rather more obdurate and confirmed in their conſtancy and reſolution. There is no doubt but the former proceeds of weakneſſe, and it is commonly found in effeminate and vulgar mindes; but the ſecond is not without

difficultie, and is found in all ſorts of people. It ſhould ſeeme that to yeeld vnto vertue, and to manly & generous ſtrength and vigour, is the part of a valorous and generous minde. It is true if it be done in a reuerent eſteeme of vertue, as Scanderbeg did receiuing into grace a ſouldiour whom hee had ſeene to carrie himſelfe valorouſly in fight euen againſt himſelfe; or as Pompey did, pardoning the citie of the Mammertines, for the vertue of Zenon a citizen thereof; or as the Emperour Conradus did, forgiuing the Duke of Bauiers, and others beſieged with him, for the magnanimitie of their women, who priuily conuaied them away, and tooke the danger vpon their owne heads. But if it be done with a kinde of aſtoniſhment and affright of the power of vertue, as the people of Thebes, who loſt their hearts hearing Epaminondas then accuſed, recount vnto them his honourable acts, and ſeuerely reproaching them with their ingratitude, it is debility and cowardize. The fact of Alexander containing the braue reſolution of Betis taken with the citie of Gaza where he commanded, was neither weaknes nor courage, but choler, which in him had neither bridle, nor moderation.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXVIII. 3. Inconſtancie.
                  
                  MAn is a ſubiect wonderfully diuers, and wauering, vpon  whom it is very difficult to ſettle an aſſured iudgement, I ſay a iudgement vniuerſall and entire; by reaſon of the great contrarietie and diſagreement of the parts of our life. The greateſt part of our actions, are nothing elſe but eruptions and impulſions enforced by occaſions, and that haue reference to others. Irreſolution on the one part, and afterwards inconſtancy and inſtability, are the moſt common and apparent vices in the nature of man. Doubtleſſe our actions doe many times ſo contradict one the other in ſo ſtrange a maner, that it ſeemes impoſſible they ſhould all come foorth of one and the ſame ſhop; we alter and we feele it not, we eſcape as it were, from our ſelues, and we rob our ſelues, ipſi nobis furto ſubducimur. We goe after the inclinations of our appetite, and as the wind of occaſions carieth vs,

not according to reaſon; at nil potest eſſe aequabile, quod non a certa ratione proficiſcatur. Our ſpirits alſo and our humours are changed with the change of time. Life is an vnequall motion, irregular, of many faſhions. In the end wee ſtirre and trouble our ſelues by the inſtabilitie of our behauiour. Nemo non quotidiè conſilium mutat & votum: modò vxorem vult, modò amicam; modò regnare vult, modò non eſt eo officioſior ſeruus; nunc pecuniam ſpargit, nunc rapit; modò frugi videtur & grauis, modò prodigus & vanus; mutamus ſubinde perſonam.
                  
                  
                     Quod petijt, ſpernit, repetit quod nuper omiſit,
                     Aestuat, & vitae diſconuenit ordine toto.
                  
                  Man is a creature of all others the moſt hard to be ſounded and knowen, for he is the moſt double and artificiall couert and counterfeit, and there are in him ſo many cabinets and blind corners, from whence he comes forth ſometimes a man, ſometimes a ſatyre; ſo many breathing holes, from whence hee breathes ſometimes heat, ſometimes colde, and from whence comes foorth ſo much ſmoake: all his carriage and motion is a perpetuall race of errours; in the morning to be borne, in the euening to die; ſometimes in the racke, ſometimes at libertie; ſometimes a god, ſometimes a flie; hee laughs and weeps for one and the ſame thing; he is content and diſcontent; hee will, and hee will not; and in the end he knowes not what he will: now he is filled with ioy and gladneſſe, that he can not ſtay within his owne skinne, and preſently he falleth out with himſelfe, nay dares not truſt himſelfe, modò amore noſtri, modò taedio laboramus.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXIX. 4. Miſerie.
                  
                  BEhold heere the maine and principall line and liniament of the picture of man, he is (as hath beene ſayd) vaine, 1 Miſerie proper vnto man.
                      feeble, fraile, inconſtant in good, in felicitie, in pleaſure, but ſtrong, conſtant and hardned in miſerie: he is miſerie it ſelfe quicke and incarnate; and this is in a word to expreſſe humanitie, for in man is all miſerie, and without him there is not any in the world. It is the propertie of man to be miſerable, only man and all man is alwayes miſerable, Homo natus
                     
                     de muliere breui viuens tempore repletur multis miſerijs. Hee that will take vpon him to repreſent vnto vs all the parts of humane miſerie, had need to diſcouer his whole life, his ſubſtance, his entrance, his continuance, his end. I do not therefore vndertake this buſineſſe, it were a worke without end; and beſides, it is a common ſubiect handled by all: but I will heere only quote certaine points which are not common nor taken for miſeries, either becauſe they are not felt, or ſufficientlie conſidered of, although they be ſuch as preſſe man moſt, if he knew how to iudge of them.
                  The firſt point and proofe of the miſerie of man is his 2 In his beginning and his end.
                      birth; his entrance into the world is ſhamefull, vile, baſe, contemptible; his departure, his death, ruine, glorious and honorable: whereby it ſeemeth that he is a monſter and againſt nature, ſince there is ſhame in making him, honor in deſtroying him. Noſtri noſmet poenitet & pudet. Heerof a word or two. The action of planting and making man is ſhamefull, and all the parts thereof, the congredients, the preparations, the inſtruments,  and whatſoeuer ſerues thereunto is called and accounted ſhamefull, and there is nothing more vncleane in the whole nature of man. The action of deſtroying and killing him honourable, and that which ſerues thereunto glorious: we gild it, we inrich it, we adorne our ſelues with it, we carrie it by our ſides, in our hands, vpon our ſhoulders. We diſdaine  to go to the birth of man: euery man runnes to ſee him die, whether it be in his bed, or in ſome publike place, or in the field. When we goe about to make a man, we hide our  ſelues, we put out the candle, we do it by ſtealth. It is a glorie and a pompe to vnmake a man, to kill him; wee light the candles to ſee him die, wee execute him at high noone, wee ſound a trumpet, we enter the combat, and we ſlaughter him when the ſunne is at higheſt. There is but one way to beget, to make a man; a thouſand and a thouſand meanes, inuentions,  arts to deſtroy him. There is no reward, honour or recompence aſſigned to thoſe that know how to increaſe, to  preſerue humane nature; all honours, greatneſſe, riches, dignities, empires, triumphs, trophes are appointed for thoſe that know how to afflict, trouble, deſtroy it. The two principall men of the world, Alexander and Caeſar, haue vnmade,

haue ſlaine, ech of them (as Plinie reporteth) more than a million of men, but they made none, left none behinde them. And in ancient times, for pleaſure onely and paſtime, to delight the eyes of the people, there were publike ſlaughters and maſſacres of men made. Homo ſacra res per iocum & luſum 
                     Seneca. Tertull. de Spectac. 
                     occiditur: ſatis ſpectaculi in homine mors eſt: innocentes in ludum veniunt, vt publicae voluptatis hostiae fiant. There are ſome nations that curſe their birth, bleſſe their death. How monſtrous a creature is this, that is made a horror vnto himſelfe! None of all this is in any other creature, no not in the whole world beſides.
                  The ſecond point and teſtimonie of the miſerie of man is the diminiſhing of his pleaſures, euen thoſe ſmall and ſlight  ones that appertaine vnto him, (for of ſuch as are great and ſound he is not capable, as hath beene ſhewed in his weakeneſſe) and the impairing of the number and ſweetneſſe of them. If it be ſo, that he doe it not for Gods cauſe, what a monſter is this, that is an enemie vnto himſelfe, robbes, and betrayes himſelfe, to whom his pleaſures are a burthen and a croſſe! There be ſome that flie from health, ioy, comfort, as from an euill thing.
                  O miſeri quorum gaudia crimen habent!
                  We are not ingenious but to our owne hurt, it is the true diet of the force of the ſpirit.
                  But there is yet that which is worſe, the ſpirit of man is not only a diminiſher of his ioy, a trouble-feaſt, an enemy to his 4 Forging of euils.
                      ſmall, naturall and iuſt pleaſures, as I meane to proue, but alſo a forger of thoſe that are euill; it faineth, feareth, flieth, abhorreth as great miſchiefs, things that are not any way euill in themſelues; and in trueth, which beaſts themſelues feare not, but that by his owne proper diſcourſe and imagination they are fained to be ſuch, as not to be aduanced in honour, greatnes, riches, as cuckoldſhip, ſterility, death: for to ſay the truth, there is nothing but griefe it ſelfe that is euill and which is felt. And though ſome wiſe men ſeem to feare theſe things, yet it is not for their owne ſakes, but becauſe of that griefe which ſometimes doth accompany them afterwards: for many times it is a fore-runner of death, and ſometimes followeth the loſſe of goods, of credit, of honour. But take from

theſe things grief, the reſt is nothing but fantaſie, which hath no other lodging but in the head of man, which quits it ſelfe of other buſineſſe to be miſerable; and imagineth within it owne bounds, falſe euils beſides the true, employing and extending his miſerie in ſtead of leſſening and contracting it. Beaſts feele not theſe euils, but are exempted from them, becauſe nature iudgeth them not to be ſuch.
                  As for ſorrow, which is the only true euill, man is wholly borne thereunto, and it is his naturall propertie. The Mexicanes 
                     5 He is borne to ſorrow. thus ſalute their infants comming forth of the wombe of their mother: Infant thou art come into the world to ſuffer: endure, ſuffer, and hold thy peace. That ſorrow is naturall vnto man, and contrariwiſe, pleaſure but a ſtranger, it appeareth by theſe three reaſons. All the parts of man are capable of ſorrow; very few of delight. The parts capable of pleaſure  can not receiue more than one or two ſorts, but all can receiue  the greateſt number of griefs all different, heat, colde, pricking, rubbing, trampling, fleaing, beating, boiling, languiſhing, extenſion, oppreſſion, relaxation, and infinite others, which haue no proper name, (to omit thoſe of the ſoule) in ſuch ſort, that man is better able to ſuffer them, than to expreſſe them. Man hath no long continuance in pleaſure: for that of the bodie is like a fire of ſtraw: and if it ſhould continue,  it would bring with it much enuie and diſpleaſure: but ſorrowes are more permanent, and haue not their certaine ſeaſons as pleaſures haue. Againe, the empire and command of ſorrow is farre more great, more vniuerſall, more powerfull, more durable, and (in a word) more naturall, than that of pleaſure.
                  To theſe three a man may adde other three: Sorrow and griefe is more frequent, and falles out often; Pleaſure is rare.  Euil comes eaſily of it ſelfe, without ſeeking; Pleaſure neuer comes willingly, it muſt be ſought after, and many times we  pay more for it than it is woorth. Pleaſure is neuer pure, but alwayes diſtempered, and mingled with ſome bitterneſſe,  and there is alwayes ſome thing wanting; but ſorrow and griefe is many times entire and pure. After all this, the worſt of our market, and that which doth euidently ſhew the miſerie of our condition, is, that the greateſt pleaſures touch vs

not ſo neere, as the lighteſt griefs. Segnius homines bona, quàm mala ſentiunt, we feele not ſo much our ſoundeſt health, as the leaſt maladie that is, pung it in cute vix ſumma violatum plagula corpus, quando valere, nil quenquam monet.
                  
                  It is not enough that man be indeede and by nature miſerable, 6 By memorie and anticipation.
                      and beſides true and ſubſtantiall euills he faine & forge falſe and fantaſticall, as hath beene ſaide; but hee muſt likewiſe extend and lengthen them, and cauſe both the true and falſe to endure and to liue longer than they can, ſo amarous is he of iniſerie; which he doth diuers waies. Firſt by the remembrance of what is paſt, and the anticipation of what is to come, ſo that we cannot faile to be miſerable, ſince that thoſe things which are principally good in vs, and whereof wee glorie moſt, are inſtruments of miſerie: futuro torquemur & praeterito, mult a bona noſtra nobis nocent, timoris tormentum memoria reducit, prouidentia anticipat, nemo praeſentibus tantùm miſer est. It is not enough to be miſerable, but wee muſt encreaſe it by a continual expectation before it come, nay ſeeke it and prouoke it to come, like thoſe that kill themſelues with the feare of death, that is to ſay, either by curioſitie or imbecillitie, and vaine apprehenſion, to preoccupate euils and inconueniences, and to attend them with ſo much paine & ado, euen thoſe which peraduenture will neuer come neere vs? Theſe kinde of people will be miſerable before their time, and double miſerable, both by a reall ſenſe or feeling of their miſerie, and by a long premeditation therof, which many times is a hundred times worſe than the euils themſelues, Minùs afficit ſenſus fatigatio quàm cogitatio. The eſſence or being of miſerie endureth not long, but the minde of man muſt lengthen and extend it, and entertaine it before hand. Plùs dolet quàm neceſſe eſt qui antè dolet quàm neceſſe eſt. Quaedam magis, quaedam antequam debeant, quaedam cùm omninò non debeant, nos torquent. Aut augemus dolorem, aut fugimus, aut praecipimus. Beaſts do well defend themſelues from this follie and miſerie, and are much bound to thanke nature that they want that ſpirit, that memorie, that prouidence that man hath. Caeſar ſaid well that the beſt death was that which was leaſt premeditated. And to ſay the truth, the preparation before death hath beene to many a greater torment, than the execution it ſelfe.

My meaning is not here to ſpeake of that vertuous and philoſophicall premeditation, which is that temper, whereby the ſoule is made inuincible, & is fortified to the proofe againſt all aſſaults and accidents, whereof we ſhall ſpeake heerafter: but Lib. 2. ca 7. of that fearefull and ſometimes falſe, and vaine apprehenſion of euils that may come, which afflicteth and darkeneth, as it were with ſmoke, all the beauty and ſerenity of the ſoule, troubleth all the reſt and ioy thereof, inſomuch that it were better to ſuffer it ſelfe to be wholly ſurpriſed. It is more eaſie and more naturall not to thinke thereof at all. But let vs leaue this anticipation of euill, for ſimply euery care and painfull thought bleating after things to come by hope, deſire, feare, is a very great miſery. For beſides that we haue not any power ouer that which is to come, much leſſe ouer what is paſt; (and ſo it is vanity, as it hath been ſaid) there doth ſtil remain vnto vs that euill and dammage, Calamitoſus eſt animus, futuri anxius, which robbeth our vnderſtanding, and taketh from vs the peaceable comfort of our preſent good, and will not ſuffer vs to ſettle and content our ſelues therein.
                  But this is not yet enough. For to the end man may neuer want matter of miſery, yea that he may alwaies haue his 7 By vnquiet ſearch.
                      full, he neuer ceaſeth ſearching and ſeeking with great ſtudy, the cauſes and aliments of miſery. He thruſteth himſelfe into buſineſſe euen with ioy of heart, euen ſuch as when they are offered vnto him, he ſhould turne his backe towards them; and either out of a miſerable diſquiet of mind, or to the end he may ſhew himſelfe to be induſtrious, a man of employment and vnderſtanding, that is a foole and miſerable too, he enterpriſeth, mooueth, and remooueth new buſineſſe, or els he putteth himſelfe into that of other mens. To be ſhort, he is ſo ſtrongly and inceſſantly moleſted with care, and thoughts not only vnprofitable and ſuperfluous, but painfull and hurtfull, tormented with what is preſent, annoied with what is paſt, vexed with that which is to come, that hee ſeemeth to feare nothing more, than that he ſhall not be ſufficiently miſerable. So that a man may iuſtly crie out, O poore and wretched creatures that you are, how many euils doe you willingly endure, beſides thoſe neceſſarie euils that nature hath beſtowed vpon you? But what? Man contenteth

himſelfe in miſerie, he is obſtinate to ruminate & continually to recall to minde his paſſed euils. Complaints are common with him, and his owne euils and ſorrowes ſeeme many times deare vnto him, yea it is a happie thing for ſmall and light occaſions to be termed the moſt miſerable of all others: est quaedam dolendi voluptas. Now this is a farre greater miſerie to be ambitiouſly miſerable, than not to know it, not to feele it at all. Homo animal querulum, cupidè ſuis incumbens miſerijs.
                  
                  We will not account it a humane miſerie, ſince it is an euill 8 By incompatibilitie.
                      common to all men, and not to beaſts, that men can not accommodate themſelues, and make profit of one another, without the loſſe and hurt, the ſickneſſe, folly, ſinne, death of one another. We hinder, wound, oppreſſe one the other in ſuch maner, that the better ſort euen without thought or will thereunto, out of an inſenſible deſire and innocentlie thirſt after the death, the euill, the paine and puniſhment of another.
                  So that we ſee man miſerable both naturally and voluntarily, 9 In the remedies of miſerie.
                      in truth and by imagination, by obligation and willingneſſe of heart. He is too miſerable, and yet he feares he is not miſerable enough, and laboureth to make himſelfe more miſerable. Let vs now ſee how. When he feeles any euill, and is annoyed with ſome certaine miſerie (for hee is neuer without many miſeries that he feeles not) he endeuoureth to quit himſelfe thereof; but what are his remedies? Truly ſuch as importune him more than the euill it ſelfe which hee would cure; in ſuch ſort, that being willing to get forth of one miſerie, he doth but change it into another, and perhaps into a worſe. But what of that, the change it ſelfe perhaps delighteth him, or at leaſt yeelds him ſome ſolace: he thinketh to heale one euill with another euill, which proceedeth from an opinion which the bewitched and miſerable world holdeth; that is, That there is nothing profitable, if it be not painfull. That is woorth nought that coſts nothing, yea eaſe it ſelfe is much ſuſpected. This doth likewiſe proceed from an higher cauſe. It is a ſtrange thing, but true, and which conuicteth man to be miſerable, That no euill can be taken away, but by another euill, whether it be in bodie or in ſoule. Spirituall maladies and corporall are not cured and chaſed away, but

by torment, ſorrow, paine. The ſpirituall by repentance, It was erroneous, but corrected. watchings, faſtings, impriſonments, which are truly afflictions, and ſuch as gaule vs too, notwithſtanding the reſolution and deuotion willingly to endure them: for if we vſe them either for pleaſure or profit, they can worke no effect, but are rather exerciſes of pleaſure, of couetouſneſſe, of houſhold gouernment, than of repentance and contrition of heart. The corporall in like ſort be medicines, inciſions, cauteries, diets, as they well feele that are bound to medicinall rules, who are troubled on the one ſide with the diſeaſe that afflicts them, on the other with that rule, the thought whereof continually annoyes them. So likewiſe other euils, as ignorance is cured by great, long and painfull ſtudie: Qui addit ſcientiam, addit & laborem: want and pouertie, by great care, watchings, trauell, ſweatings: In ſudore vultus tui. So that both for the ſoule and for the bodie, labour and trauell is as proper vnto man, as it is for a bird to flie.
                  All theſe miſeries aboue mentioned are corporall, or common 10 Spirituall miſeries.
                      both to the ſpirit and to the body, and mount little higher than the imagination and fantaſie. Let vs conſider of the more ſubtile and ſpirituall, which are rather to be called miſeries, as being erroneous and malignant, more actiue and more our owne, but leſſe felt and confeſſed, which makes a man more, yea doubly miſerable, becauſe hee onely feeleth thoſe euils that are indifferent, and not the greater; yea a man dares not touch them, or ſpeake of them, ſo much is he confirmed, and ſo deſperate in his miſeries. We muſt therefore by the way as it were, and gently ſay ſomething, at leaſt with the finger point afarre off, to giue him occaſion to conſider and thinke thereof, ſince of himſelfe he hides it not. Firſt, in regard of the vnderſtanding, is it not a ſtrange and a lamentable miſerie of humane nature, that it ſhould wholly be compoſed of error and blindneſſe? The greater part of common and vulgar opinions, yea the more plauſible, and ſuch as are receiued with reuerence, are falſe and erroneous; and which is woorſe, the greater part vnprofitable for humane ſocietie. And although ſome of the wiſeſt, which are but few in number, vnderſtand better than the common ſort, and iudge of theſe opinions as they ſhould, neuertheleſſe ſometimes they

ſuffer themſelues to be caried, if not in all and alwayes, yet in ſome and ſometimes. A man had need be firme and conſtant, that he ſuffer not himſelfe to be carried with the ſtreame, yea ſound and prepared to keepe himſelfe cleere from ſo vniuerſall a contagion. The generall opinions receiued with the applauſe of all, and without contradiction, are as a ſwift riuer which carrieth all with it: Proh ſuperi quantum mortalia pectora caecae noctis habent! O miſeras hominum mentes & pectora caeca, qualibus in tenebris vita, quantis
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         periclis degitur hoc aeui quodcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         est! Now it were too long and too tedious a thing to runne ouer all thoſe fooliſh opinions by name, wherewith the whole world is made drunken: yet let vs take a view of ſome few of them, which in their due place ſhall be handled more at large.
                  1 To iudge of aduice and counſell by the euents, which 
                        See lib. 3. cap. 1. are no way in our owne hands, and which depend vpon the heauens.
                  2 To condemne and reiect all things, maners, opinions, 
                        Lib. 2. ca. 8. lawes, cuſtomes, obſeruations as barbarous and euill, not knowing what they are, or ſeeing any inconuenience in them, but onely becauſe they are vnuſuall, and different from ſuch as are ordinarie and common.
                  3 To eſteeme and commend things, becauſe of their noueltie, 
                        Lib. 2. ca. 3. or raritie, or ſtrangeneſſe, or difficultie, foure meſſengers which haue great credit in vulgar ſpirits: and many times ſuch things are vaine, and not to be eſteemed, if they bring not with them goodneſſe and commoditie. And therefore that Prince did iuſtly contemne him that glorified himſelfe becauſe he could from far caſt a graine of millet thorow the eye of a needle.
                  4 Generally all thoſe ſuperſtitious opinions wherewith children, women, and weake mindes are infected.
                  5 To eſteeme of men for their riches, dignities, honors, and to contemne thoſe that want them, as if a man ſhould iudge of a horſe by the ſaddle and bridle.
                  6 To account of things not according to their true, naturall and eſſentiall worth, which is many times inward and hidden, but according to the outward ſhew or common report.
                  
                     
7 To thinke to be reuenged of an enemy by killing him: for that is to put him in ſafetie, and to quit him from all ill, and to bring a vengeance vpon himſelfe: it is to take from his enemie all ſenſe of reuenge, which is the principall effect thereof. This doth likewiſe belong vnto weakneſſe.
                  8 To account it a great iniurie, or to thinke a man miſerable becauſe he is a cuckold: for what greater folly in iudgement can there be, than to eſteeme of a man the leſſe for the vice of another, which hee neuer allowed? As much may be ſayd of a baſtard.
                  9 To account leſſe of things preſent, and that are our owne, and which wee peaceably enioy; and to eſteeme of them moſt, when a man hath them not, or becauſe they are another mans, as if the preſence and poſſeſſion of them did leſſen their worth, and the want of them increaſe it.
                  
                     Virtutem incolumem odimus,
                     Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus inuidi.
                  
                  And this is the cauſe why a Prophet is not eſteemed in his owne countrey. So likewiſe, maſterſhip and authoritie ingendreth contempt of thoſe that are ſubiect to that authoritie: husbands haue a careleſſe reſpect of their wiues, and many fathers of their children. Wilt thou (ſaith the good fellow) loue her no more, then marrie her? Wee eſteeme more the horſe, the houſe, the ſeruant of another, becauſe he is anothers and not ours. It is a thing very ſtrange to account more of things in imagination, than in ſubſtance, as a man doth all things abſent and that are not his, whether it be before hee haue them, or after he hath had them. The cauſe hereof in both caſes may be, becauſe before a man poſſeſſe them, hee eſteemeth not according to that they are worth, but according to that which he imagineth them to be, or they haue by another beene reported to be; and poſſeſſing them, hee eſteemes them according to that good and benefit he getteth by them; and after they are taken from him, he conſidereth and deſireth them wholly in their perfection and declination, whereas before he enioyed them and vſed them, but by peecemeale ſucceſſiuely: for a man thinketh he ſhall alwayes haue time enough to enioy them, and by that meanes they are gone before he was aware that he had them. And this is

the reaſon why the griefe is greater in hauing them not, than the pleaſure in poſſeſſing them. But heerein there is as much imbecillitie as miſerie. We haue not the ſufficiencie to enioy, but only to deſire. There is another vice cleane contrarie to this, and that is, when a man ſetleth himſelfe in himſelfe, and in ſuch ſort conceits himſelfe and whatſoeuer he hath, that he preferres it before all, and thinks nothing comparable to his owne. Though theſe kinde of people be no wiſer than the other, yet they are at leaſt more happie.
                  10 To be ouer-zealous in euery queſtion that is propoſed, to bite all, to take to the heart, and to ſhew himſelfe importunate and opinatiue in euery thing, ſo he haue ſome faire pretext of iuſtice, religion, the weale publike, the loue of the people.
                  11 To play the mourner, the afflicted perſon, to weepe 
                        See cap. 27. for the death, or vnhappie accident of another, to thinke that not to be moued at all, or very little, is for want of loue and affection. There is alſo vanitie in this.
                  12 To eſteeme and make account of actions that are done 
                        Lib. 2. ca. 10. with rumour, clatter, and clamor, and to contemne thoſe that are done otherwiſe, and to thinke that they that proceed after ſo ſweet and calme a maner, do nothing, are as in a dreame without action; and to be brieſe, to eſteeme Art more than Nature. That which is puffed vp, ſwollen, and eleuated by ſtudie, fame, report, and ſtriketh the ſenſe (that is to ſay, artificiall) is more regarded and eſteemed, than that which is ſweet, ſimple, plaine, ordinarie, that is to ſay, Naturall: that awaketh, this brings vs aſleepe.
                  13 To giue an ill and wrong interpretation of the honourable actions of another man, and to attribute them to baſe and vaine, or vicious cauſes or occaſions; as they that attributed the death of yoong Cato to the feare he had of Caeſar, wherewith Plutarch ſeemes to be offended, and others more fooliſhly, to ambition. This is a great maladie of the iudgement, which proceedeth either from malice, and corruption of the will and maners, or enuie againſt thoſe that are more woorthy than themſelues, or from that vice of bringing their owne credit to their owne doore▪ and meaſuring another by their owne foot; or rather than all this, from imbecillitie and

weakneſſe, as not hauing their ſight ſo ſtrong and ſo certaine to conceiue the brightneſſe of vertue in it owne natiue purity. There are ſome that thinke they ſhew great wit and ſubtiltie in deprauing and obſcuring the glory of beautifull and honorable actions, wherein they ſhew much more malice than ſufficiencie. It is a thing eaſy enough to doe, but baſe and villanous.
                  14 To defame and to chaſtiſe ouer-rigorouſly, and ſhamefully, certaine vices as crimes in the higheſt degree villanous and contagious, which are neuertheleſſe but indifferent, and haue their roote and excuſe in nature: and not ſo much to deteſt, and to chaſtiſe with ſo greedy adoo thoſe vices that are truly great, and againſt nature, as pretended and plotted murders, treaſons, and treachery, cruelty, and ſo forth.
                  15 Behold alſo after all this a true teſtimonie of ſpirituall miſerie, but which is wily & ſubtile, and that is, that the ſpirit of man in it beſt temper, and peaceable, ſetled, and ſoundeſt eſtate, is not capable but of common, ordinary, naturall, and indifferent things. To be capable of diuine and ſupernaturall, as of diuination, propheſie, reuclation, inuention, and as a man may ſay, to enter into the cabinet of the gods, he muſt be ſicke, diſplaced from his naturall ſeate, and as it were corrupted, correptus, either by extrauagancie, extaſie, inſpiration, or by dreaming; inſomuch that the two naturall wayes to atteine thereunto are either fury, or dead ſleepe. So that the ſpirit is neuer ſo wiſe, as when it is a foole, nor more awaked, than when it ſleepeth: it neuer meeteth better, than when it goes on one ſide, or croſſeth the way; it neuer mounts or flies ſo high, as when it is moſt deiected. So that it muſt needs be miſerable, becauſe to be happy, it muſt be, as it were loſt, and without it ſelfe. This toucheth not in any ſort the diuine diſpoſition, for God can to whom, and when it pleaſeth him, reueale himſelfe, man in the meane time continuing ſetled in his ſenſe and vnderſtanding, as the ſcripture makes mention of Moyſes and diuers others.
                  16 To conclude, can there be a greater fault in iudgement, than not to eſteeme of iudgement, not to exerciſe it, and to preferre the memory, and imagination, or fantaſie before it? We ſee thoſe great, goodly and learned orations, diſcourſes,

lectures, ſermons, bookes, which are ſo much eſteemed and admired, written by men of greateſt learning in this age (I except ſome few) what are they all, but a heape and collection of allegations, and the labours of other men (a worke of memory and reading, and a thing very eaſie, being all culled and diſpoſed to their hands, and heereof are ſo many bookes compoſed) with ſome few poynts handled, with a good inſtruction or two (a worke of imagination) and heere is all? This is many times a vanity, and there appeareth not in it any ſparke of iudgement, or excellent vertue: ſo likewiſe the authours themſelues are many times weake and common in iudgement, and in will corrupted: how much better is it, to heare a countrey ſwaine, or a merchant talking in his counting-houſe, diſcourſing of many goodly propoſitions and verities, plainely and truely without arte or forme and giuing good and wholeſome counſell, out of a ſound, ſtrong, and ſolide iudgement?
                  In the will there are as many, or rather more miſeries, and 11 Of the Will.
                      more miſerable; they are without number, among which theſe following are ſome few of them.
                  1 To be willing rather to ſeeme an honeſt man, than to be, and rather to be ſuch to another, than to himſelfe.
                  2 To be farre more ready and willing to reuenge an offence, than to acknowledge a good turne, in ſuch ſort, that it is a corſiue to his heart to acknowledge, pleaſure and gaine to reuenge, a proofe of a malignant nature, gratia oneri eſt, vltio in quaestu habetur.
                  
                  3 To be more apt to hate, than to loue, to ſlaunder, than to commend; to feede more willingly and with greater pleaſure vpon the euill, than the good of another, to enlarge it more, to diſplay it more in his diſcourſe, and the exerciſe of his ſtile; witneſſe Lawyers, Oratours, and Poets, who in reciting the good of any man, are idle, eloquent in euill. The words, inuentions, figures, to ſpeake ill, to ſcoffe, are farre otherwiſe, more rich, more emphaticall and ſignificant, than to prayſe, or ſpeake well.
                  4 To flye from euill, to doe what is good, not properly for the good effect by naturall reaſon, and for the loue of vertue, but for ſome other ſtrange conſideration, ſometimes baſe

and idle, of gaine and profit, vaine-glory, hope, feare, of cuſtome, company; and to be briefe, not ſimply for himſelfe and his duty, but for ſome other outward occaſion and circumſtance: all are honeſt men by occaſion and accident. And this is the reaſon why they are ſuch vnequally, diuerſly, not perpetually, conſtantly, vniformely.
                  5 To loue him the leſſe whom we haue offended, and that becauſe we haue offended him; a ſtrange thing, and which proceedeth not alwayes from feare that he will take occaſion to be reuenged, for it may be he wiſheth vs neuer the worſe; but it is becauſe his preſence doth accuſe vs, and brings to memory our fault and indiſcretion. And if the offendour loue not the offended the worſe, it is becauſe the offence he committed was againſt his will; for commonly he that hath a will to offend, loues him the leſſe whom he hath offended, Chi offende, mai non perdona, He that offends, neuer forgiues.
                  6 As much may be ſayd of him to whom we are much bound for courteſies receiued, his preſence is a burthen vnto vs, he putteth vs in minde of our band and duty, he reprocheth vnto vs our ingratitude and inabilities, and we wiſh he were not, ſo we were diſcharged of that duty. Villaines by nature, Quidam quo plus debent, magis oderunt: leue aes alienum debitorem facit, graue inimicum.
                  
                  7 To take pleaſure in the euill, hurt, and danger of another, to greeue and repine at his good, aduancement, proſperitie (I meane when it is without cauſe of hatred, or priuate quarrell, for it is another thing when it proceedeth from the ill deſert of a man) I ſpeake heere of that common and naturall condition, whereby without any particular malice, men of indifferent honeſtie, take pleaſure to ſee others aduenture their fortunes at ſea, and are vexed to ſee them thriue better than themſelues, or that fortune ſhould ſmile more vpon others than them, and make themſelues merry with the ſorrow of another: this is a token of a malitious ſeed in vs.
                  To conclude, that I may yet ſhew you how great our 12 The concluſion of theſe ſpirituall miſeries.
                      miſery is, let me tell you that the world is repleniſhed with three ſorts of people, who take vp much roome therein, and carry a great ſway both in number and reputation: the ſuperſtitious,

formaliſts, Pedanties, who notwithſtanding they are in diuers ſubiects, iuriſdictions, and theaters (the three principall, religion, life or conuerſation, and doctrine) yet they are all of one ſtamp, weake ſpirits, ill borne, or very ill inſtructed, a very dangerous kind of people in iudgement, and touched with a diſeaſe incurable. It is loſt labour to ſpeake to theſe kind of people, or to perſwade them to change their minds, for they account themſelues the beſt and wiſeſt in the world, opinatiue obſtinacie is there in his proper ſeate; he that is once ſtricken and touched to the quick with any of theſe euils, there is little hope of his recouery: Who is there more ſottiſh, and withall more braine-ſick and heady than theſe kind of people? Two things there are that doe much hinder them (as hath been ſpoken) naturall imbecillitie, and incapacitie, and afterwards an anticipated opinion to do as well and better than others. I do heere but name them, and point them with the finger, for afterwards in their places heere quoted their faults ſhall be ſhewed more at large.
                  The Superstitious, iniurious to God, and enemies to true religion, couer themſelues with the cloke of pietie, zeale and 1 Superſtitious See Lib. 2. Cap. 5. loue towards God, euen to the puniſhing and tormenting of themſelues more than is needfull, thinking thereby to merit much, and that God is not only pleaſed therewith, but indebted vnto them for the reſt. What would you do to theſe kind of people? If you tell them that they do more than they need, and that they receiue things with the left hand, in not vnderſtanding them aright, they will not beleeue you, but tell you, that their intent is good (whereby they thinke to ſaue themſelues) and that they do it for deuotion. Howſoeuer, they will not quit themſelues of their gaine, nor the ſatisfaction which they receiue, which is to bind God vnto them.
                  The Formalists doe wholly tie themſelues to an outward forme and faſhion of life, thinking to be quit of blame in the 2 Formalists.
                      purſuite of their paſſions and deſires, ſo they do nothing againſt the tenour of the lawes, and omit none of their formalities. See heere a miſerable churle which hath ouerthrowne and brought to a deſperate ſtate many poore families; but this hath fallen out by demaunding that which he thought to be his owne, and that by way ofiuſtice. Who then can affirme

that he hath done ill? O how many good works haue beene omitted, how many euils committed, vnder this cloake of formes, which a man ſees not! And therefore it is very truly ſayd, That the extremitie of law is the extremitie of wrong: and as well ſayd, God ſhield vs from Formalists.
                  
                  The Pedantie or houſholde ſchoole-maſter hauing with great ſtudy and paines filched from other mens writings their 3 Pedanties. Lib. 3. cap. 13. learning, they ſet it out to the view and to ſale, and with a queſtuous and mercinary oſtentation they diſgorge it, and let it flie with the winde. Are there any people in the world ſo ſottiſh in their affaires, more vnapt to euery thing, and yet more preſumptuous and obſtinate? In euery tongue and nation, Pedante, Clerke, Maſter, are words of reproch. To doe any thing ſottiſhly, is to doe it like a Clerke. Theſe are a kinde of people that haue their memories ſtuffed with the wiſdome of other men, and haue none of their owne: their iudgements, willes, conſciences are neuer the better, they are vnapt, ſimple, vnwiſe, in ſuch ſort, that it ſeemes that learning ſerues them for no other vſe than to make them more fooles, yea more arrogant pratlers: they diminiſh or rather ſwallow vp their owne ſpirits, and baſtardize their vnderſtanding, but puffe vp their memorie. Heere is that miſerie ſeated which we now come to ſpeake of, and is the laſt of thoſe of the vnderſtanding.
               
               
                  CHAP. XL. 5. Preſumption.
                  
                  BEholde heere the laſt and leawdeſt line or liniament of this picture; it is the other part of that deſcription giuen by Plinie; the plague of man, and the nurſe of falſe and erroneous opinions, both publike and particular: and yet a vice both naturall and originall in man. Now this preſumption muſt be conſidered diuerſly, and in all ſenſes, high, low, collaterall, inward and outward, in reſpect of God, things high and celeſtiall; in regard of things baſe, as of beaſts, man his companion, of himſelfe, and all may be reduced to theſe two, To eſteeme too much of himſelfe, and not to eſteeme ſufficiently of another: Qui in ſe conſidebant, & aſpernabantur alios. A word or two of either. Lue. 18.
                  
                  
                     
Firſt in reſpect of God (and it is a horrible thing) all ſuperſtition 1 Preſumption in regard of God.
                      and want in religion, or falſe ſeruice of God, proceedeth from this, That we eſteeme not enough of God, we vnderſtand him not; and our opinions, conceits and beliefs of the Diuinitie are not high and pure enough. I meane not by this enough, proportion anſwerable to the greatneſſe of God, which being infinite receiueth not any proportion; for it is impoſſible in this reſpect to conceit or beleeue enough: but I meane enough in reſpect of what we can and ought to doe. We ſoare not high enough, we doe not eleuate and ſharpen ſufficiently the point of our ſpirit, when we enter into an imagination of the Diuinitie: we ouer-baſely conceit him, our ſeruices are vnworthy his maieſtie: we deale with him after a baſer maner than with other creatures; we ſpeake not only of his works, but of his maieſtie, will, iudgements, with more confidence and boldneſſe than we dare to doe of an earthly Prince or man of honour. Many men there are that would ſcorn ſuch kind of ſeruice and acknowledgement, and would holde themſelues to be abuſed, and their honours in ſome ſort violated, if a man ſhould ſpeake of them, or abuſe their names in ſo baſe and abiect a maner. We enterpriſe to leade God, to flatter him, to bend him, to compound or condition with him; that I may not ſay, to braue, threaten, deſpight, murmure againſt him. Caeſar willed his Pilot not to feare to hoiſe vp ſailes, and commit himſelfe to the furie of the ſeas euen againſt deſtinie and the will of the heauens, with this onely confidence, That it was Caeſar whom he carried. Augustus 
                     
                        See lib. 2. cap. 10. hauing beene beaten with a tempeſt at ſea, defied god Neptune, and in the chiefeſt pompe of the Circean ſports cauſed his image to be taken downe, from where it was placed amongſt the reſt of the gods, to be reuenged of him. The Thracians when it thundereth and lighteneth, ſhoot againſt heauen, to bring God himſelfe into order. Xerxes ſcourged the ſea, and writ a bill of defiance againſt the hill Athos. And one telleth of a Chriſtian King a neere neighbour of ours 
                        See lib. 2. cap. 18., who hauing receiued a blow from God, ſwore he would be reuenged: and gaue commandement, that for ten yeeres no 
                        See lib. 3. cap. 1. man ſhould pray vnto him, or ſpeake of him.
                  
                     Audax Iapeti genus
                     
                        
Nil mortalibus arduum.
                     Coelum ipſum petimus ſtultitia, neque
                     Per noſtrum patimur ſcelus
                     Iracunda Iouem ponere fulmina.
                  
                  But to leaue theſe ſtrange extrauagancies, all the common ſort of people do they not plainly verifie that ſaying of Pliny, That there is nothing more miſerable, and therewithall more glorious than man? For on the one ſide he faineth loftie and rich opinions of the loue, care and affection of God towards him, as his minion and only beloued, and in the meane time he returneth him no dutie or ſeruice worthie ſo great and louing a God. How can a life ſo miſerable, and a ſeruice ſo negligent on the one ſide, agree with an opinion and beliefe ſo glorious and ſo haughtie on the other? This is at one and the ſame time, to be an angel and a ſwine: and this is that wherewith a great Philoſopher reproched the Chriſtians, that there were no people more fierce & glorious in their ſpeech, and in effect more diſſolute, effeminate and villanous. It was an enemie that ſpake it perhaps to wrong and abuſe vs, but yet he ſpake but that which doth iuſtly touch all hypocrites.
                  It likewiſe ſeemeth vnto vs, that we burthen and importune God, the world, and nature, that they labour and trauell 2 In reſpect of Nature.
                      in our affayres, they watch not but for vs, and therefore we wonder and are aſtoniſhed with thoſe accidents that happen vnto vs, and eſpecially at our deaths. Few there are that reſolue and beleeue, that it is their laſt houre, and almoſt all do euen then ſuffer themſelues to be mocked with vaine hopes. This proceedeth from preſumption, we make too much of our ſelues, and we thinke that the whole world hath great intereſt in our death, that things faile vs according to that meaſure that we faile them, or that they faile themſelues, according to that meaſure that they faile vs; that they goe the ſelfe-ſame daunce with vs, not vnlike thoſe that rowe vpon the water, thinke the heauens, the earth, yea cities themſelues to mooue, when they mooue; we thinke to draw all with vs, and there is no man amongſt vs that ſufficiently thinks he is but one.
                  Beſides all this, man beleeueth that the heauen, the ſtarres, 3 Of Heauen.
                     
                     
all this great celeſtiall motion of the world, is only made for him, Tot circa vnum caput tumultuantes Deos. And the poore miſerable wretch is in the meane time ridiculous: he is heere beneath lodged in the laſt and worſt ſtage of the world, moſt diſtant from the celeſtiall vaut, in the ſincke of the world, amongſt the filth and lees thereof; with creatures of baſer condition, made to receiue all thoſe excrements and ordures, which raine downe and fall from aboue vpon his head; nay he liues not but by them, and to endure all thoſe accidents that on all ſides happen vnto him; and yet he makes himſelfe beleeue that he is the maſter and commander of all, that all creatures, yea thoſe great luminous incorruptible bodies, whereof he knowes not the leaſt vertue, and which he is conſtrained with aſtoniſhment to admire, moue not but for him, and to do him ſeruice. And becauſe he beggeth (wretch that he is) his liuing, his maintenance, his commodities, from the beames, light and heate of the Sunne, from the raine and other diſtillations of heauen, and the aire, he ſticks not to ſay, that he enioyeth the heauens and the elements, as if all had been made, and ſtill mooue only for him. In this ſenſe a goſling may ſay as much, and perhaps more iuſtly and peremptorily. For man who many times receiueth many diſcommodities from aboue, and of all that he receiueth hath nothing in his owne power or vnderſtanding, nor can diuine of them, is in continuall doubt and feare, leſt thoſe ſuperiour bodies ſhould not moue aright, and to that end and purpoſe which he hath propoſed, and that they procure vnto him ſterilitie, ſickneſſe, and whatſoeuer is contrary to his deſignement, and ſo he trembleth vnder this burthen; whereas beaſts receiue whatſoeuer commeth from aboue, without ſtirre or apprehenſion of what ſhall happen vnto them, and without complaint of that which is hapned, which man cannot doe. Non 
                     Senec. 
                     nos cauſa mundo ſumus hiemem aestatem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         referendi: ſuas ista leges habent, quibus diuina exercentur: minus nos ſuſpicimus ſi digni nobis videmur, propter quos tanta moueantur. non tanta coelo nobiſcum ſocietas eſt, vt nostro fato ſit ille quoque ſiderum fulgor.
                  
                  In reſpect of things baſe and earthly, that is to ſay, all other creatures, he diſdaineth and contemneth them, as if they did 4 Of Creatures.
                      not appertaine to the ſame maſter-workeman, and came not

of the ſame mother, did not belong to the ſame family with him, as if they did not any way concerne him, or had any part or relation vnto him. And from hence proceedeth that common abuſe and cruelty that is practiſed againſt them; a thing that reboundeth againſt that common and vniuerſall maſter which hath made them, which hath care of them, and hath ordeined lawes for their good and preſeruation, hath giuen them preheminence in certaine things, and ſent man vnto them as to a ſchoole. But this belongs to the ſubiect of the chapter following.
                  Now this derogateth not any thing at all from that common doctrine, that the world is made for man, and man for  God: for beſides the inſtruction that man draweth in generall from euery high and low thing, whereby to know God, himſelfe, his duty, he alſo draweth in particular from euery thing either profit, pleaſure, or ſeruice. That which is aboue him, which he hath leaſt in vnderſtanding, and nothing at all in his power, the azured heauen ſo richly decked and counterpointed with ſtarres, and rowling torches neuer ceaſing ouer our heads, he only enioyeth by contemplatiō, he mounteth and is caried with admiration, feare, reuerence of the authour and ſoueraigne Lord of all: and therefore in this ſenſe it was truly ſaid by Anaxagoras, that man was created to contemplate the heauen and the ſunne, and as truly by other Philoſophers was he called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , from baſe and inferior things, he draweth help, ſeruice, commoditie; but for a man to perſwade himſelfe that in the framing of all theſe things no other thing was thought vpon but man, and that he is the only end and butt of all theſe luminous and incorruptible bodies, it is a greatfolly and an ouer-bold preſumption.
                  Finally but eſpecially, this preſumption is to be conſidered in man himſelfe, that is to ſay, in regard of himſelfe, and of 6 Of man himſelfe.
                      man his companion, both within, in the progreſſe of his iudgment and opinions; and without in his communication and conuerſation with another. Concerning which, wee are to conſider three things, as three heads which follow one the other, Three degrees of humane preſumption. where humanitie bewrayeth in a ſottiſh imbecillitie the fooliſh preſumption thereof. The firſt in beleeuing or misbeleeuing (heere is no queſtion of religion, nor of faith and beliefe

theologicall, and therefore we muſt ſtill call to minde the aduertiſement giuen in the Preface) where we are to note two contrary vices, which are common in humane condition; 1 To beleeue miſ-beleeue.
                      the one and the other more ordinarie, is a kinde of lightnes, qui citò credit, leuis eſt corde, and too great a facilitie to beleeue and to entertaine whatſoeuer is propoſed, with any kinde of appearance of truth or authority. This belongeth to the folly, ſimplicitie, tenderneſſe and imbecillitie of the weaker ſort of people, of ſpirits effeminate, ſick, ſuperſtitious, aſtoniſhed, indiſcretly zealous, who like wax do eaſily receiue all impreſſions, ſuffer themſelues to be taken and lead by the eares. And this is rather an error and weakeneſſe, than malice, and doth willingly lodge in minds gentle and debonaire. Credulitas error eſt magis quàm culpa, & quidem in optimi cuiuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         mentem facilè irrepit. We ſee almoſt the whole world led and caried with opinions and beliefes, not out of choice and iudgement, yea many times before they haue either yeares or diſcretion to iudge, but out of the cuſtome of the countrey, or inſtruction in youth receiued, or by ſome ſuddaine encounter as with a tempeſt, whereby they are in ſuch ſort faſtned, ſubiected and enthralled, that it is a matter of great difficultie euer to vnlearne them againe. Veluti tempestate delati ad quamcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         diſciplinam tanquam ad ſaxum adhaereſcunt. Thus is the world lead, we truſt our ſelues too much, and then perſwade others to beleeue vs. Vnuſquiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         mauult credere quàm iudicare; verſat nos & praecipitat traditus per manus error, ipſa conſuetudo aſſentiendi periculoſa & lubrica. Now this popular facilitie, though it be in truth weakeneſſe and imbecillitie, yet it is not without preſumption. For ſo lightly to beleeue and hold for truth and certaintie that which we know not, or to enquire of the cauſes, reaſons, conſequents, and not of the truth it ſelfe, is to enterpriſe to preſume too much. For from what other cauſe proceeds this? If you ſhall anſwere, from a ſuppoſition that it is true; why this is nothing: a man handleth and ſtirreth the foundations and effects of a thouſand things which neuer were, whereby both pro and contra are falſe. How many fables, falſe and ſuppoſed miracles, viſions, reuelations, are there receiued in the world that neuer were? And why ſhould a man beleeue a miracle, a thing neither humane

nor naturall, when he is able by naturall and humane meanes to confute, and confound the truth thereof? Truth and lying haue like viſages, like cariage, reliſh, gate, and we behold them with one and the ſame eye, it a ſunt finitima falſa veris, vt in praecipitem locum non debeat ſe ſapiens committere. A man ought not to beleeue that of a man which is not humane, except he be warranted by ſupernaturall and ſuperhumane approbation, which is only God, who is only to be beleeued in that he ſaith, only becauſe he ſaith it.
                  The other contrary vice is an audacious temeritie to condemne  and reiect as falſe all things that are not eaſily vnderſtood, and that pleaſe not the palat. It is the propertie of thoſe that haue a good opinion of themſelues, which play the parts of men of dexteritie and vnderſtanding, eſpecially heretikes, Sophists, Pedanties: for they finding in themſelues ſome ſpeciall point of the ſpirit, and that they ſee a little more cleerely than the common ſort, they aſſume vnto themſelues law and authoritie to decide and determine all things. This vice is farre greater and more baſe than the former: for it is an enraged folly to thinke to know as much as poſſiblie is to be knowne, the iuriſdiction and limits of nature, the capacitie of the power and will of God, to frame vnto himſelfe and his ſufficiencie the truth and falſhood of things, which muſt needs be in ſo certaine and aſſured reſolution and definition of them: for ſee their ordinarie language, that is falſe, impoſſible, abſurd: and how many things are there which at one time we haue reiected with laughter as impoſſible, which we haue been conſtrained afterwards to confeſſe and approue, yea and others too, more ſtrange than they? And on the other ſide how many things haue wee receiued as articles of our faith, that haue afterwards prooued vanities and lies?
                  The ſecond degree of preſumption, which followeth and commonly proceedeth from the former, is certainly and obſtinatelie 2 To affirme and condemne.
                      to affirme or diſprooue that which he hath lightly beleeued or misbeleeued. So that it addeth vnto the firſt obſtinacie in opinion, and ſo the preſumption increaſeth. This facilitie to beleeue with time is confirmed, and degenerateth into an obſtinacie inuincible and vncapable of amendment, yea a man proceeds ſo farre in this obſtinacie, that he defends

thoſe things that he knowes and vnderſtands leaſt: Maiorem fidem homines adhibent ijs quae non intelligunt: cupiditate humani ingenij lubentius obſcura creduntur: he ſpeaks of all things with reſolution. Now affirmation and opinatiue obſtinacie are ſignes of negligence and ignorance accompanied with follie and arrogancie.
                  The third degree which followeth theſe two, and which 8 3. To perſwade.
                      is the height of preſumption, is to perſwade others to receiue as canonicall whatſoeuer he beleeueth, yea imperiouſly to impoſe a beleefe as it were by obligation, and inhibition to doubt. What tyranny is this? Whoſoeuer beleeueth a thing, thinks it a worke of charitie to perſwade another to beleeue the ſame; and that he may the better do it, he feareth not to adde of his owne inuention ſo much as he ſeeth neceſſarie for his purpoſe to ſupplie that want, and vnwillingnes which he thinks to be in the conceit of another of that he tels. There is nothing vnto which men are commonly more prone, than to giue way to their owne opinions: Nemo ſibi tantùm errat, ſed alijs erroris cauſa & author eſt. Where the ordinarie meane wanteth, there a man addeth commandement, force, fire, ſword. This vice is proper vnto dogmatiſts, and ſuch as will gouerne, and giue lawes vnto the world. Now to attaine to the end heereof, and to captiuate the beliefs of men vnto themſelues they vſe two meanes: Firſt they bring in certain generall and fundamentall propoſitions, which they call principles and preſuppoſitions, wherof they ſay we muſt neither doubt nor diſpute; vpon which they afterwards build whatſoeuer they pleaſe; and leade the world at their pleaſure: which is a mockerie whereby the world is repleniſhed with errours and lies. And to ſay the trueth, if a man ſhould examine theſe principles, he ſhould finde as great or greater vntrueths and weakneſſes in them, than in all that which they would haue to depend vpon them, and as great an appearance of trueth in propoſitions quite contrarie. There haue Copernicus. Paracelſus. beene ſome in our time that haue changed and quite altered the principles and rules of our Ancients and beſt Profeſſors in Aſtronomie, Phiſicke, Geometrie, in nature, and the motion of the windes. Euery humane propoſition hath as much authoritie as another, if reaſon make not the difference. Trueth

dependeth not vpon the authoritie and teſtimonie of man: there are no principles in man if Diuinitie haue not reuealed them; all the reſt is but a dreame and ſmoake. Now theſe great maſters will that whatſoeuer they ſay ſhould be beleeued and receiued, and that euery man ſhould truſt them, without iudging or examining what they teach: which is a tyrannicall iuſtice. God onely (as hath beene ſayd) is to be beleeued in all that he ſaith, becauſe he ſaith it: Qui a ſemetipſo loquitur mendax eſt.
                  
                  The other meane is by ſuppoſition of ſome miraculous thing done, new and celeſtiall reuelation and apparition, which hath beene cunningly practiſed by Law-makers, Generals in the field, or priuate Captaines. The perſwaſion taken from the ſubiect it ſelfe poſſeſſeth the ſimpler ſort, but at the firſt it is ſo tender and fraile, that the leaſt offence, miſtaking or imprudencie that ſhall happen, vndoeth all: for it is a great maruell how from ſo vaine beginnings and friuolous cauſes there ſhould ariſe the moſt famous impreſſions. Now this firſt impreſſion being once gotten, doth woonderfully grow and increaſe, in ſuch ſort that it faſteneth euen vpon the moſt expert and skilfull, by reaſon of the multitude of beleeuers, witneſſes, yeeres, wherewith a man ſuffereth himſelfe to be carried, if he ſee not well into it, and be not well prepared againſt it: for then it is to ſmall purpoſe to ſpurne againſt it, or to enquire farther into it, but ſimply to beleeue it. The greateſt and moſt powerfull meane to perſwade, and the beſt touch-ſtone of trueth, is multitude of yeeres and beleeuers: now fooles do win the game, ſanitatis patrocinium est inſanientium turba. It is a very difficult thing for a man to reſolue and ſettle his iudgement againſt the common opinion. All this may eaſily appeare by thoſe many impoſtures and fooleries which we haue ſeene to go for miracles, and rauiſh the whole world with admiration, but inſtantly extinguiſhed by ſome accident, or by the exact inquirie of ſuch as are quicke ſighted, who haue cleered and diſcouered the couſenage; which if they had had but time to ripen, and to haue fortified in nature, they had continued for euer, beene generally receiued and adored. And euen ſuch are diuers others, which by the fauour of Fortune haue paſſed for currant, and gained publike

beliefe, whereunto men afterwards accommodate themſelues, without any farther deſire to know the thing in it firſt forme and originall, nuſquam ad liquidum fama perducitur. And this is the reaſon why there are ſo many kinds of religions in the world, ſo many ſuperſtitious cuſtomes of the Pagans, which are yet remaining euen in Chriſtendome, and concerning which we can not wholly aſſure the people. By this whole diſcourſe we ſee what we are, and to what we tend, ſince we are lead by ſuch guides.
               
            
            
               The fift and laſt Conſideration of Man, by thoſe varieties and great differences that are in him, and their compariſons.
               
                  CHAP. XLI. Of the difference and inequalitie of men in generall.
                  
                  THere is nothing in this lower world wherein there is found ſo great difference as amongſt men, and where the differences are ſo diſtant and diuers in one and the ſame ſubiect and kinde. If a man ſhould beleeue Plinie, Herodotus, Plutarch, there are ſhapes of men in ſome countreys, that haue very little reſemblance with ours, and ſome that are of a mixt and doubtfull kind betwixt men and beaſts. There are ſome countreys where men are without heads, carrying their eyes and mouthes in their breſts, where they are Hermaphrodites, where they go with foure feet, where they haue one eye in the forehead, and a head liker to a dogs head than a mans, where they are fiſh from the nauell downwards, and liue in the water; where their women beare children at fiue yeeres of age, and liue but eight; where they haue their head and forhead ſo hard, that iron can not pierce them; where they doe naturally change into wolues and other beaſts, and afterwards into men again; where they are without a mouth, nouriſhing themſelues with the ſmell of certaine odours; where they yeeld a ſeed that is blacke; where they are verie little and dwarfs; where they are very great and giants; where they goe alwayes naked; where they are all hairie;

where they ſpeake not, but liue in woods like beaſts, hidden in caues and hollow trees. And in our times we haue diſcouered, ſeene with the eye, and touched with our fingers, where the men are without beards, without vſe of fire, corne, wine; where that is held to be the greateſt beautie, which we account the greateſt deformitie, as hath beene ſayd before. Touching the diuerſitie of maners we ſhall ſpeake elſwhere. And to omit many of theſe ſtrange wonderments, we know that as touching the viſage, it is impoſſible to find two in all things alike; it may fall out that we may miſtake, and take the one for the other, becauſe of the great reſemblance that may be betweene two; but this muſt be in the abſence of the one, for in the preſence of them both it is eaſie to note a difference, though a man know not how to expreſſe it. In the ſoules of men there is a farre greater difference, for it is not only greater without compariſon betwixt a man and a man, than betwixt a beaſt and a beaſt: but there is greater difference betwixt a man and a man, than a man and a beaſt; for an excellent beaſt comes neerer to a man of the baſeſt ſort and degree, than that man to another great and excellent perſonage. This great difference of men proceedeth from the inward qualities, and from the ſpirit, where there are ſo many parts, ſo many iuriſdictions, ſo many degrees beyond number, that it is an infinit thing to conſider. We muſt now at the laſt learne to know man by thoſe diſtinctions and differences that are in him, which are diuers, according to the many parts in man, many reaſons, and meanes to compare and conſider of him. We will heere ſet downe fiue principall, vnto which all the reſt may be referred, and generally all that is in man, Spirit, bodie naturall, acquired, publike, priuate, apparent, ſecret: and ſo this fift and laſt conſideration of man ſhall haue fiue parts, which are fiue great and capitall diſtinctions of men, that is to ſay:
                  The firſt naturall, eſſentiall, and vniuerſall of all men, ſoule and bodie.
                  The ſecond naturall and eſſentiall principally, and in ſome ſort acquired, of the force and ſufficiencie of the ſpirit.
                  The third accidentall of the eſtate, condition and dutie of man, drawen from ſuperioritie and inferioritie.
                  
                     
The fourth accidentall of the condition and profeſſion of life.
                  The fift and laſt of the fauours and disfauours of Nature and of Fortune.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLII. The firſt diſtinction and difference of men naturall and eſſentiall, drawen from the diuers ſituation of the world.
                  
                  THe firſt moſt notable and vniuerſall diſtinction of men, 1 The diuerſitie of men proceedeth from the diuers ſituatiō of the world.
                      which concerneth the ſoule and body, and whole eſſence of man, is taken and drawne from the diuers ſite of the world, according to which the aſpect and influence of heauen, and the ſunne, the aire, the climate, the countrie, are diuers. So likewiſe not only the colour, the feature, the complexion, the countenance, the manners, are diuers, but alſo the faculties of the ſoule, plaga coeli non ſolùm ad robur corporum, ſed & animorum facit. Athenis tenue caelum, ex quo etiam acutiores Attici; craſſum Thebis, ideo pingues Thebani & valentes. And therefore Plato thāked God that he was an Athenian, and not a Theban. As fruites and beaſts are diuers, according to the diuers countries wherein they are: ſo men are borne more and leſſe warlike, iuſt, temperate, docible, religious, chaſte, ingenious, good, obedient, beautifull, ſound, ſtrong. And this is the reaſon why Cyrus would not agree to the Perſians to abandon their ſharp and hillie countrie, to goe to another more plaine and pleaſant, ſaying, that fat countries and delicate, made men ſoft and effeminate, and fertile grounds barren and infertile ſpirits.
                  Following this foundation, we may in groſſe diuide the world into three parts, and all men into three kinds of nature: 2 The diuiſion of the world into three parts.
                      we will make three generall ſituations of the world, which are, the two extremities South, and North, and the middle betwixt them both; euery part and ſituation ſhall haue ſixtie degrees. The Southerne part which is vnder the Aequator, hath thirtie degrees on this ſide the line, thirtie on that, that is to ſay, all that part which is betwixt the two tropicks or ſomewhat more, where are the hot and Southerne countries, Africke and Aethiope, in the middle betwixt the Eaſt and the Weſt; Arabia, Calicut, the Moluques, Ianes, Taprobana towards the Orient; Peru and the great Seas towards the Occident.

The other middle part hath thirtie degrees beyond the Tropicks both on this ſide the line and on that, towards the Poles, where are the middle and temperate regions, all Europe with the Mediterrane Sea in the middle betwixt the Eaſt and Weſt; all Aſia both the leſſe and the greater which is towards the Eaſt, with China, Iapan, and America, towards the Weſt. The third which is the thirtie degrees which are next to the two Poles on both ſides, which are the cold and Icie countries, the Septentrionall people, Tartary, Muſcony, Estotilan, Magelan, which is not yet throughly diſcouered.
                  Following this generall partition of the world, the natures of men are likewiſe different in euery thing, body, ſoule, religion, 3 Their natures.
                      maners, as wee may ſee in this little Table: For the
                  
                     
                        
                            
                           
                              Northerne people are
                           
                           
                              Middle are
                           
                           
                              Southerne are
                           
                        
                        
                           1 In their Bodies.
                           
                           
                              High and great, phlegmaticke, ſanguin, white, and yellow, ſociable, the voyce ſtrong, the skin ſoft and hairie, great eaters and drinkers, puiſſant.
                           
                           
                              Indifferent and temperate in all thoſe things as neuters, or partakers a little of thoſe two extremities, & participating moſt of that region to which they are neareſt neighbours.
                           
                           
                              Little, melancholicke, cold, and dry, blacke. Solitary, the voyce ſhrill, the skin hard, with little haire, and curled, abstinent, feeble.
                           
                        
                        
                           2 Spirit.
                           
                           
                              Heauy, obtuſe, ſtupid, ſottiſh, facill, light, inconstant. 
                           
                           
                              Ingenious, wiſe, ſubtile, opinatiue.
                           
                        
                        
                           3 Religion.
                           
                           
                              Little religious and deuout. 
                           
                           
                              Superstitious, contemplatiue.
                           
                        
                        
                           4 Manners.
                           
                           
                              Warriers, valiant, painfull, chaſt, free from iealouſie, cruell and inhumane.
                           
                           
                              No warriers, idle, vnchaſt, iealous, cruell, and inhumane.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  All theſe differences are eaſily prooued. As for thoſe of the bodie, they are knowne by the eye, and if there be any exceptions, 4 The proofes of theſe differences of the Body.
                      they are rare, and proceed from the mixture of the people, or from the winds, the waters, and particular ſituation of the place, whereby a mountaine is a notable difference in the ſelfe-ſame degree, yea the ſelfe-ſame countrie and citie. They of the higher part of the citie of Athens, were of a quite contrary

humor, as Plutarke affirmeth, to thoſe that dwelt about the gate of Pyreus: and they that dwell in the North ſide of a mountaine differ as much from thoſe that dwell on the South ſide, as they do both differ from thoſe in the valley.
                  As for the differences of the ſpirit, we know that mechanicall 2 The ſpirit.
                      and manuall artes belong to the North, where men are made for labour; Speculatiue ſciences came from the South. Caeſar and other ancients of thoſe times called the Aegyptians ingenious, and ſubtile: Moyſes is ſaid to be inſtructed in their wiſdome: and Philoſophie came from thence into Greece. Greatneſſe began rather with them, becauſe of their ſpirit and ſubtiltie. The gards of Princes (yea in the Southerne partes) are Northerne men, as hauing more ſtrength, and leſſe ſubtiltie and malice. So likewiſe the Southerne people are indued with great vertues, and ſubiect to great vices, as it is ſaid of Hannibal: The Northerne haue goodnes and ſimplicitie. The leſſer and middle ſciences, as policies, lawes, and eloquence, are in the middle nations, wherein the greateſt Empires and policies haue flouriſhed.
                  As touching the third point, religions haue come from the South, Egypt, Arabia, Chaldea; more ſuperſtition in 3 Religion.
                      
                     Africke than the whole world beſides, witneſſe their vowes ſo frequent, their temples ſo magnificent. The Northerne people, ſaith Caeſar, haue little care of religion, being whollie giuen to the warres and to hunting.
                  As for manners, and firſt touching warres, it is certaine that the greateſt armies, artes, military inſtruments and inuentions 4 Manners.
                      haue come from the North. The Scythians, Gothes, Vandals, Huns, Tartarians, Turks, Germanes, haue beaten and conquered all other nations, and ranſaked the whole world; and therefore it is a common ſaying, that all euill comes from the North. Single combats came from them. The Northerne people adore a ſword faſtned in the earth, ſaith Solinus. To other nations they are inuincible, yea to the Romans, who hauing conquered the reſt of the world, were vtterly deſtroyed by them. They grow weake and languiſh with the Southerne winds, and going towards the South; as the Southerne men comming into the North redouble their forces. By reaſon of their warlike fiercenes, they will not endure to be commanded

by authority, they loue their libertie, at leaſtwiſe electiue commanders. Touching chaſtitie and iealouſie in the North, ſaith Tacitus, one woman to one man; yea, one woman ſufficeth many men, ſaith Caeſar. There is no iealouſie, ſaith Munſter, where men and women bathe themſelues together with ſtrangers. In the South Polygamie is altogether receiued. All Africke adoreth Venus, ſaith Solinus. The Southerns die with iealouſie, and therefore they keepe Eunuches as gardians to their wiues, which their great Lords haue in great number, as they haue ſtables of horſes. Touching crueltie, the two extreames are alike cruell, but the cauſes are diuers, as we ſhall ſee anon, when we come to ſpeake of the cauſes. Thoſe tortures of the wheele, and ſtaking of men aliue, came from the North: The inhumanities of the Moſcouites and Tartars, are too well knowne. The Almanes, ſaith Tacitus, puniſh not their offenders by lawe, but cruelly murther them as enemies. The Southerns flea their offenders aliue, and their deſire of reuenge is ſo great, that they become furious if they be not glutted therewith. In the middle regions they are mercifull and humane: The Romans puniſhed their greateſt offenders with baniſhment. The Greeks vſed to put their offenders to death with a ſweet drugge made of a kinde of Hemlocke which they gaue them to drinke: And Cicero ſaith, that humanitie and courteſie were the conditions of Aſia minor, and from thence deriued to the reſt of the world.
                  The cauſe of all theſe corporall and ſpirituall differences, is the inequalitie and difference of the inward naturall heate, 5 The cauſe of the aforeſaid differences.
                      which is in thoſe countries and peoples, that is to ſay, ſtrong and vehement in the Northerns, by reaſon of the great outward cold which incloſeth and driueth the heate into the inward parts, as caues and deepe places are hot in winter, ſo mens ſtomacks, ventres hieme culidiores. Weake and feeble is the Southerns, the inward heate being diſperſed and drawne into the outward parts, by the vehemencie of the outward heate, as in Sommer vaults and places vnder the earth are cold. Meane and temperate in the middle regions. From this diuerſitie, I ſay, and inequalitie of naturall heat; proceed theſe differences not only corporall, which are eaſie to note, but alſo ſpirituall; for the Southerns by reaſon of their cold temperature,

are melancholike, and therefore ſtaied, conſtant, contemplatiue, ingenious, religious, wiſe; for wiſdome is in cold creatures, as Elephants, who as they are of all other beaſts the moſt melancholicke, ſo are they more wiſe, docile, religious, by reaſon of their cold bloud. From this melancholie temperature it likewiſe commeth, that the Southerns are vnchaſte, by reaſon of that frothie, freating, tickling melancholie, as we commonly ſee in Hares; and cruell, becauſe this freating ſharp melancholie doth violently preſſe the paſſions and reuenge. The Northernes are of a phlegmatick and ſanguine temperature, quite contrarie to the Southerne; and therefore haue contrary qualities, ſaue that they agree in this one, that they are likewiſe cruell and inhumane, but by another reaſon, that is, for want of iudgement, whereby like beaſts, they know not how to conteine and gouerne themſelues. They of the middle regions are ſanguin and cholericke, tempered with a ſweete, pleaſant, kindly diſpoſed humor; they are actiue. We could likewiſe more exquiſitely repreſent the diuers natures of theſe three ſorts of people, by the application and compariſon of all things, as you may ſee in this little Table, where it appeareth that there doth properly belong, and may be referred to the
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Northerne,
                           
                           
                              Midlers,
                           
                           
                              Southerne.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              The common ſenſe,
                           
                           
                              Diſcourſe & reaſoning,
                           
                           
                              Vnderſtanding 
                              Qualities of the ſoule.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Force as of Beares and other beaſts.
                           
                           
                              Reaſon and iustice of men.
                           
                           
                              Subtilty of foxes, & religion of diuines.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Mars warre The moon hūting 
                           
                           
                              Iupiter emperours. Mercurie oratours.
                           
                           
                              Saturn cōtemplation.
                              Venus loue.
                              Planets.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Arte and handicrafts.
                           
                           
                              Prudence, knowledge of good and euill.
                           
                           
                              Knowledge of trueth and falſhood. 
                              Actions and parts of the Commonweale.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Labourers, artificers, ſouldiers, to execute & obey.
                           
                           
                              Magistrates, prouident, to iudge, command.
                           
                           
                              Prelates, Philoſophers, to contemplate.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Yoong men vnapt.
                           
                           
                              Perfect men, managers of affaires.
                           
                           
                              Graue old men, wiſe, penſiue.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The other diſtinction more particular may be referred to this generall of North and South: for wee may referre to

the conditions of the Northerne thoſe of the Weſt, and that liue in mountaines, warriours, fierce people, deſirous of libertie, by reaſon of the colde which is in mountaines. So likewiſe, they that are farre diſtant from the ſea are more ſimple and innocent. And contrarily to the conditions of the Southernes, we may referre the Eaſterlings, ſuch as liue in valleys, effeminate and delicate perſons, by reaſon of the fertillitie of the place, which naturally yeeldeth pleaſure. So likewiſe they that liue vpon the ſea coaſts are ſubtile, deceiuers by reaſon of their commerce and traffike with diuers ſorts of people and nations. By all this diſcourſe we may ſee that generally thoſe of the North doe excell in bodie, haue ſtrength for their part; and they of the South in ſpirit, and haue for their part ſubtiltie; they of the middle Regions partake of both, and are temperate in all. So likewiſe we may ſee that their maners, to ſay the trueth, are neither vices nor vertues, but works of nature, which to amend or renounce altogether is more than difficult; but to ſweeten, temper and reduce the extremities to a mediocritie, is a worke of vertue.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLIII. The ſecond diſtinction, and more ſubtile difference of the ſpirits and ſufficiences of men.
                  
                  THis ſecond diſtinction which reſpecteth the ſpirit and 
                        
                           •
                        
                        Three ſorts and degrees of people in the world.
                      ſufficiencie, is not ſo plaine, and perceptible as the other, and comes as well from nature as atchieuement; according vnto which there are three ſorts of people in the world, as three conditions and degrees of ſpirits. In the one and the loweſt are the weake and plaine ſpirits, of baſe and ſlender  capacitie, borne to obey, ſerue, and to be led, who in effect are ſimply men. In the ſecond and middle ſtage are they that are of an indifferent iudgement, make profeſſion of ſufficiencie,  knowledge, dexterity; but do not ſufficiently vnderſtand and iudge themſelues, reſting themſelues vpon that which is commonly held, and giuen them at the firſt hand, without further enquirie of the truth and ſource of things, yea with a perſwaſion that it is not lawfull; and neuer looking farther than where they be, but thinking that it is euery where ſo, or ought to be ſo, and that if it be otherwiſe, they are deceiued,

yea, they are barbarous. They ſubiect themſelues to opinions, and the municipall lawes of the place where they liue, euen from the time they were firſt hatched, not only by obſeruance and cuſtome, which all ought to do, but euen from the very heart and ſoule, with a perſwaſion that that which is beleeued in their village is the true touchſtone of truth (heere is nothing ſpoken of diuine reuealed truth, or religion) the only, or at leaſt the beſt rule to liue well. Theſe ſorts of people are of the ſchoole and iuriſdiction of Aristotle, affirmers, poſitiue men, dogmatiſts, who reſpect more vtilitie than veritie, according to the vſe and cuſtome of the world, than that which is good and true in it ſelfe. Of this condition there are a very great number, and diuers degrees, the principall and moſt actiue amongſt them gouerne the world, and haue the commaund in their hand. In the third and higheſt ſtage are men indued with a quick and cleare ſpirit, a ſtrong, firme, and  ſolid iudgement, who are not content with a bare affirmation, nor ſettle themſelues in common receiued opinions, nor ſuffer themſelues to be wonne and preoccupated by a publicke and common beleefe, whereof they wonder not at all, knowing that there are many couſenages, deceits & impoſtures receiued in the world with approbation and applauſe, yea publick adoration and reuerence: but they examin all things that are propoſed, ſound maturely, and ſeeke without paſſion the cauſes, motiues, and iuriſdictions euen to the roote, louing better to doubt, and to hold in ſuſpence their beleefe, than by a looſe and idle facilitie or lightneſſe, or precipitation of iudgement to feede themſelues with lies, and affirme or ſecure themſelues of that thing whereof they can haue no certaine reaſon. Theſe are but few in number, of the Schoole of Socrates and Plato, modeſt, ſober, ſtaied, conſidering more the veritie and realitie of things than the vtilitie; who if they be well borne, hauing with that aboue mentioned probitie and gouernment in manners, they are truly wiſe, and ſuch as heere we ſeeke after. But becauſe they agree not with the common ſort, as touching opinions, ſee more clearely, pierce more deeply, are not ſo facill and eaſily drawne to beleeue, they are ſuſpected and little eſteemed of others, who are farre more in number, and held for fantaſticks and philoſophers; a word which they

vſe in a wrong ſenſe, to wrong others. In the firſt of theſe three degrees or orders there is a farre greater number than in the ſecond, and in the ſecond, than in the third. They of the firſt and laſt, the loweſt and higheſt trouble not the world, make no ſtirre, the one for inſufficiencie and weakenes, the other by reaſon of too great ſufficiēcie, ſtabilitie, and wiſdome. They of the middle make all the ſtirre, the diſputations that are in the world, a preſumptuous kind of people, alwayes ſtirred, and alwayes ſtirring. They of the lower range, as the bottome, the leeſe, the ſinke, reſemble the earth, which doth nothing but receiue and ſuffer that which comes from aboue. They of the middle reſemble the region of the aire, wherein are formed all the meteors, thunderings, and alterations are made, which afterwards fall vpon the earth. They of the higher ſtage reſemble the firmament it ſelfe, or at leaſt the higheſt region next vnto heauen, pure, cleare, neate, and peaceable. This difference of men proceedeth partly from the nature of the firſt compoſition and temperature of the braine, which is different, moiſt, hot, drie, and that in many degrees, whereby the ſpirits and iudgements are either very ſolid, couragious, or feeble, fearefull, plaine: and partly from inſtruction and diſcipline; as alſo from the experience and practiſe of the world, which ſerueth to put off ſimplicitie, and to become more aduiſed. Laſtly, all theſe three ſorts of people are found vnder euery robe; forme and condition both of good and euill men, but diuerſly.
                  There is another diſtinction of ſpirits and ſufficiencies, for ſome there are that make way themſelues, and are their owne 2 Another diſtinction.
                      guides and gouernours. Theſe are happie, of the higher ſort, and very rare; others haue neede of help, and theſe are of two ſorts. For ſome neede only a little light, it is enough if they haue a guide and a torch to goe before them, they will willinglie and eaſily follow. Others there are that muſt be drawen, they neede a ſpurre, and muſt be led by the hand. I ſpeake not of thoſe that either by reaſon of their great weakneſſe cannot, as they of the lower range, or the malignitie of their nature will not, as they of the middle, who are neither good to follow, nor will ſuffer themſelues to be drawen and directed, for theſe are a people paſt all hope.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XLIIII.
                  
                     The third diſtinction and difference of men accidentall, of their degrees, estates and charges.
                     THis accidentall diſtinction, which reſpecteth the eſtates and charges, is grounded vpon two principles and foundations of humane ſocietie, which are, to command and obey, power and ſubiection, ſuperioritie and inferioritie; imperio & obſequio omnia conſtant. This diſtinction we ſhall better ſee, firſt in groſſe in this Table.
                     
                        All power and ſubiection is either
                        
                           
                              Priuate, which is either in
                              
                                 
                                    Families and houſholde gouernmēt, and it is fourfold:
                                    
                                       
                                          Mariage, of the huſband and 
                                          The firſt generall diuiſion. 
                                          the wife. This is the ſource of humane ſocietie.
                                       
                                       
                                          Paternall of parents ouer their children. This is truely naturall.
                                       
                                       
                                          Herile, which is twofold, of
                                          
                                             
                                                Lordes, ouer their ſlaues.
                                             
                                             
                                                Maſters, ouer their ſeruāts.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          Patronall, of patrons ouer their pupils: the vſe whereof is leſſe frequent.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Corporations and Colleges, Ciuill communities ouer the particular members of that communitie.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Publike, which is either
                              
                                 
                                    Souereign, which is threefolde, and they are three ſorts of eſtates, cunctas nationes & vrbes, populus aut primores, aut ſinguli regunt. i.
                                       
                                          Monarchie, of one.
                                       
                                       
                                          Ariſtocratie, of a few.
                                       
                                       
                                          Democritie, of all.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Subaltern, which is in thoſe who are ſuperiors and inferiors, for diuers reaſons, places, perſons, as
                                    
                                       
                                          Particular lords in manie degrees.
                                       
                                       
                                          Officers of the ſouereignty, whereof there are diuers ſorts.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
This publicke power whether it be ſoueraigne, or ſubalterne, The ſubdiuiſion of the ſouereigne power. hath other ſubdiuiſions neceſſarie to be knowne. The ſoueraigne, which, as hath been ſaid, is threefold, in regard of the maner of gouernment is likewiſe threefold; that is to ſay, euery one of theſe three is gouerned after a threefold manner, and is therefore called Royall, or Signoriall, or Tyrannicall. Royall, wherein the ſoueraigne (be it one, or many, or all) obeying the lawes of nature, preſerueth the naturall libertie and proprietie of the goods of his ſubiects. Adreges potestas omnis pertinet, ad ſingulos proprietas: omnia Rex imperio poſſidet, ſinguli dominio. Seignoriall or lordly, where the ſoueraigne is lord both of men and goods, by the right of armes, gouerning his ſubiects as ſlaues. Tyrannicall where the ſoueraigne contemning all lawes of Nature, doth abuſe both the perſons and goods of his ſubiects, differing from a lord, as a theefe from an enemie in warre. Of the three ſouereigne ſtates, the Monarchie, & of the three gouernments, the Lordly, are the more ancient, great, durable and maieſticall, as in former times Aſſyria, Perſia, Egypt, and now Ethiopia the moſt ancient that is, Moſcouie, Tartarie, Turkie, Peru. But the better and more naturall ſtate and gouernment is the Monarchie Royall. The moſt famous Aristocraties hath ſometimes beene that of the Lacedemonians, and now the Venetians. The Democrities, Rome, Athens, Carthage, Royall in their gouernment.
                     The publike ſubaltern power, which is in particular lords, is of many kindes and degrees, principally fiue, that is to ſay, 3 Of particular lords.
                         Lords Tributaries, who pay only tribute.
                     
                        Feudetaries, ſimple Vaſſals, who owe faith and homage for the tenure of their land. Theſe three may be ſouereignes.
                     
                        Vaſſals bound to do ſeruice, who beſides faith and homage owe likewiſe perſonall ſeruice, whereby they cannot trulie be ſouereignes.
                     Naturall ſubiects, whether they be Vaſſals or Cenſors, or otherwiſe, who owe ſubiection and obedience, and can not be exempted from the power of their ſouereigne: and theſe are Lords.
                     The publike ſubaltern power which is in the officers of the ſouereigntie, is of diuers kindes, and both in regard of the 4 Of offices.
                         honour and the power may be reduced to fiue degrees.
                     
                        
The firſt and baſeſt are thoſe ignominious perſons, which  ſhould remaine without the citie, the laſt executioners of iuſtice.
                     The ſecond, they that haue neither honour nor infamie,  Sergeants, Trumpeters.
                     The third, ſuch as haue honour without knowledge and  power, Notaries, Receiuers, Secretaries.
                     The fourth, they that haue with honour, power and knowledge,  but without iuriſdiction, the Kings ſeruants.
                     The fift, they that haue with the reſt iuriſdiction; and  theſe are properly called Magiſtrates: of whom there are many diſtinctions, and eſpecially theſe fiue, which are all double:
                     
                        
                           1 
                                 Maiors, Senators.
                                 Minors, Iudges.
                              
                           
                           2
                                 Politiques.
                                 Militaries.
                              
                           
                           3
                                 Ciuill.
                                 Criminall.
                              
                           
                           4
                                 Titularies in offices of form, who haue it by inheritance.
                                 Commiſſaries.
                              
                           
                           5
                                 Perpetuall, as the leſſer both in number and otherwiſe ſhould be.
                                 Temporall and moueable, as the greater ſhould be.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     OF THE ESTATES AND DEGREES OF MEN in particular following this precedent Table. An Aduertiſement.
                     
                     HEere we are to ſpeake in particular of the parts of this Table, and the diſtinctions of powers and ſubiections (beginning with the priuate and domeſticall) that is to ſay, of euery eſtate and profeſſion of men, to the end we may know them; and therefore this may be called The Booke of the Knowledge of man: for the duties of euery one ſhall be ſet downe in the Third Booke, in the vertue of iuſtice; where in like maner and order, all theſe eſtates and chapters ſhall be reſumed and examined. Now before we begin, it ſhall be neceſſarie ſummarily to ſpeake of commanding and obeying, two foundations and principall cauſes of theſe diuerſities of eſtates and charges.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XLV. Of commanding and obeying.
                  
                  THeſe, as hath beene ſayd, are the two foundations of all humane ſocietie, and the diuerſitie of eſtates and profeſſions. They are Relatiues, they do mutually reſpect, ingender and conſerue one the other, and are alike required in all aſſemblies and communities; but are yet ſubiect to a naturall kinde of enuie, and an euerlaſting conteſtation, complaint and obtrectation. The popular eſtate make the Souereigne of woorſe condition than a Carter. The Monarchie placeth him aboue God himſelfe. In commanding is the honour, the difficultie (theſe two commonly go together) the goodneſſe, the ſufficiencie, all qualities of greatneſſe. Command, that is to ſay, ſufficiencie, courage, authority, is from heauen and of God, imperium non niſi diuino fato datur: omnis poteſtas a Deo eſt: And therefore Plato was wont to ſay, That God did not appoint and eſtabliſh men, that is to ſay, men of a common ſort and ſufficiencie, and purely humane, to rule others, but ſuch as by ſome diuine touch, ſingular vertue, and gift of heauen, do excell others: and therefore they are called Heroes. In obeying is vtilitie, procliuitie, neceſſitie, in ſuch ſort, that for the preſeruation of the weale publike it is more neceſſarie than well to command; and the deniall of obedience, or not to obey as men ſhould, is farre more dangerous than for a Prince not to command as he ſhould. Euen as in mariage, though the husband and the wife be equally obliged to loialtie and fidelitie, and haue both bound themſelues by promiſe in the ſame words, the ſame ceremonies and ſolemnities, yet notwithſtanding the inconueniences are incomparably farre greater, in the fact of adulterie, in the wife than the huſband: euen ſo, though command and obedience are equally required in euery ſtate and companie, yet the inconueniences of diſobedience in ſubiects are farre more dangerous than of ill gouernment in a Commander. Many States haue a long time continued and proſpered too vnder the command of wicked Princes and Magiſtrates, the ſubiects obeying and accommodating themſelues to their gouernment: and therefore a wiſe man being once asked why the Common-wealth

of Sparta was ſo flouriſhing, and whether it were becauſe their Kings commanded well? Nay rather, ſaith he, becauſe the Citizens obey well. For if the ſubiects once refuſe to obey, and ſhake off their yoke, the ſtate muſt neceſſarily fall to the ground.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLVI. Of Mariage.
                  
                  NOtwithſtanding the ſtate of marriage be the firſt, more  ancient and moſt important, and as it were the foundation and fountaine of humane ſocietie, whence ariſe families, and from them Common-weales, Prima ſocietas in coniugio eſt, quod principium vrbis, ſeminarium Reipublicae; yet it hath been contemned and defamed by many great perſonages, who haue iudged it vnwoorthy men of heart and ſpirit, and haue framed many obiections againſt it.
                  Firſt, they account the band and obligation thereof vniuſt, 2 Obiections againſt mariage.
                      a hard and ouerſtreight captiuitie, inſomuch, that by marriage a man is bound and enthralled to the cares and humours of another. And if it fall out, that hee haue miſtaken in his choice, and haue met with a hard bargaine, more bone than fleſh, his life is euer afterwards moſt miſerable. What iniquitie and iniuſtice can there be greater than for one houres follie, a fault committed without malice, and by meere ouerſight, yea many times to obey the aduice of another, a man ſhould be bound to an euerlaſting torment? It were better for him to put the halter about his necke, and to caſt himſelfe into the ſea, his head downward, to end his miſerable life, than to liue alwayes in the paines of hell, and to ſuffer without intermiſſion on his ſide, the tempeſt of iealouſie, of malice, of rage, of madneſſe, of brutiſh obſtinacie, and other miſerable conditions: and therefore one ſticks not to ſay, That he that inuented this knot and tie of marriage, had found a goodly and beautifull meanes to be reuenged of man, a trap or gin to intangle beaſts, and afterwards to make them languiſh at a little fire. Another ſaith, That to marrie a wiſe man to a foole, or a foole to a wiſe man, is to binde the liuing to the dead, which was the cruelleſt death inuented by Tyrants, to make the liuing to languiſh and die by the companie of the dead.

Secondly, they ſay that mariage is a corruption and adulterating of good and rare ſpirits; inſomuch that the flatteries and ſmooth ſpeaches of the partie beloued, the affection towards children, the care of houſhold affaires, and aduancement of their famelies, do leſſen, diſſolue, and mollifie the vigour and ſtrength of the moſt liuely and generous ſpirit that is, witneſſe Samſon, Salomon, Marc. Antony. And therefore howſoeuer the matter goe, we had not neede to marry. But thoſe that haue more fleſh than ſpirit, ſtrong in bodie, and weake in minde, tie them to the fleſh, and giue them the charge of ſmall and baſe matters, ſuch as they are capable of. But ſuch as are weake of body, haue their ſpirits great, ſtrong, and puiſtant, is it not then a pitie to binde them to the fleſh, and to mariage, as men doe beaſts in a ſtable? We ſee that beaſts the more noble they are, the ſtronger and fitter for ſeruice, as horſes and dogs, the more are they kept aſunder from the companie and acquaintance of the other ſex, and it is the maner to put beaſts of leaſt eſteeme at randon together. So likewiſe ſuch men and women as are ordeined to the moſt venerable and holieſt vocation, and which ought to be as the creame and marrow of Chriſtianitie, Church-men and religigious, are (though not by any warrant from the word of God) excluded from mariage. And the reaſon is, becauſe mariage hindreth and auerteth thoſe beautifull and great eleuations of the ſoule, the contemplation of things, high, celeſtiall, and diuine, which is incompatible with the troubles and moleſtations of domeſticall affaires; for which cauſe the Apoſtle preferreth the ſolitarie continent life before mariage. Vtilitie may well hold with mariage, but honeſtie is on the other ſide.
                  Againe, it troubleth beautifull and holy enterpriſes: as Saint Austin reporteth, that hauing determined with ſome other his friends, among whom there were ſome maried, to retire themſelues from the citie, and the company of men, the better to attend to the ſtudie of wiſdome and vertue, their purpoſe was quickly broken and altered by the wiues of thoſe that were maried. And another wiſeman did not doubt to ſay, that if men could liue without women, they ſhould be viſited and accompaned by Angels. Moreouer, mariage is a hindrance

to ſuch as delight in trauell and to ſee ſtrange countries, whether to learne to make themſelues wiſe, or to teach others to be wiſe, and to publiſh that to others which they know. To conclude, mariage doth not only corrupt and deiect good and great ſpirits, but it robbeth the weale-publicke of many beautifull and great things, which cannot manifeſt themſelues remaining in the boſome and lap of a woman, or being ſpent about young children. But is it not a goodly ſight, nay a great loſſe, that he that is able for his wiſdome and policie to gouerne the whole world, ſhould ſpend his time in the gouernment of a woman and a few children? And therefore it was well anſwered by a great perſonage being ſollicited to marry, That he was borne to command men, not a woman, to counſell Kings and Princes, not little children.
                  To all this a man may anſwere, that the nature of man is 3 The anſwere to the aforeſaid obiections, Cap. 4. not capable of perfection, or of any thing againſt which nothing may be obiected, as hath elſewhere beene ſpoken. The beſt and moſt expedient remedies that it hath, are in ſome degree or other but ſickly, mingled with diſcommodities: They are all but neceſſarie euils. And this is the beſt that man could deuiſe for his preſeruation and multiplication. Some (as Plato, and others) would more ſubtillie haue inuented meanes to haue auoided theſe thornie inconueniences; but beſides that they built caſtels in the aire, that could not long continue in vſe, their inuentions likewiſe if they could haue been put in practiſe, would not haue been without many diſcommodities and difficulties. Man hath been the cauſe of them, and hath himſelfe brought them forth by his vice, intemperancie, and contrarie paſſions; and we are not to accuſe the ſtate, nor any other but man, who knowes not well how to vſe any thing. Moreouer a man may ſay, that by reaſon of theſe thornes and difficulties, it is a ſchoole of vertue, an apprentiſhip, and a familiar and domeſticall exerciſe: and Socrates a doctor of wiſdome did once ſay to ſuch as hit him in the teeth with his wiues pettiſh frowardnes, That he did thereby learne euen within his owne dores, to be cōſtant and patient euery where elſe, and to thinke the croſſes of fortune to be ſweet and pleaſant vnto him. It is not to be denied but that he that can liue vnmaried, doth beſt: but yet for the honour of mariage, a

man may ſay, that it was firſt inſtituted by God himſelfe in Paradiſe before any other thing, and that in the ſtate of innocencie and perfection. See heere foure commendations of mariage, but the fourth paſſeth all the reſt, and is without replie. Afterwards the Sonne of God approued it, and honored it with his preſence at the firſt miracle that he wrought, and that miracle done in the fauour of that ſtate of mariage and maried men; yea he hath honored it with this priuiledge, that it ſerueth for a figure of that great vnion of his with the Church, and for that cauſe it is called a myſterie and great.
                  Without all doubt, mariage is not a thing indifferent: It is either wholly a great good, or a great euill, a great content, or 4 Wholly good, or wholly ill.
                      a great trouble, a paradiſe or a hell: It is either a ſweet and pleaſant way, if the choice be good, or a rough and dangerous march, and a gauling burthenſome tye, if it be ill: It is a bargaine where truly that is verified which is ſaid, Homo homini deus, aut lupus.
                  
                  Mariage is a worke that conſiſteth of many parts; there muſt be a meeting of many qualities, many conſiderations 5 A good mariage, a rare good.
                      beſides the parties maried. For whatſoeuer a man ſay, he marieth not only for himſelfe; his poſteritie, familie, alliance, and other meanes, are of great importance, and a greeuous burthen. See heere the cauſe why ſo few good are found; and becauſe there are ſo few good found, it is a token of the price and value thereof: it is the condition of all great charges: Royaltie is full of difficultie, and few there are that exerciſe it well and happily. And whereas we ſee many times that it falleth not out ſo luckely, the reaſon thereof is the licentious libertie, and vnbridled deſire of the perſons themſelues, and not in the ſtate and inſtitution of mariage: and therefore it is commonly more commodious, and better fitted in good, ſimple, and vulgar ſpirits, where delicacie, curioſitie, and idleneſſe are leſſe troubleſome: vnbridled humours and turbulent wauering minds are not fit for this ſtate or degree.
                  Mariage is a ſtep to wiſdome, a holie and inuiolable band, an honorable match. If the choyce be good and well ordered 6 A ſimple deſcription and ſummary of mariage.
                      there is nothing in the world more beautifull: It is a ſweet ſocietie of life, full of conſtancie, truſt, and an infinite number of profitable offices and mutuall obligations: It is a

fellowſhip not of loue, but amitie. For loue and amitie are as different, as the burning ſick heate of a feuer, from the naturall heate of a ſound bodie. Mariage hath in it ſelfe amitie, vtilitie, iuſtice, honor, conſtancie, a plaine pleaſure, but ſound, firme, and more vniuerſall. Loue is grounded vpon pleaſure only, and it is more quicke, piercing, ardent. Few mariages ſucceede well that haue their beginnings and progreſſe from beautie and amorous deſires. Mariage hath neede of foundations more ſolid and conſtant; and we muſt walke more warily; this boyling affection is worth nothing: yea mariage hath a better conduct by a third hand.
                  Thus much is ſaid ſummarily and ſimplie; but more exactly to deſcribe it, we know that in Mariage there are two 7 A deſcriptiō more exact.
                      things eſſentiall vnto it, and ſeeme contraries, though indeed they be not; that is to ſay, an equalitie ſociable, and ſuch as is betweene Peeres: and an inequalitie, that is to ſay, ſuperioritie and inferioritie. The equalitie conſiſteth in an entire and perfect communication and communitie of all things, ſoules, wills, bodies, goods, the fundamentall law of Mariage, which in ſome places is extended euen to life and death, in ſuch ſort, that the husband being dead, the wife muſt incontinently follow. This is practiſed in ſome places by the publick lawes of the countries, and many times with ſo ardent affection, that many wiues belonging to one husband, they contend, and publicklie pleade for the honor to goe firſt to ſleepe with their ſpouſe (that is their word) alleaging for themſelues the better to obtaine their ſuite, and preferment heerein, their good ſeruice, that they were beſt beloued, had the laſt kiſſe of their deceaſed husband, and haue had children by him.
                  
                     Et certamen habent lethi, quae viua ſequatur coniugium; pudor eſt non licuiſſe mori.
                     Ardent victrices, & flammae pectora praebent, Imponunt
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſuis ora perusta viris.
                  
                  In other places it was obſerued, not by publicke lawes, but priuate compacts and agreements of mariage, as betwixt Marc. Antony, and Cleopatra. This equalitie doth likewiſe conſiſt in that power which they haue in commune ouer their family, whereby the wife is called the companion of her husband, the miſtris of the houſe and family, as the huſband

the maſter and lord: And their ioint authoritie ouer their family is compared to an Aristocracie.
                  
                  The diſtinction of ſuperioritie and inferioritie conſiſteth in this, that the husband hath power ouer the wife, and the 8 Inequalitie.
                      wife is ſubiect to the husband. This agreeth with all lawes and policies; but yet more or leſſe according to the diuerſitie of them. In all things the wife, though ſhe be far more noble, and more rich, yet is ſubiect to the husband. This ſuperioritie and inferioritie is naturall, founded vpon the ſtrength and ſufficiencie of the one, the weaknes and inſufficiencie of the other. The Diuines ground it vpon other reaſons drawen from the Bible: Man was firſt made by God alone and immediatly, expreſly for God his head, and according to his image, and perfect, for nature doth always begin with things perfect. The woman was made in the ſecond place, after man, of the ſubſtance of man, by occaſion and for another thing, mulier eſt vir occaſionatus, to ſerue as an aide and as a ſecond to man, who is her head, and therefore imperfect. And this is the difference by order of generation. That of corruption and ſinne proueth the ſame, for the woman was the firſt in preuarication, and by hir own weakenes and will did ſinne, man the ſecond, and by occaſion of the woman; the woman then the laſt in good and in generation, and by occaſion, the firſt in euill and the occaſion thereof, is iuſtly ſubiect vnto man, the firſt in good, and laſt in euill.
                  This ſuperioritie and power of the husband hath beene in ſome places ſuch as that of the father, ouer life and death, as 9 The power of the huſband. Dion. Halicar. l. 2. Lib. 2. Lib. 6. bel. Gal. with the Romans by the law of Romulus: and the husband had power to kill his wife in foure caſes, Adulterie, Suborning of children, counterfeiting of falſe keyes, and drinking of wine. So likewiſe with the Greeks, as Polybius, and the ancient French, as Caeſar affirmeth, the power of the husband was ouer the life and death of his wife. Elſwhere, and there too, afterwards this power was moderated; but almoſt in all places the power of the husband and the ſubiection of the wife doth inferre thus much, That the husband is maſter of the actions and vowes of his wife, and may with words correct her and hold her to the ſtocks (as for blowes, they are vnworthy a woman of honour or honeſtie, ſaith the Law) and the wife is bound

to holde the condition, follow the qualitie, countrey, familie, habitation and rancke of her husband, ſhe muſt accompanie and follow him in all things, in his iourneys if need be, his baniſhment, his impriſonment, yea a wandring perſon, a vagabond, a fugitiue. The examples heereof are many and excellent, of Sulpitia, who followed her husband Lentulus being baniſhed into Cicilie; Erithrea her husband Phalaris; Ipſicrates the wife of King Mithridate vanquiſhed by Pompey, who wandred thorow the world. Some adde vnto this, That wiues are to follow their husbands euen in the warres, and into thoſe prouinces whither the husband is ſent with publike charge. Neither can the wife bring any thing into queſtion of law, whether ſhe be plaintiffe or defendant, without Corn. Tacit. the authority of her husband, or of the Iudge, if he refuſe; neither can ſhe call her husband into iudgement, without the permiſſion of the Magiſtrate.
                  Marriage is not carried after one and the ſame faſhion, neither 10 The diuers rules of mariage.
                      hath it in euery place the ſame lawes and rules, but according to the diuerſitie of religions and countreys, it hath rules either more eaſie or more ſtreight: according to the rules of Chriſtianitie of all others the ſtreighteſt, marriage is more ſubiect, and held more ſhort. There is nothing but the entrance left free, the continuance is by conſtraint, depending of ſome thing els than our owne willes. Other nations and religions, to make marriage more eaſie, free, and fertile, haue receiued and practiſed Polygamie and repudiation, libertie to take and leaue wiues: they accuſe Chriſtianitie for taking away theſe two, by which meanes amity and multiplication, the principall ends of marriage, are much preiudiced, inaſmuch as amitie is an enemie to all conſtraint, and they doe better maintaine themſelues in an honeſt libertie; and multiplication is made by the woman, as Nature doth richly make knowen vnto vs in wolues, of whom the race is ſo fertile in the production of their yoong, euen to the number of twelue or thirteene, that they farre excell all other profitable creatures: of theſe there are great numbers killed euery day, by which meanes there are but few, and they though of all others the moſt fertile, yet by accident the moſt barren: the reaſon is becauſe of ſo great a number as they bring, there is

one only female, which for the moſt part beareth not by reaſon of the multitude of males that concurre in the generation, of which the greateſt part die without fruit, by the want of females. So likewiſe we may ſee how much Polygamy helpeth to multiplication in thoſe nations that receiue it, Iewes, Turks and other Barbarians, who are able to raiſe forces of three or foure thouſand fighting men fit for warres. Contrariwiſe, in Chriſtendome there are many linked together in matrimony, the one of which, if not both, are barren, which being placed with others, both the one and the other may happely leaue great poſteritie behinde them. But to ſpeake more truly, all his fertilitie conſiſteth in the fertilitie of one only woman. Finally, they obiect, That this Chriſtianlike reſtraint is the cauſe of many laſciuious pranks and adulteries. To all which we may anſwer, That Chriſtianitie conſidereth not of marriage by reaſons purely humane, naturall, temporall; but it beholds it with another viſage, and weigheth it with reaſons more high and noble, as hath beene ſaid. Adde vnto this, That experience ſheweth in the greateſt part of marriages, that conſtraint increaſeth amitie, eſpecially in ſimple and debonaire mindes, who doe eaſily accommodate themſelues where they finde themſelues in ſuch ſort linked. And as for laſciuious and wicked perſons, it is the immodeſtie of their maners that makes them ſuch, which no libertie can amend. And to ſay the truth, Adulteries are as common where Polygamie and repudiation are in force; witneſſe the Iewes and Dauid, who for all the wiues that hee had could not defend himſelfe from it: and contrariwiſe, they haue beene a long time vnknowen in policies well gouerned, where there was neither Polygamie nor repudiation; witneſſe Sparta and Rome a long time after the foundation. And therefore it is abſurd to attribute it vnto religion, which teacheth nothing but puritie and continencie.
                  The libertie of Polygamie which ſeemeth in ſome ſort naturall, 11 Polygamie diuers.
                      is caried diuerſly according to the diuerſitie of nations and policies. In ſome, all the wiues that belong to one huſband liue in common, and are equall in degree; and ſo are their children. In others, there is one who is the principall and as the miſtreſſe, whoſe children inherit the goods, honours,

and titles of the husband: the reſt of the wiues are kept apart, and carrie in ſome places the titles of lawfull wiues, in others of concubines, and their children are onely penſioners.
                  The vſe of repudiation in like ſort is different: for with 12 Repudiation diuers.
                      ſome, as the Hebrewes, Greeks, Armenians, the cauſe of the ſeparation is not expreſſed, and it is not permitted to retake the wife once repudiated, but yet lawfull to marry another. But by the law of Mahumet, the ſeparation is made by the Iudge, with knowledge taken of the cauſe (except it be by mutuall conſent) which muſt be adulterie, ſterilitie, incompatibilitie of humours, an enterpriſe on his, or hir part againſt the life of each other, things directly and eſpeciallie contrarie to the ſtate and inſtitution of mariage: and it is lawfull to retake one another as often as they ſhall thinke good. The former ſeemeth to be the better, becauſe it bridleth proud women, and ouer-ſharp and bitter husbands: The ſecond, which is to expreſſe the cauſe, diſhonoureth the parties, & diſcouereth many things which ſhould be hid. And if it fall out that the cauſe be not ſufficientlie verified, and that they muſt continue together, poyſonings and murthers doe commonly enſue, many times vnknowne vnto men: as it was diſcouered at Rome before the vſe of repudiation, where a woman being apprehended for poyſoning of her husband, accuſed others, and they others too to the number of threeſcore and ten, which were all executed for the ſame offence. But the worſt law of all others hath beene, that the adulterer eſcapeth almoſt euery where without puniſhment of death, and all that is laid vpō him is diuorce & ſeparation of companie, brought in by Iustinian, a man whollie poſſeſſed by his wife, who cauſed whatſoeuer lawes to paſſe that might make for the aduantage of women. From hence doth ariſe a danger of perpetuall adulterie, deſire of the death of the one partie, the offender is not puniſhed, the innocent iniured remaineth without amends.
                  The dutie of maried folke, See Lib. 3. Cap. 12.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XLVII. Of Parents and Children.
                  
                  THere are many ſorts and degrees of authoritie and humane power, Publicke, and Priuate; but there is none 1 Fatherly power.
                      more naturall, nor greater, than that of the father ouer his children, (I ſay father, becauſe the mother who is ſubiect vnto hir husband, cannot properly haue hir children in hir power and ſubiection) but it hath not been alwayes, and in all places alike. In former times almoſt euery where it was abſolute and vniuerſall ouer the life and death, the libertie, the goods, the honor, the actions and cariages of their children, as to plead, to marie, to get goods: as namely with the Romans by the expreſſe law of Romulus, parentum in liberos omne ius esto, relegendi, vendendi, occidendi; except only children vnder Dion. Halic. li 2. antiq. Rom l. in 
                           •
                        uis ff. de lib. & poſt. Aul. Gell. lib. 20. Lib. 8. Eth. cap. 20. Lib 6. Bel. Gal. Proſper. Aquitan. in Epiſt. Sigiſm. the age of three yeares, who as yet could not offend either in word or deede; which law was afterwards renued by the law of the twelue tables, by which the father was allowed to ſell his children to the third time: with the Perſians according to Aristotle; the ancient French as Caeſar and Prosper affirme; with the Muſcouits and Tartars, who might ſell their children to the fourth time. And it ſhould ſeeme by that fact of Abraham going about to kill his ſonne, that this power was likewiſe vnder the law of nature: for if it had been againſt his dutie, and without the power of the father, he had neuer conſented thereunto, neither had hee euer thought that it was God that commanded him to do it, if it had beene againſt nature. And therefore we ſee that Iſaac made no reſiſtance, nor alledged his innocencie, knowing that it was in the power of his father: which derogateth not in any ſort from the greatneſſe of the faith of Abraham, becauſe he would not ſacrifice his ſonne by vertue of his right or power, nor for any demerit of Iſaac, but only to obey the commandement of God. So likewiſe it was in force by the law of Moyſes, though ſomewhat Deut. 21. moderated. So that we ſee what this power hath been in ancient times in the greateſt part of the world, and which endured vnto the time of the Romane Emperours. With the Greeks it was not ſo great and abſolute, nor with the Egyptians: neuertheleſſe, if it fell out, that the father had killed

his ſonnes wrongfully and without cauſe, he had no other puniſhment, but to be ſhut vp three daies together with the dead bodie.
                  Now the reaſons and fruits of ſo great and abſolute a power 2 The reaſons and fruits thereof.
                      of fathers ouer their children, neceſſarie for the culture of good maners, the chaſing away of vice, and the publike good, were firſt to holde the children in awe and dutie: and ſecondly, becauſe there are many great faults in children, that would eſcape vnpuniſhed, to the great preiudice of the weale publike, if the knowledge and puniſhment of them were but in the hand of publike authoritie, whether it be becauſe they are domeſticall and ſecret, or becauſe there is no man that will proſecute againſt them: for the parents who know them and are intereſſed in them will not diſcredit them; beſides that, there are many vices and inſolencies that are neuer puniſhed by iuſtice. Adde heereunto, that there are many things to be tried, and many differences betwixt parents and children, brothers and ſiſters, touching their goods or other matters, which are not fit to be publiſhed, which are extinct and buried by this fatherly authoritie. And the law did alwayes ſuppoſe, that the father would neuer abuſe this authoritie, becauſe of that great loue which he naturally carrieth to his children, incompatible with crueltie; which is the cauſe that in ſtead of puniſhing them with rigour, they rather become interceſſours for them, when they are in danger of the law: and there can be no greater torment to them, than to ſee their children in paine. And it falleth out very ſeldome or neuer, that this power is put in practiſe without very great occaſion; ſo that it was rather a ſcarcrow to children and very profitable, than a rigour in good earneſt.
                  Now this fatherly power (as ouer-ſharpe and dangerous) is almoſt of it ſelfe loſt and aboliſhed (for it hath rather hapned 3 The declination.
                      by a kinde of diſcontinuance than any expreſſe law) and it beganne to decline at the comming of the Romane Emperours: for from the time of Auguſtus, or ſhortly after, it was no more in force, whereby children became ſo deſperate and inſolent againſt their parents, that Seneca, ſpeaking to Nero, 
                     Lib. 1. de Clem. ſayd, That hee had ſeene more paricides puniſhed in fiue yeeres paſt, than had beene in ſeuen hundred yeeres before;

that is to ſay, ſince the foundation of Rome. In former times, if it fell out that the father killed his children, he was not puniſhed, Saluſt. in bel. Catil. Valer. Maxim. as we may ſee by the example of Fuluius the Senator, who killed his ſonne becauſe he was a partner in the conſpiracie of Catiline: and of diuers other Senatours, who haue made criminall proceſſe againſt their children in their owne houſes, and haue condemned them to death, as Caſſius Tratius; or to perpetuall exile, as Manlius Torquatus his ſonne Sillanus. There were afterwards lawes ordeined, that inioyned the father to preſent vnto the Iudge his children offending, that they might be puniſhed, and that the Iudge ſhould pronounce ſuch a ſentence as the father thought fit; which is ſtill a kinde of footſtep of antiquitie: and going about to take away the power of the father, they durſt not doe it but by halfes, and not altogether and openly. Theſe latter lawes come ſomewhat neere the law of Moyſes, which would, That at the only complaint of the father made before the Iudge, without any other knowledge taken of the cauſe, the rebellious and contumacious childe ſhould be ſtoned to death; requiring the preſence of the Iudge, to the end the puniſhment ſhould not be done in ſecret or in choler, but exemplarilie. So that according to Moyſes this fatherly power was more free and greater, than it hath beene after the time of the Emperours; but afterwards vnder Conſtantine the Great, and Theodoſius, and finally vnder Iuſtinian, it was almoſt altogether extinct. From whence it is, that children haue learned to denie their obedience to their parents, their goods, their aide, yea to wage law againſt them; a ſhamefull thing to ſee our Courts full of theſe caſes. Yea, they haue beene diſpenſed heerewith vnder pretext of deuotion and offerings, as with the Iewes before Chriſt, wherwith he reprocheth them: Matt. 15. and afterwards in Chriſtianitie; according to the opinion of ſome: yea, it hath beene lawfull to kill them either in their owne defence, or if they were enemies to the Commonweale: although, to ſay the truth, there ſhould neuer becauſe iuſt enough for a ſonne to kill his father. Nullum tantum ſcelus admitti poteſt a patre, quod ſit parricidio vindicandum, & nullum ſcelus rationem habet.
                  
                  Now we feele not what miſchiefe and preiudice hath hapned

to the world, by the aboliſhing and extinction of this fatherly power. The Common-weales wherein it hath beene in force haue alwayes flouriſhed. If there were any danger or euill in it, it might in ſome ſort be ruled and moderated; but vtterly to aboliſh it, as now it is, is neither honeſt nor expedient, but hurtfull and inconuenient, as hath beene ſayd.
                  Of the reciprocall duty of parents and children, See Lib. 3. Cap. 14.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLVIII. Lords and ſlaues, Maſters and ſeruants.
                  
                  THe vſe of ſlaues, and the full and abſolute power of Lords and Maſters ouer them, although it be a thing common 1 The vſe of ſlaues vniuerſall and againſt nature.
                      thorowout the world and at all times (except within theſe foure hundred yeeres, in which time it hath ſomewhat decayed, though of late it reuiue againe) yet it is a thing both monſtrous and ignominious in the nature of man, and ſuch as is not found in beaſts themſelues, who conſent not to the captiuitie of their like neither actiuely nor paſſiuely. The law of Moyſes hath permitted this as other things, ad duritiam cordis eorum, but not ſuch as hath beene elſwhere: for it was neither ſo great, nor ſo abſolute, nor perpetuall, but moderated within the compaſſe of ſeuen yeeres at the moſt. Chriſtianitie hath left it, finding it vniuerſall in all places, as likewiſe to obey idolatrous Princes and Maſters, and ſuch like matters as could not at the firſt attempt and altogether be extinguiſhed, they haue aboliſhed.
                  There are foure ſorts, Naturall, that is, ſlaues borne; Enforced, 2 Diſtinction.
                      and made by right of warre; Iuſt termed ſlaues by puniſhment by reaſon of ſome offence, or debt, whereby they are ſlaues to their Creditors, at the moſt for ſeuen yeeres, according to the law of the Iewes, but alwayes vntill paiment and reſtitution be made, in other places; Voluntaries, whereof there are many ſorts, as they that caſt the dice for it, or ſell Tacit. de mort German. their libertie for money, as long ſithence it was the cuſtome in Almaigne, and now likewiſe in ſome parts of Chriſtendom, where they do giue and vow themſelues to another for euer, as the Iewes were woont to practiſe, who at the gate bored a

hole in their eare in token of perpetuall ſeruitude. And this kind of voluntarie captiuitie, is the ſtrangeſt of all the reſt, and almoſt againſt nature.
                  It is couetouſneſſe that is the cauſe of ſlaues enforced; and lewdneſſe the cauſe of voluntaries. They that are Lords and 3 The cauſe of Slaues.
                      Maſters haue hoped for more gaine and profit by keeping, than by killing them: and indeed the faireſt poſſeſſions and the richeſt commodities, were in former times ſlaues. By this meanes Craſſus became the richeſt among the Romanes, who had beſides thoſe that ſerued him fiue hundred ſlaues, who euery day brought gaine and commoditie by their gainefull artes and myſteries, and afterwards when he had made what profit by them he could, he got much by the ſale of them.
                  It is a ſtrange thing to reade of thoſe cruelties practiſed by Lords vpon their ſlaues, euen by the approbation and permiſſion 4 The cruelties of Lords againſt their ſlaues.
                      of the lawes themſelues: They haue made them to till the earth being chained together, as the manner is in Barbary at this day; they lodge them in holes and ditches; and being old, or impotent, and ſo vnprofitable, they ſell them, or drowne them, and caſt them into lakes to feed their fiſh withall: They kill them not only for the leaſt fault that is, as the breaking of a glaſſe, but for the leaſt ſuſpition, yea, for their owne pleaſure and paſtime, as Flaminius did, one of the honeſteſt men of his time: And to giue delight vnto the people, they were conſtrained in their publicke Theaters to kill one another. If a Maſter hapned to be killed in his houſe by whomſoeuer, the innocent ſlaues were all put to death, inſomuch that Pedonius the Romane being ſlaine, although the murtherer were knowne, yet by the order of the Senat, foure hundred of his ſlaues were put to death.
                  On the other ſide, it is a thing as ſtrange, to heare of the rebellions, inſurrections, and cruelties of ſlaues againſt their 5 The cruelties of Slaues againſt their Lords.
                      Lords, when they haue beene able to worke their reuenge, not only in particular by ſurpriſe and treaſon, as it fell out one night in the Citie of Tyre, but in ſet battaile both by ſea and land; from whence the prouerb is, So many ſlaues, ſo many enemies.
                  Now as Chriſtian religion, and afterwards Mahumetiſme 
                     6 Diminution of Slaues.
                      did increaſe, the number of ſlaues did decreaſe, and ſeruitude

did ceaſe, inſomuch that the Chriſtians, and afterwards the Turks, like apes imitating them, gaue freedome and libertie to all thoſe that were of their religion; in ſuch ſort, that about the twelue hundred yeare, there were almoſt no ſlaues in the world, but where theſe two religions had no authoritie.
                  But as the number of ſlaues diminiſhed, the number of beggers and vagabonds increaſed: for ſo many ſlaues being 7 The increaſe of poore people and vagabonds.
                      ſet at libertie, come from the houſes and ſubiection of their Lords, not hauing wherewithall to liue, and perhaps hauing children too, filled the world with poore people.
                  This pouertie made them returne to ſeruitude, and to become 8 Returne to ſeruitude.
                      voluntarie ſlaues, paying, changing, ſelling their libertie, to the end they might haue their maintenance and life aſſured, and be quit of the burthen of their children. Beſides this cauſe and this voluntarie ſeruitude, the world is returned to the vſe of ſlaues, becauſe the Chriſtians and Turks alwaies mainteining warres one againſt the other, as likewiſe againſt the Gentiles both orientall and occidentall, although by the example of the Iewes they haue no ſlaues of their owne nation, yet they haue of others, whom, though they turne to their religion, they hold ſlaues by force.
                  The power and authoritie of maſters ouer their ſeruants,  is not very great, nor imperious, and in no ſort can be preiudiciall to the libertie of ſeruants; only they may chaſtiſe and correct them with diſcretion and moderation. This power is much leſſe ouer thoſe that are mercenarie, ouer whom they haue neither power nor correction.
                  The dutie of Maſters and Seruants, See lib. 3. cap. 15.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLIX. Of the State, Soueraigntie, Soueraignes.
                  
                  HAuing ſpoken of priuate power, we come to the publicke, 1 The deſcription and neceſſitie of the ſtate.
                      that of the ſtate. The ſtate, that is to ſay, Rule, dominion, or a certaine order in commanding and obeying, is the prop, the cement, and the ſoule of humane things: It is the bond of ſocietie, which cannot otherwiſe ſubſiſt; It is the vitall

ſpirit, whereby ſo many millions of men doe breath, and the whole nature of things.
                  Now notwithſtanding it be the piller and prop of all, yet it is a thing not ſo ſure, very difficult, ſubiect to changes, arduuin 
                     2 The nature of the ſtate. Tacit. 
                     & ſubiectum fortunae cuncta regendi onus, which declineth and ſometimes falleth by hidden and vnknowne cauſes, and that altogether at an inſtant, from the higheſt ſtep to the loweſt, and not by degrees, as it vſeth to be long ariſing. It is likewiſe expoſed to the hatred both of great and ſmall, wherby it is gauled, ſubiect to ambuſhments, vnderminings, and dangers, which hapneth likewiſe many times by the corrupt and wicked manners of the ſoueraignes, and the nature of the ſoueraigntie, which we are about to deſcribe.
                  Soueraigntie is a perpetuall and abſolute power, without conſtraint either of time or condition. It conſiſteth in a power 3 The deſcription of ſoueraigntie.
                      to giue lawes to all in generall, and to euery one in particular, without the conſent of any other, or the gift of any perſon. And as another ſaith (to derogate from the common law) Soueraigntie is ſo called, and abſolute, becauſe it is not ſubiect to any humane lawes, no not his owne. For it is againſt nature to giue lawes vnto all, and to command himſelfe in a thing that dependeth vpon his will, Nulla obligatio conſistere poteſt, quae a voluntate promittent is ſtatum capit; nor of another, whether liuing, or of his predeceſſors, or the countrie. Soueraigne power is compared to fire, to the ſea, to a wilde beaſt; it is a hard matter to tame it, to handle it, it will not be croſt, nor offended, but being is very dangerous, potestas res eſt quae moneri, doceri
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         non vult, & castigationem aegrè ferat.
                  
                  The marks and properties thereof, are, to iudge the laſt appeales, to ordaine lawes in time of peace and warre, to create 4 The properties.
                      and appoint magiſtrates and officers, to giue graces and diſpenſations againſt the law, to impoſe tributes, to appoint money, to receiue homages, ambaſſages, oathes. But all this is comprehended vnder the abſolute power to giue and make lawes according to their pleaſure. Other marks there are of leſſe weight, as the law of the ſea and ſhipwracke, confiſcation for treaſon, power to change the tongue, title of Maieſtie.
                  Greatnes and Soueraigntie is ſo much deſired of all, becauſe 
                     
all the good that is in it appeareth outwardly, and all the ill is altogether inward: As alſo becauſe to commaund others, is a thing as beautifull and diuine, as great and difficult; and for this cauſe they are eſteemed and reuerenced for more than men. Which beliefe in the people, and credit of theirs is very neceſſarie and commodious to extort from the people due reſpect and obedience, the nource of peace and quietnes. But in the end they prooue to be men caſt in the ſame mould that other men are, and many times worſe borne, and worſe qualified in nature than many of the common ſort of people. It ſeemeth that their actions becauſe they are weightie and important, doe proceed from weightie and important cauſes: but they are nothing, and of the ſame condition that other mens are. The ſame occaſion that breeds a brawle betwixt vs and our neighbour, is ground enough of a warre betwixt Princes: and that offence for which a Lackey deſerues a whipping, lighting vpon a King, is the ruine of a whole prouince. They will as lightly as we, and we as they, but they can do more than we: the ſelfe-ſame appetites moue a flie and an elephant. Finally, beſides theſe paſſions, defects, and naturall conditions which they haue common with the meaneſt of thoſe that doe adore them, they haue likewiſe vices and diſcommodities which their greatnes and ſoueraigntie beares them out in, peculiar vnto themſelues.
                  The ordinarie maners of great perſonages are, vntamed 6 The maners of Soueraignes.
                      pride, durus eſt veri inſolens, ad recta flecti regius non vult tumor; violence too licentious, id eſſe regni maximum pignus putant, ſi quicquid alijs non licet, ſolis licet: quod non poteſt, vult poſſe, qui nimium poteſt: Their mott that beſt pleaſeth them is, Senec. 
                     Tacit. 
                     quod libet, licet: ſuſpition, icalouſie, ſuapte natura, potentiae anxij, yea euen of their owne infants, ſuspectus ſemper, inuiſuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         dominantibus quiſquis proximus destinatur, adeo vt displiceant etiam ciuilia filiorum ingenia: whereby it falleth out that they are many times in alarum and feare, ingenia regum prona ad formidinem.
                  
                  The aduantages of Kings and ſoueraigne Princes aboue 7 The miſeries and diſcommodities.
                      their people, which ſeeme ſo great and glittering, are indeed but light, and almoſt imaginarie; but they are repayed with great, true, and ſolid diſaduantages and inconueniences. The

name and title of a ſoueraigne, the ſhew and outſide is beautifull, pleaſant, and ambitious; but the burthen and the inſide is hard, difficult, and yrkſome. There is honor enough, but little reſt and ioy, or rather none at all: It is a publicke and honorable ſeruitude, a noble miſerie, a rich captiuitie, Aureae & fulgidae compides, clara miſeria; witneſſe that which Augustus, Marcus Aurelius, Pertinax, Diocletian, haue ſaid and done, and the end that almoſt all the firſt twelue Ceſars made, and many others after them. But becauſe few there are that beleeue this, but ſuffer themſelues to be deceiued by the beautifull ſhew, I will more particularly quote the inconueniences and miſeries that accompanie great Princes.
                  Firſt, the great difficultie to play their part, and to quit themſelues of their charge: for can it be but a great burthen 8 1 In their charge.
                      to gouerne ſo many people, ſince in the ruling of himſelfe there are ſo many difficulties? It is an eaſier matter and more pleaſant to follow, than to guide; to trauell in a way that is alreadie traced, than to finde the way; to obey, than to command; to anſwere for himſelfe only, than for others too; vt ſatius multo iam ſit parere quietum, quàm regere imperio res velle. Adde heereunto that it is required that he that commandeth muſt be a better man, than he that is commanded: ſo ſaid Cyrus a great Commander. How difficult a thing this is, we may ſee by the paucitie of thoſe that are ſuch as they ought to be. Vespaſian, ſaith Tacitus, was the only Prince that in goodnes excelled his predeceſſors: and another ſticks not to ſay, that all the good Princes may be grauen in a ring.
                  Secondly in their delights and pleaſures, wherein it is thought they haue a greater part than other men. But they 9 2 In the pleaſures and actions of their life.
                      are doubtleſſe of a worſe condition than the pleaſures of priuate men: for beſides that the luſtre of their greatnes makes them vnfit to take ioy in their pleaſures, by reaſon that they are too cleare and apparent, and made as a butt and ſubiect to cenſure, they are likewiſe croſt and peered into euen to their very thoughts, which men take vpon them to diuine and iudge of. Againe, the great eaſe and facilitie that they haue to do what pleaſeth them, becauſe all men applie themſelues vnto them, takes away the taſte, & ſowreth that ſweet which ſhould be in their pleaſures; which delight no man but thoſe

that taſte them, with ſome ſcarcitie and difficultie. He that giues no time to be thirſtie, knowes not what a pleaſure it is to haue drinke: Sacietie is noyſome, and goes againſt the ſtomacke.
                  
                     Pinguis amor nimium
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         potens in taedia nobis
                     Vertitur: & ſtomacho dulcis vt eſca nocet.
                  
                  There is nothing more tedious and loathſome than abundance, yea they are depriued of all true and liuely action, which can not be without ſome difficultie and reſiſtance. It is not going, liuing, acting in them, but ſleeping and an inſenſible ſliding away.
                  The third inconuenience that followeth Princes, is in their 10 3 In their marriages.
                      marriages. The marriages of the vulgar ſort are more free and voluntarie, made with more affection, libertie and contentment. One reaſon heereof may be, that the common ſort of men finde more of their degree to chuſe, whereas Kings and Princes, who are not of the rout, as we know, haue no plentifull choice. But the other reaſon is better, which is, that the common ſort in their marriages looke but into their owne affaires, and how they may accommodate it beſt vnto themſelues; but the marriages of Princes are many times inforced for publike neceſſity: they are great parts of the State, and inſtruments ſeruing for the generall good and quiet of the world. Great perſonages and Souereignes marrie not for themſelues, but for the good of the State, whereof they muſt be more amourous and iealous, than of their wiues and children: for which cauſe they many times hearken vnto marriages where there is neither loue nor delight; and matches are made betweene perſons, who neither know nor haue ſeene one another, much leſſe affect: yea, ſuch a great man takes ſuch a great ladie, whom if he were not ſo great, he would not take: but this is to ſerue the weale-publike, to aſſure the States, and to ſettle peace amongſt their people.
                  The fourth is, That they haue no true part in the attempts that men make one againſt the other in emulation of honour 11 4 Attempte of honour.
                      and valour, in the exerciſes of the minde and of the bodie, which is one of the moſt delightfull things in the commerce and conuerſation of men. The reaſon heereof is, becauſe all the world giues place vnto them, all men ſpare them, and

loue rather to hide their owne valour, to betray their owne glorie, than to hurt or hinder that of their Souereigne, eſpecially where they know he affects the victorie. This, to ſay the trueth, is by force of reſpect to handle men diſdainfully and iniuriouſly, and therefore one ſaid, that the children of Princes learned nothing by order and rule, but to manage a horſe, becauſe in all other exerciſes euery one bowes vnto them, and giues them the priſe: but the horſe who is neither flatterer nor Courtier, caſts as well the Prince to the ground as the Eſquire. Many great perſonages haue refuſed the praiſes and approbations offered them, ſaying, I would accept and eſteeme of them, and reioyce in them, if they came from free men, that durſt ſay the contrarie, and tax me if there were cauſe.
                  The fift is, that they are depriued of the libertie to trauell in the world, being as it were empriſoned within their owne 12 5 Libertie of trauell.
                      countries, yea within their owne palaces, being alwaies encloſed with people, ſuters, gazers, and lookers on, and that whereſoeuer they be, and in all actions whatſoeuer, prying euen through the holes of their chaire: whereupon Alphonſus the King ſaid, that in this reſpect the eſtate of an aſſe was better than the condition of a King.
                  The ſixt miſerie is, that they are depriued of all amitie and mutuall ſocietie, which is the ſweeteſt and perfecteſt fruit of 13 6 Mutuall and hartie amitie.
                      humane life, and cannot be but betwixt equals, or thoſe betwixt whom the difference is but ſmall. This great diſparitie puts them without the commerce and ſocietie of men; all humble ſeruices, and baſe offices, are done vnto them by thoſe that cannot refuſe them, and proceed not from loue, but from ſubiection, or to increaſe their owne greatnes, or of cuſtome and countenance; which is plaine, becauſe wicked Kings are as well ſerued and reuerenced as the good; they that are hated, as they that are beloued, there is no difference, the ſelfe-ſame apparell, the ſelfe-ſame ceremonie: Wherevpon Iulian the Emperour anſwered his Courtiers, that commended him for his iuſtice, Perhaps I ſhould be proud of theſe praiſes, if they were ſpoken by ſuch as durſt to accuſe me, and to diſpraiſe my actions when they ſhall deſerue it.
                  The ſeuenth miſery, worſe perhaps than all the reſt, and 14 7 Ignorance of things.
                     
                     
more dangerous to the weale-publicke, is, that they are not free in the choice of men, nor in the true knowledge of things. They are not ſuffered truly to know the ſtate of their affaires, and conſequently not to call and employ ſuch as they would, and as were moſt fit and neceſſarie. They are ſhut vp, and beſet with a certaine kind of people, that are either of their own bloud, or by the greatnes of their houſes and offices, or by preſcription, are ſo farre in authoritie, power, and managing of affaires before others, that it is not lawfull, without putting all to hazard, to diſcontent, or in any ſort to ſuſpect them. Now theſe kind of people that couer, and hold as it were hidden the Prince, do prouide that all the truth of things ſhall not appeare vnto him, and that better men, and more profitable to the ſtate come not neere him, leſt they be knowne what they are. It is a pitifull thing not to ſee but by the eyes, not to vnderſtand, but by the eares of another, as Princes doe. And that which perfecteth in all points this miſerie, is, that commonly, and as it were by deſtinie, Princes and great perſonages are poſſeſſed by three ſorts of people, the plagues of humane kinde, Flatterers, Inuenters of impoſts or tributes, Informers, who vnder a faire and falſe pretext of zeale and amitie towards the Prince, as the two firſt, or of loyaltie and reformation as the latter, ſpoile and ruinate both Prince and State.
                  The eight miſerie is, that they are leſſe free, and maſters of their owne wills than all other, for they are inforced in their 15 8 Not maeſters of their wills.
                      proceedings by a thouſand conſiderations and reſpects, whereby many times they muſt captiuate their deſignments, deſires, and wills; in maxima fortuna, minima licentia. And in the meane time in ſtead of being plaintiffes, they are more rudely handled and iudged than any other: For men will not ſtick to diuine of their deſignes, penetrate into their hearts and inuentions, which they cannot doe, Abditos principis ſenſus, & ſi quid occultius parat exquirere: illicitum anceps nec ideo aſſequare: and looking into things with another viſage, where they vnderſtand not ſufficientlie the affaires of the ſtate, they require of their Princes what they thinke ſhould be done, blame their actions, & refuſing to ſubmit themſelues to what

is neceſſarie, they commonly proceed in their buſineſſe rudely enough.
                  Finally, it falleth out many times, that they make a miſerable end, not only tyrants and vſurpers, for it belongs to 16 9 A miſerable end.
                      them, but ſuch as haue a true title to their Crowne; witnes ſo many Romane Emperours after Pompey the Great, and Caeſar, and in our time Mary Queene of Scotland, who loſt her life by the hand of an executioner; and Henry the third, wilfullie murthered in the middle of fortie thouſand armed men, by a little Monke, and a thouſand the like examples. It ſeemeth that as lightning and tempeſts oppoſe themſelues againſt the pride and height of our buildings, ſo there are likewiſe ſpirits that enuie and emulate greatnes below vpon earth.
                  
                     Vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         adeo res humanas vis abdita quaedam
                     Obterit, & pulchros faſces, ſaeuaſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſecures
                     Proculcare, ac ludibrio ſibi habere videtur.
                  
                  To conclude, the condition of Soueraignes is hard and dangerous: Their life if it be innocent, is infinitly painefull; 17 The concluſion of their miſeries.
                      if it be wicked, it is ſubiect to the hate and ſlaunder of the world, and in both caſes expoſed to a thouſand dangers: for the greater a Prince is, the leſſe may he truſt others, and the more muſt he truſt himſelfe. So that we ſee, that it is a thing as it were annexed to ſoueraigntie, to be betrayed.
                  Of their duty, See the third booke, Chap. 16.
               
               
                  CHAP. L. Magistrates.
                  
                  THere are diuers degrees of Magiſtrates as well in honor as power, which are the two things to be conſidered in 1 The distinction.
                      the diſtinction of them, and which haue nothing common the one with the other: and many times they that are more honorable haue leſſe power, as Counſellors of the priuie Counſell, the Secretaries of the ſtate. Some haue but one of the two; others haue both, and that of diuers degrees, but they are properly called Magiſtrates that haue both.
                  
                     
The Magiſtrates that are in the middle betwixt the Soueraigne  & the particulars, in the preſence of their Soueraignes haue no power to command. As riuers loſe both their name and power at the mouth or entrance into the ſea, and the ſtarres their light in the preſence of the ſunne; ſo all power of Magiſtrates is but vpon ſufferance in the preſence of their Soueraigne: as alſo the power of inferiours and ſubalternate Magiſtrates in the preſence of their ſuperiours. Amongſt equals there is neither power nor ſuperioritie, but the one may hinder the other by oppoſition and preuention.
                  All Magiſtrates iudge, condemne and command either according  to the law, and then their ſentence is but the execution of the law; or according to equitie, and ſuch iudgement is called the office or dutie of the Magiſtrate.
                  Magiſtrates can not change nor correct their iudgements,  except the Soueraigne permit it, vnder paine of iniuſtice: they may reuoke their commands or make ſtay of them, but not that which they haue iudged and pronounced with knowledge of the cauſe.
                  Of the dutie of Magiſtrates, See lib. 3.
               
               
                  CHAP. LI. Lawyers, Doctours, Teachers.
                  
                  IT is one of the vanities & follies of man, to preſcribe lawes and rules that exceed the vſe and capacitie of men, as ſome Philoſophers and Doctors haue done. They propoſe ſtrange and eleuated formes or images of life, or at leaſtwiſe ſo difficult and auſtere, that the practiſe of them is impoſſible at leaſt for a long time, yea the attempt is dangerous to manie. Theſe are caſtles in the aire, as the Common-wealth of Plato, and More, the Oratour of Cicero, the Poet of Horace, beautifull and excellent imaginations; but he was yet neuer found that put them in vſe. The ſoueraigne and perfect Lawgiuer and Doctor tooke heed of this, who both in himſelfe, his life and his doctrine, hath not ſought theſe extrauagancies and formes diuided from the common capacitie of men; and therefore he calleth his yoke eaſie, and his burden light. Iugum
                     
                     meum ſuaue, & onus meum leue. And they that haue inſtituted and ordered their companie vnder his name, haue very wiſely conſidered of the matter, that though they make ſpeciall profeſſion of vertue, deuotion, and to ſerue the wealepublike aboue all others, neuertheleſſe they differ very little from the common and ciuill life. Wherein there is firſt great iuſtice: for there muſt alwaies be kept a proportion betwixt the commandement and the obedience, the duetie and the power, the rule and the workmaſter: and theſe binde themſelues and others to be neceſſarilie in want, cutting out more worke than they know how to finiſh: and many times theſe goodly Law-makers are the firſt Law-breakers: for they do nothing, and many times do quite contrarie to that they enioyne others, like the Phariſes, Imponunt onera grauia, & nolunt ea digito mouere. So do ſome Phyſitians and Diuines: ſo liues the world; rules and precepts are enioined, and men not only by an irregularitie of life and maners, but alſo by contrarie opinion and iudgement follow others.
                  There is likewiſe another fault full of iniuſtice, they are farre more ſcrupulous, exact, and rigorous in things free and accidentall than in neceſſarie and ſubſtantiall, in poſitiue and humane than in naturall and diuine; like them that are content to lend, but not to pay their debts: and all like the Phariſes, as the great and heauenly Doctour telleth them to their reproch. All this is but hypocriſie and deceit.
               
               
                  CHAP. LII.
                  
                     People or vulgar ſort.
                     THe people (we vnderſtand heere the vulgar ſort, the popular rout, a kinde of people vnder what couert ſoeuer,  of baſe, ſeruile, and mechanicall condition) are a ſtrange beaſt with many heads, and which in few words can not be deſcribed, inconſtant and variable, without ſtay, like the waues of the ſea: they are mooued and appeaſed, they allow and diſallow one and the ſame thing at one and the ſame inſtant: there is nothing more eaſie than to driue them into what paſſion he will: they loue not warres for the true end thereof, nor peace for reſt and quietneſſe, but for varieties ſake, and the change

that there is from the one to the other: confuſion makes them deſire order, and when they haue it, they like it not: they run alwaies one contrary to another, and there is no time pleaſeth but what is to come: hi vulgi mores, odiſſe praeſentia, ventura cupere, praeterita celebrare.
                     
                     They are light to beleeue, to gather together newes, eſpecially  ſuch as are moſt hurtfull; holding all reports for aſſured trueths. With a whiſtle, or ſome ſonnet of newes, a man may aſſemble them together like bees at the ſound of a baſon.
                     Without iudgement, reaſon, diſcretion. Their iudgement  and wiſdome is but by chance, like a caſt at dice, vnaduiſed and headlong of all things, and alwayes ruled by opinion or cuſtome, or the greater number, going all in a line, like ſheepe that run after thoſe that goe before them, and not by reaſon and truth. Plebi non iudicium, non veritas: ex opinione multa, 
                        Tacit. Cic. 
                        ex veritate paucae iudicat.
                     
                     Enuious and malicious, enemies to good men, contemners  of vertue, beholding the good hap of another with an ill eye, fauouring the more weake and the more wicked, and wiſhing all ill they can to men of honor they know not wherefore, except it be becauſe they are honourable and well ſpoken of by others.
                     Treacherous and vntrue, amplifying reports, ſmothering of truthes, and alwayes making things greater than they are,  without faith, without holde. The faith or promiſe of a people, and the thought of a childe, are of like durance, which change not onely as occaſions change, but according to the difference of thoſe reports that euery houre of the day may bring forth.
                     Mutinous, deſiring nothing but nouelties and changes, ſeditious,  enemies to peace and quietneſſe: ingenio mobili, ſeditioſum, diſcordioſum, cupidum rerum nouarum, quieti & otio aduerſum, 
                        Saluſt. eſpecially when they meet with a leader: for then euen as the calme ſea, of nature tumbleth, and foameth, and rageth, being ſtirred with the furie of the windes; ſo doe the people ſwell, and grow proud, wilde, and outragious: but take from them their leader, they become deiect, grow wild, are confounded with aſtoniſhment, ſine rectore praeceps, pauidus, ſocors: nil auſura plebs principibus amotis.
                     
                     
                        
Procurers and fauorers of broiles and alterations in houſeholde affaires, they account modeſtie ſimplicitie, wiſdome  ruſticitie: and contrariwiſe, they giue to fierie and heady violence the name of valour and fortitude. They prefer thoſe that haue hot heads and actiue hands, before thoſe that haue a ſetled and temperate iudgement, and vpon whom the weight of the affaires muſt lie; boaſters and pratlers before thoſe that are ſimple and ſtayed.
                     They care neither for the publike good nor common honeſtie,  but their priuate good only; and they refuſe no baſe offices for their gaine and commodity. Priuata cui
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ſtimulatio, vile decus publicum.
                     
                     Alwayes muttering and murmuring againſt the State, alwayes belching out ſlanders and inſolent ſpeeches againſt  thoſe that gouerne and command. The meaner and poorer ſort haue no better paſtime, than to ſpeake ill of the great and rich, not vpon cauſe and reaſon, but of enuie, being neuer content with their gouernours, nor the preſent State.
                     They haue nothing but a mouth, they haue tongues that  ceaſe not, ſpirits that bowge not: they are a monſter whoſe parts are all tongues, they ſpeake all things, but know nothing; they look vpon all, but ſee nothing; they laugh at all, and weepe at all; fit to mutine and rebell, not to fight. Their propertie is rather to aſſay to ſhake off their yoke, than to defend their libertie: procacia plebis ingenia, impigrae linguae, 
                        Tacit. 
                        ignaui animi. 
                        Saluſt.
                     
                     They neuer know how to holde a meaſure, nor to keepe  an honeſt mediocritie. Either like ſlaues they ſerue ouer-baſely, or like lords they are beyond all meaſure inſolent and tyrannicall. They can not endure a ſoft and temperate bit, nor are pleaſed with a lawfull libertie; they run alwaies to extremities, either out of hope too much truſting, or too much diſtruſting out of feare. They will make you afeard, if you feare not them: when they are frighted, you chocke them vnder the chin, and you leape with both feet vpon their bellies. They are audacious and proud, if a man ſhew not the cudgell; and therefore the prouerbe is, Tickle them, and they will pricke thee; pricke them, and they will tickle thee. Nil in vulgo modicum terrere ni paueant, vbi pertimuerint impunè
                        
                        contemni: audacia turbidum niſi vbi metuat aut ſeruit humiliter, aut ſuperbè dominatur: libertatem, quae media, nec ſpernere nec habere.
                     
                     Very vnthankfull towards their benefactors. The recompenſe  of all thoſe that haue deſerued well of the Common-wealth, haue alwayes beene baniſhment, reproch, conſpiracie, death. Hiſtories are famous, of Moyſes and all the Prophets, Socrates, Aristides, Phocion, Lycurgus, Demosthenes, Themistocles. And the Truth it ſelfe hath ſaid, That he being one that procured the good and health of the people eſcaped not: and contrariwiſe, they that oppreſſe them, are deareſt vnto them. They feare all, they admire all.
                     To conclude, the people are a ſauage beaſt, all that they  thinke, is vanitie; all they ſay, is falſe and erroneous; that they reprooue, is good; that they approoue, is naught; that which they praiſe is infamous; that which they doe and vndertake, is follie: Non tam bene cum rebus humanis geritur vt 
                        Seneca. 
                        meliora pluribus placeant: argumentum peſſimi turba eſt. The vulgar multitude is the mother of ignorance, iniuſtice, inconſtancie, idolatrie, vanitie, which neuer yet could be pleaſed: their mot is, Vox populi, vox Dei; but we may ſay, Vox populi, vox ſtultorum. Now the beginning of wiſdome, is for a man to keepe himſelfe cleere and free, and not to ſuffer himſelfe to be caried with popular opinions. This belongs to the ſecond Lib. 2. ca. 1. booke, which is now neere at hand.
                  
                  
                     
                        The fourth diſtinction and difference of men, drawen from their diuers profeſſions and conditions of life. THE PREFACE.
                     BEholde heere another difference of men, drawen from the diuerſitie of their profeſſions, conditions and kindes of life. Some follow the ciuill and ſociable life, others flie it, thinking to ſaue themſelues in the ſolitarie wilderneſſe; ſome loue armes, others hate them; ſome liue in common, others in priuate; it pleaſeth ſome beſt to haue charge, and to leade a publike life, others to hide and keepe themſelues priuate; ſome are Courtiers, attending wholly vpon others, others

court none but themſelues; ſome delight to liue in the citie, others in the fields affecting a countrey life; whoſe choice is the better, and which life is to be preferred, It is a difficult thing ſimply to determine, and it may be impertinent. They haue all their aduantages and diſaduantages, their good and their ill. That which is moſt to be looked into and conſidered heerein, as ſhall be ſaid, is, That euery man know how to chuſe that which beſt befits his owne nature, that he might liue the more eaſily and the more happily. But yet a word or two of them all, by comparing them together: but this ſhall be after we haue ſpoken of that life that is common to all, which hath three degrees.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. LIII. The diſtinction and compariſon of the three ſorts of degrees of life.
                  
                  THere are three ſorts of life, and as it were three degrees, one priuate of euery particular man within himſelfe, and in the cloſet of his owne heart, where all is hid, all is lawfull: the ſecond, in his houſe and family, in his priuate and ordinarie actions, where there is neither ſtudie nor arte, and whereof he is not bound to giue any reaſon: the third is publike in the eyes of the world. Now to keepe order and rule in this firſt low and obſcure ſtage, it is very difficult, and more rare than in the other two; and in the ſecond, than in the third: the reaſon is, becauſe where there is neither Iudge nor Controler, nor Regarder, and where we haue no imagination either of puniſhment or recompenſe, we carrie our ſelues more looſely and careleſly, as in priuate liues, where conſcience and reaſon only is our guide, than in publike; where we are ſtill in checke and as a marke to the eyes and iudgement of all; where glory, feare of reproch, baſe reputation, or ſome other paſſion doth leade vs (for paſſion commands with greater power than reaſon) whereby we keepe our ſelues readie, ſtanding vpon our guard: for which cauſe it falleth out, that many are accounted holy, great, and admirable in publike, who in their owne priuate haue nothing commendable. That which is done in publike is but a fable, a fiction, the

truth is ſecret and in priuat; and he that will well iudge of a man, muſt conuerſe euery day with him, and pry into his ordinarie and naturall cariage; the reſt is all counterſet; Vniuerſus mundus exercet histrioniam: and therefore ſaid a wiſe man, That he is an excellent man, who is ſuch within and in himſelfe which he is outwardly for feare of the lawes, and ſpeech of the world. Publick actions thunder in the eares of men, to which a man is attentiue, when he doth them; as exploits in warre, ſound iudgement in counſell, to rule a people, to performe an Ambaſſage. Priuate and domeſticall actions are quick and ſure, to chide, to laugh, to ſell, to pay, to conuerſe with his owne, a man conſiders not of them, he doth them not thinking of them: ſecret and inward actions much more, to loue, to hate, to deſire.
                  Againe, there is heere another conſideration, and that is, that that is done by the naturall hypocriſie of men, which we  make moſt account of, and a man is more ſcrupulous in outward actions, that are in ſhew, but yet are free, of ſmall importance, and almoſt all in countenances and ceremonies, and therefore are of little coſt, and as little effect; than in inward and ſecret actions that make no ſhew, but are yet requiſite and neceſſarie, and therefore they are the more difficult. Of thoſe depend the reformation of the ſoule, the moderation of the paſſions, the rule of the life; yea, by the attainement of theſe outward, a man becomes careleſſe of the inward.
                  Now of theſe three liues, inward, domeſticall, publicke, he that is to leade but one of them, as Hermits, doth guide and  order his life at a better rate, than he that hath two, and he that hath but two, his condition is more eaſie, than he that hath all three.
               
               
                  CHAP. LIIII. A compariſon of the eiuill and ſociable life with the ſolitarie.
                  
                  THey that eſteeme and commend ſo much the ſolitarie and retired life, as a great ſtay and ſure retraite from the moleſtations and troubles of the world, and a fit meanes to preſerue and maintaine themſelues pure and free from many vices, in as much as the worſe part is the greater, of a thouſand

there is not one good, the number of fooles is infinite, contagion in a preaſe is dangerous, they ſeeme to haue reaſon on their ſide: for the companie of the wicked is a dangerous thing, and therefore they that aduenture themſelues vpon the ſea, are to take heed that no blaſphemer, or diſſolute and wicked perſon enter their ſhip; one only Ionas with whom God was angrie had almoſt loſt all; Bias to thoſe that were in the ſhip with him crying out in a great danger for help vnto their gods, pleaſantlie ſaid, Hold you your peace, for the gods perceiue not that you are heere with me. Albuquerque the Vice-roy of the Indies for Emmanuel king of Portingall, in a great danger at ſea, tooke vpon his ſhoulders a little child, to the end that his innocencie might ſerue as a ſuretie to God for his ſinnes. But to thinke that a ſolitarie life is better, more excellent and perfect, more fit for the exerciſe of vertue, more difficult, ſharp, laborious and painfull, as ſome would make vs beleeue, they groſſely deceiue themſelues: for contrarily it is a great diſcharge and eaſe of life, and it is but an indifferent profeſſion, yea a ſimple apprentiſhip and diſpoſition to vertue. This is not to enter into buſines, troubles, and difficulties, but it is to flie them, and to hide themſelues from them, to practiſe the counſell of the Epicures (Hide thy ſelfe) it is to runne to death, to flie a good life. It is out of all doubt, that a King, a Prelat, a Paſtor, is a farre more noble calling, more perfect, more difficult, than that of a Monke, or a Hermit. And to ſay the truth, in times paſt the companies of Monks were but ſeminaries and apprentiſhips, from whence they drew thoſe that were fit for Eccleſiaſticall charge, and their preparatiues to a greater perfection. And he that liues ciuillie hauing a wife, children, ſeruants, neighbours, friends, goods, buſines, and ſo many diuers parts which he muſt ſatisfie, and truly and loyally anſwere for, hath without compariſon farre more buſines, than he that hath none of all theſe, hath to doe with none but himſelfe: Multitude and abundance is farre more troubleſome, than ſolitarineſſe and want. In abſtinencie there is but one thing, in the conduct and vſe of many, diuers things, there are many conſiderations, diuers duties. It is an eaſier thing to part from goods, honours, dignities, charges, than to gouerne them well, and well to diſcharge

them. It is eaſier for a man to liue altogether without a wife, than in all points duly to liue, and to maintaine himſelfe with his wife, children, and all the reſt that depend vpon him: ſo is the ſingle life more eaſie than the maried ſtate.
                  So likewiſe to thinke that ſolitarineſſe is a ſanctuarie and an aſſured hauen againſt all vices, temptations, and impediments,  is to deceiue themſelues; for it is not true in euery reſpect. Againſt the vices of the world, the ſtirre of the people, the occaſions that proceed from without, it is good; but ſolitarineſſe hath it inward and ſpirituall affaires and difficulties: Iuit in deſertum vt tentaretur à diabolo. To imprudent and vnaduiſed young men, ſolitarineſſe is a dangerous ſtaffe, and it is to be feared, that whileſt he walks alone he entertaines worſe companie than himſelfe, as Crates ſaid to a young man who walked all alone farre from companie. It is there where fooles contriue their wicked deſignements, begin their owne ouerthrowes, ſharpen their paſſions and wicked deſires. Many times to auoid the gulfe of Charybdis, they fall into Scylla; to flie is not to eſcape, it is many times to increaſe the danger, and to loſe himſelfe, non vitat, ſed fugit: magis autem periculis patemus auerſi. A man had neede be wife and ſtrong, and well aſſured of himſelfe when he falles into his owne hands, for it falls out many times that there are none more dangerous than his owne, Guarda me, dios de mi, ſaith the Spaniſh prouerb very excellently; nemo eſt ex imprudentibus qui ſibi relinqui debeat; ſolitudo omnia mala perſuadet. But for ſome priuat and particular conſideration, though good in it ſelfe (for many times it is for idleneſſe, weakeneſſe of ſpirit, hatred, or ſome other paſſion) to flie and to hide himſelfe, hauing means to profit another, or to do good to the weale-publick, is to be a fugitiue, to bury his talent, to hide his light, a fault ſubiect to the rigour of iudgement.
               
               
                  CHAP. LV. A compariſon betwixt the life lead in common, and in priuat.
                  
                  SOme haue thought that the life led in common, wherein nothing is proper to any man, whereby he may ſay, this

is mine, or that is thine, but where all things are common, tendeth moſt to perfection, and hath moſt charitie and concord. This may take place in the companie of a certaine number of people, lead and directed by ſome certaine rule, but not in a ſtate and common-weale; and therefore Plato hauing once allowed it, thinking thereby to take away all auarice and diſſenſion, did quickly alter his opinion, and was otherwiſe aduiſed: for as the practiſe ſheweth, there is not only not any hartie affection towards that that is common to all, and as the prouerb is, The common aſſe is alwaies ill ſadled, but alſo the communitie draweth vnto it ſelfe contentions, murmurings, hatreds, as it is alwaies ſeene, yea euen in the primitiue Church: Creſcente numero diſcipulorum, factum eſt murmur 
                     Luc. Acts 6. 
                     Graecorum aduerſus Hebraeos. The nature of loue is ſuch as that of great riuers, which being ouer-charged with abundance of waters, being diuided, are quit of that charge; ſo loue being diuided to all men, and all things, loſeth it force and vigor. But there are degrees of communitie; to liue, that is to ſay, to eate and drinke together is very good, as the maner was in the better and moſt ancient common-weales of Lacedemon and Creete; for beſides that modeſtie and diſcipline is better retained amongſt them, there is alſo a very profitable communication; but to thinke to haue all things common, as Plato for a while would, though he were afterwards otherwiſe aduiſed, is to peruert all.
               
               
                  CHAP. LVI. The compariſon of the countrie-life with the Citizens.
                  
                  THis compariſon to him that loueth wiſdome is not hard to make, for almoſt all the commodities and aduantages are on one ſide, both ſpirituall and corporall, libertie, wiſdome, innocencie, health, pleaſure. In the fields the ſpirit is more free and to it ſelfe: in Cities, the perſons, the affaires, both their owne and other mens, the contentions, viſitations, diſcourſes, entertainements, how much time doe they ſteale from vs? amici fures temporis. How many troubles bring they with them, auocations, allurements to wickedneſſes? Cities

are priſons to the ſpirits of men, no otherwiſe than cages to birds and beaſts. This celeſtiall fire that is in vs, will not be ſhut vp, it loueth the aire, the fields; and therefore Columella ſayth, that the countrey life is the couſen of wiſdome, conſanguinea, which can not be without beautifull & free thoughts and meditations; which are hardly had and nouriſhed among the troubles and moleſtations of the citie. Againe, the countrey life is more neat, innocent and ſimple. In cities vices are hid in the rout, and are not perceiued, they paſſe and inſinuate themſelues pell-mell, the vſe, the aſpect, the encounter ſo frequent and contagious is the cauſe. As for pleaſure and health, the whole heauens lie open to the view, the ſun, the aire, the waters, and all the elements are free, expoſed and open in all parts, alwayes ſuſtaining vs, the earth diſcouereth it ſelfe, the fruits thereof are before our eyes; and none of all this is in cities in the throng of houſes: ſo that to liue in cities is to be baniſhed in the world and ſhut from the world. Againe, the countrey life is wholly in exerciſe, in action, which ſharpeneth the appetite, mainteineth health, hardeneth and fortifieth the bodie. That which is to be commended in cities, is commoditie either priuate, as of merchants and artificers; or publike, to the managing whereof few are called, and in ancient times heeretofore they were choſen from the countrey life, who returned hauing performed their charge.
               
               
                  CHAP. LVII.
                  
                     Of the militarie profeſſion.
                     THe militarie profeſſion is noble in the cauſe thereof, for there is no commoditie more iuſt, nor more vniuerſall 1 The praiſe thereof.
                         than the protection of the peace and greatneſſe of his countrey; noble in the execution, for valour is the greateſt, the moſt generous and heroicall vertue of all others; honorable, for of all humane actions, the greateſt & moſt glorious is the warriers, and by which all other honours are iudged and diſcerned; pleaſant, the company of ſo many noble men, yong, actiue, the ordinarie view of ſo many accidents and ſpectacles, libertie and conuerſation without arte, a manly faſhion

of life without ceremonie, the varietie of diuers actions, a couragious harmonie of warlike muſike, which entertaines vs and ſtirres our blood, our eares, our ſoule; thoſe warlike commotions which rauiſh vs with their horror and feare, that confuſed tempeſt of ſounds and cries, that fearefull ordering of ſo many thouſands of men, with ſo much furie, ardour and courage.
                     But on the other ſide, a man may ſay, that the arte and experience of vndoing one another, of killing, ruinating, deſtroying 2 The diſpraiſe.
                         our owne proper kinde, ſeemes to be vnnaturall and to proceed from an alienation of our ſenſe and vnderſtanding; it is a great teſtimonie of our weakneſſe and imperfection, and it is not found in beaſts themſelues, in whom the image of nature continueth farre more entire. What follie, what rage is it, to make ſuch commotions, to torment ſo many people, to runne thorow ſo many dangers and hazzards both by ſea and land, for a thing ſo vncertaine and doubtfull as the iſſue of warre, to runne with ſuch greedineſſe and fierceneſſe after death, which is eaſily found euery where, and without hope of ſepulture, to kill thoſe he hates not, nor euer ſaw? But whence proceedeth this great furie and ardor, for it is not for any offence committed? What frenſie and madneſſe is this for a man to abandon his owne bodie, his time, his reſt, his life, his libertie, and to leaue it to the mercie of another? to expoſe himſelfe to the loſſe of his owne members, and to that which is a thouſand times worſe than death, fire and ſword, to be troden, to be pinched with hot iron, to be cut, to be torne in pieces, broken, and put to the gallies for euer? And all this, to ſerue the paſſion of another, for a cauſe which a man knowes not to be iuſt, and which is commonly vniuſt: for warres are commonly vniuſt, and for him whom a man knowes not, who takes ſo little care for him that fights for him, that he will be content to mount vpon his dead bodie to helpe his owne ſtature, that he may ſee the farther. I ſpeake not heere of the dutie of ſubiects towards their Prince and countrey, but of voluntaries and mercenarie ſouldiers.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        The fift and laſt diſtinction and difference of men, drawen from the fauors and disfauors of Nature and Fortune. THE PREFACE.
                     THis laſt diſtinction and difference is apparent enough and ſufficiently knowen, and hath many members and conſiderations, but may all be reduced to two heads, which a man may call with the vulgar ſort, Felicitie or good fortune, and Infelicitie or ill fortune, Greatneſſe or littleneſſe. To Felicitie and greatneſſe belong health, beautie, and the other goods of the bodie, libertie, nobilitie, honor, dignitie, ſcience, riches, credit, friends. To Infelicitie or littleneſſe belong all the contraries, which are priuations of the other good things. From theſe things doth ariſe a very great difference, becauſe a man is happie in one of theſe, or in two, or in three, and not in the reſt, and that more or leſſe by infinite degrees: few or none at all are happie or vnhappie in them all. He that hath the greateſt part of theſe goods, and eſpecially three, Nobilitie, Dignitie, or Authoritie and riches, is accounted great; he that hath not any of theſe three, little. But many haue but one or two, and are accounted midlings betwixt the great and the little. We muſt ſpeake a little of them all.
                     Of Health, beautie, and other naturall goods of the bodie 
                           Chap. 11. hath been ſpoken before; as likewiſe of their contraries, 
                           Chap. 6. Sickneſſe, Griefe.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. LVIII. Of Libertie and Seruitude.
                  
                  LIbertie is accounted by ſome a ſouereigne good, and Seruitude an extreame euill, inſomuch that many haue choſen rather to die a cruell death, than to be made ſlaues, or to ſee either the publike good or their owne priuate indangered. But of this there may be too much, and of theſe too manie, as of all other things. There is a twofolde libertie: the true, which is of the minde or ſpirit, and is in the power of

euery one, and can not be taken away, nor indamaged by another, nor by Fortune it ſelfe: contrariwiſe, the ſeruitude of the ſpirit is the moſt miſerable of all others, to ſerue our owne affections, to ſuffer our ſelues to be deuoured by our owne paſſions, to be led by opinions. ô pitifull captiuitie! The corporall libertie is a good greatly to be eſteemed, but ſubiect to Fortune: and it is neither iuſt nor reaſonable (if it be not by reaſon of ſome other circumſtance) that it ſhould be preferred before life it ſelfe, as ſome of the ancients haue done, who haue rather made choice of death, than to loſe it; and it was accounted a great vertue in them: ſo great an euill was ſeruitude thought to be: Seruitus obedientia eſt fracti animi & abiecti arbitrio carentis ſuo. Many great and wiſe men haue ſerued, Regulus, Valerianus, Plato, Diogenes, euen thoſe that were wicked, and yet diſhonoured not their owne condition, but continued in effect and truth more free than their maſters.
               
               
                  CHAP. LIX. Nobilitie.
                  
                  NObilitie is a qualitie euery where not common, but honourable, brought in and eſtabliſhed with great reaſon  and for publike vtilitie.
                  It is diuers, diuerſly taken and vnderſtood, and according to diuers nations and iudgements it hath diuers kindes. According The deſcription of nobilitie. to the generall and common opinion and cuſtome it is a qualitie of a race or ſtocke. Ariſtotle ſaith, that it is the antiquitie of a race and of riches. Plutarch calleth it the vertue of a race, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , meaning thereby a certaine habit and qualitie continued in the linage. What this qualitie or vertue is, all are not wholly of one accord, ſauing in this, that it is profitable to the weale-publike. For to ſome and the greater part this qualitie is militarie, to others it is politike, literarie of thoſe that are wiſe, palatine of the officers of the Prince. But the militarie hath the aduantage aboue the reſt: for beſides the ſeruice which it yeeldeth to the weale-publike as the reſt do, it is painfull, laborious, dangerous; whereby it is accounted more worthy and commendable. So hath it caried with vs by excellencie the honourable title of Valour.

There muſt then according to this opinion be two things in true and perfect nobilitie, profeſſion of this vertue, and qualitie profitable to the common-weale, which is as the forme; and the race as the ſubiect and matter, that is to ſay, a long continuance of this qualitie by many degrees and races, and time out of mind, whereby they are called in our language Gentlemen, that is to ſay, of a race, houſe, familie, carying of long time the ſame name, and the ſame profeſſion. For he is truely and entirely noble, who maketh a ſingular profeſſion of publick vertue, ſeruing his Prince and Countrie, and being deſcended of parents and anceſtors that haue done the ſame.
                  There are ſome that ſeparate theſe two, and thinke that one of them ſufficeth to true nobilitie, that is, either only vertue 3 the distinction.
                      and qualitie, without any conſideration of race or anceſtors. This is a perſonall and acquired nobilitie, & conſidered with rigour it is rude, that one come from the houſe of a Butcher or Vintner ſhould be held for noble, whatſoeuer ſeruice he hath done for the Common-weale. Neuertheleſſe, this opinion hath place in many nations, namely with the Turks, contemners of ancient nobilitie, and eſteeming of no other but perſonall, and actuall militarie valour; or only antiquitie of race without profeſſion of the qualitie; this is in the bloud and purely naturall.
                  If a man ſhould compare theſe two ſimple and imperfect nobilities together, that which is purely naturall (to iudge aright) 4 Naturall nobilitie.
                      it is the leſſe, though many, out of their vanitie haue thought otherwiſe. The naturall is another mans qualitie, and not his owne, genus & proauos & quae non fecimus ipſi, vix ea nostra puto: nemo vixit in gloriam nostram; nec quod ante nos fuit nostrum eſt. And what greater follie can there be, than to glorie in that which is not his owne? This honor may light vpon a vitious man, a knaue, and one in himſelf a true villaine. It is alſo vnprofitable to another, for it communicateth not with any man, neither is any man bettered by it, as ſcience, iuſtice, goodnes, beautie, riches do. They that haue nothing elſe commendable in them but this nobilitie of fleſh and bloud, make much of it, they haue it alwaies in their mouthes, it makes their cheekes ſwell and their hearts too (they will be ſure to manage that little good that they haue) it is the marke

by which they are knowne, and a token that they haue nothing elſe in them, becauſe they reſt themſelues whollie vpon that. But this is vanitie, for all their glorie ſpringeth from fraile inſtruments, ab vtero, conceptu, partu, and is buried vnder the toombe of their anceſtors. As offenders being purſued haue recourſe to altars and the ſepulchers of the dead, and in former times to the ſtatues of Emperours; ſo theſe men being deſtitute of all merit and ſubiect of true honor, haue recourſe to the memorie and armories of their anceſtors. What good is it to a blind man, that his parents haue beene well ſighted, or to him that ſtammereth, that his Grandfather was eloquent? and yet theſe kind of people are commonly glorious, high minded, contemners of others; Contemptor animus & ſuperbia commune nobilitatis malum. 
                     Saluſt.
                  
                  The perſonall and acquired honor hath conditions altogether contrarie and very good. It is proper to the poſſeſſor 5 Acquired and perſonall honor.
                      thereof, it is alwaies a worthie ſubiect, and profitable to others. Againe, a man may ſay that it is more ancient and more rare, than the naturall, for by it the naturall began; and in a word, that is true honor which conſiſteth in good and profitable effects, not in dreames and imagination, vaine and vnprofitable, and proceedeth from the ſpirit, not the bloud, which is the ſame in noble men that is in others. Quis generoſus? ad virtutem à natura bene compoſitus animus facit nobilem, cui ex quacun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         conditione ſupra fortunam licet ſurgere. 
                     Senec.
                  
                  But they are both oftentimes, and verie willinglie together, and ſo they make a perfect honor: The naturall is a way 6 Naturall and acquired.
                      and occaſion to the perſonall; for things do eaſily returne to their firſt nature and beginning. As the naturall hath taken his beginning and eſſence from the perſonall, ſo it leadeth and conducteth his to it, fortes creantur fortibus: hoc vnum in nobilitate bonum, vt nobilibus impoſita neceſſitudo videatur, ne à maiorum virtute degenerent; To know that a man is ſprung from honorable anceſtors, and ſuch as haue deſerued well of the Common-weale, is a ſtrong obligation and ſpurre to the honorable exploits of vertue. It is a foule thing to degenerate, and to belie a mans owne race. The nobilitie that is giuen by the bountie and letters patent of the Prince, if it haue no other reaſon, it is ſhamefull, and rather diſhonorable than honorable.

It is an nobilitie in parchment, bought with ſiluer or fauor, and not by bloud as it ought: If it be giuen for merit, and notable ſeruices, it is perſonall and acquired as hath beene ſaid.
               
               
                  CHAP. LX. Of Honor.
                  
                  SOme ſay (but not ſo well) that honor is the priſe and recompence of vertue, or not ſo ill, an acknowledgement of 1 The deſcription of honor.
                      vertue, or a prerogatiue of a good opinion, and afterwards of an outward dutie towards vertue; It is a priuiledge that draweth his principall eſſence from vertue. Others haue called it the ſhadow of vertue, which ſometimes followeth, ſometimes goeth before it, as the ſhadow the bodie. But to ſpeake truly, it is the rumor of a beautifull and vertuous action, which reboundeth from our ſoules to the view of the world, and by reflexion into our ſelues, bringeth vnto vs a teſtimonie of that which others beleeue of vs, which turneth to a great contentment of mind.
                  Honor is ſo much eſteemed and ſought for by all, that to attaine thereunto a man enterpriſeth, endureth, contemneth  whatſoeuer beſides, yea life it ſelfe; neuertheleſſe, it is a matter of ſmall and ſlender moment, vncertaine, a ſtranger, and as it were ſeparated in the aire, from him that is honored; for it doth not only not enter into him, nor is inward and eſſentiall vnto him, but it doth not ſo much as touch him (being for the moſt part either dead or abſent, and who feeleth nothing) but ſetleth it ſelfe and ſtayeth without at the gate, ſticks in the name, which receiueth and carieth all the honors and diſhonours, praiſes and diſpraiſes, whereby a man is ſaid to haue either a good name or a bad. All the good or euill that a man can ſay of Caeſar is caried by his name. Now the name is nothing of the nature and ſubſtance of the thing, it is only the image which preſenteth it, the marke which diſtinguiſheth it from others, a ſummarie which conteineth it in a ſmall volume, mounteth it, and carieth it whole and entire, the meane to enioy it and to vſe it (for without the names there would be nothing but confuſion, the vſe of things would be loſt, the world would decay, as the hiſtorie of the

tower of Babell doth richly teach vs) to be breefe, the ſtickler and middle of the eſſence of the thing, and the honor or diſhonor thereof, for it is that that toucheth the thing it ſelfe, and receiueth all the good or ill that is ſpoken Now honor before it ariue to the name of the thing, it goes a courſe almoſt circular, like the Sunne, performed and perfected in three principall ſites or places, the action or worke, the heart, the tongue: for it begins and is conceiued, as in the matrix and roote, in that beautie, goodnes, profit of the thing honored which comes to light and is produced, this is (as hath beene ſaid) the rumor of a beautifull or honorable action. Coeli enarrant gloriam dei: pleni ſunt coeli & terra gloria tua (for whatſoeuer valour worth and perfection the thing haue in it ſelfe and inwardly, if it produce nothing that is excellent, it is altogether vncapable of honor, and is as if it were not at all) from thence it entreth into the ſpirit and vnderſtanding, where it takes life, and is formed into a good, hautie, and great opinion: finally ſallying foorth from thence, and being caried by the word verball or written, it returnes by reflexion, and as it were, diſſolueth and endeth in the name of the authour of this beautifull worke, where it had the beginning, as the Sunne in the place from whence it departed, and then it beares the name of honor, praiſe, glorie, and renowme.
                  But the queſtion is, what thoſe actions are to which honor is due. Some thinke that it is generally due to thoſe that performe  their dutie in that which belongs to their profeſſion, although it be neither famous nor profitable, as he that vpon a Stage playes the part of a ſeruant, well, is no leſſe commended than he that preſenteth the perſon of a King, and he that cannot worke in ſtatues of gold, cannot want thoſe of leather or earth wherein he may as well ſhew the perfection of his arte. All cannot employ themſelues, neither are they called to the managing of great affaires, but the commendation is to do that well, that he hath to do. This is too much to leſſen and vilifie honor, which is not a common and ordinarie gheſt for all perſons, and all iuſt and lawfull actions. Euery chaſte woman, euery honeſt man is not honorable. The wiſeſt men require alſo thereunto two or three things, the one is difficultie, labor or danger, the other is publick vtilitie, and this is the

reaſon why it is properly due to thoſe that adminiſter, and well acquit themſelues of great charges; that be the actions as priuatly and generally good and profitable as they will, they ſhall haue approbation and ſufficient renowme which thoſe that know them, and the ſafetie and protection of the lawes; but not honour, which is publike, and hath more dignitie, fame, and ſplendor. Some adde vnto theſe a third, and that is, that it be not an action of obligation, but of ſupererogation.
                  The deſire of honour and glorie, and the approbation of 4 Deſire of honor, chap. 20. another, is a vitious, violent, powerfull paſſion, whereof we haue ſpoken in the paſſion of ambition; but very profitable to the weale-publike, to conteine men in their dutie, to awaken and inflame them to honourable actions, a teſtimonie of weakneſſe and humane inſufficiencie, which for want of good money vſeth light and falſe coine. Now in what, and how 
                        Lib. 3. in the vertue of Temperancie.
                      far-foorth is it excuſable, and when not commendable, and that honour is not the recompenſe of vertue, ſhall be ſayd heerafter.
                  The marks of honour are very diuers, but the better and more beautifull are they that are without profit and gaine, 5 Marks of honour.
                      and are ſuch as a man may not ſtraine, and applie to the vitious, and ſuch as by ſome baſe office haue ſerued the wealepublike. Theſe are the better and more eſteemed: they are in themſelues more vaine, that haue nothing of woorth in them but the ſimple marke of men of honour and vertue, as almoſt in all policies, crownes, lawrell garlands, oake, a certaine forme of accoutrements, the prerogatiue of ſome ſurname, precedencie in aſſemblies, orders of Knighthood. And it falleth out ſometimes, that it is a greater honour not to haue theſe marks of honour, hauing deſerued them, than to haue them. It is more honourable vnto me, ſaid Cato, that euery man ſhould aske me, why I haue not a ſtatue erected in the Market-place, than they ſhould aske why I haue it.
               
               
                  CHAP. LXI. Science.
                  
                  SCience, to ſay the trueth, is a beautifull ornament, a very profitable inſtrument to him that knowes well how to vſe

it; but in what ranke to place it, or how to priſe it, all are not of one opinion: and therin they commit two contrary faults, ſome by eſteeming it too much, ſome too little. Some make that account of it, that they preferre it before all other things, and thinke that it is a ſouereigne good, ſome kinde and ray of Diuinitie, ſeeking it with greedineſſe, charge and great labour; others contemne it, and deſpiſe thoſe that profeſſe it: the mediocritie betwixt both is the more iuſt and moſt aſſured. For my part I place it farre beneath honeſtie, ſanctitie, 
                        See lib. 3. cap. 14. wiſdome, vertue, yea beneath dexteritie in affaires: and yet I dare to range it with dignitie, naturall nobilitie, militarie valour, and I thinke they may very well diſpute of the precedencie: and if I were called to ſpeake my opinion, I ſhould make it to march either ſide by ſide with them, or incontinently after. As ſciences are different in their ſubiects and matters, in the apprentiſhip and acquiſition, ſo are they in their vtilitie, honeſtie, neceſſitie, as alſo in their gaine and glorie: ſome are Theoricks and in ſpeculation only, others are practike and in action: againe, ſome are Reals, occupied in the knowledge of things that are without vs, whether they be naturall or ſupernaturall; other are particular, which teach the tongues to ſpeake, and to reaſon. Now without all doubt, thoſe ſciences that haue moſt honeſtie, vtilitie, neceſſitie, and leaſt glorie, vanitie, mercenarie gaine, are farre to be preferred before others. And therefore the practike are abſolutely the better, which reſpect the good of man, teaching him to liue well, to die well, to command well, to obey well; and therefore they are diligently to be ſtudied by him that endeuoureth to be wiſe: whereof this worke is a briefe and ſummarie, that is to ſay, Morall Science, Oeconomicall, Politicall. After theſe is Naturall, which ſerueth to the knowledge of whatſoeuer is in the world fit for our vſe, as likewiſe to admire the greatneſſe, goodneſſe, wiſdome, power of the chiefe workmaſter. All other knowledges are vaine, and are to be ſtudied curſorily, as appendents vnto theſe, becauſe they are no wayes beneficiall to the life of man, and helpe not to make vs honeſt men. And therefore it is a loſſe and a follie to employ therein ſo much time, ſo much coſt, ſo much labour as we doe. It is true that they ſerue to heape vp crownes, and

to win reputation with the people, but it is in policies that are not wholly ſound goods.
               
               
                  CHAP. LXII. Of riches and pouertie.
                  
                  THeſe are the two ſources and elements of all diſcords, 1 The cauſes of troubles.
                      troubles, and commotions that are in the world: for the exceſſiue riches of ſome do ſtirre them vp to pride, to delicacies, pleaſures, diſdaine of the poore; to enterpriſe and attempt: the extreame pouertie of others, prouokes them to enuie, extreame iealouſie, furie, deſpaire, and to attempt fortunes. Plato calleth them the plagues of a Common-wealth. But which of the two is the more dangerous, is not thorowly reſolued amongſt all. According to Aristotle it is abundance, for a State needs not doubt of thoſe that deſire but to liue, but of ſuch as are ambitious and rich. According to Plato it is pouertie, for deſperate poore men are terrible and furious creatures; for wanting either bread or worke to exerciſe their arts and occupation,s or too exceſſiuely charged with impoſts, they learne that of the miſtreſſe of the ſchoole Neceſſitie, which of themſelues they neuer durſt to haue learned, and they dare becauſe their number is great. But yet there is a better remedie for theſe than for the rich, and it is an eaſie matter to hinder this euill; for ſo long as they haue bread and emploiment to exerciſe their myſteries, and liue, they will neuer ſtir. And therefore the rich are to be feared for their owne ſakes, their vice and condition: the poore by reaſon of the imprudencie of gouernours.
                  Now many Law-makers and great States-men haue gone 2 Againſt the equalitie & inequalitie of riches.
                      about to take away theſe two extreamities, and this great inequalitie of goods and fortunes, and to bring in a mediocritie and equalitie, which they called the nourſing-mother of peace and amitie; and others likewiſe haue attempted to make all things common, which could neuer be but by imagination. But beſides that, it is impoſſible to eſtabliſh an equalitie, by reaſon of the number of children which increaſe in one familie, and not in another; and that it can hardly be put in practiſe, although a man be enforced, and it coſt much

to attaine thereunto; it were alſo inexpedient, and to ſmall purpoſe, and by another way to fall into the ſame miſchiefe: for there is no hatred more capitall than betwixt equals; the enuie and iealouſie of equals is the ſeminarie of troubles, ſeditions, and cruell warres. Inequalitie is good, ſo it be moderate. Harmonie conſiſteth not of like ſounds, but different and well according.
                  Nihil est aequalitate inaequalius.
                  This great and deformed inequalitie of goods proceedeth from many cauſes, eſpecially two: the one is from vniuſt lones, as vſuries and intereſts, whereby the one eat the other, and grow fat with the ſubſtance of another: qui deuorant plebem ſicut eſcam panis. The other from diſpoſitions, whether amongſt the liuing, as alienations, donations, endowments in mariages; or teſtamentaries by reaſon of death. By both which meanes ſome doe exceſſiuely increaſe aboue others, who continue poore. The heires of rich men marrie with thoſe that are rich, whereby ſome houſes are diſmembred and brought to nothing; and others made rich and exalted. All which inconueniences muſt be ruled and moderated by auoiding exceſſiue extremities, and in ſome ſort approching to ſome mediocritie and reaſonable equality: for to haue either entire, is neither poſſible, nor good nor expedient, as hath beene ſayd. And this ſhall be handled in the vertue of Iuſtice.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            OF WISDOME, THE SECOND BOOKE, Conteining the generall inſtructions and rules of Wiſdome.
            
            
               THE PREFACE. Wherein is conteined a generall portrait of Wiſdome, and the ſumme of this Booke.
               
               
                  HAuing in the Firſt Booke layd open vnto man  many and diuers meanes to know himſelfe and our humane condition, which is the firſt part, and a great introduction to Wiſdome, we are now to enter into the doctrine, and to vnderſtand in this Second Booke the generall rules and opinions thereof, reſeruing the more particular to the Third and laſt Booke. It is worthieſt conſideration, and as a Preamble to the reſt, to call man vnto himſelfe, to taſte, ſound, ſtudie himſelfe, to the end he may know and vnderſtand his defects and miſerable condition, and ſo make himſelfe capable of holſome and neceſſarie remedies, which are the aduiſements and inſtructions of wiſdome.
               But it is a ſtrange thing, that the world ſhould take ſo little  care of it owne good and amendment. What wit is it for a man to be vtterly careleſſe that his buſineſſe be well done?

Man would only liue, but he eares not to know how to liue well. That which a man ſhould eſpeciallie, and only know, is that which he knowes leaſt, and cares leaſt to know.
               Our inclinations, deſignments, ſtudies, are (as we ſee) from our youth diuers, according to the diuerſitie of natures, companies, inſtructions, occaſions, but there is not any that caſteth his eies to the other ſide, that indeuoreth to make himſelfe wiſe, not any that ruminateth hereupon, or that doth ſo much as thinke thereon. And if perhaps ſometimes he do, it is but by chance, and as it were paſſing by, and he attendeth it, as newes that is told, which concerneth him not at all. The word pleaſeth ſome well, but that is all, the thing it ſelfe is neither accounted of, nor ſought for in this world of ſo vniuerſall corruption and contagion. To vnderſtand the merit and worth of wiſdome, ſome kind of aire or tincture of nature is neceſſarie; for men are willing to vſe ſtudie and indeuor, rather for thoſe things that haue their effects and fruits glorious, outward, and ſenſible, ſuch as ambition, auarice, paſſion haue, than for wiſdome whoſe effects are ſweet, darke, inward, and leſſe viſible.
               O how much doth the world erre in this account, it loueth better the wind with noiſe, than the bodie it ſelfe, the eſſence without it, opinion and reputation than veritie! Man (as hath been ſaid in the firſt booke) is nothing but vanitie and miſerie, vncapable of wiſdome. Euery man hath a taſte of that aire which he breatheth, and where he liueth, followeth the traine and cuſtome of liuing followed by all, how then ſhould he aduiſe himſelfe of any other? We follow the ſteps of another, yea we preſſe and inflame one another, we inueſt our vices and paſſions one into another; no man ſtayes vs, or cryes hola vnto it, ſo much do we faile and miſtake our ſelues. We haue neede of ſome ſpeciall fauour from heauen, and withall a great and generous force and conſtancie of nature to note that common error which no man findeth, in aduiſing and conſulting of that which no man conſidereth, and reſoluing our ſelues quite contrarie to the courſe of other men.
               There are ſome though rare, I ſee them, I vnderſtand them, I ſmell them with pleaſure and admiration; but what, they  are all Democrites or Heraclites; the one ſort do nothing but

mock and gibe, thinking they ſhew truth & wiſdome enough in laughing at error and follie. They laugh at the world, for it is ridiculous, they are pleaſant, but not good and charitable. The other are weake and poore, they ſpeake with a low voice, their mouths halfe open, they diſguiſe their language, they mingle and ſtuffe their propoſitions, to make them paſſe more currantlie, with ſo many other things, and with ſuch arte, that they are hardly diſcerned. They ſpeake not diſtinctly, clearely, aſſuredly, but doubtfully like oracles. I come after them and vnder them, but I ſpeake in good ſooth that which I thinke and beleeue clearely and perſpicuouſly.
               I giue heere a picture, with certaine leſſons of wiſdome, which perhaps may ſeeme to ſome new and ſtrange, and ſuch as no man in former time hath giuen in ſuch a faſhion; and I doubt not but malitious people, who haue neither patience, nor power to iudge truly and wiſely of things, malitiouſly condemne whatſoeuer agrees not with their palat, and with that which they haue alreadie receiued. But that is all one, for who is he that can aſſure himſelfe of the good opinion of all? But my hope is that the ſimple and debonairie, the Aetherian and ſublime ſpirits will iudge indifferentlie. Theſe are the two extremities and ſtages of peace and ſerenitie; In the middle are the troubles, tempeſts, and meteors, as hath beene Lib. 1. ſaid.
               To the end we may haue ſome rude and generall knowledge 
                     The diuiſion of this Booke into 4. parts.
                   of that which is handled in this booke, and the whole doctrine of wiſdome, we may diuide this matter into foure points or conſiderations. The firſt are preparatiues to wiſdome, which are two, the one an exemption and freedome from all that may hinder the attainment thereof, which are 1 Preparatiues.
                   either the externall errours and vices of the world, or inward, as paſſions: the other is a plaine, entire, and vniuerſall libertie of the mind. Theſe two firſt, and the more difficult make a man capable and apt for wiſdome, becauſe they emptie and cleanſe the place, to the end it may be more ample & capable to receiue a thing of ſo great importance as wiſdome is, magna & ſpatioſares eſt ſapiētia, vacuo illi loco opus eſt, ſuperuacua ex animo tollenda ſunt. And this is the firſt. Afterwards they make him open, free, & always ready to receiue it. This is the ſecōd.
               
                  
The ſecond are foundations of wiſdome, which are likewiſe two, true and eſſentiall probitie, and to haue a certaine 2 Foundations.
                   end and courſe of life. Theſe two reſpect nature, they rule and accommodate vs thereunto; the firſt to the vniuerſall nature, which is reaſon; for probitie or honeſtie, as ſhall be ſaid, is no other thing: the ſecond to the particular of euery one of vs; for it is the choice of the kind of life proper and fit for the nature of euery one.
               The third belongs to the raiſing of this building, that is to ſay, offices and functions of wiſdome, which are ſix, whereof 3 Offices.
                   the three firſt are principallie for euery one in himſelfe, which are pietie, inward gouernment of our deſires and thoughts, and a ſweet cariage in all accidents of proſperitie and aduerſitie: the other three reſpect another, which are ſuch an obſeruation as is neceſſarie of lawes, cuſtomes, and ceremonies, a ſweet conuerſation with another, and prudence in all affaires. Theſe ſix do correſpond and comprehend the foure morall vertues, the firſt, fourth, and fift do properly appertaine to Iuſtice, and to that which we owe to God and our neighbour; the ſecond and third to Fortitude and Temperance, the ſixt to Prudence. And therefore theſe ſix, are the matter and ſubiect of the third booke, which handleth at large the foure morall vertues, and in particular the offices and duties of a wiſe man, but in this booke they are handled in generall.
               The fourth are the effects and fruits of wiſdome, which are two, to be alwaies readie for death, and to maintaine a 4 Fruites.
                   mans ſelfe in true tranquillitie of ſpirit, the crowne of wiſdome, and the ſoueraigne good.
               Theſe are in all twelue rules and leſſons of wiſdome, diuided into ſo many Chapters, which are the proper and peculiar foot-ſteps and offices of a wiſe man, which are not found elſewhere. I meane in that ſenſe wherein we take them, and now deſcribe them: For although ſome of them, as honeſtie, the obſeruation of the lawes, ſeeme to be found in others of the common and prophane ſort, yet not ſuch as we heere require and decipher them to be. He then is wiſe, who mainteining himſelfe truly free and noble, is directed in all things according to nature, accommodating his owne proper and particular

to the vniuerſall, which is God; liuing and carying himſelfe before God, with all, and in all affaires, vpright, conſtant, cheerefull, content, and aſſured, attending with one and the ſame foote, all things that may happen, and laſtly, death it ſelfe.
            
            
               CHAP. I. Exemption and freedome from errours and the vices of the world, and from paſſions. The firſt dispoſition to Wiſdome.
               
               IT is heere neceſſarie for the firſt leſſon and inſtruction vnto wiſdome to not the knowledge of our ſelues and our humane condition; for the firſt in euery thing is well to know the ſubiect, wherewith a man hath to do, and which he handleth and manageth to bring to perfection. But we hold that to be alreadie done, for it is the ſubiect of our firſt booke: We can only ſay heere, as a ſummary repetition of all that hath beene ſpoken, that a man aſpiring vnto wiſdome, ſhould aboue all things, and before all other works, ſufficientlie know himſelfe, and all men beſides. This is the true ſcience of man, very profitable, a matter of great ſtudie, fruit, and efficacie, for man is all in all: It is proper to a wiſe man, for only he that is wiſe knowes himſelfe, and he that knowes himſelfe well is wiſe: It is very difficult, for man is extreamely counterfeited and diſguiſed, not only man with man, but euery man with himſelfe. Euery one takes a delight to deceiue himſelfe; to hide, to rob, to betray himſelfe, Ipſi nobis furto ſubducimur; flattering and tickling himſelfe to make himſelfe laugh, extenuating his defects, ſetting a high price of whatſoeuer is good in himſelfe, winking of purpoſe leſt he ſhould too clearely ſee himſelfe: It is very rare and ſought for by a few, and therfore no maruell if wiſdome be ſo rare, for they are very few that do well know this firſt leſſon, or that do ſtudie it; there is not a man that is maſter to himſelfe, much leſſe to another. In things not neceſſarie and ſtrange, there are many maſters, many diſciples. In this point we are neuer with, nor within our ſelues, we alwaies muſe of outward things, and man better knoweth all things than himſelfe. O miſerie, O madneſſe! To be wiſe in this point, it is neceſſarie that we know all ſorts

of men, of all aires, climats, natures, ages, eſtates, profeſſions, (to this end ſerues the traueller and the hiſtorie) their motions, inclinations, actions; not only publicke, (they are leaſt to be regarded, being all fained and artificiall) but priuate, and eſpecially the more ſimple and peculiar, ſuch as ariſe from their proper and naturall iuriſdiction; as likewiſe all thoſe that concerne them particularly, for in theſe two their nature is diſcouered: afterwards that we conferre them all together to make an entire bodie and vniuerſall iudgement; but eſpecially that we enter into our ſelues, taſte and attentiuely ſound our ſelues, examin euery thought, word, action. Doubtleſſe we ſhall in the end learne that man is in truth on the one ſide a poore, weake, pitifull, and miſerable thing, and we cannot but pitie him; and on the other, we ſhall find him ſwollen and puffed vp with wind, preſumption, pride, deſires, and we cannot but diſdaine and deteſt him. Now he hath beene ſufficientlie deciphered and preſented vnto vs euen to the life, in the firſt booke, by diuers meanes, in all ſenſes, and according to all his viſages: and this is the reaſon why we ſpeake no more of this knowledge of man, and of our ſelues in this place, but we ſet downe heere for the firſt rule of wiſdome the fruit of this knowledge, to the end, that the end and fruit of the firſt booke might be the beginning and entrance of the ſecond. This fruit is to defend and preſerue men from the contagion of the world and of themſelues; theſe are the two euils and formall hindrances of wiſdome, the one outward, as popular opinions & vices, the generall corruption of the world; the other inward, that is, our paſſions. Now we are to ſee how difficult this is, and how a man may defend himſelfe againſt theſe two. Wiſdome is difficult and rare, and the greateſt, yea almoſt the only endeuor that we haue to attaine vnto it, is to ſet at libertie, & to free our ſelues from that miſerable double captiuitie, publick and domeſticall, of another and of our ſelues: this being attained, the reſt will be eaſie. Let vs ſpeake of theſe two euils diſtinctlie and apart.
               As concerning the outward, we haue before ſufficientlie diplayed the vulgar nature, the ſtrange humors of the world, 2 Exemption of vulgar errours.
                   and the common ſort of people, whereby it is eaſie enough to know what can proceed from them; for ſince they are worſhippers

of vanitie; enuious, malitious, vniuſt; without iudgement, diſcretion, mediocritie; what can they deliberat, thinke, iudge, reſolue, ſpeake, do well and iuſtlie? We haue likewiſe as it were by example reported and quoted (in preſenting the miſerie of mankind) many great faults, which the world doth generally commit in iudgement and will, whereby it is eaſie to know, that it is whollie compoſed of error and vice; wherevnto all the ſayings of the wiſeſt of the world do accord, affirming, that the worſer part is the greater: of a thouſand there is not one good; the number of fooles are infinit, and contagion is moſt dangerous in a preaſe.
               And therefore they counſell vs not only to preſerue our ſelues neate and cleare from popular opinions, deſignments,  and affections, as being all baſe, feeble, indigeſted, impertinent, and very often falſe, at the leaſt imperfect: but alſo to flie aboue all things the multitude, the companie and conuerſation of the vulgar ſort, becauſe a man cannot approch neere vnto it without ſome loſſe and empeachment. The frequentation of the people is contagious and very dangerous euen to the wiſeſt and beſt ſetled men that are: for who is able to withſtand the force and charge of vices comming with ſo great a troope? One example of couetouſneſſe or incontinencie doth much harme. The companie of one delicate effeminat perſon, doth ſoften and make nice by little and little thoſe that liue with him. One rich neighbour giues light and life to our couetouſneſſe. One diſſolute perſon worketh (if I may ſo ſay) and applieth his vice, like ruſt into the neateſt and pureſt minds. What then can we looke for from ſuch maners, after which the world runneth, as it were with a looſe bridle?
               But what? it is very rare and difficult ſo to do. It is a plauſible thing, and that hath great appearance of goodnes and  iuſtice, to follow the way approued by all; the great beaten way doth eaſily deceiue, lata eſt via ad mortem, & multi per eam; mundus in maligno poſitus: we goe one after another like beaſts for companie; we neuer diue into the reaſon, the merit, the equitie of the cauſe; we follow examples and cuſtomes, and as it were of enuie and emulation, we ſtumble, and fall one vpon another; we throng one another, and draw euery

one to a head-long downe-fall. We borrow our owne ouerthrow, and periſh vpon credit, alienis perimus exemplis. Now he that would be wiſe, muſt alwaies ſuſpect whatſoeuer pleaſeth, and is approued by the people by the greater number, and muſt looke into that that is true and good in it ſelfe, and not into that which ſeemeth to them, and that is moſt vſed and frequented, and not ſuffer himſelfe to be cunny-catcht and caried by the multitude, which ſhould not be accounted but for one, vnus mihi pro populo, & populus pro vno. And when to ſtop his mouth, and to beate him downe at a blow it ſhall be ſaid, that the whole world ſaith it, beleeues it, doth it, he muſt ſay in his heart, it is ſo much the worſe, it is but a ſimple and a wicked caution; I eſteeme it the leſſe, becauſe the world eſteemes it ſo much; like wiſe Phocion, who ſeeing the people highlie to applaud ſomething which he had ſpoken, turned to his friends that ſtood by him, and ſaid vnto them, Hath any follie vnwitting to my ſelfe eſcaped my mouth, or any looſe or wicked word, that all this people do ſo approue me? Quis placere poteſt populo, cui placet virtus? malis artibus quaeritur popularis fauor. We muſt then as much as is poſſible flie the haunt and companie of the ſottiſh, illiterate, ill-compoſed people, but aboue all preſerue our ſelues from their iudgements, opinions, vitious behauiour, and without any ſtirre keepe alwayes our owne thoughts apart by themſelues: Quod ſcio non probat populus, quod probat populus ego neſcio: Sapiens non respicit quid homines iudicent; non it quâ populus ſed vt ſidera mundi contrarium iter intendunt, it a hic aduerſus opiniones omnium vadit: remaining in the world, without being of the world, like the kidneies couered with fat, but haue none themſelues: non estis de mundo, ideo odit vos mundus: odi prophanum vulgus & arceo. This is that ſolitarineſſe ſo much commended by the wiſe, which is to disburthen the ſoule of all vices and popular opinions, and to free it from this confuſion and captiuitie, to draw it to it ſelfe, and to ſet it at libertie.
               The other euill and hinderance to wiſdome, which a man muſt carefullie auoid, and which is inward, and therefore the 5 The ſecond part, exemption of paſſions.
                   more dangerous, is the confuſion and captiuitie of his paſſions, and turbulent affections; whereof he muſt disfurniſh and free himſelfe, to the end he may be emptie and neate, like a

white paper, and be made a ſubiect more fit to receiue the tincture and impreſſions of wiſdome, againſt which the paſſions do formallie oppoſe themſelues: and therefore the wiſeſt were wont to ſay, that it was impoſſible euen for Iupiter himſelfe to loue, to be in choler, to be touched with any paſſion, and to be wiſe at one time. Wiſdome is a regular managing of our ſoule with meaſure and proportion: It is an equabilitie, and ſweet harmonie of our iudgements, wills, manners, a conſtant health of our mind; whereas the paſſions are contrariwiſe but the furious reboundings, acceſſions and receſſions of follie, violent and raſh ſallies and motions.
               We haue ſufficientlie deciphered the paſſions in the firſt 6 Generall remedies againſt the paſſions.
                   booke, and ſaid enough to bring vs into horror and deteſtation of them: the generall meanes and remedies to ouercome them (for the particular in euery one are in the third booke, in the vertue of fortitude and temperancie) are many and different, good and euill. And not to ſpeake of that goodnes and felicitie of nature, ſo well tempered and ſeaſoned, that it maketh vs calme and cleare, exempt and quit from ſtrong paſſions and violent motions, and keepeth vs in good caſe, equall, vnited, firme, and as ſtrong as ſteele againſt the aſſault of our paſſions, a thing very rare; for this is not a remedie againſt this euill, but an exemption of euill, and health it ſelfe: but of the remedies againſt them we may note foure.
               The firſt improper and by no meanes commendable, is a kind of ſtupiditie and inſenſiblenes in not perceiuing and 7 Stupiditie.
                   apprehending of things; a brutiſh pampering foode of baſe minds, or ſuch as haue their apprehenſion whollie dulled; a ſpirituall leproſie, which ſeemeth to haue ſome ſhew of health, but hath it not; for it is not poſſible there ſhould be wiſdome and conſtancie, where there is not knowledge and vnderſtanding, and employment in affaires; ſo that it is only a complexion, and not a vertue. This is not to feele the diſeaſe, and therefore not to cure it: neuertheleſſe this eſtate is nothing ſo bad, as to know, and feele, and vnderſtand, and yet to ſuffer himſelfe to be gulled and ouercome:
               
                  —Praetulerim delirus inerſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      videri,
                  Dum mea delectent mala me, vel deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fallant,
                  Quam ſapere & ringi.—
               
               
                  
The ſecond remedie is little better than the euill it ſelfe, but yet more in vſe, that is, when a man conquereth and extinguiſheth 8 Counterpaſſion.
                   one paſſion by a ſtronger than it: for paſſions are neuer of equall force, but there is alwayes one or other (as in the humors of the bodie) which is the predominant, which ruleth and deuoureth the reſt; and we attribute many times very vntruly that vnto vertue and wiſdome which ariſeth from paſſion: but yet it is enough in theſe men, when thoſe paſſions that beare ſway in them are not of the worſt.
               The third remedie and good (though it be not the beſt) is wiſe and artificiall, whereby a man auoideth, flieth, and hideth 9 Precaution.
                   himſelfe from all ſuch accidents whatſoeuer, as may ſtirre, awaken, or kindle his paſſions. This is a kind of ſtudie and arte, whereby a man prepareth himſelfe before the occaſions, in diuerting of euils, and prouiding that he feele them not; like that King who brake a beautifull and rich cup that one gaue him, to take away in a good houre all matter of brawle and anger that might happen about it. The prayer of theſe kind of people is, ne nos inducas in tentationem. By this remedie, he that ſets himſelfe forward to the ſport, ſports not himſelfe; men of honor, prompt and cholerick, flie contentions, altercations, and ſtay themſelues at the firſt onſet and occaſion of paſſion. For when a man is once entred, it is no eaſie matter to carrie himſelfe wiſely and diſcretly: We guide our affaires in the beginning, and hold them at our mercie, but after they are once afoote and throughlie heated, they guide and carry vs. Paſſions are farre more eaſily auoided than moderated, excinduntur animo faciliùs quam temperantur, becauſe all things are in their firſt birth feeble and tender. In their weakenes we diſcouer not the danger, and in their full growth and ſtrength we know not how to withſtand them; as we may ſee in diuers, who eaſily and lightlie enter into quarels, and law, and contentions, but are afterwards enforced to get out as they can with ſhame enough, and to come to any agreement, be it neuer ſo baſe and diſhonorable, yea, to ſeeke falſe interpretations, to belie themſelues, to betray their own hearts, to plaſter and couer the fact, which are all remedies a hundred times worſe than the euill they go about to heale; melius non incipient, quàm deſinent; from the want of wiſdome,

they fall into want of heart: This is contrarie to that ſaying of Bias, Enterpriſe coldly, purſue ardentlie. It is like fooles, who out of a vitious ſhame are eaſily perſwaded to agree to whatſoeuer a man demands, and as eaſily flie from their words and reuoke that they haue ſpoken. We muſt therefore in all our affaires and commerce with men, from the beginning be prudent and aduiſed.
               The fourth and beſt remedie of all, is a liuely vertue, reſolution, and conſtancie of the mind, whereby a man ſeeth and 10 Vertue.
                   confronteth all accidents without trouble, he wreſtleth and entreth into combat with them. It is a valiant, noble, and glorious impaſſibilitie, quite contrarie to the firſt which we haue ſpoken of, baſe ſtupiditie. Now to forme it, and to attaine vnto it, there is nothing more neceſſarie than a precedent diſcourſe. Diſcourſe is the maſter of our paſſions, premeditation is that which giueth the temper to the ſoule, and makes it hard and ſteelie and impenetrable againſt whatſoeuer would wound, or hurt it. The proper meanes to appeaſe and ſweeten theſe paſſions, is to know them well, to examin, to iudge what power they haue ouer vs, and we ouer them. But aboue all, the ſoueraigne remedie is to beleeue, and not to ſuffer himſelfe to be caried with opinion, which is that which cheriſheth and kindleth our paſſions, and is (as hath bin ſaid) falſe, fooliſh, inconſtant, and vncertaine, the guide of fooles and the vulgar ſort; but to ſuffer himſelfe to be ſweetly led by reaſon and nature, which is the guide of the wiſer ſort, ripe, ſolid, and ſetled. But heereof, heereafter more at large.
               But aboue all other paſſions, it is neceſſarie that we do carefullie 11 Preſumption.
                   gard and defend our ſelues from that ſelfeloue preſumption, and fooliſh dotage of our ſelues, the plague of mankind, the capitall enemie of wiſdome, the true gangreene and corruption of the ſoule, whereby we adore our ſelues, and reſt contented with our ſelues, we harken to none other, and beleeue none other but our ſelues. Now we ſhould know that we are not in greater danger in the hands of any, than of our ſelues. It is an excellent mott originallie come from the Spaniſh tongue, O God keepe my ſelfe, from my ſelfe. This preſumption and fooliſh loue of our ſelues proceedes from the ignorance we haue of our ſelues, of our weakneſſe, and that little

that is in vs, not only in generall of the infirmitie and miſerie of mankind, but alſo of our owne proper and perſonall imperfections: but whoſoeuer he be that hath the leaſt graine or touch of this follie, ſhall neuer attaine vnto wiſdome. Faith, modeſtie, a hartie and ſerious acknowledgment of that little that we haue, is a great teſtimonie of a good and ſound iudgement, of a right will, and is an excellent diſpoſition vnto wiſdome.
            
            
               CHAP. II. A vniuerſall and plaine libertie of ſpirit both in iudgement and will, the ſecond dispoſition to Wiſdome.
               
               THe other diſpoſition vnto Wiſdome, which followeth the firſt (which doth quit vs from this outward and inward  captiuitie and confuſion, popular and paſſionate) is a plaine, entire, generous, and lord-like libertie of the mind, which is two-fold, that is to ſay, of iudgement, and will.
               The firſt, of iudgement, conſiſteth in the conſideration, iudgement, examination of all things, and in not tying himſelfe 1 The firſt part, libertie of iudgemēt.
                   to any one, but remaining free in himſelfe, vniuerſall, readie, and open for all. And this is the higheſt point, the proper law and true priuiledge of a wiſe and actiue man. But few they are that will vnderſtand it, and acknowledge it, fewer that practiſe it as they ſhould: and this is the reaſon why we muſt heere eſtabliſh it, againſt ſuch as are incapable of wiſdome. And firſt, to auoid all miſcountings, we explaine the words, & giue the ſenſe. There are heere three things which maintaine, cauſe, and conſerue one the other, that is, to iudge of all things, not to be maried or bound to any, to continue open and readie for all. When I ſay to iudge, my meaning is not to reſolue, affirme, determine: this were contrarie to the ſecond, which is, not to bind our ſelues to any thing: but it is to examine, and weigh the reaſons and counter-reaſons on all parts, the weight and merit of them, and thereby worke out the truth. So likewiſe not to bind our ſelues to any thing, is not to ſettle our ſelues, and to remaine ſhort of that we ſhould, bleating in the aire, and to ceaſe our indeuors, and to proceed in our neceſſarie actions and deliberations: For I will that in

all outward and common actions of our life, and in whatſoeuer is ordinarily vſed, a man ſhould agree and accommodate himſelfe to the common ſort; for our rule extendeth not it ſelfe to that which is outward, and to the action, but to that which is within, the thought, and ſecret, and inward iudgement: yea and therein likewiſe I conſent, that a man ſettle and applie himſelfe to that which ſeemeth moſt agreeable to the truth, moſt honeſt and profitable; but yet that it be without determination, reſolution, affirmation, or condemnation of contrarie or diuers iudgements, old, or new; but alwaies to hold himſelfe readie to entertaine better if it appeare; yea not to be offended if another ſhall conteſt with him againſt that which he thinketh better, but rather deſire to heare what may be ſaid; for this is the meane, to exerciſe the firſt, which is to iudge, and alwaies to enter into the ſearch of the truth. Theſe three I ſay, doe maintaine and conſerue one the other; for he that iudgeth well, and without paſſion of all things, findeth in euery thing appearances of reaſon, which hinder his reſolution, whereby he feareth to ſettle his iudgement, and ſo remaineth vndetermined, indifferent, and vniuerſall: whereas contrariwiſe, he that reſolueth, iudgeth no more, but ſetleth and reſteth himſelfe vpon that which he holdeth, and ſo makes himſelfe a partaker and a particular. To the former, fooles, ſimple and weake people are contrarie: to the ſecond, obſtinate opinatiue affirmers: to the third, both of them, which are particulars: but all three are practiſed by the wiſe, modeſt, diſcreet, and temperate ſearcher of the truth and true Philoſophie. It remaineth for the explication of this our propoſition, that I let you know, that by all things, and ſome thing (for it is ſaid, to iudge of all things, not to be aſſured of any) we vnderſtand not thoſe diuine verities which haue bin reuealed vnto vs, which we are to receiue ſimplie with all humilitie and ſubmiſſion, and without all controuerſie and diſcuſſion, ſubmit our ſelues, and captiuate our minds thereunto, captiuantes intellectum ad obſequium fidei, but we vnderſtand heereby all other things without exception. This ſimple explication would be ſufficient perhaps to perſwade an indifferent ſpirit to receiue this rule of wiſdome; but I ſee and perceiue a ſort of people, glorious, reſolute, affirmatiue, which

would rule the world, and command it as it were with a rod, and as others in former times haue ſworne to certaine principles, and maried themſelues to certaine opinions, ſo they would that all others ſhould do the like, whereby they oppoſe themſelues to this noble libertie of the ſpirit. It ſhall be neceſſarie therefore to eſtabliſh it more amplie, and by order to confirme and handle theſe three points and members thereof.
               The firſt is to iudge of all. It is the propertie of a wiſe and 2 The firſt, to iudge of all.
                   ſpirituall man; ſaith one of the firſt and wiſeſt of the world, Spiritualis omnia dijudicat, & à nemine iudicatur: The true office of man, his moſt proper and naturall exerciſe, his worthieſt profeſſion is to iudge. Why is he a man diſcourſing, reaſoning, vnderſtanding? Why hath he a ſpirit, to build (as they ſay) caſtles in the aire, and to feede himſelfe with fooleries and vanities, as the greateſt part of the world doth? Quis vnquam oculos tenebrarum cauſâ habuit? No doubtleſſe, but to vnderſtand, to iudge of all things, and therefore he is called the gouernour, the ſuperintendent, the keeper of nature, of the world, of the works of God. To go about to depriue him of this right, is to make him no more a man, but a beaſt; to do it ſingularly, excellently, is the part of a wiſe man: If not to iudge, hurts the ſimple and proper nature of man, what ſhall it doe in a wiſe man, who is as farre aboue the common ſort of men, as a common man is aboue beaſts? It is then ſtrange that ſo many men (I ſpeake not of idiots, and the weaker ſort, who haue not the facultie and meane to exerciſe it) who either are, or make ſhew of vnderſtanding and ſufficiencie, depriue themſelues willinglie of this right and authoritie ſo naturall, ſo iuſt, and excellent, who without the examining or iudging of any thing, receiue and approue whatſoeuer is preſented, either becauſe it hath a faire ſemblance & appearance, or becauſe it is in authoritie, credit, and practiſe; yea, they thinke that it is not lawfull to examin or doubt of any thing, in ſuch ſort do they debaſe and degrade themſelues: they are forward and glorious in other things, but in this, they are fearefull and ſubmiſſe, though it do iuſtly appertaine vnto them, and with ſo much reaſon. Since there are a thouſand lies for one truth, a thouſand opinions of one and the ſame thing, and

but one that is true, why ſhould not I examin with the inſtrument of reaſon which is the better, the truer, the more reaſonable, honeſt, and profitable? Is it poſſible that amongſt ſo many lawes, cuſtomes, opinions, different maners, and contrary to ours, as there are in the world, there are none good but ours? Hath all the world beſides beene miſtaken? Who dares to ſay ſo, and who doubteth but others ſay as much of ours, and that he that thus condemneth others, if he had been there borne and brought vp, would thinke them better, and prefer them before thoſe he now accounteth the only good, and all becauſe he hath been accuſtomed vnto them? To conclude, to him that ſhall be ſo foole-hardy to ſay it, I doe anſwere, that this rule ſhall at the leaſt be good for all others, to the end that they iudging and examining all, may finde ours to be the better. Go to then, the wiſe man ſhall iudge of all, nothing ſhall eſcape him which he bringeth not to the barre, and to the ballance. It is to play the part of prophane men and beaſts, to ſuffer themſelues to be lead like oxen. I will that men liue, and ſpeake, and do, as others, and the common ſort do; but not that they iudge like the common ſort, but iudge them. What can a wiſe man, or a holie man haue aboue a prophane, if he muſt haue his ſpirit, his mind, his principall and heroicall part a ſlaue to the vulgar ſort? The publicke and common ſhould content it ſelfe, if a man conforme himſelfe thereunto in all apparent things; what hath it to do with our inſide, our thoughts, and iudgements? They ſhall gouerne as long as they will my hand, my tongue, but not my ſpirit, for that, by their leaue, hath another maſter. It is a hard thing to bridle the libertie of the ſpirit, and if a man would do it, it is the greateſt tyrannie that may be: a wiſe man will take heed thereof actiuely and paſſiuely, will maintaine himſelfe in his libertie, and not trouble that of other men.
               Now a wiſe man enioying this his right to iudge and examin all things, it many times comes to paſſe, that the iudgement 3 The effect of this firſt treatiſe. A wiſe man one within, another without.
                   and the hand, the mind and the bodie, contradict one another, and that he will carie himſelfe outwardlie after one maner, and iudge inwardlie after another, will play one part before the world, and another in his mind, which he muſt do to preſerue equitie and iuſtice in all. That generall ſaying,

                  vniuerſus mundus exercet histrioniam, ſhould properly and truly be vnderſtood of a wiſe man, who is another man within than he outwardly ſhewes. If he were without ſuch as he is within, he ſhould not be accounted of, but in all things offend the world: If he were within ſuch as without, he ſhould be no more a wiſe man, he ſhould iudge amiſſe, be corrupted in his mind. He muſt do, and carie himſelfe outwardly, for publike reuerence, and ſo as he offend no man, according to the law, cuſtome, and ceremonie of the countrey; and inwardly iudge of the truth as it is, according to the vniuerſall reaſon, whereby it many times comes to paſſe that he condemneth that which outwardly he doth. Sapiens faciet quae non probabit, vt ad maiora tranſitum inueniat, nec relinquet bonos mores, ſed tempori aptabit omnia quae imperiti faciunt, & luxurioſi, faciet: ſed non eodem modo, nec eodem propoſito, multa ſapientes faciunt quâ homines ſunt, non quâ ſapientes. He will carie himſelfe in things and actions, as Cicero in words, who ſaid, I leaue the vſe or cuſtome of ſpeach to the people, and obſerue the true ſcience and knowledge of words, Loquendum & extrà viuendum vt multi, ſapiendum vt pauci. Some few examples heereof, and firſt of things of leſſe moment. In all humilitie I take off my hat, and keepe my head vncouered before my ſuperior, for ſo doth the cuſtome of my countrey require; but yet I will not leaue to iudge, that the cuſtome of the Eaſt is farre better, to ſalute and do reuerence, by laying the hand vpon the breſt, without vncouering the head, to the preiudice of our health, and other inconueniences. Contrariwiſe, if I were in the Eaſt, I would take my repaſt, ſitting vpon the earth, or leaning on the elbow, or halfe lying looking vpon the table ſide-wayes as they do there, and as our Sauiour with his Apoſtles did vſe to do, recumbentibus, diſcumbentibus: and yet I would not ceaſe to iudge, that the maner of ſitting vpright at table, our faces towards it, as the cuſtome is heere, is more honeſt, more fit, and commodious. Theſe examples are of ſmall weight, and there are a thouſand the like: let vs take another of better importance. I will and I yeeld my conſent that the dead be interred and left to the mercie of the wormes, of rottenneſſe and ſtench, becauſe it is now the common cuſtome almoſt euery-where; but yet I will

not ceaſe to iudge, that the ancient manner of burning them, and gathering their aſhes together, is more noble and more neate, to commit and commend them to the fire, the excellenteſt element, enemie to putrefaction and ſtench, neighbour to heauen it ſelfe, a ſigne of immortalitie, a ſhadow of the diuinitie, and whereof the vſe is proper and peculiar vnto man, rather than to the earth, which is the ordure, lees, dregs of the elements, the ſinke of the world, the mother of corruption, and to the wormes which is the extreameſt ignominie and horror, and ſo to couple and handle alike a man and a beaſt. Religion it ſelfe teacheth and commandeth to diſpoſe after this maner of all things, as of the Paſchall lamb which might not be eaten, and (where popery beareth ſway) the conſecrated hoſt, and diuers the like; why then ſhould not the like reſpect be had of our bodies? What can a man do that is more diſhonorable to the bodie, than to caſt it into the earth there to corrupt? It ſeemeth to me to be the vttermoſt puniſhment that can be inflicted vpon infamous perſons and heinous offenders, and that the carcaſies of honeſt and honorable men ſhould be handled with better reſpect. Doubtleſſe of all the maners in diſpoſing of dead bodies, which may be reduced to fiue, that is, to commit them to the foure elements, and the bowels of wild beaſts, the vileſt, and baſeſt, and moſt ſhamefull is to interre them, the moſt noble and honorable to burne them. Again, I will and conſent, that this my Wiſe man in things naturall be modeſt, that he hide and couer thoſe parts and actions that are called ſhamefull, diſhonorable; and he that ſhould do otherwiſe, I would deteſt, and thinke hardlie of him, becauſe it is almoſt the cuſtome of the whole world; but yet I will neuertheleſſe that he iudge that ſimplie in themſelues, and according to nature, they are no more ſhamefull than the noſe or the mouth, to drinke and to eate: Nature, that is, God, hauing made nothing ſhamefull, but it is for another cauſe, not from nature, that is to ſay, from the enemie of nature, which is ſinne. Diuinitie alſo more chaſte than Philoſophie telleth vs, that in entire nature, not yet altered by the ſinne of man, theſe parts and actions were not ſhamefull, for then ſhame was not, it is the enemie of nature, the fruit of ſinne. I conſent to apparell my ſelfe like thoſe of

my countrey and profeſſion, and if I had beene borne in thoſe countries where they go naked, I would haue gone ſo too: but yet I ceaſe not to iudge, that neither of the two faſhions is very good; and if I were to chuſe, and ordaine, I would chuſe a faſhion indifferent betwixt both, out of thoſe countries where they couer themſelues with one only and ſimple couering, light and eaſie enough, without faſhion, or coſt; for our maner of attiring is not good, yea worſe than to goe naked, to be ſo faſt wrapped and bound, with ſuch a multitude and varietie of couerings of diuers ſtuffes, euen to the number of foure, fiue, ſix, one vpon another, and whereof ſome are double, that they hold vs preſt and packt vp with ſo many tyes, binding, butnings (not to ſpeake of that diſſolute and abominable exceſſe condemned by all good lawes) that we can hardlie ſtirre our ſelues in them. I will content my ſelfe with theſe examples. The ſelfeſame a man may ſay of all lawes, cuſtomes, maners, and of that which is de facto, and much more of opinions, and that which is de iure.
               
               If any man ſhall ſay that I haue iudged amiſſe in theſe examples; and that generally, if libertie be giuen to iudge of all 4 An obiection.
                   things, the ſpirit will wander and loſe it ſelfe, filling and furniſhing it ſelfe with follies and falſe opinions; I anſwere to the firſt, which toucheth me in particular, that it is very eaſie to erre in finding the truth in all theſe inſtances, and yet it is ouer-boldnes to accuſe any man; for it is as much as if he ſhould ſay, that a man knowes where and what the truth is in things, which who can perfectlie know or iudge of? Now not to find the truth, is not to iudge amiſſe; to iudge amiſſe, is to wey, and ballance, and compare amiſſe, that is to ſay, not to examin the reaſons, and to ponder them according to the firſt and vniuerſall nature, (both which though a man do, yet it followeth not that he muſt needs find out the truth.) Now I beleeue nothing that is but ſimplie affirmed, if it be not likewiſe proued; but if any man by contrarie reaſons more ſtrong and forcible ſhall make good what he ſaith, of all others he is the welcomeſt man vnto me, and the man I looke for; for oppoſitions and contradictions well vrged, and with reaſon, are the true meanes to exerciſe this iudging office. I had neuer ſet downe theſe opinions, but that I looked that ſome one or

other ſhould abrogate them, and help me to better, and to anſwere more effectuallie; and to that generall obiection of the danger that there is in this libertie, beſides that which hath been ſpoken, and ſhall more expreſly be ſaid in the third leſſon of Wiſdome and Chapter following, that the rule which we ought to hold in iudging, and in all things is nature, naturall and vniuerſall reaſon, following which a man can neuer erre. See heere the other member of this iudicious libertie which we are about to handle, which will furniſh vs with a remedie againſt this pretended danger.
               The other point of this lord-like libertie of ſpirit, is an indifferencie of taſte, and a differring of a ſetled reſolution, 
                     5 2 Not to binde our ſelues to any thing.
                   whereby a wiſe man conſidering coldly and without paſſion all things, as is ſaid, is not obſtinate, doth not ſweare, tye, bind himſelfe to any opinion; keeping himſelfe alwaies readie to receiue the truth, or that which ſeemes to him to haue beſt ſemblance of truth; and ſaying in his inward and ſecret iudgement, that which our ancients were wont to ſay in their outward and publicke, it a videtur, it ſeemeth ſo; there is great appeerance of truth on this ſide; and if any man do contradict and oppoſe himſelfe, with patience he is readie to vnderſtand the contrarie reaſons and to receiue them, finding them more ſtrong & better; and when he hath heard what he can heare, he ſtill thinketh that either there is, or may be better, though as yet it appeareth not. This dilation and putting off of a mans iudgement is founded firſt vpon thoſe propoſitions ſo much celebrated among the wiſe, That there is nothing certaine; that we know nothing; that there is nothing in nature but doubt; nothing certaine but incertaintie, Solum certum, nihil eſſe certi; hoc vnum ſcio, quòd nihilſcio; That of all things a man may diſpute alike; that we do nothing but ſearch, enquire, and grope after appearances, ſcimus nihil, opinamur veriſimilia; That veritie is not a thing of our owne inuention and purchaſe, and when it yeelds it ſelfe into our hands, we haue nothing in our ſelues whereby we may challenge it, poſſeſſe it, or aſſure our ſelues of it; That truth and falſhood enter into vs by one and the ſame gate, and there hold the ſame place and credit, and maintaine themſelues by the ſame meanes; That there is no opinion held by all, or currant in all places,

none that is not debated and diſputed, that hath not another held and maintained quite contrarie vnto it; That all things haue two handles and two viſages, and there is reaſon for all, and there is not any that hath not his contrarie, it is of lead, it turneth and accommodateth it ſelfe to whatſoeuer a man will haue it: To be ſhort, it is the doctrine and practiſe of all the wiſeſt, greateſt, and moſt noble Philoſophers, who haue made profeſſion of ignorance, doubting, enquiring, ſearching. Others notwithſtanding they haue beene dogmatiſts, and affirmers, yet it hath beene of geſtures and words only, and that to ſhew how far they could wade in the purchaſe and ſearch of the truth, quam docti fingunt magis quàm norunt; giuing vnto all things no other nor ſtronger title, than probabilitie and true likelihood, and handling them diuerſly, ſometimes with one viſage and in one ſenſe, ſometimes in another, by problematicall queſtions, rather enquiring than inſtructing; and many times ſhewing that they ſpeake not in earneſt, but in ſport and for exerciſe; non tam id ſenſiſſe quod dicerent, quàm exercere ingenia materiae difficultate voluiſſe videntur. And who will beleeue that it was the purpoſe of Plato to tie men to his Common-wealth and his Idees, of Pythagoras to his numbers, of Epicurus to his Atomes, or to giue them for currant coine? They tooke pleaſure to ſolace their ſpirits with pleaſant and ſubtile inuentions, quae ex ingenio finguntur, non ex ſcientiae vi. Sometimes likewiſe they haue ſtudied after difficultie, to couer the vanitie of their ſubiect, and to employ the curioſitie of their ſpirits. And Aristotle the moſt reſolute of all the reſt, the prince of dogmatiſts, and peremptorie affirmers, the god of pedanties, how often hath he been croſt in his opinions, not knowing what to reſolue in that point of the ſoule, wherein he is almoſt alwaies vnlike to himſelfe, and in many other things more baſe which he knew not how to find or vnderſtand, ingeniouſly confeſſing ſometimes the great weakenes of man in finding and knowing the truth.
               They that haue come after, of a pedanticall and preſumptuous ſpirit, who make Aristotle and others ſay what they 6 Obiects.
                   pleaſe, and are more obſtinate in their opinions than euer they were, diſauowing thoſe for diſciples that faint in their opinions, hate & arrogantlie condemne this rule of wiſdome,

this modeſtie, and academicall ſtayednes, glorying in their obſtinate opinions, whether they be right or wrong; louing better a headie froward affirmer againſt their owne opinions, and againſt whom they may exerciſe their wit and skill, than a modeſt peaceable man, who doubteth and maketh ſtay of his iudgement, againſt whom their wits are dulled, that is to ſay, a foole than a wiſe man; like to women, who loue better to be contradicted, euen with iniurie, than that a man either out of the coldnes of his nature, or contempt ſhould ſay nothing to them, whereby they imagin they are either ſcorned or condemned, wherein they ſhew their iniquitie. For why ſhould it not be as lawfull to doubt, and conſider of things as doubtfull, not determining of any thing, as it is to them to affirme? Why ſhould it not be lawfull ingenuouſly to confeſſe that which a man knoweth not, ſince in veritie he knoweth it not, and to hold in ſuſpence that which he is not aſſured of, and againſt which there are many reaſons and oppoſitions? It is certaine according to the opinion of the wiſeſt, that we are ignorant of much more than we know, that all our knowledge is the leſſer part, and almoſt nothing, in regard of that we know not: the cauſes of our ignorances are infinit, and both in reſpect of the things themſelues either too farre from vs, or too neere, too great, or too little, too durable, or not durable enough, perpetuallie changing, and in reſpect of our ſelues, and the maner of knowing them, which as yet is not ſufficientlie learned. And that which we thinke we know, we know not, neither can we hold it well, for with violence it is got from vs, and if it may not be gotten becauſe our obſtinacie in opinion is ſtrong, yet we are contended with, and much troubled. Now how ſhould we be capable to know more or leſſe, if we grow reſolute in our opinions, ſettle and repoſe our ſelues in certaine things, and in ſuch maner, that we ſeeke no farther, nor examine any more that which we thinke to hold? They thinke this ſuſpenſion a ſhame and a weaknes, becauſe they know not what it is, and they perceiue not that the greateſt men that are haue made profeſſion thereof; they bluſh, and haue not the heart freely to ſay, I know not, ſo much are they poſſeſſed with the opinion and preſumption of ſcience; and they know not that there is a kind of ignorance & doubt,

more learned, and more certaine, more noble and generous, than all their ſcience and certaintie. This is that that hath made Socrates ſo renoumed and held for the wiſeſt man: It is the ſcience of ſciences, and the fruit of all our ſtudies: It is a modeſt, mild, innocent, and hartie acknowledgement of the myſticall height of truth, and of the pouertie of our humane condition full of darknes, weaknes, vncertaintie; cogitationes mortalium timidae, incertae adinuentiones nostrae: Deus nouit cogitationes hominum quoniam vanae ſunt. Heere I would tell you, that I cauſed to be grauen ouer the gate of my little houſe which I built at Condom in the yeare 1600, this word, I know not.
               
               But they will needs that we ſubmit our ſelues in all dutie to certaine principles, which is an vniuſt tyrannie. I yeeld my  conſent, that a man employ them in all iudgement, and make vſe of them, but yet not ſo as that a man may not ſpurne againſt them, for againſt that opinion I oppoſe my ſelfe. Who is he in the whole world, that hath right to command, and giue lawes to the world, to ſubiect the ſpirits of men, and to giue principles which may be no more examined, that a man may no more denie or doubt of, but God himſelfe the ſoueraigne ſpirit, and true principle of the world, who is only to be beleeued becauſe he ſaith it? All other things are ſubiect to triall and oppoſition, and it is weaknes to ſubiect our ſelues vnto it. If they will that I ſubmit my ſelfe to principles, I will ſay to them as the Curat ſaid to his pariſhoners in a matter of time, and as a Prince of ours to the Secretaries of this age in a point of religion, Do you firſt agree to theſe principles, and then I will ſubmit my ſelfe vnto them. Now there is as great doubt and diſpute in the principles, as in the concluſions, in the Theſes, as in the Hypotheſes, whereby there are ſo many ſects among them, that if I yeeld my ſelfe to the one, I offend all the reſt. They ſay likewiſe, that it is a great affliction not to be reſolued, to remaine alwaies in doubt, yea, that it is a matter of difficultie for a man to continue long in that ſtate. They haue reaſon to ſay it, for they find it ſo in themſelues, being the propertie of fooles, and weake minds, of preſumptuous fooles, paſſionate and obſtinate in certaine opinions, who condemne all others, and although they be ouercome,

neuer yeeld themſelues, vexing and putting themſelues into choler, neuer acknowledging any reaſon. If they be conſtrained to change their opinions, being altered, they are as reſolute and obſtinate in their new, as they were before in their firſt opinion, not knowing how to hold any thing without paſſion, and neuer diſputing to learne and find the truth, but to maintaine that which they haue ſworne and bound themſelues vnto. Theſe kind of people know nothing, neither know they what it is to know, becauſe they thinke to know and to hold the truth in their ſleeue: Becauſe thou thinkeſt thou ſeeſt, thou ſeeſt nothing, ſaith the Doctor of truth to the Ioh. 9. glorious and preſumptuous man; Si quis existimet ſe ſcire aliquid, nondum cognouit quemadmodum oporteat cum ſcire. It is fit 2. Cor. 8. that weake men that haue not ſtrength, to keepe themſelues vpright vpon their feet, be kept vp with props, they cannot liue but in bonds, nor maintaine themſelues free, a people borne to ſeruitude, they feare Bug-beares, or that the Wolfe will eate them if they be alone. But in wiſe, modeſt, and ſtayed men it is quite contrarie, the ſureſt ſtay and moſt happie eſtate of the ſpirit, which by this meanes keepeth it ſelfe firme, vpright, conſtant, inflexible, alwaies free and to it ſelfe: hoc liberiores & ſolutiores ſumus, quia integra nobis iudicandi potestas manet. It is a very ſweet, peaceable, and pleaſant ſoiorne or delay, where a man feareth not to faile or miſcount himſelfe, where a man is in the clame, vnder couert, and out of danger of participating ſo many errors produced by the fantaſie of man, and whereof the world is full of entangling himſelfe in complaints, diuiſions, diſputes, of offending diuers parts, of belying and gainſaying his owne beleefe, of changing, repenting, and readuiſing himſelfe. For how often hath time made vs ſee that we haue beene deceiued in our thoughts, and hath enforced vs to change our opinions? To be breefe, it is to keepe the mind in peace and tranquillitie, farre from agitations and vices, which proceed from that opinion of ſcience which we thinke to haue in things; for from thence do ſpring pride, ambition, immoderate defires, obſtinacie in opinion, preſumption, loue of nouelties, rebellion, diſobedience: from whence come troubles, ſects, hereſies, ſeditions, but from men fierce, obſtinate, & reſolute in opinion?

not from Academiques, neuters, modeſt, indifferent, ſtaied, that is to ſay, wiſemen. Moreouer let me tell them, that it is a thing that doth more ſeruice to piety, religion, and diuine operation, than any thing whatſoeuer. I ſay ſeruice as well in the generation and propagation, as the conſeruation thereof. Diuinity, yea the myſticall part thereof, teacheth vs, that well to prepare our ſoules for God and the receiuing of his holy ſpirit, we muſt empty, cleanſe, purifie them, and leaue them naked of all opinion, beleefe, affection; make them like a white paper, dead to it ſelfe and to the world, that God might liue and worke in it, driue away the old maſter, to eſtabliſh the new, expurgate vetus fermentum, exuite veterem hominem: So that it ſeemeth, that to plant and eſtabliſh Chriſtianity among infidels, or miſ-beleeuing people, as in theſe daies in China, it were a very excellent method to begin with theſe propoſitions and perſwaſions: That all the wiſedome of the world is but vanity and leaſing: That the world is wholly compoſed, torne, and vilefied with the forged phantaſticall opinions of euery priuate mans braine: That God hath created man to know the truth, but that hee cannot know it of himſelf, nor by any humane meanes: And That it is neceſſary that God himſelfe, in whoſe boſome it reſideth, and who hath wrought a deſire thereof in man, ſhould reueale it as he doth. But That the better to prepare himſelfe for this reuelation, man muſt firſt renounce and chaſe away all opinions and beleefs, wherewith the ſpirit is already anticipated and beſotted, and preſent himſelfe white, naked, and ready to receiue it. Hauing well beaten and gained this point, and made men as it were Academicks and Pyrrhonians, it is neceſſary that we propoſe the principles of Chriſtianity as ſent from heauen, brought by the Embaſſadour and perfect meſſenger of the diuinity, authoriſed and confirmed in his time by ſo many maruellous proofes and authenticall teſtimonies. So that we ſee that this innocent and modeſt delay from reſolution, is a great meanes to true piety, not only to receiue it, as hath been ſaid, but to preſerue it, for with it there neuer are hereſies, and ſelected particular extrauagant opinions. An Academicke or Pyrrhonian was neuer hereticke, they are things oppoſite. It may be ſome man will ſay that he will neuer bee either good

Chriſtian or Catholike, becauſe he will as well be a neuter and irreſolute in the one, as the other. This is to vnderſtand amiſſe that which hath beene ſpoken, becauſe there is no delay to be made, nor place to iudge, nor liberty in that which concerneth God, but wee muſt ſuffer him to put and engraue that which pleaſeth him, and none other. I haue made heere a digreſſion for the honour of this our rule againſt ſuch as contradict it. Let vs now returne to the matter.
               After theſe two, to iudge of all, to be ſlow in determining, there commeth in the third place, the vniuerſality of ſpirit, 7 3. The third part, vniuerſality of ſpirit.
                   whereby a wiſe man taketh a view and entreth into conſideration of the whole Vniuerſe, hee is a citizen of the world like Socrates, hee containeth in his affection all humanekind, hee walketh through all, as if they were neere vnto him; hee ſeeth like the ſunne, with an equall, ſetled, and indifferent regard, as from a high watch-tower all the changes and interchangeable courſes of things, not changing himſelfe; but alwaies continuing one and the ſame, which is a liuery of the diuinitie, and a high priuiledge of a wiſe man, who is the image of God vpon earth. Magna & generoſares animus humanus, nullos ſibi poni niſi communes & cum Deo terminos patitur. Non idem ſapientem qui caeteros terminos includit, omnia illi ſecula vt Deo ſerviunt. Nullum ſeculum magnis ingenijs clauſum, nullum non cogitationi peruium tempus. Quam naturale in immenſum mentem ſuam extendere, in hoc a natura formatus homo vt paria dijs velit. ac ſe in ſpatium ſuum extendat. The moſt beautifull and greateſt ſpirits are the more vniuerſall, as the more baſe and blunt are the more particular. It is a ſottiſh weakeneſſe to thinke that a man muſt beleeue, doe, liue in all reſpects as at home in his owne village and country, or that the accidents that fall out heere, concerne and are common with the reſt of the world. A foole, if a man tell him that there are diuers maners, cuſtomes, lawes, opinions, contrary to thoſe which hee ſeeth in vſe, either he will not beleeue them, and ſaith they are fables; or hee preſently refuſeth and condemneth them as barbarous, ſo partiall is hee, and ſo much enthralled with thoſe his municipall maners, which hee accounteth the onely true, naturall, vniuerſall. Euery man calleth that barbarous that agreeth not with his palat and cuſtome, and it ſeemeth that

we haue no other touch of truth and reaſon, than the example and the idea of the opinions and cuſtomes of that countrie where we liue. Theſe kind of people iudge of nothing, neither can they, they are flaues to that they hold, a ſtrong preuention and anticipation of opinions doth whollie poſſeſſe them, they are ſo beſorted, that they can neither ſay, nor do otherwiſe. Now partialitie is an enemie to libertie, and ouerlulleth the mind alreadie tainted and preoccupated with a particular cuſtome, that it cannot iudge aright of others; an indifferent man iudgeth all things. He that is faſtned to one place, is baniſhed and depriued from all others. The paper that is blurred with another colour, is no more capable of any other, whereas the white is fit to receiue any. A iudge that heares a cauſe! with a preiudicate opinion, and inclineth to one part more than to another, cannot be a iuſt, vpright, and true iudge. Now a wiſe man muſt free himſelfe from this brutiſh blockiſhnes, and preſent vnto himſelfe as in a table this great image of our mother Nature in her entire maieſtie, marke and conſider hir in a Realme, an Empire, yea in this whole viſible world, as in the figure of a ſmall point, and there reade that generall and conſtant varietie in all things, ſo many humours, iudgements, beleefes, cuſtomes, lawes; ſo many alterations of ſtates, changes of fortune; ſo many victories and conqueſts buried and forgotten, ſo many pomps and greatneſſes vaniſhed, as if they had neuer been. Heereby a man may learne to know himſelfe, to admire nothing, to thinke nothing new, or ſtrange, to ſettle and reſolue himſelfe in all things. For the better attaining of this vniuerſall ſpirit, this generall indifferencie, we are to conſider theſe foure or fiue points.
               The great inequalitie and difference of men in their nature,  forme, compoſition, whereof we haue ſpoken.
               The great diuerſitie of lawes, cuſtomes, maners, religions, opinions, whereof we will ſpeake heereafter. 
               
               The diuers opinions, reaſons, ſayings of Philoſophers, touching the vnitie and pluralitie, the eternitie and temporalitie,  the beginning and end, the durance and continuance, the ages, eſtates, changes, and interchangeable courſes of the world and the parts thereof. The Egyptian prieſts told Herodotus
                  
that ſince their firſt King (which was aboue eleuen thouſand yeares before, the picture and ſtatue of whom, and of all that ſucceeded him, they ſhewed him drawne to the life) the Sun had changed his courſe four times. The Chaldeans in the time of Diodorus (as he ſaith) & Cicero, had a regiſter of ſeuen hundred thouſand yeares. Plato ſaith they of the citie of Sais, had memorials in writing of eight thouſand yeares; and that the citie of Athens was built a thouſand yeares before the ſaid citie of Sais. Zoroaster, Plinie, and others haue affirmed, that Socrates liued ſix thouſand yeares before the time of Plato. Some haue ſaid, that the world hath been from all eternitie, mortall, and growing and being againe by interchangeable courſes. Others and the more noble Philoſophers, haue held the world for a god, made by another god greater than it, or as Plato auerreth; and others argue from the motions thereof, that it is a creature compoſed of a bodie and of a ſoule, which ſoule lodging in the centre thereof, diſperſeth and ſpreadeth it ſelfe by muſicall numbers into the circumference, and parts thereof, the heauen, the ſtarres, compoſed of bodies and of a ſoule, mortall by reaſon of their compoſition, immortall by the decree and determination of the Creator. Plato ſaith, that the world changeth countenance in all reſpects: that the heauen, the ſtarres, the ſunne change and quite alter by turnes their motions, in ſuch ſort, that that which was firſt is laſt, the Eaſt is made the Weſt; and according to the ancient and moſt authenticall opinion, and of the more famous ſpirits, worthie the greatnes of God, and founded vpon reaſon, there are many worlds, in ſo much that there is nothing one and only in this world, all kinds are multiplied in number, whereby it ſeemeth not to haue ſemblance of truth, that God hath made this only worke, without companion, and that all is concluded in this one indiuiduum; at the leaſt diuinitie ſaith that God could make many, and infinite worlds, for if he could make no more but this one viſible, his power ſhould be finite, becauſe the world is ſuch.
               By that which we haue learned of the diſcouerie of the  new world, the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, we ſee firſt that all our ancient writers haue beene deceiued, thinking to haue found the meaſure of the habitable earth, and to haue comprehended

the whole Coſmographie, except ſome ſcattered Ilands, doubting of the Antipodes: for now behold another world, almoſt ſuch as ours is, and that all vpon firme land, inhabited, peopled, politiquely gouerned, diſtinguiſhed by realmes, and Empires, beautified with cities, that excell in beautie, greatneſſe, opulencie, all thoſe of Aſia, Africa, Europe, many thouſand yeares ago: And who doubteth but that in time heereafter there will be diſcouered diuers others? If Ptolemy and other our ancient Writers haue been heeretofore deceiued, why ſhould not he be likewiſe deceiued that affirmeth, that all is alreadie found and diſcouered? Say it he that will, I will beleeue him as I liſt.
               Secondly, we ſee that the Zones which were thought inhabitable by reaſon of their exceſſiue heate and cold, are habitable. 
               
               Thirdly, that in theſe new countries, almoſt all things which we ſo much eſteeme of heere, and hold that they were  firſt reuealed and ſent from heauen, were commonly beleeued and obſerued (from whence they came, I will not ſay, who dares determine it?) Yea many of them were in vſe a thouſand yeares before we heard any tidings of them, both in the matter of religion, as the beleefe of one only man the father of vs all, of the vniuerſall deluge, of one God, who ſometimes liued in the forme of a man vndefiled and holy, of the day of iudgement, the reſurrection of the dead, circumciſion like to that of the Iewes, and Mahumet: And in the matter of policie, as that the elder ſonne ſhould ſucceed in the inheritance, that he that is exalted to a dignitie, loſeth his owne name & takes a new; tyrannicall ſubſidies, armories, tumblers, muſicall inſtruments; all ſorts of ſports, Artillerie, Printing. From all theſe diſcourſes we may eaſily draw theſe concluſions: That this great bodie which we call the world, is not that which we thinke and iudge it to be; That neither in the whole, nor parts thereof, it is alwaies the ſame, but in perpetuall flux and reflux; That there is nothing ſaid, held, beleeued at one time and in one place, which is not likewiſe ſaid, held, beleeued in another, yea and contradicted, reprooued, condemned elſe-where; the ſpirit of man being capable of all things, the world alwaies tumbling, ſometime the ſame, ſometimes

diuers; That all things are ſetled and comprehended in this courſe and reuolution of nature, ſubiect to increaſe, changing, ending, to the mutation of times, places, climats, heauens, aires, countries. And from theſe concluſions we learne, to marie our ſelues, to ſweare to nothing, to admire, to trouble our ſelues at nothing; but whatſoeuer ſhall happen, whatſoeuer men talke of and trouble themſelues about, to reſolue vpon this point, that it is the courſe of the world, that it is nature that worketh theſe things; but yet wiſely to prouide that nothing hurt vs by our own weaknes and deiection of mind. Enough is ſaid of this perfect libertie of iudgement, eſtabliſhed by theſe three parts, to iudge of all, to iudge nothing, to be vniuerſall, wherein I haue the rather inſiſted, becauſe I know that it pleaſeth not the palat of the world, it is an enemie to pedanterie as well as wiſdome, but yet it is a faire floure or ornament of wiſdome, which preſerueth vs from two contrarie rocks, whereon the vulgar ſort do commonly loſe themſelues, that is to ſay, from being headie, opinatiue, ſhamefull gainſayers, repenters, mutable; and a man maintaineth himſelfe in a ſweet, peaceable, and aſſured modeſtie and great libertie of ſpirit, noble and magnificall vniuerſalitie. This is that great qualitie and ſufficiencie of Socrates, the Coricaeus of the wiſe, by the confeſſion of all, of whom it is ſaid as Plutarch diſcourſeth, That he neuer brought forth, but ſeruing as a Midwife, he made others to bring foorth. This is very neere and in ſome ſenſe the diſorder of the Pyrhonians, the neutralitie and indifferencie of the Academicks, from whence proceedeth, not to be aſtoniſhed at any thing, not to admire any thing, the ſoueraigne good of Pythagoras, the magnanimitie of Aristotle.
               
               
                  Nil admirari, prope res eſt, vna Numici
                  Sola
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      quae poſſit facere, & ſeruare beatum.
               
               It is a ſtrange thing that man will not ſo much as taſte it, yea is offended to heare ſpeach thereof, loueth better to continue a ſlaue to runne from one part to another, than to be to himſelfe, to liue of his owne, to be aboue all, and to paſſe equallie through all. 5. Hath he not reaſon to cry with Tiberius, and  farre more iuſtly, O homines ad ſeruitutem nati? What monſter is this, to deſire to haue all things free, his bodie, his members,

his goods, and not his ſpirit, which neuertheleſſe is only borne vnto libertie? A man will willinglie make benefit of whatſoeuer is in the world, that comes from the Eaſt or the Weſt, for the good and ſeruice of his bodie, nouriſhment, health, ornament, and accommodate it all vnto his vſe, but not for the culture of his ſpirit, benefit and enriching, giuing his bodie the libertie of the fields, and holding his ſpirit in cloſe priſon.
               The other libertie which is of the will, muſt likewiſe be in high eſteeme with a wiſe man. We ſpeake not heere of the 7 2 The ſecond part, libertie of will.
                   free will of man, according to the maner of Diuines: we ſay, that a wiſe man to maintaine himſelfe in reſt and libertie, muſt manage his will and his affections, in giuing himſelfe and affecting but few things, and thoſe iuſt (for the iuſt are but few in number if a man iudge well) and that without violence and aſperitie. There enter heere into combat (or to ſpeake more mildly, there are to be explicated and vnderſtood) two popular and plauſible opinions in the world; the one teacheth to be readie and willing in the ſeruice of another, to forget our ſelues for our neighbor, and principallie for the weale-publike, in reſpect whereof the particular is not to be reſpected: the other to cary our ſelues couragiouſly with actiuitie, zeale, affection. He that doth not the firſt, is accuſed not to haue any charitie; He that doth not the ſecond, ſuſpected to be cold, not to be a friend, and not to haue that zeale or ſufficiencie that he ought. Some would haue theſe two opinions to preuaile beyond reaſon and meaſure, and there is not any thing which hath not been ſpoken heerof: for the heads or Cheeftaines many times preach things according to that vſe for which they ſerue, not according as they are: And many times the trueſt opinions are not the more profitable. And afterwards ſeeing we hold our ſelues too much to our ſelues, and with a tye too naturall, they would diſtract vs and draw vs along, as they that go about to ſtreighten a crooked ſtaffe, bend it as much more the contrary way.
               But theſe opinions ill vnderſtood and ill taken, as they are by diuers, bring with them iniuſtice, trouble, paine, and much 8 The deſcription of others.
                   euill, as a man may ſee in thoſe who backbite and detract from all, giuing themſelues to hire, and the ſeruice of another: They do not only ſuffer themſelues to be caried, and feaſed

vpon, but they likewiſe thruſt themſelues into all matters, as well into thoſe that concerne them not, as thoſe that do, as well into ſmall as great, and many times for no other cauſe, but to employ and buſie themſelues, in negotijs ſunt negotij cauſa; and becauſe they cannot hold and ſtay themſelues, asif they had nothing to doe, with and within themſelues, and that for want of inward, eſſentiall, proper and domeſticall affaires, they ſeeke and vndergoe thoſe that are ſtrange vnto them. They are good husbands and frugall enough of their purſe, but prodigall of their ſoules, their liues, their time, affection, and willes, the good husbandrie whereof is only profitable and commendable. And if they giue themſelues to any thing, it is with ſuch paſſion and violence, that they are no more their owne men, ſo whollie doe they engage and inſinuate themſelues thereinto. Great men ſeeke after ſuch people, that will grow into paſſion and kill themſelues for them, and they allure them with faire promiſes and much Arte, to win them vnto them; and they alwaies find fooles enow that beleeue them, but thev that are wiſe will take heed of them.
               This is firſt vniuſt, it wholly troubleth the ſtate, driues away the reſt, and libertie of the ſpirit. It is, not to know that  which euery one ought to know, and by how many offices euery man is obliged vnto himſelfe; whileſt they ſeeke to be officious and ſeruiceable to another, they are vniuſt to themſelues. Wee haue all buſineſſe enough with and within our ſelues, and neede not ſeeke meanes to loſe our ſelues without, and to giue our ſelues vnto others: euery man muſt hold him to himſelfe. He that knowes not how to liue honeſtly, healthfully, and merrily, is ill aduiſed, and takes an ill and vnnaturall courſe, if he thinke to doe it by ſeruing another. He muſt affect and tie himſelfe but to a few things and thoſe iuſt.
               Secondly, this ſharpe intention and paſſionate affection, troubleth all, and hindreth the conduct of thoſe affaires to  which he ſo much giueth himſelfe; as in a precipitate paſe too much haſt makes a man ſtumble and enterfeare, and ſo ſtaies him whether he will or no: Ipſa ſe volocitas implicat, vnde feſtinatio tarda eſt. Qui nimium properat ſeriùs abſoluit. So likewiſe a man being drunken with this violent intention, he

entangleth and fettereth himſelfe, commits many indiſcretions and wrongs, growes into hard conceits and ſuſpicions of others, becomes impatient in croſſe or ſlow occurrents that fall not out according to his owne deſire: malè cuncta miniſtrat impetus. This is ſeene not only in ſerious affaires, but alſo vaine and friuolous, as in play, where hee that is carried with an ardent thirſt of gaining, troubleth himſelfe, and the more hee troubleth himſelfe, the more hee loſeth. Hee that walkes moderately, is alwaies with himſelfe, directeth his buſineſſe with better aduantage, and more ſuredly and cheerfully: he diſſembleth, applieth, deferreth all to his owne leaſure, and as his occaſions ſhall fall out: if hee chance to be conuicted in a matter, it is without torment and affliction, being alwaies readie for a new charge: hee alwaies marcheth with the bridle in his hand, feſtinat lentè.
               
               Thirdly, this violent affection infecteth and corrupteth euen the iudgement it ſelfe: for following one part and deſiring  the aduantage thereof, they wax mad if they be contradicted, attributing to their partie falſe praiſes and conditions, and to the contrary falſe accuſations; interpreting all prognoſtications and occurrents at their owne pleaſure, and making them ſerue their owne deſignements. All that are of the contrary part, muſt needs be wicked and of contrarie conditions, yea and they that ſpeake anie good, or deſcrie anie good thing in them, are likewiſe ſuſpected to be of their part. Can it not poſſiblie be that a man honeſt in all things elſe, or at leaſt in ſome thing, may follow a wicked perſon, maintaine a wicked cauſe? It is enough that paſſion enforce the will, but that it cary likewiſe the iudgement, and make that a foole, this is too much. It is the ſoueraigne and laſt part that ſhould alwaies maintaine it owne authority; and we muſt ingenuouſlie, and in good ſooth acknowledge the good that is in our aduerſaries, and the euill that is in thoſe whom wee follow. The ground and foundation of the controuerſie being laid aſide we muſt keepe moderation and indifferency, and out of the buſineſſe it ſelfe baniſh all choler, all diſcontent. And thus we ſee the euils that this ouergreat affection to any thing whatſoeuer bringeth with it; of all, yea of goodneſſe and wiſedome it ſelfe a man may haue too much.
               
                  
But for a rule heerein, we muſt remember, that the principle 12 An aduiſement.
                   and moſt lawfull charge that we haue, is in euery man the conduct and guide of himſelfe. The reaſon why we are here, is, that we ſhould maintaine our ſelues in tranquillitie and libertie. And to do this, the beſt remedie is, to lend our ſelues to others, and to giue our ſelues to none but to our ſelues; to take our affaires into our hands, not to place them in our hearts; to take buſineſſe vpon vs, but not incorporate them into vs; to be diligent, not paſſionate, not to tie our ſelues but to a few, but rather alwaies to reſerue our ſelues vnto our ſelues. This counſell condemneth not thoſe offices due to the weale-publike, to our friends, our neighbour, yea it is ſo farre from it, that a wiſe man muſt be officious and charitable, applie vnto himſelfe the cuſtomes of other men and the world, and the rather to do it, he muſt contribute to publike ſocietie thoſe offices and duties which concerne him. Qui ſibi amicus est, hunc omnibus ſcito eſſe amicum. But I require a double moderation and diſcretion heerein; the one, that a man applie not himſelfe to all that is preſented vnto him, but to that which is iuſt and neceſſarie; and that is not hard to be done: the other, that it be without violence and trouble. He muſt deſire little, and that little moderately; buſie himſelfe little, and that peaceably: and in thoſe charges that he vndertaketh, employ his paſe, his ſpeech, his attentions, his ſweatings, his meanes, and if need be, his blood, his life; but yet without vexation and paſſion, keeping himſelfe alwayes to himſelfe in health and tranquillitie. A man may performe his dutie ſufficiently without this ardencie, and this ſo great contention of will. And they deceiue themſelues very much, that thinke that a buſineſſe is not well done, and there is no maner of affection, if it be not done with tempeſt, clamour and clatter: for contrariwiſe, it is that that hindreth and troubleth the good guide and conduct thereof, as hath been ſaid. O how many men hazzard their liues euery day in thoſe warres which no way concerne them, and thruſt themſelues into the danger of that bartell, the loſſe whereof doth no way trouble their ſleepe: and all to the end they may not faile in their dutie! whileſt there is another in his owne houſe, that dares not enter the danger, or looke the enemie in the face, is

more affected with the iſſue of that warre, and hath his mind more troubled than the ſouldier that aduentureth his blood and life in the field.
               Finally, we muſt know how to diſtinguiſh and ſeparate  our ſelues from our publike charges: euery one of vs playeth two parts, two perſons; the one ſtrange and apparent, the other proper and eſſentiall: we muſt diſcerne the skinne from the ſhirt. An actiue man will performe his charge, and yet withall not leaue to iudge of the follie, vice, deceit that is therein: he will conforme himſelfe to euery thing, becauſe the cuſtome of his countrey requireth it, it is profitable to the weale-publike: the world liues ſo, and therefore it muſt be done. A man muſt ſerue and make vſe of the world ſuch as he findeth it; in the meane time, he muſt likewiſe conſider it as a thing eſtranged from it ſelfe, know how to keepe and carie himſelfe apart, and to communicate himſelfe to his owne truſtie good, howſoeuer things fall out with himſelfe.
            
            
               CHAP. III. True and eſſentiall honeſtie, the firſt and fundamentall part of wiſdome.
               
               HAuing prepared and diſpoſed our ſcholar to wiſdome by theſe precedent aduiſements, that is to ſay, hauing purified and freed him from all euils, and placed him in a good eſtate, of a full and vniuerſall libertie, to the end he may haue a perfect view, knowledge and power ouer all things (which is the priuiledge of a wiſe and ſpirituall man, ſpiritualis omnia dijudicat) it is now time to giue him inſtructions and generall rules of wiſdome. The two firſt ſhall be as preambles and foundations, whereof the firſt and principall is honeſtie or probitie.
               It will not be, perhaps, any matter of difficultie, to make good this propoſition, That honeſtie is the firſt principall  and fundamentall part of wiſdome: for all (whether in truth and good earneſt, or in outward ſhew, for ſhame or feare to ſay the contrarie) doe applaud it; they alwayes honour it in the firſt place, confeſſing themſelues ſeruitours and affectionate followers thereof: but it will coſt me ſome labour to

ſhew and perſwade, which is that true and eſſentiall probitie we heere require. For that which is in authoritie and credit, wherewith the whole world contenteth it ſelfe, that which is only knowne, ſought for, and poſſeſſed (I alwaies except ſome few of the wiſer) is baſtardly, artificiall, falſe, and counterfeit.
               Firſt we know that many times we are lead & pricked forward 2 Maſques of honestie.
                   to vertue and honorable actions, by wicked and condemned meanes, by default & naturall impotencie, by paſſion, and vice it ſelfe; chaſtitie, ſobrietie, temperancie may be in vs by reaſon of our corporall imbecillitie; the contempt of the world, patience in aduerſitie, conſtancie in danger, proceede many times from want of apprehenſion and iudgement: valor, liberalitie, iuſtice it ſelfe, from ambition: diſcretion, prudence, from feare, from auarice. And how many beautifull actions hath preſumption and temeritie brought forth? So that the actions of vertue are many times no other but maſques, they carie the outward countenance, but they haue not the eſſence; they may very well be termed vertuous in conſideration of another, and of the viſage they cary outwardly and in publike, but in truth and with the actor himſelfe they are nothing ſo; for it will appeare at the laſt, that profit, glorie, cuſtome, and other the like ſtrange cauſes haue induced him to do them.
               Sometimes they ariſe from ſtupiditie and brutiſh ſottiſhnes, and therefore it is ſaid, that wiſdome and ſottiſh ſimplicitie do meete in one and the ſame point, touching the bearing and ſuffering of humane actions. It is then very dangerous to iudge of the probitie or improbitie of a man by his actions: we muſt ſound him within, from what foundation theſe motions doe ariſe: wicked men performe many times many good and excellent actions, and both good and euill preſerue themſelues alike from doing euill, oderunt peccare boni & mali. To diſcouer therefore and to know which is the true Honeſtie, we muſt not ſtay in the outward action, that is but the ſigne, the ſimpleſt token, and many times a cloke and maske to couer villanie: we muſt penetrate into the inward part, and know the motiue which cauſeth the ſtrings to play, which is the ſoule and the life that giueth motion to all. It is that whereby we muſt iudge, it is that wherein euery man

ſhould prouide to be good and entire, and that which we ſeeke.
               That honeſtie which is commonly accounted true, and ſo much preached and commended of the world, whereof they 3 Vulgar honestie, and according to the ſtile of the world.
                   make expreſſe profeſſion, who haue the title and publike reputation to be men of honeſtie and ſetled conſtancie, is ſcholaſticall, and pedanticall, ſeruant to the lawes, enforced by hope, and feare, acquired, learned and practiſed out of a ſubmiſſion too, & a conſideration of the religion, lawes, cuſtomes, commaunds of ſuperiors, other mens examples, ſubiect to preſcript formes, effeminate, fearefull, and troubled with ſcruples and doubts; ſunt quibus innocentia niſi metu non placet: which is not only in reſpect of the world diuers and variable, according to the diuerſitie of religions, lawes, examples, formes, (for the iuriſdictions changing, the motions muſt likewiſe alter) but alſo in it ſelfe vnequall, wauering, deambulatorie, according to the acceſſe, receſſe, and ſucceſſe of the affaires, the occaſions which are preſented, the perſons with whom a man hath to do, as a ſhip driuen with the winds and the oares, is caried away with an vnequall tottering paſe, with many blowes, blaſts, and billows. To be breefe, theſe are honeſt men by accident and occaſion, by outward and ſtrange euents, and not in veritie and eſſence; they vnderſtand it not, and therefore it is eaſie to diſcouer them, and to conuince them, by ſhaking of a little their bridle, and ſounding them ſomewhat nearer, but aboue all, by that inequalitie and diuerſitie which is found in them: for in one and the ſame action they will giue diuers iudgements, and cary themſelues altogether after a diuers faſhion, going ſometimes a ſlow paſe, ſometimes running a maine gallop. This vnequall diuerſitie proceedeth from this, that the outward occaſions which moue and ſtirre them, do either puffe them vp, multiplie and increaſe them, or make them luke-warme and deiect them, more or leſſe like accidents, quae recipiunt magis & minus.
               
               Now that true honeſtie, which I require in him that will be wiſe, is free, manly, and generous, pleaſant, and cheerefull, equall 4 The deſcription of true honestie.
                  , vniforme, and conſtant, which marcheth with a ſtayed paſe, ſtately and hawtie, going alwaies his owne way, neither looking on this ſide, or behind him, without ſtaying or altering

his paſe, or gate for the wind, the times, the occaſions, which are changed, but that is not, I meane in iudgement and will, that is in the ſoule, where honeſtie reſideth and hath it ſeate. For outward actions, eſpeciallie the publike haue another iuriſdiction, as ſhall be ſaid in his place: This honeſtie I will deſcribe in this place, giuing you firſt to vnderſtand, that following the deſignment of this booke declared in the Preface, I ſpeake of humane honeſtie and wiſdome, as it is humane, whereby a man is called an honeſt man and a wiſe, and not of Chriſtian, though in the end I may chaunce to ſpeake a word or two thereof.
               The iuriſdiction of this honeſtie is Nature, which bindeth 5 Nature enioyneth honestie. euery man to be, and to make himſelfe ſuch as he ought, that is to ſay, to conforme and rule himſelfe according vnto it. Nature is together both a miſtris which enioyneth and commaundeth honeſtie, and a law and inſtruction which teacheth it vnto vs. As touching the firſt, there is a naturall obligation inward and vniuerſall in euery man to be honeſt, iuſt, vpright, following the intention of his author and maker. A man ought not to attend or ſeeke any other cauſe, obligation, inſtinct, or motiue of this honeſtie; and he can neuer know how to haue a more iuſt and lawfull, more powerfull, more ancient, it is altogether as ſoone as himſelfe, borne with himſelfe. Euery man ſhould be, or ſhould deſire to be an honeſt man, becauſe he is a man, and he that takes no care to be ſuch is a monſter, renounceth himſelfe, belieth, deſtroyeth himſelfe, by right he is no more a man, and in effect ſhould deſiſt to be a man. It is neceſſarie that honeſtie grow in him by himſelfe, that is to ſay, by that inward inſtinct which God hath put in him, and not from any other outward and ſtrange cauſe, any occaſion, or induction. A man will not, out of a iuſt and regular will, any thing that is depraued, or corrupt, or other than it owne nature requireth, it implieth a contradiction to deſire or accept a thing, and nothing to care whether it be worth the caring for; a man would haue all his parts good and ſound, his bodie, his head, his eies, his iudgement, his memorie, yea his hoſe and ſhooes; and why will he not like wiſe haue his will, and his conſcience good, that is to ſay, be whollie good and ſound? I will therefore that he be good,

and haue his will firme and reſolued to equity and honeſty, for the loue of himſelfe, and becauſe he is a man, knowing that he can be no other, without the renouncing and deſtruction of himſelfe, and ſo his honeſty ſhall be proper, inward, eſſentiall, euen as his owne eſſence is vnto him, and he vnto himſelfe. It muſt not then be for any outward conſideration, and proceeding from without, whatſoeuer it bee, for ſuch a cauſe being accidentall and outward, may happen to faile, grow weake, and alter, and conſequently all that honeſty that is grounded thereupon, muſt doe the like. If he be an honeſt man, for honour, or reputation, or other recompence, being in a ſolitary place, where he hath no hope to be knowen, hee either ceaſeth to be honeſt, or putteth it in practiſe very coldly and negligently. If for feare of the lawes, magiſtrates, puniſhments, if he can deceiue the lawes, circumuent the iudges, auoid or diſprooue the proofes, and hide himſelfe from the knowledge of another, there is an end of his honeſty. And this honeſtie is but fraile, occaſioned, accidentall and miſerable; and yet it is that which is in authoritie and vſe, no man knowes of any other, there is not an honeſt man, but ſuch as is enforced or inuited by ſome cauſe, or occaſion, nemo gratis bonus eſt. Now I would haue in this my wiſe man an eſſentiall and inuincible honeſtie, which dependeth of it ſelfe, and ariſeth from it owne root, and may as hardlie bee ſeparated, and rooted out, as humanitie from a man. I will that he neuer conſent vnto euill, and though his honeſtie be not made knowen to any, yet if he know it himſelfe, what needs any more? If all the world beſides ſhould know it, it is not ſo much, quid tibi prodeſt non habere con
                        ••
                     ium, habenti conſcient iam? And what though he receiue no great recompence for it? For what may it be that concerneth him ſo neere, as his own proper eſſence? This were not to care how bad the horſe is, ſo the ſaddle bee faire. I will then that thoſe things be inſeparable, to be, and to conſent to liue a man, to be, and to be willing to bee an honeſt man. This firſt hath beene ſufficientlie preſſed. Let vs come to the ſecond.
               Now the paterne and rule to bee honeſt, is this nature it 6 Nature teacheth honeſty.
                   ſelfe, which abſolutely requireth that wee be ſuch, it is, I ſay, this equitie and vniuerſall reaſon which ſhineth in euery one

of vs. Hee which worketh according to it, worketh truely according to God, for it is God, or at leaſt, his firſt fundamentall and vniuerſall law, which hath brought it into the world, and which came firſt from God; for God and nature are in the world, as in a ſtate, the king, the author and founder, and the fundamentall law which he hath made for the preſeruation and gouernment of the ſaid eſtate. This is a lightning and ray of the diuinitie, a ſtreame and dependance of the eternall law, which is God himſelfe and his will: quid natura niſi Deus, & diuina ratio toti mundo, & partibus eius inſerta? He worketh alſo according to himſelfe, for he worketh according to the ſterne, and animated inſtinct, which he hath within himſelfe mouing and ſtirring him: and ſo he is an honeſt man eſſentially, and not by accident and occaſion; for this law and light is eſſentiall and naturall in vs, and therefore it is called Nature, and the law of nature. He is alſo by conſequent an honeſt man, alwaies and perpetually, vniformly and equally at all times and in all places: for this law of equitie, and naturall reaſon is perpetuall in vs, edictum perpetuum, inuiolable, which can neuer be extinct nor defaced, quam nec ipſa delet iniquitas; vermis eorum non morietur, vniuerſall and conſtant in all things, and alwaies the ſame, equall vniforme, which neither time nor place can alter nor diſguiſe, receiueth neither acceſſe nor receſſe, more nor leſſe, ſubſtantia non recipit magis & minus. What ſeckeſt thou elſewhere, either law or rule in the world? What may a man ſay or alleadge which thou haſt not about thee and within, if thou wilt but feele and hearken to thy ſelfe? A man may ſay to thee, as to a bad debtor, who asked for what the debt is, and will ſee the bill which he hath about him, Quod petis intus habes; Thou demandeſt that which thou haſt in thy owne boſome. Signatum est ſuper nos lumen vultus tui. Gentes naturaliter 
                  
                     Pſal. 4. Rom. 1. Auguſt.
                   
                  quae legis ſunt faciunt: oſtendunt opus legis ſcriptum in cordibus ſuis; lex ſcripta in cordibus noſtris. The law of Moſes in his decalogue, is an outward and publike copie, the law of the twelue tables, and the Romane law, the morall inſtructions of diuines and Philoſophers, the aduiſements and counſels of Lawyers, the edicts and ordinances of Princes are no other but petie and particular pourtraies thereof: ſo that if

there be any law, that ſtraveth the leaſt that may be from this firſt and originall miſtris, it is a monſter, falſhood, and error. To be briefe, all the lawes of the world, are no other but copies and abſtracts brought forth into iudgement, againſt thee that holdeſt hidden the originall, and makeſt as if thou kneweſt it not, extinguiſhing as much as in thee lieth this light, which enlightneth thee within, qui veritatem dei detinent in iniustitia, for theſe lawes had neuer beene publiſhed abroad, but becauſe that law which was inward, whollie celeſtiall and diuine, hath been too much contemned and forgotten. Theſe are all riuers, but ſuch as neither haue ſo much water, nor ſo pure as the ſource and inuiſible fountaine, which is within thee, if thou ſuffer it not to periſh, and to be loſt: I ſay not ſo much water, Quam multa pietas, humanitas, liberalitas, fides exigunt, quae extra tabulas ſunt. O the miſerable honeſtie of formaliſts, who hold themſelues to the words of the law, and ſo thinke themſelues diſcharged! How many duties are there required beſides? Quam angusta innocentia ad legem bonum eſſe: latius officiorum patet quam iuris regula. The rule of our dutie is farre larger than that of the law, which is neither ſo ſtrong, nor ſo liuely, witnes this one thing, that well to vnderſtand and know their intention to quit our ſelues of ambiguitie, difficultie, contrarietie, we muſt bring them to the ſource, and reentring into the inward part, put them to the touch and rule of nature, Anima leg is ratio. Behold then an eſſentiall, radicall, and fundamentall honeſtie, ſprung in vs from it owne proper rootes by the ſeed of that vniuerſall reaſon which is in the ſoule, as the ſpring and ballance in a clock, as the naturall heate in the bodie, maintaining it ſelfe of it ſelfe ſtrong and inuincible, whereby a man worketh according to God, according to himſelfe, nature, the vniuerſall order and policie of the world, quietly, ſweetly, and as ſilently without noyſe, as a Ship that is not driuen but by the naturall and ordinarie courſe of the water: All other is ingrafted by arte and by accidentall diſcipline, as the heate and cold offeuers, acquired and conducted by ſtrange occaſions and conſiderations, working with clamor and clatter ambitiouſly.
               This is the reaſon why the doctrine of all the Sages doth 7 We muſt follow nature. teach, that to liue well, is to liue according to nature, that the

chiefeſt good in this world is to conſent to nature, that in following nature as our guide and miſtris, we can neuer erre, Naturam ſi ſequaris ducem nuſquam aberrabis: bonum eſt quod ſecundùm naturam, omnia vitia contra naturam ſunt: Idem beatè viuere & ſecundum naturam: vnderſtanding by nature that equitie and vniuerſall reaſon which ſhineth in vs, which conteineth and hatcheth in it the ſeeds of all vertues, probitie, iuſtice, and is the matrix from whence all good and excellent lawes do ſpring and ariſe, yea thoſe true and iuſt iudgements that are ſometimes pronounced by the mouth of an idiot. Nature hath diſpoſed all things in the beſt ſtate that they could be, and hath giuen them the firſt motion to good, and the end which they ſhould ſeeke, in ſuch ſort, that he that will follow hir, need not obtaine and poſſeſſe his owne good and his owne end, Sapientia eſt in naturam conuerti, & eò restitui vnde publicus error expulerit; Ab illa non deerr are, ad illius legem exemplum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      formari ſapientia eſt. Men are naturallie good, and follow not euill, but for profit or pleaſure, and therefore lawmakers to induce them to follow their naturall and good inclination, and not to enforce their wils, haue propoſed two contrarie things, puniſhment and reward.
               Doubtleſſe, Nature in euery one of vs is ſufficient, and a ſweet Miſtris and rule to all things, if we will hearken vnto 8 As a good and ſufficiēt mistris.
                   hir, employ and awaken hir; and wee need not ſeeke elſewhere, nor begge of Arte and the Sciences, the meanes, the remedies, and the rules which we haue need of: Euery one of vs if he will, may liue at his pleaſure of his owne. To liue content and happie, a man neede not be wiſe, a courtier, nor ſo actiue; all this ſufficiencie that is beyond the common and naturall is vaine and ſuperfluous, yea it bringeth more euill with it than good. We ſee ignorant people, idiots, and ſimple men, leade their liues more ſweetly and cheerefully, reſiſt the aſſaults of death, of want, of ſorrow, more conſtantly and contentedly, than the wiſeſt men and moſt actiue. And if a man marke it well, he ſhall finde among perſants and other poore people examples of patience, conſtancie, equanimitie, more pure than all thoſe that are taught in Schooles; they follow ſimplie the reaſon and conduct of nature, they trauell quietly and contentedly in their affaires, not enflaming or eleuating

themſelues, and conſequently more ſoundly: Others mount themſelues vpon their great horſes, play the light horſemen, bandie themſelues one againſt the other, keepe their braines alwaies in worke and agitation. A great maſter and admirable doctor in nature was Socrates, as Aristotle in arte and ſcience. Socrates by ſimple and naturall diſcourſes, by vulgar ſimilitudes and inductions, ſpeaking like a country ſwaine, did furniſh vs with precepts and rules of good life, and remedies againſt all euils, ſo ſubſtantiall and ſtrong, that all the arte and ſcience of the world could not deuiſe better or the like.
               But we doe not only not hearken vnto it, beleeue and follow 9 We alter it wholly. By violence.
                   it according to the counſell of the wiſe, but alſo (not to ſpeake of thoſe monſters who by the violence of their vices, inordinate and peruerſe delights and pleaſures ſuffocate and extinguiſh, as much as in them lieth, the light, mortifie the ſeed thereof) we endeuour to auoid it, we ſuffer it to ſleepe and to ceaſe, louing better to begge elſewhere our firſt rudiments, to runne to ſtudie and arte, than to content our ſelues By arte. with that which is bred within vs. We haue a buſie troubleſome ſpirit, which offereth it ſelfe to rule and gouerne in all things, and which carrieth it ſelfe after our owne willes, diſguiſeth, changeth, and troubleth all, will adde, inuent, alter, and can not ſtay it ſelfe in home-borne ſimplicitie, it thinketh nothing good wherein there is not craft and ſubtiltie, ſimplex illa & aperta virtus in obſcuram & ſolertem ſcientiam verſa est. And it is a vice common amongſt vs, not to account of any thing that is in vs, we eſteeme only of that which is bought, which is coſtly, and is brought from farre: we preferre arte before nature, we ſhut the windowes at highnoone, and light candles. This fault and follie proceedeth from another, that is, that we eſteeme not of things according to their true and eſſentiall value, but according to the ſhew and report. How many are there more ſcrupulous and exact in thoſe things that belong to the poſitiue and municipall law, than the naturall? Truly almoſt all, yea euen in the ceremoniall, and law of ciuilitie, which we haue framed to our ſelues, in reſpect By ceremonis. whereof we diſdaine and are aſhamed of nature. We ſpeake little, we make a faire ſhew, and carefully keepe a decorum or decencie, and make no difficultie to goe directly againſt nature,

dutie, conſcience. So that the ſhadow is more vnto vs than the bodie, the root, the countenance more than the ſubſtance and ſound veritie. That we may not offend a ceremonie, we couer and hide things naturall; we dare not name, and we bluſh at the ſound of things, which we doe in no ſort feare to do, both lawfull and vnlawfull. We dare not ſpeake that which is permitted to doe, we dare not directly to name our owne proper members, and yet we feare not to employ them in all maner of wickedneſſe: we pronounce, ſpeake, and do, without feare and without ſhame, wicked things, and ſuch as are againſt nature and reaſon, forſweare, betray, aſſaile, kill, deceiue; and we bluſh to ſpeake of things good, naturall, neceſſarie, iuſt and lawfull. There is not a husband, which is not more aſhamed to embrace his wife in the open view of the world, than to kill, lie, aſſaile; nor a woman that will not rather vtter any wickedneſſe in the world, than name that wherein ſhe taketh moſt delight, and may lawfullie doe. Euen to treaſons and murders, they tie themſelues to the lawes of a ceremonie, and there faſten their deuoires. A ſtrange thing, that iniuſtice ſhould complaine of inciuility, malice of indiſcretion! The act of a ceremonie, doth it not preuaile againſt nature? The ceremonie forbiddeth vs to expreſſe naturall things and lawfull, and we giue credit therevnto: Nature and reaſon forbiddeth vs things vnlawfull, and no man beleeues it: A man ſends his conſcience to the brothell-houſe, and keeps his outward countenance in order. All this is monſtrous, and the like is not found amongſt beaſts. I will not for all this ſay (as I perceiue malice doth already mutter) that ceremonie and decencie ought not carefully be kept, which is the ſalt and ſeaſoning of our actions and conuerſations. Amo verecundiam, in ea ornatus vitae, & 
                  Cicer. 
                  vis decori. But I ſay to them as our Sauiour to men of the like ſpirit: O hypocritae excelantes culicem, camelum deglutientes, 
                  Matth. 23. 
                  qui minima curatis, grauiora ſpernitis: Haec oportet primùm facere, tum illa non omittere.
               
               From this generall and vniuerſall alteration and corruption 10 In ſuch ſort, that it is no more knowen in man.
                   it is come to paſſe, that there is nothing of Nature knowen in vs. If we muſt ſay what the lawes thereof are, and how many they are, we are much hindred. The enſigne & marke

of a naturall law is the vniuerſitie of approbation: for that which Nature ſhall haue truly ordemed for vs, we with a common conſent ſhall follow without doubting; and not only euery nation, but euery particular perſon.
               Now there is not any thing in the world which is not denied and contradicted, not by one nation, but by diuers: and there is not any thing ſo ſtrange and vnnaturall in the opinion of diuers, which is not approued and authoriſed in many places by common vſe. The little care of hauing children, the murther of parents, of children, of himſelfe, mariage of the neereſt in bloud, theft, publike marchandize of their libertie and bodies, as well of males as females, are receiued by publike vſe in many nations.
               Doubtleſſe there remaineth no more any image or trace of nature in vs, we muſt go ſeeke it in beaſts, where this troubleſome 11 And we muſt ſeeke it elſewhere.
                   and vnquiet ſpirit, this quick-ſiluer, neither arte, nor beautifull ceremonie hath power to alter it; they haue it pure and entire, if it be not corrupted by our vſage and contagion, as ſometimes it is. All the world followeth nature, the firſt and vniuerſall rule which the author thereof hath giuen and eſtabliſhed, except man only who troubleth the policie and ſtate of the world with his gentle ſpirit, and his free-will to wickedneſſe; he is the only irregular creature, and enemy of nature.
               So then the true honeſtie (the foundation and piller of wiſdome) is to follow nature, that is to ſay, reaſon. The good and 12 True honeſtie.
                   the end of man, in whom conſiſteth his reſt, his libertie, his contentment, and in a word, his perfection in this world, is, to liue and do according to nature, when that which is the moſt excellent thing in him commaundeth, that is to ſay, reaſon. True honeſtie is a right and firme diſpoſition of the will to follow the counſell of reaſon: And as the heedle touched with the adamant neuer reſteth it ſelfe vntill he ſee the north point, and thereby ordereth and directeth the nauigation; ſo a man is neuer well, yea, he is as it were vndone, and diſlocated, vntill he ſee this law, and directeth the courſe of his life, his maners, his iudgements and willes, according to the firſt, diuine, naturall law, which is an inward domeſticall light, whereof all the reſt are but beames.
               
                  
But to effect it, and to come to the practiſe, it is farre more eaſie to ſome, than to others. There are ſome that haue their 13 The distinction of true honestie.
                   particular nature, that is to ſay, their temper and temperature ſo good and pleaſing (which eſpecially proceedeth from the firſt formation in the womb of the mother, and afterwards from the milke of the nurſe, and this firſt and tender education) that they find themſelues without endeuor, and without arte or diſcipline, whollie caried and diſpoſed to goodneſſe and honeſtie, that is to ſay, to follow and conforme themſelues to the vniuerſall nature, whereby they are tearmed well-borne; gaudeant bene nati.
               
               This kind of naturall and eaſie honeſtie, and as it were Naturall goodnes. borne with vs, is properly called goodneſſe, a qualitie of a ſoule well borne and well gouerned, it is a ſweetneſſe, facilitie, and debonairie mildneſſe of nature: and not (leſt any bodie ſhould be deceiued) a ſoftneſſe, a feminine, ſottiſh calmeneſſe and vitious facilitie, whereby a man delighteth to pleaſe all, and not to diſpleaſe or offend any, although he haue a iuſt and a lawfull cauſe, and it be for the ſeruice of reaſon and iuſtice; whereby it comes to paſſe, that they will not employ themſelues in lawfull actions, when it is againſt thoſe that take offence thereat; nor altogether refuſe the vnlawfull, when they pleaſe thereby thoſe that conſent thereunto. Of theſe kind of people it is ſaid (and this commendation is iniurious) He is good, ſince he is good euen to the wicked; and this accuſation true, How ſhould he be good, ſince he is not euill, to thoſe that are euill? We ſhould rather call this kind of goodneſſe innocencie, as men call little children ſheepe, and the like, innocent creatures. But an actiue, valiant, manly, and effectuall goodneſſe is that I require, which is a readie, eaſie, and conſtant affection vnto that which is good, right, iuſt, according to reaſon and nature.
               There are others ſo ill borne and bred, that it ſeemeth (that like monſters) their particular natures are made, as it were in deſpite of the vniuerſall nature, ſo croſſe and contrarie are they thereunto. In this caſe the remedie to correct, reforme, ſweeten, make tame, and amend this euill, rough, ſauage, and crooked nature, to bend it and applie it to the rule of this generall and great miſtris the vniuerſall nature, is to haue recourſe

to the ſtudy of philoſophie (as Socrates did) and vnto Acquired vertue. vertue, which is a combate and painfull endeuor againſt vice, a labourious ſtudie, which requireth time, labour, and diſcipline. Virtus in arduo & circa difficile: ad ianuam virtutis excubant labor & ſudor. Dij mortalibus virtutem laboris pretio vendiderunt. This is not to bring in a new, ſtrange, or artificiall honeſtie, and ſo accidentall, and ſuch, as I haue ſaid before, is not the true; but it is by taking away the lets and hinderances, to ſtirre vp and enlighten this light almoſt extinct and languiſhing, and to reuiue thoſe ſeeds almoſt choked by the particular vice, and ill temperature of the particular perſon; as by taking away the moat from the eie, the ſight is recouered, and the duſt from off the glaſſe, a man ſeeth the clearer.
               By all this that hath beene ſaid, it appeareth that there are 14 Three degrees of perfection.
                   two ſorts of true honeſtie; the one naturall, ſweet, eaſie, iuſt, called goodneſſe; the other acquired, difficult, painfull, and laborious, called vertue. But to ſay the truth, there is alſo a third, which is, as it were, compoſed of the two, and ſo there ſhould be three degrees of perfection. The loweſt of the three is a facill and debonairie nature, diſtaſted by it ſelfe by reaſon of vice; we haue named it goodneſſe, innocencie. The ſecond more high, which wee haue named vertue, is with a liuelie force to hinder the progreſſe of vice, and hauing ſuffered himſelfe to be ſurpriſed, with the firſt motions of the paſſions, to arme and bend himſelfe to ſtaie their courſe, and to ouercome them. The third and chiefeſt, is out of a high reſolution, and a perfect habit, to be ſo well framed, that temptations cannot ſo much as grow in him, and the ſeedes of vice are whollie rooted out, in ſo much that his vertue is turned into a complexion, and into nature. This laſt may be called perfection. That & the firſt, which is called goodneſſe, do reſemble one the other, and differ from the ſecond, in that they are without ſtirre, paine, or endeuour. This is the true tincture of the ſoule, hir naturall and ordinary courſe, which coſteth nothing. The ſecond is alwaies in care and in awe. The laſt and perfect is acquired by the long ſtudie and ſerious exerciſe of the rules of philoſophie, ioined to a beautifull and rich nature. For both are neceſſarie, the naturall and the acquired. This

is that thoſe two ſects did ſo much ſtudie, the Stoickes and much more the Epicures (which would haue ſeemed ſtrange if Seneca and other ancient Philoſophers did not teſtifie it, who are rather to bee credited, than all the other more moderne) who made aſport and play game of ſhame, want, ſickneſſe, griefes, tortures, death: They did not only contemne, patiently endure and vanquiſh all aſperities and difficulties, but they fought them, they tooke pleaſure and delight in them, and all to keepe their vertue in breath, and in action, which made them not only firme, conſtant, graue and ſeuere, as Cato and the Stoickes, but cheerefull, merry, wanton, and if a man may ſo ſay, foole-hardy too.
               By the compariſon of theſe three together, it ſeemeth to ſome (who vnderſtand not the height and value of the third)  that the ſecond, which we call vertue, by reaſon of the difficulties, dangers, endeuours thereof, carrieth the honour, and that as Metellus ſaid, to doe euill is an idle and a baſe thing; to doe good where there is neither paine nor danger, is a common thing and too eaſie; but to doe good where there is danger and paine, is the part of an honeſt man, and of vertue: it is the mot of that diuine Philoſopher 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . But to ſpeake in truth that which it is, beſides that difficultie (as elſwhere hath beene ſaid) is no true, not iuſt and lawfull cauſe, why a thing ſhould be the more eſteemed, it is certaine that in the like thing the natural is more worth than the acquired, that it is far more noble, more excellent and diuine to worke by nature than by Art, eaſily, equally, vniformedly, than painfully, vnequally, with doubt and danger. God is good after the firſt maner, that is, the naturall and eſſentiall goodneſſe, we dare not call him vertuous, nor the Angels and ſpirits fortunate they are called good. But becauſe vertue maketh a greater clamor and ſtirre, and worketh with greater vehemencie than goodneſſe, it is more admired and eſteemed of the vulgar ſort (who are but fooliſh iudges) but wrongfully. For theſe great exalters and extravagant productions; which ſeeme to be all zeale and fire, are no part of the play, and do not in any ſore appertaine to true honeſty; they are rather maladies and furious entrances, faire diſtant from that wiſdome we here require, which is ſweet, equal, & vniforme.
               
                  
Thus much be ſpoken in groſſe of honeſtie; for the parts thereof and the duties ſhall be handled in the third booken  eſpeciallie in the vertue of Iuſtice I will heere adde a word or two (according to promiſe) to rebate and blunt the point of detraction, and to ſtay the plaints of thoſe, that diſlike that I attribute ſo much to nature (although it be God as hath been ſaid, and this booke ſpeaketh not but of the naturall and humane) as if that were all, and there were nothing elſe to be required. Wherefore beſides all that hath been ſaid, there remaineth yet one thing to make this worke complete and perfect, and that is the grace of God, whereby this honeſtie, goodnes, vertue, hath life, is brought forth in his due tune, and receiueth it laſt and perfect portraict, it is eleuated, chriſtned, crowned, that is to ſay, accepted, verified, approued by God, and made (after a ſort) worthie it due reward. Honeſtie is like to a good Organiſt, who toucheth well and truly according to arte: the grace and ſpirit of God, is the blaſt and wind which expreſſeth the touch, giueth life, and maketh the inſtrument to ſpeake, and to make a pleaſant melodie. Now this good conſiſteth not in long diſcourſe, precepts and inſtructions, neither is it attained by our owne proper act and labour, it is a free gift from aboue, whereof it taketh the name, Grace: but we muſt deſire it, aske, implore it, both humblie and ardentlie: O God, vouchſafe of thy infinit goodneſſe to looke vpon me with the eye of thy clemencie, to accept & to like of my deſire, mine eſſaye, my little worke, which comes originallie from thee, by that obligation and inſtruction, which thou haſt giuen me in the law of nature, which thou haſt planted in me, to the end it may returne vnto thee, and that thou mayeſt end that thou haſt begun, that ſo thou mayeſt be both my α and ω Sprinckle me with thy grace, keepe me, and account me thine, and ſo forth. The better to obteine it, that is to ſay to incline God vnto vs, is this 
                     Art. 14. honeſtie (as hath been ſaid in the Preface, whither (that I may not iterate it) I reſend the reader) the matter being well prepared, is the fitter for the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , the grace, it is not contrarie, neither doth it enforce or deſtroy nature, but ſweetly it releeueth and perfecteth it, ſo that it muſt not oppoſe it ſelfe therevnto as to it contrarie, but put it on as a crowne. They are

both of God, they muſt not therefore be confounded; euery one hath his iuriſdiction, his action apart: The organiſt and he that worketh at the bellowes are two, ſo are honeſtie and grace, the action good in it ſelfe naturally, rhorhlly, humainly, and that by grace made acceptable. That may well be without this, and hath his worth, as in thoſe philoſophers & great men in times paſt, admirable in nature, and in all kind of morall vertue, and is likewiſe found in misbeleeuers or Infidels; but this cannot be without that, no more than the couering, the crowne and perfection can be without the entire bodie. The player or organiſt may in euery point exerciſe his arte, without the bellowes-blower, and ſo likewiſe honeſtie without grace. It is true that this cannot be but aes ſonans, and cymbulum tinniens, but this requireth that 
                     •
                   wherein I ſee many to  miſtake themſelues very groſſely, who neuer haue any taſte, or do euer conceiue the image of true honeſtle, and continue puffed vp with a perſwaſion of grace, which they thinke to practiſe, to attract, to attaine by certaine eaſie & idle meanes, after the maner of the Phariſies, where with they reſt contented, not troubling themſelues any further for the true honeſtie, promotiper ſaltum, Maſters without apprentiſhip, Doctours and nobles in parchment. Now I ſee many of theſe kind of people in the would, but very few ſuch as Aristides, Bhocion, Cato, Regulus, Socrates; Scipio, Epaminondas, that is to ſay, profeſſors of an exact, true, and ſolid morall vertue, and philoſophicall probitie. That complaint and reproch ſo frequent of the ſoueraigne Doctor of the truth, againſt hypocriticall Pharifies, will alwaies haue place, for ſuch people will neuer be wanting, no not amongſt the Cenſors and refourcers of the world. Now hauing ſpoken much of honeſtie, we muſt likewiſe in a word or two touch the contrarie the reunto.
               Wickednes i
                     •
                  s againſt nature, it is foule; deformed, and vnprofitable, it offendeth euery good iudgement, fit breedeth a 17 The deſcription of wickednes.
                   hatred of it ſelfe being well knowen, whereupon ſome haue ſaid, that it was bred and brought forth by idleneſſe and ignorance. Againe, wickednes ingendreth offence and repentance in the ſoule, which like an vlcer in the fleſh, eateth and fretteth it, malice and miſchiefe buildeth vp torments againſt it ſelfe: malitia ipſa maximam partem veneni ſui bibit: malum
                  
                  conſilium conſultori poſſimum: like the waſpe, which with his ſting offendeth another but much more himſelfe, for he leaueth behind him, and that for euer, both his ſting and his ſtrength: vice hoth pleaſure in it, otherwiſe it would not be receiued, nor find place in the world, nemo enim animi cauſu malus eſt; but it doth withall ingender diſpleaſure and offence, paine followeth firme, ſaith Plato, yea it groweth with it, ſaith Heſiodus, which is quite contrarie to the will and to vertue, which reioyceth and contenteth. There is a congratulation, a pleaſing contentment and ſatisfaction in well doing; it is the true and eſſentiall reward of a good ſoule, which can neuer faile him, and wherewith he muſt content himſelfe in this world.
               There is no man maketh a doubt, whether vice be to be auoided, and hated aboue all things; but it is a queſtion, whether 18 Whether it be neuer permitted to ſinne.
                   there may be any ſuch profit or pleaſure, as may carrie with it a ſufficient excuſe for the committing of ſuch or ſuch a finne. It ſeemeth to diuers, that there may. Touching proſin, if it be publike, there is no doubt (but yet with limitation, as ſhall be ſayd in the vertue of politike prudence) but ſome will ſay as much of particular profit and pleaſure. A man 
                     
                        •
                      
                     Lib. 3. cap. 2. might ſpeake and iudge heereof more certainly, if ſome certaine fact on example were propoſed: but to ſpeake ſimplie, we are firmly to holde the negatiue.
               That ſinne can not inwardly furniſh vs with ſuch pleaſure and content, as honeſtie doth, there is no doubt; but that it 19 Whether all ſinne ingender repentance. The diſtinction of vice or wickedneſſe.
                   tormendth (as hath been ſayd) it is not vniuerſally and in all ſenſes true: we muſt therefore diſtinguiſh it. There are three ſorts of wickedneſſe and wicked people ſome are incorporated into euill, by diſcourſe and reſolution, or by long habit, in ſuch ſort, that their vnderſtanding it ſelfe approueth it and conſenteth there unto. This falleth out, when ſinne hauing met with a ſtrong and vigorous heart, is in ſuch ſort rooted therein, that it is there formed and as it were naturalized, and the ſoule infected and wholly tainted therewith. Others contrariwiſe do ill by impulſions, according as the violent winde of temptation troubleth, ſtirreth and precipitateth the ſoule vnto ſinne, and as they are ſurpriſed and caried by the force of paſſion. The third, as midlings betwixt theſe two, account

their vice ſuch as it is, they accuſe and condemne it, contrarie to the firſt, and they are not carried by paſſion or temptation as the ſecond; but in colde blood, hauing well thought thereof, they enter into the market, they ballance it with ſome great pleaſure or profit, and in the end at a certaine price and meaſure they yeeld thereunto, and they thinke they haue ſome excuſe to doe it. Of this ſort of ſinnes are vſuries, obſcenities or venereous pleaſures, and other ſinnes manie times reſumed, conſulted, deliberated, as alſo the ſinnes of complexion.
               Of theſe three, the firſt do neuer repent, without ſome extraordinarie 20 Their compariſon.
                   touch from heauen: for being ſetled and hardned in wickedneſſe, they feele not the pricke and ſting thereof: for ſince the vnderſtanding approueth it, and the ſoule is wholly tainted therewith, the will hath no will to gainſay it. The third repent, or ſeeme in a certaine faſhion, that is to ſay, ſimply conſidering the diſhoneſt action in it ſelfe, but afterwards weighing it with profit or pleaſure, they repent not at all: and to ſay the truth, and to ſpeake properly, they do not repent, ſince both their reaſon and conſcience willeth and conſenteth to the fault. The ſecond are they that repent and readuiſe themſelues, and of whom properly it is called repentance; whereof I will heere take occaſion to ſpeake a word or two.
               Repentance is a diſauowing or deniall, and a retractation 21 Of repentance.
                   of the will, that is, a ſorrow or griefe ingendred in vs by reaſon, which driueth away all other ſorrowes and griefs which proceed from outward cauſes. Repentance is inward, inwardly ingendred, and therfore more ſtrong than any other, as the heat and colde of a feauer is more violent than that which is outward. Repentance is the medicine of the ſoule, the death of ſinne, the cure of our willes and conſciences: but it is neceſſarie that we well know it. Firſt, it is not of euerie ſinne, as hath beene ſayd, not of that which is inueterate, habituated, authorized by the iudgement it ſelfe, but of the accidentall, and that which happeneth either by ſurpriſe or by force; nor of things that are not in our power, whereof we are ſorrie we cannot repent; neither can it be in vs, by reaſon of bad iſſues, and contrary to our counſels and deſignments.

If a matter fall out beſides a mans thought, conceipt, and aduice; for that he muſt not repent him of his counſell and aduice, if he therein carrie himſelfe as he ought, for a man cannot diuine of euents; and if a man did know them, yet he hath no place to conſult of them; and we neuer are to iudge of counſels by their iſſues; neither muſt it grow in him by the age, impotencie, & diſtaſte of things, this were to ſuffer his iudgement to be corrupted: for the things are not changed, becauſe we are changed, by age, ſickneſſe, or other accidents. The growing wiſe, or amendment, which comes by anxietie, diſtaſte, or feeblenes, is not true and religious, but idle and languiſhing. The weakneſſe of the bodie is no fit poſt to carie vs to God, and to our dutie and repentance, but true repentance is the gift of God, which toucheth our heart, and muſt grow in vs not by the weakneſſe of the bodie, but by the force of the ſoule and of reaſon.
               Now from true repentance there ariſeth a true, free, and religious confeſſion of our faults. As in the maladies of the bodie 22 Of confeſſion and excuſe.
                   we ſee two kinds of remedies, the one which healeth, taking away the cauſe and roote of the maladie, the other which doth only couer it and bring it aſleepe, and therefore the former is more forcible and more wholſome. So likewiſe in the maladies of the ſoule, the true remedie which clenſeth and healeth, is a ſerious and modeſt confeſſion of our faults; the other falſe which doth only diſguiſe and couer, is excuſe, a remedie inuented by the author of euill it ſelfe, whereof the prouerb is, That ſinne ſoweth itſelfe a garment, that is, excuſe, the garment made of figge leaues by the firſt offenders, who couered themſelues both with words and deeds, but it was a garment without warmth. We ſhould therefore learne to accuſe our ſelues, boldly to confeſſe all our actions & thoughts; for beſides that it were a faire and generous libertie, it were likewiſe a meane not to do or thinke any thing, which were not honeſt and fit to be publiſhed: for he that will be content to be bound to tell all, will be likewiſe content to bind himſelfe to do nothing that a man is conſtrained to hide; but contrarily, euery man is diſcret and ſecret in confeſſion, but not in action. Boldnes to ſinne, is in ſome ſort bridled by boldnes to confeſſe. If it be vndecent to do a thing, it is farre more vndecent

not to dare to auouch it. Many great and holy men, as Saint Austin, Origen, Hippocrates, haue publiſhed the errours of their opinions, and we ſhould doe the like of our maners. By going about to hide them, a man falleth many times into greater euils, as he that ſolemnly denieth that he hath abuſed his bodie with another, by thinking to mend the matter marres it, at leaſtwiſe multiplies his ſinne. This is not to excuſe vice, but to adde thereunto.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII. To haue a certaine end and forme of life, the ſecond foundation of Wiſdome.
               
               AFter this firſt foundation of true and inward honeſtie, there commeth as it were by way of preamble, a ſecond foundation, neceſſarie for the gouernment of our life, which is to prepare and frame our ſelues to a certaine and aſſured courſe of life, to make choyce of that calling which doth beſt befit vs, and is proper vnto vs; that is to ſay, which our particular nature (following alwaies the vniuerſall, our great and generall miſtris and gouernor) doth willinglie accommodate and applie it ſelfe vnto. Wiſdome is a ſweet and regular conduct and cariage of our ſoule, guiding it with meaſure and proportion, and conſiſteth in an equalitie of life and maners.
               This choyce then is a matter of great difficultie, wherein a 2 This choyce a difficult thing, wherin a man carieth himſelf diuerſty.
                   man carieth himſelfe very diuerſlie, and wherein he findeth himſelfe hindered by diuers conſiderations, which draw him into diuers parts, and many times hurt and hinder one another. Some are happie therein, who by a great goodnes and felicitie of nature, haue knowne both ſpeedily and eaſily how to chooſe, and either by a certaine good hap, without any great deliberation, are, as it were, whollie caried into that courſe of life, which doth beſt befit them, in ſuch ſort that fortune hath been their chooſer, and led them vnto it, or by the friendly and prouident hand of another, they haue been guided and directed. Others contrarily are vnhappie, who hauing failed euen from the entrance, and wanting the ſpirit or induſtrie to know themſelues, and in a good houre to be readuifed how they might cunningly withdraw their ſtake

in the middeſt of the game, are in ſuch ſort engaged, that they can no more recall themſelues, and ſo conſtrained to lead a life full of inconuenience and repentance.
               But it likewiſe proceedeth many times from the great default of him that deliberateth, either in not knowing himſelfe well, and preſuming too much of himſelfe, whereby it falleth out that he muſt either ſhamefully deſiſt from that which he hath vndertaken, or endure much paine and torment in perſiſting therein. Hee muſt remember that to carrie a burthen, it is neceſſary there be more ſtrength than burthen, otherwiſe a man is conſtrained either to leaue it, or to ſinke vnder it. A wiſe man doth neuer charge himſelfe with more buſineſſe, than he knoweth how to goe thorow: or in not ſetling himſelfe in any thing, but changing from day to day, as they doe that are neuer pleaſed nor ſatisfied with any thing, but that which they haue not, euery thing diſcontenteth them, as well eaſe, as buſineſſe, to command as to obey. Theſe kind of people liue miſerablie, and without reſt, as men conſtrained. The other likewiſe cannot hold themſelues quiet, they ceaſe not to go and come to no purpoſe, they ſeeme to do much and do nothing; the actions of a wiſe man do alwaies tend to ſome certaine end, Magnam rem puta vnum hominem agere, praeter ſapientem nemo vnum agit, multiformes ſumus. But the moſt part doe not deliberate, and conſult of any thing, they ſuffer themſelues to be led like oxen, or carried according to the times, company, occaſion, and they know not how to giue a reaſon, why they are rather of this calling than another, except it be becauſe their father profeſt the ſame, or that they were vnawares carried into it, and ſo haue continued therein, in ſuch ſort, that as they did neuer well conſider of their entrance, ſo they know not which way to get out, Pauci ſunt qui conſilio ſe ſuaque diſponant, caeteri eorum more qui fluminibus innatant, non eunt ſed feruntur.
               
               Now that a man may carrie himſelfe well heerein, chooſe well, and well acquite himſelfe, he muſt know two things and 3 Counſell in choſe afairs.
                   two natures; his owne, that is, his complexion, his port and capacity, his temperature, in what a man excelleth, in what he is feeble, what he is fit for, for what he is vnfit: For to goe againſt his owne nature, is to tempt God, to ſpit againſt the

heauens, to leaue the buſineſſe vndone, becauſe hee cannot doe it, nec quidquam ſequi quod aſſequinequeas, and to expoſe himſelfe to laughter and mockery. Afterwards hee muſt know that which belongs to his affires, that is to ſay, the eſtate, profeſſion, and kinde of life that is propoſed. There are ſome wherein the affaires are great and weighty, others where they are dangerous, others where they are not ſo great, but are mingled, and full of entaglements, and that draw after them many other buſineſſes; theſe charges doe much afflict the ſpirit. Euery profeſſion requireth more ſpecially one certaine facultie of the ſoule, one the vnderſtanding, another the imagination, another the memorie. Now to know theſe two natures, his owne, and that of the profeſſion and courſe of life, that which hath beene ſaid of the diuers temperatures of the inward parts and faculties, will helpe much. Knowing theſe two natures, we muſt compare them together, to ſee whether they can well ioine and endure together, for it is neceſſarie that they agree; if a man be to conteſt with his owne nature, and to enforce it for the ſeruice and performance of a function and charge which he vndertaketh; or contrarily, if to follow his nature, whether willingly, or that by force and inſenſibly it draw him, a man happen to faile or erre in his dutie, what diſorder is there? Where is equitie? Where is decencie? Si quicquam decorum, nihil profectò magis quàm aequabilitas vitae vniuerſae, & ſingularum actionum, quam conſeruare non poſſis: ſi aliorum imiteris naturam, omittas tuam. This is the account wee muſt make, when we thinke to doe any thing that hath worth or grace in it, if nature it ſelfe be wanting,
               Tu nihil inuita dices facieſue Minerua:
               
                  Id quemque decet quod est ſuum maximè: ſic est faciendum, vt contra naturam vniuerſam nil contendamus, ea ſeruata propriam ſequamur. And if it fall out, that by miſhap, imprudency or otherwiſe a man finde himſelfe engaged in a vocation and courſe of life painfull and vnprofitable, and that a man cannot flie backe; it is the part of wiſedome, to reſolue to beare it, to ſweeten it, to accommodate it vnto himſelfe as much as he can; doing as in a game at hazard, according to the counſell of Plato, wherein if the die or card fall not out to be good,

a man taketh it patientlie, and indeuoreth to mend his ill chaunce by his good play; and like Bees, who from Tyme, a ſharp and dry herbe, gather ſweet hony, and as the prouerb is, make a vertue of neceſſitie.
            
            
               CHAP. V. To ſtudie true pietie, the firſt office of Wiſdome.
               
               THe preparatiues made, and the two foundations laid, it is time to build, and to ſet downe the rules of wiſdome, whereof the firſt and moſt noble concerneth the religion and worſhip of God. Pietie holdeth the firſt place in the ranke of our duties, and it is a thing of great importance, wherein it is dangerous and very eaſie to erre and be miſtaken. It is neceſſarie therefore to be aduiſed, and to know how he that ſtudieth wiſdome ſhould gouerne himſelfe; which we purpoſe to do hauing a little diſcourſed of the ſtate and ſucceſſe of religions in the world, referring the reſt vnto that which I haue ſaid in my three Verities.
               It is firſt a very fearefull thing, to conſider the great diuerſitie of religions which haue beene and are in the world, and 1 Diuerſitie of religions.
                   much more of the ſtrangenes of ſome of them, ſo fantaſticall and exorbitant, that it is a wonder that the vnderſtanding of man ſhould be ſo much beſotted and made drunken with impoſtures; for it ſeemeth, that there is nothing in the world high or low, which hath not been deified in ſome place or other, and that hath not found a place wherein to be worſhipped.
               They all agree in many things, and haue likewiſe taken their beginning in the ſame climat. Palestina and Arabia 
                  2 That all agree in many principles.
                   which ioyne together (I meane the more renowned and famous miſtris of the reſt) haue their principles and foundations almoſt alike; The beliefe of one God the author of all things, of his prouidence and loue towards mankinde, the immortalitie of the ſoule, reward for the good, chaſtiſement for the wicked after this life, a certaine outward profeſſion of praying, inuocating, honoring and ſeruing God. To win them credit, and that they may be receiued, they alledge and furniſh themſelues, whether indeed and in veritie,

as the true, or by impoſture and faire ſemblance, with reuelations, apparitions, prophets, miracles, prodigies, holie myſteries, Saints. All haue their fountaine and beginning ſmall, feeble, humble, but by little and little by the imitation and contagious acclamation of the people, with ſome fictions as forerunners, they haue taken footing, and been authoriſed, in ſo much that they all are held with affirmation and deuotion, yea the abſurdeſt amongſt them. All hold and teach that God is appeaſed and woon by prayers, preſents, vowes, and promiſes, and the like: All beleeue that the principall and moſt pleaſant ſeruice of God, and the powerfulleſt meane to appeaſe him, and to obtaine his grace, is to puniſh, to cut themſelues, to impoſe vpon themſelues ſome painefull and difficult labour; witnes throughout the world, and almoſt in all religions, and rather in the falſe than in the true, in Mahumetiſme, than Chriſtianitie, ſo many orders, companies, hermitages and frieries deſtinated to certaine and diuers exerciſes very painefull and of a ſtrict profeſſion, euen to the lancing and cutting of their bodies, thinking thereby to merit much more than the common ſort, who purifie not themſelues with afflictions and torments as they do, and euery day they prouide new: and the nature of man doth neuer ceaſe to inuent meanes of paine and torment, which proceedeth from the opinion that God taketh pleaſure, and is pleaſed with the torment and ruine of his creatures; which opinion is founded vpon the ſacrifices, which were vniuerſall throughout the world before the birth of Chriſtianitie, and exerciſed not only vpon innocent beaſts, which were maſacred, with the effuſion of their bloud, for a pretious preſent vnto God, but (a ſtrange thing that man ſhould be ſo ſottiſh) vpon infants, innocents, and men, as well good and honeſt as offenders, a cuſtome practiſed with great religion almoſt in all nations: As the Getae a people of Scythia, who among other ceremonies and ſacrifices diſpatched vnto their god Zamolxis, from fiue yeares to fiue, a man amongſt them to demaund things neceſſarie for them. And becauſe it was thought neceſſarie that one ſhould die ſuddainly, at an inſtant, and that they did expoſe themſelues vnto death after a doubtfull maner, by running

themſelues vpon the points of three iauelins, whereby it fell out, that many were diſpatched in their order, vntill there came one that lighted vpon a mortall wound, and died ſuddenly, accounting him the fitteſt meſſenger, and in greateſt fauour with their god, and not the reſt: as the Perſians, witneſſe that fact of Amestris the mother of Xerxes, who at one inſtant buried aliue foureteene yoong men of the beſt houſes, according to the religion of the countrey: as the ancient Gawles, the Carthaginians, who ſacrificed to Saturne their children, their fathers and mothers being preſent: the Lacedemonians, who flattered their goddeſſe Diana, by whipping their youths in fauour of her, many times euen to death: the Greeks, witneſſe the ſacrifice of Iphigenia: the Romans, witneſſe the two Decij; quae fuit tanta iniquitas deorum vt placari pop. Rom. non poſſent, niſi tales viri occidiſſent: Turks, who ſo maſſacre their viſage, their breſts, their members, to gratifie their Prophet: the new Eaſt and Weſt Indies; and in Themiſtitan, where they cement their idols with the blood of children. What madneſſe was this, to thinke to flatter the Diuinitie with inhumanitie; to content the Diuine Goodnes with our affliction, and to ſatisfie the iuſtice of God with crueltie! Iuſtice then thirſting after humane blood, innocent blood, drawen and ſhed with ſo much paine and torment, Vt ſic dij placentur quemadmodum ne homines quidem ſaeuiunt. From Seneca. whence can this opinion and beleefe ſpring, that God taketh pleaſure in torment, and in the ruine of his works, and humane nature? Following this opinion, of what nature ſhould God be? But all this hath beene aboliſhed thorowout Chriſtendome, as before hath been ſayd.
               They haue alſo their differences, their particular articles, whereby they are diſtinguiſhed amongſt themſelues, and 3 They differ.
                   euery one preferres it ſelfe aboue the reſt, aſſuring himſelfe it is the better, and more true than the reſt, reproching the one the other with ſome things, and ſo condemne and reiect one another.
               But no man doubteth, neither is it a matter of labour to know which is the trueſt, the Chriſtian religion hauing ſo 4 Chriſtian religion aboue all.
                   many aduantages and priuileges, ſo high and ſo authenticall

aboue others, and eſpecially theſe. It is the ſubiect of my ſecond veritie, where is ſhewed how farre all others are inferior vnto it.
               Now as they ſpring vp one after another, the younger doth alwayes build vpon the more ancient and next precedent, 5 The latter are built vpon the former.
                   which from the toppe to the bottome it doth not wholly diſproue & condemn; for then it could not be heard or take footing: but it only accuſeth it either of imperfection, or of the end, and that therfore it commeth to ſucceed it and to perfect it; and ſo by little and little ouerthroweth it, and inricheth it ſelfe with the ſpoiles therof: as the Iudaicall, which hath retained many things of the Gentile Egyptian religion the elder, the Hebrewes not being eaſily purified of their cuſtomes: the Chriſtian built vpon the verities and promiſes of the Iudaicall; the Turkiſh vpon them both, retaining almoſt all the verities of Chriſt Ieſus, except the firſt and principall, which is his Diuinity: ſo that if a man will leape from Iudaiſme to Mahumatiſme, he muſt paſſe by Chriſtianity: and ſuch there haue beene among the Mahumatiſts as haue expoſed themſelues to torments, to maintaine the trueth of Chriſtian religion, as a Chriſtian would do to maintaine the truth of the Old Teſtament. But yet the elder and more ancient doe wholly condemne the yonger, and holde them for capitall enemies.
               All religions haue this in them, that they are ſtrange and 6 All are ſtrange to nature.
                   horrible to the common ſenſe; for they propoſe and are built and compoſed of parts, whereof ſome ſeeme to the iudgement of man baſe, vnworthy and vnbefitting, wherewith the ſpirit of man ſomwhat ſtrong and vigorous, ieſteth and ſporteth it ſelfe; others too high, bright, wonderfull, and myſticall, where he can know nothing, wherewith it is offended. Now the ſpirit of man is not capable but of indifferent things, it contemneth and diſdaineth the ſmall, it is aſtoniſhed and confounded with the great; and therefore it is no maruell if it be hardly perſwaded at the firſt onſet to receiue all religion, where there is nothing indifferent and common, and therefore muſt be drawen thereunto by ſome occaſion: for if it be ſtrong, it diſdaineth and laugheth at it; if it be feeble and ſuperſtitious, it is aſtoniſhed and ſcandalized: praedicamus Ieſum crucifixum, Iudaeis ſcandalum, gentib us ſtultitiam. Whereof

it comes to paſſe, that there are ſo many miſ-beleeuers and irreligious perſons, becauſe they conſult and hearken too much to their owne iudgements, thinking to examine and iudge of the affaires of religion according to their owne capacitie, and to handle it with their owne proper and naturall inſtruments. We muſt be ſimple, obedient, and debonaire, if we will be fit to receiue religion, to beleeue and liue vnder the law, by reuerence and obedience to ſubiect our iudgement, and to ſuffer our ſelues to be led and conducted by publike authoritie, Captiuantes intellectum ad obſequium fidei.
               
               But it was required ſo to proceed, otherwiſe religion ſhould not be reſpected and had in admiration as it ought; now it is neceſſarie that it be receiued and ſworne to, as well authenticallie and reuerentlie, as difficultlie: If it were ſuch as were whollie pleaſing to the palat and nature of man without ſtrangenes, it would be thought more eaſily, yet leſſe reuerently receiued.
               Now the religions and beliefs being ſuch as hath been ſaid, ſtrange vnto the common ſenſe, very farre exceeding all the 7 Why they are not to be gottē by humane means. reach and vnderſtanding of man, they muſt not, nor cannot be gotten nor ſetled in vs by naturall and humane meanes (for then among ſo many great minds as there haue been rare and excellent, ſome had attained thereunto) but it muſt needs be, that they be giuen vs by extraordinarie and heauenlie reuelation, gotten and receiued by diuine inſpiration, and as ſent from heauen. In this maner likewiſe all do affirme, that they hold their religion and beleeue it, not from men, or any other creature, but from God.
               But to ſay the truth and not to flatter or diſguiſe, this is 8 And yet they are gotten by humane meanes.
                   nothing; they are, whatſoeuer ſome ſay, held by humane hands and meanes, which is true in euery reſpect, in falſe religions, being nothing but prayers, and humane or diabolicall inuentions: the true, as they haue another iuriſdiction, ſo are they both receiued and held by another hand; neuertheleſſe we muſt diſtinguiſh. As touching the receiuing of them, the firſt and generall publication and inſtallation of them hath beene domino cooperante, ſermonem confirmante ſequentes ſignis, diuine and wonderfull, the particular is done by humane hands and meanes; the nation, countrie, place, giues the religion,

and that a man profeſſeth which is in force in that place and among thoſe perſons where he is borne, and where he liueth; He is circumciſed, baptiſed, a Iew, a Chriſtian, before he knowes that he is a man; for religion is not of our choyce or election, but man without his knowledge is made a Iew or a Chriſtian, becauſe he is borne in Iudaiſme or Chriſtianitie; and if he had been borne elſewhere among the Gentiles, or Mahumetans, he had beene likewiſe a Gentile or a Mahumetan. As touching the obſeruation, the true and good profeſſors thereof, beſides the outward profeſſion, which is common to all, yea to misbeleeuers, they attribute to the gift of God, the teſtimonie of the Holy Ghoſt within; but this is a thing not common nor ordinarie, what faire colour ſoeuer they giue it, witnes the liues and maners of men, ſo ill agreeing with their beleefe, who for humane occaſions and thoſe very light, goe againſt the tenor of their religion. If they were held & planted with a diuine hand, nothing in the world could ſhake vs, ſuch a tye would not be ſo eaſily broken: If it had any touch or ray of diuinitie, it would appeare in all, it would produce wonderfull effects that could not be hid, as Truth it ſelfe hath ſaid, If you haue but as much faith as a muſtard ſeed, you ſhould remoue mountaines. But what proportion or agreement is there betwixt the perſwaſion of the immortalitie of the ſoule, and a future reward ſo glorious and bleſſed, or ſo inglorious and accurſed, and the life that a man leadeth? The only apprehenſion of thoſe things that a man ſaith he doth firmely beleeue, wil take his ſenſes from him: The only apprehenſion and feare to die by iuſtice, and in publike place, or by ſome other ſhamefull and diſhonorable action, hath made many to loſe their ſenſes, and caſt them into ſtrange trances: and what is that in reſpect of the worth of that which religion teacheth vs is to come? But is it poſſible in truth to beleeue, to hope for that immortalitie ſo happie, and yet to feare death a neceſſarie paſſage thereunto? to feare and apprehend that infernall puniſhment, and liue as we do? Theſe are things as incompatible as fire and water. They ſay they beleeue it, they make themſelues beleeue they beleeue it, and they will make others beleeue it too; but it is nothing, neither do they know what it is to beleeue. For a beleefe, I meane ſuch as

the ſcripture calleth hiſtoricall, is diabolicall, dead, informed, vnprofitable, and which many times doth more hurt than good: Such beleeuers (ſaith an ancient Writer) are mockers and impoſtors; and another ſaith, that they are in one reſpect, the moſt fierce and glorious, in another the moſt looſe, diſſolute, and villanous of the world; more than men in the articles of their beleefe, and worſe than ſwine in their liues. Doubtleſſe if we hold our ſelues vnto God, and our religion, I ſay not by a diuine grace as we ſhould, but only after a ſimple and common maner, as we beleeue a hiſtorie, or a friend or companion, wee ſhould place them farre aboue all other things for that infinite goodneſſe that ſhineth in them, at the leaſt they ſhould be put in the ſame ranke or degree with honour, riches, friends. Now there are very few that doe not feare leſſe to commit an offence againſt God, and any point of his religion, than againſt his father, his maſter, his friend, his equalls. All this hurteth not the dignitie, puritie, and height of Chriſtianitie, no more than the dunghill infecteth the beames of the Sunne, which ſhines vpon it; for as one ſaith, Fides non à perſonis, ſed contrà: But a man cannot pronounce ſo great a Vae againſt thoſe falſe hypocrites, whom Matth. 23. Verity it ſelfe ſo much condemneth, as they belch out of their owne mouthes againſt themſelues.
               The better to know true pietie, it is neceſſarie firſt to ſeparate it from the falſe, fained and counterfeite, to the end wee 9 A diſtinction betwixt the true and falſe religion.
                   may not equiuocate as the moſt part of the world doth. There is nothing that maketh a fairer ſhew, and that taketh greater paines to reſemble true pietie and religion, and yet that is more contrarie and enemie thereunto, than ſuperſtition: like the Woulfe, which doth not a little reſemble the dogge, but yet hath a ſpirit and humour quite contrarie: and the flatterer who counterfetteth a zealous friend, and is nothing leſſe; or like falſe coine which maketh a more glittering ſhew than the true. Gens ſuperſtitioni obnoxia, religionibus aduerſae. It is likewiſe enuious and iealous like an amorous adultereſſe, Tacit. who with her ſmooth ſpeeches makes ſhew of greater affection, and care of the husband, than the true and lawfull wife, whom ſhe endeuoureth to make odious vnto him. Now the notable differences of theſe two are, that religion loueth

and honoureth God, ſetleth a man in peace and reſt, and lodgeth in a liberall, free and generous ſoule: Superſtition troubleth a man, and makes him wild, and iniureth God himſelfe, teaching to feare with horror and aſtoniſhment, to hide himſelfe, and to flie from him, if it were poſſible; it is a weake, poore, and baſe malady of the ſoule; Superſtitio error inſanus, 
                  Auguſt. 
                  amandos timet, quos colit violat: morbus puſilli animi, qui ſuperſtitione imbutus eſt, quietus eſſe nuſquam poteſt. Varro ait Deum a religioſo vereri, a ſuperſtitioſo timeri. Let vs ſpeake of them both apart.
               A ſuperſtitious man ſuffereth neither God nor man to liue 10 Superſtition deſcribed.
                   in peace. Hee apprehendeth God as one anxious, ſpitefull, hardly contented, eaſily moued, with difficulty appeaſed, examining our actions after the humane faſhion of a ſeuere Iudge, that watcheth our ſteps; which he prooueth true by his maner of ſeruing him, which is all after one faſhion. He trembleth for feare, he is neuer ſecure, fearing hee neuer doth well enough, and that he hath left ſomething vndone, by the omiſſion whereof all is worth nothing that he hath done; hee doubteth whether God be well content, and laboureth to flatter him, to the end he may appeaſe and winne him; he importuneth him with praiers, vowes, offerings; he faineth to himſelfe miracles, eaſily beleeueth and receiueth ſuch as are counterfetted by others, and interpreteth all things though purely naturall, as expreſlie ſent and done by God; and runneth after whatſoeuer a man ſaith with all the care that may be, duo ſuperſtitionis propria, nimius timor, nimius cultus. What is all this but by puniſhing himſelfe, vilely, baſely, and vnworthily to deale with God, and more mechanicallie, than a man would doe with a man of honour? Generally al ſuperſtion and fault in religion, proceedeth from this, that wee make not that account of God that we ſhould, we reuoke him, and compell him into order, wee iudge of him according to our ſelues, we put vpon him our humours. O what blaſphemie is this!
               Now this vice and malady is almoſt naturall vnto vs, and 11 It is naturall.
                   we haue all a kind of inclination thereunto. Plutarch deploreth the infirmity of man, who neuer knoweth how to keepe a meaſure, or to ſettle himſelfe vpon his feet: for it leaneth and

degenerateth either into ſuperſtition and vanitie, or into a contempt and careleſneſſe of diuine things. We are like to an ill aduiſed husband, beſotted and couſened with the coyning ſubtilties of a light woman, with whom he conuerſeth more by reaſon of hir artificiall flatteries, than with his honeſt ſpouſe, who honoreth and ſerueth him with a ſimple and naturall ſhamefaſtnes: and euen ſo ſuperſtition pleaſeth vs more than true religion.
               It is likewiſe vulgar, it proceedeth from a weakneſſe of the ſoule, an ignorance or miſ-knowledge of God, and that very 12 Popular.
                   groſſe, and therefore it is moſt commonly found in children, women, old men, ſick and ſuch as haue been aſſaulted with ſome violent accident. To be briefe, it is in barbarous natures, Inclinant natura ad ſuperstitionem barbari. Of this then it is Plutarch. in ſectorio. ſaid, and not of true religion, that it is true that Plato affirmeth, that the weakneſſe and idleneſſe of men hath brought in religion, and made it preuaile, whereby children, women, and old men ſhould be moſt capable of religion, more ſcrupulous and deuout: this were to wrong true religion to giue it ſo poore and fraile a foundation.
               Beſides theſe ſeeds and naturall inclinations to ſuperſtition, there are many that ſhake hands with it, and fauour it 13 Nouriſhed and maintained by humane reaſon.
                   greatly for the great gaine and profit they receiue by it. Great men likewiſe and mightie, though they know what it is, will not trouble nor hinder it, becauſe they know it is a very fit inſtrument to leade a people withall, and therefore they do not only enflame and nouriſh that which is alreadie grafted in nature, but when neede requireth they forge and inuent new, as Scipio, Sertorius, Sylla, and others, qui faciunt animos humiles formidine diuûm, depreſſoſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      premunt ad terram. Nulla res multitudinem efficaciùs regit, quàm ſuperstitio 
                  Curtius..
               Now quitting our ſelues of this foule and baſe ſuperſtition (which I would haue him to abhorre, whom I deſire to inſtruct 14 An entrance to the diſcourſe of true religion.
                   vnto wiſdome) let vs learne to guide our ſelues to true religion and pietie, whereof I will giue ſome grounds and pourtraites as leſſer lights thereunto. But before we enter thereinto, let me heere ſay in generall, and by way of preface, that of ſo many diuers religions, and maners of ſeruing God, which are, or may be in the world, they ſeeme to be the moſt

noble, and to haue greateſt appearance of truth, which without great externall and corporall ſeruice, draw the ſoule into itſelfe, and raiſe it by pure contemplation to admire and adore the greatneſſe and infinite maieſtie of the firſt cauſe of all things, and the eſſence of eſſences, without any great declaration or determination thereof, or preſcription of his ſeruice; but acknowledging it indefinitly, to be goodnes, perfection, and infinitnes, whollie incomprehenſible & not to be known, as the Pythagoreans, and moſt famous Philoſophers do teach. This is to approch vnto the religion of the angels, and to put in practiſe that word of the ſonne of God, to adore in ſpirit and truth, for God accounteth ſuch worſhippers the beſt. There are others on the other ſide, and in another extremitie, who will haue a viſible Deitie, capable by the ſenſes, which baſe and groſſe error hath mocked almoſt all the world, euen Iſrael in the deſert, in framing to themſelues a molten calfe. And of theſe they that haue choſen the ſunne for their god, ſeeme to haue more reaſon than the reſt, becauſe of the greatnes, beautie, and reſplendent and vnknowne vertue thereof, euen ſuch as enforce the whole world to the admiration and reuerence of itſelfe. The eye ſeeth nothing that is like vnto it, or that approcheth neere vnto it in the whole vniuerſe, it is one ſunne, and without companion. Chriſtianitie, as in the middle, tempereth the ſenſible and outward with the inſenſible and inward, ſeruing God with ſpirit and body, and accommodating itſelfe to great and little, whereby it is better eſtabliſhed, and more durable. But euen in that too, as there is a diuerſitie, and degrees of ſoules, of ſufficiencie and capacitie of diuine grace; ſo is there a difference in the maner of ſeruing of God; the more high & perfect incline more to the firſt maner more ſpirituall and contemplatiue, and leſſe externall, the leſſe and imperfect quaſi ſub paedagogo remaine in the other, and do participate of the outward and vulgar deformities.
               Religion conſiſteth in the knowledge of God, and of our ſelues: (for it is a relatiue action betweene both) the office 15 Diuers deſcriptions of religion.
                   thereof is to extoll God to the vttermoſt of our power, and to beate downe man as low as low may be, as if he were vtterly loſt, and afterwards to furniſh himſelfe with meanes to riſe againe, to make him feele his miſery & his nothing, to the end

he may put his whole confidence in God alone.
               The office of religion is to ioyne vs to the author and principall  cauſe of all our good, to reunite, and faſten man to his firſt cauſe, as to his roote, wherein ſo long as he continueth firme and ſetled, he preſerueth himſelfe in his owne perfection; and contrariwiſe when he is ſeparated, he inſtantly fainteth and languiſheth.
               The end and effect of religion is faithfullie to yeeld all the  honor and glorie vnto God, and all the benefit vnto man. All good things may be reduced to theſe two; The profit, which is an amendment, and an eſſentiall and inward good, is due vnto poore, wretched, and in all points miſerable man: the glory, which is an outward ornament, is due vnto God alone, who is the perfection and fulnes of all good, whereunto nothing can be added, Gloria in excelſis Deo, & in terra pax hominibus.
               
               Thus much being firſt knowen, our inſtruction to pietie is 
                     18 An inſtruction to pietie.
                     
                     1. To know God.
                     
                   firſt to learn to know God: for from the knowledge of things proceedeth that honor we do vnto them. Firſt then we muſt beleeue that he is, that he hath created the world by his power, goodneſſe, wiſdome, and that by it he gouerneth it; that his prouidence watcheth ouer all things, yea the leaſt that are; that whatſoeuer he ſendeth vs is for our good, and that whatſoeuer is euill proceedeth from our ſelues. If we account thoſe fortunes euill that he ſendeth vs, we blaſpheme his holy name, becauſe naturally we honour thoſe that do vs good, and hate thoſe that hurt vs. We muſt then reſolue to obey him, and to take all in good part which commeth from his hand, to commit and ſubmit our ſelues vnto him:
               Secondly, we muſt honour him: and the moſt excellent 19 2. To honor him.
                   and deuouteſt way to doe it, is firſt, to mount vp our ſpirits from all carnall, earthly, and corruptible imagination, and by the chaſteſt, higheſt and holieſt conceits exerciſe our ſelues in the contemplation of the Diuinitie; and after that we haue adorned it, with all the moſt magnificall and excellent names and praiſes that our ſpirit can imagine, that we acknowledge that we haue preſented nothing vnto it woorthy it ſelfe: but that the fault is in our weakneſle and imbecillitie, which can conceiue nothing more high. God is the laſt endeuour and

higheſt pitch of our imagination, euery man amplifying the Ideaa according to his owne capacitie: and to ſpeake better, God is infinitly aboue all our laſt and higheſt endeuours and imaginations of perfection.
               Againe, we muſt ſerue him with our heart and ſpirit, it is 20 3. To ſerue him in ſpirit.
                   the ſeruice anſwerable to his nature: Deus ſpiritus eſt▪ ſi Deus eſt animus, ſit tibi pura mente colendus. It is that which he requireth, that which pleaſeth him: Pater tales quaer is adoratores. The moſt acceptable ſacrifice vnto his Maieſtie, is a pure, free, and humble heart: Sacrificium Deo ſpiritus. An innocent ſoule, an innocent life: Optimus animus, pulcherrimus 
                  Seneca. Lactan. Merc. Triſm. 
                  Dei cultus: religioſiſſimus cultus imitari: vnicus Dei cultus, non eſſe malum. A wiſe man is a true ſacrifice of the great God, his ſpirit is his temple, his ſoule is his image, his affections are his offerings, his greateſt and moſt ſolemne ſacrifice, is to imitate him, to ſerue and implore him: for it is the part of thoſe that are great, to giue; of thoſe that are poore, to aske: Beatius dare quàm accipere.
               
               Neuertheleſſe, we are not to contemne and diſdaine the 21 4. To ſerue him with our bodies.
                   outward and publike ſeruice, which muſt be as an aſſiſtant to the other, by obſeruing the ceremonies, or chnances and cuſtomes with moderation without vanity, without ambition, or hypocriſie, without auarice, & alwaies with this thought, That God wilbe ſerued in ſpirit: and That that which is outwardly done, is rather for our ſelues than for God; for humane vnitie and edification than for diuine veritie: quae potius ad moremquam ad rempertinent.
               
               Our vowes and prayers vnto God ſhould be all ſubiect 22 5. To pray vnto him.
                   vnto his will: we ſhould neither deſire nor aske any thing, but as he hath ordeined, hauing alwayes for our bridle, Fiat voluntas tua. To aske any thing againſt his prouidence, is to corrupt the Iudge and Gouernour of the world; to thinke to flatter him, and to winne him by preſents and promiſes, is to wrong him. God doth not deſire our goods: neither, to ſay the truth, haue we any: all is his: non accipiam de domo tua vitulos, &c. meus est enim orbis terrae, & plénitudo eius: but his will is, that we only make our ſelues fit to receiue from him, neuer expecting that we ſhould giue vnto him, but aske and receiue: for it is his office to giue as being great, and it belongeth

to man as being poore and needie to beg and to receiue; to preſcribe vnto him that which we want, and we will, is to expoſe our ſelues to the inconueniences of Midas, but that is alwayes beſt, which pleaſeth him beſt. To be briefe, we muſt thinke, ſpeake, and deale with God, as if all the world did behold vs; we muſt liue and conuerſe with the world, as if God ſaw vs.
               It is not with reſpect to honour the name of God as we ought, but rather to violate it, lightly and promiſcuouſly to 23 Well to vſe his name.
                   mingle it in all our actions and ſpeeches, as it were by acclamation or by cuſtome, either not thinking thereof, or curſorily to paſſe him ouer; we muſt ſpeake of God and his works ſoberly, but yet ſeriouſly with ſhamefaſtnes, feare, and reuerence, and neuer preſume to iudge of him.
               And thus much ſummarily of pietie, which ſhould be in 24 The concluſion.
                   high eſteeme, contemplating alwaies God, with a free, cheerfull, and filiall ſoule, not wilde, nor troubled, as the ſuperſtitious are. Touching the particularities as well of the beleefe as obſeruation, it is neceſſarie that we tye our ſelues to the Chriſtian, as to the true, more rich, high, and honorable to God, commodious and comfortable to man, as we haue ſhewed in our ſecond Veritie; and therein remaining, we muſt with a ſweet ſubmiſſion ſubmit and ſettle our ſelues to that which the Catholike Church in all times hath vniuerſally held, and holdeth, and not intangling our ſelues with nouelties, or ſelected and particular opinions, for the reaſons ſet downe in my third Veritie, and eſpeciallie in the firſt & laſt Chapters, which may ſuffice vnto him, that cannot, or will not reade the whole booke.
               Let me only giue this one aduice neceſſarie for him that intendeth to be wiſe, and that is, not to ſeparate pietie from true 25 An aduiſemēt to ioyne pietie and probitie together.
                   honeſtie, whereof we haue ſpoken before, and ſo content himſelfe with one of them, much leſſe to confound and mingle them together. Theſe are two things very different, & which haue diuers iuriſdictions, pietie and probitie, religion and honeſtie, deuotion and conſcience; I will that both of them be iointly in him whom I heere inſtruct, becauſe the one cannot be without the other entire and perfect, but confuſed. Behold heere two rocks whereof we muſt take heed, and few there be

that know them, to ſeparate them and to reſt contented with the one, to confound and mingle them, in ſuch ſort, that the one be the iuriſdiction of the other.
               The firſt that ſeparate them, and that haue but one of them, 26 Of thoſe which haue piety without probitie.
                   are of two ſorts, for ſome doe wholly giue themſelues to the worſhip and ſeruice of God, taking no care at all of true vertue and honeſtie, whereof they haue no taſte, a vice noted as naturall to the Iewes eſpeciallie (a race aboue all others ſuperſtitious, and for that cauſe odious to all) and much diſplayed by their prophets, and afterwards by the Meſſias, who reproched them, that of their temple they had made a denne of theeues, a cloake and excuſe for many wickedneſſes, which Matth. 15. and 22. they perceiued not; ſo were they beſotted with this outward deuotion, wherein putting their whole confidence, they thought themſelues diſcharged of all dutie, yea they were made more hardie to do any wickedneſſe. Many are touched with this feminine and popular ſpirit, wholly attentiue to thoſe ſmall exerciſes of outward deuotion, whereby they are made neuer the better; from whence came that prouerb, An angell in the Church, a diuell in the houſe; they lend the ſhew and outward part vnto God, like the Phariſes, they are ſepulchers, white walles, populus hic labijs me honor at, cor eorum longe à me; yea they make pietie a couer for impietie, they make it (as they ſay) an occupation or a merchandize, and alleadge their offices of deuotion, to extenuate and recompence their ſinne and iniquitie. Others quite contrary make no account but of vertue and honeſtie, little caring for any thing that belongs to religion, a fault of many Philoſophers, and which is likewiſe too common amongſt our Atheiſts. Theſe are two vitious extremities, but which is the more or the leſſe extreame, 27 A compariſon.
                   or which of the two is the more worthie, religion, or honeſtie, it is not my purpoſe to determin; I will only ſay (to compare them in three points) that the firſt is far more eaſie, of greater ſhew, of ſimple and vulgar ſpirits: the ſecond is far more difficult and laborious in the performance, of leſſe ſhew, of ſpirits valiant and generous. 28 Againſt thoſe that confound pietie and probitis.
                  
               
               I come to others, who differ not much from the firſt, who take no care but of religion. They peruert all order, and trouble all, confounding honeſtie, religion, the grace of God

(as hath beene ſaid before) whereby it comes to paſſe that they haue neither true honeſtie, nor true religion, nor conſequently the grace of God; as they thinke, a people only content with themſelues, and ready to cenſure and condemn others, qui confidunt in ſe, & aſperndnt abios. They thinke that religion is a generalitie of all good and of all vertue, that all vertues are contained in it, and neceſſarily follow it, whereby they acknowledge no other vertue nor honeſtie but that which is opened with the key of religion. Now it is quite contrarie; for religion which is the later, is a ſpeciall and particular vertue, diſtinguiſhed from all other vertues, which may be without them and without probitie, as hath beene ſaid of the Phariſies, religious and wicked; and they without religion, as in many Philoſophers good and vertuous, but yet irreligious. It is likewiſe, as all diuinitie teacheth, a morall humane vertue, appertaining to iuſtice, one of the foure cardinall vertues, which teacheth vs in generall to giue vnto euerie 
                     Thom. p. 2. 2. q. 81. one that which belongeth vnto him, reſeruing to euery one his place. Now God being aboue all, the vniuerſall author and maſter; wee muſt giue vnto him all ſouereigne honour, ſeruice, obedience, and this ſubalcerne religion, and the Hypotheſis of iuſtice, which is the generall Theſis, more ancient and naturall. They on the other ſide, will that a man be religious before he be honeſt, and that religion (which is acquired and gotten by an outward cauſe, ex auditu; Quomodo credent ſine praedicante?) engendreth honeſtie, which we haue ſhewed ſhould proceed from nature, from that law and light which God hath put into vs, from our firſt beginning. This is an inuerted order. Theſe men will that a man be an honeſt man, becauſe there is a Paradiſe and a hell: ſo that if they did not feare God, or feare to be damned (for that is often their language) they would make a goodly peece of worke. O miſerable honeſtie! What thankes deſerueſt thou, for that thou doeſt? ô cowardly and idle innocencie, quae niſi metu non placet! Thou keepeſt thy ſelfe from wickedneſſe, becauſe thou dareſt not be wicked, and thou feareſt to be beaten, and euen therein art thou wicked, Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. Now I will that thou dare, but yet that thou wilt not though thou be neuer chidden; I will that thou be an honeſt

man, not becauſe thou wouldeſt goe to paradiſe, but becauſe nature, reaſon, God willeth it, becauſe the law and the generall policy of the world, whereof thou art a part, requireth it; ſo as that thou canſt not conſent to be any other, except thou goe againſt thy ſelfe, thy eſſence, thy end. Doubtleſſe ſuch honeſtie occaſioned by the ſpirit of religion, beſides that it is not true and eſſentiall, but accidentall, it is likewiſe very dangerous, producing many times very baſe and ſcandalous effects (as experience in all times hath taught vs) vnder the faire and glorious pretext of piety. What execrable wickedneſſes hath the zeale of religion brought foorth? Is there any other ſubiect or occaſion that hath yeelded the like? It belongeth to ſo great and noble a ſubiect, to worke great and wonderfull effects:
               
                  Tantum religio potuit ſuadere malorum
                  Quae peperit ſaepe ſceleroſa at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      impia facta.
               
               Not to loue him, yea to look vpon him with a wicked eie, as a man ſhould looke vpon a monſter, that beleeueth not as he beleeueth. To think to be polluted by ſpeaking, or conuerſing with him, is one of the ſweeteſt and moſt pleaſing actions of theſe kind of people. Hee that is an honeſt man by ſcruple, and a religious bridle, take heed of him, and account of him as he is. And he that hath religion without honeſtie, I will not ſay he is more wicked, but farre more dangerous than he that hath neither the one, nor the other, Omnis qui interficiet vos, putabit ſe obſequium praeſtare Deo; not becauſe religion teacheth, or any way fauoureth wickedneſſe, as ſome very fooliſhly and malitiouſlie from this place do obiect, for the moſt abſurd and falſeſt religion that is, doth it not; but the reaſon is, that hauing no taſte, nor image, nor conceit of honeſtie, but by imitation, and for the ſeruice of religion, and thinking that to be an honeſt man is no other thing, than to be carefull to aduance religion, they beleeue all things whatſoeuer, be it treaſon, treacherie, ſedition, rebellion, or any other offence to be not onlie lawfull and ſufferable, being coloured with zeale and the care of religion, but alſo commendable, meritorious, yea worthy canonization, if it ſerue for the progreſſe and aduancement of religion, and the ouerthrow of their aduerſaries. The Iewes were wicked and cruell to their parents, vniuſt towards

their neighbors, neither lending, nor paying their debts, and all becauſe they gaue vnto the temple, thinking to be quit of all, duties, and reiecting the whole world, by ſaying Corban. 
                  Math. 15. 5. Marc. 7. 11. 6. Hierom.
               
               I will then (to conclude this diſcourſe) that there be in this my wiſe man a true honeſtie, and a true pietie, ioyned and maried together, and both of them compleat and crowned with the grace of God, which he denieth none that ſhall aske it of him, Deus dat ſpiritum bonum omnibus potentibus eum, as hath been ſaid in the preface, article the 14.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. To gouerne his deſires and pleaſures.
               
               IT is a principall dutie of a wiſe man, to know well how to moderate and rule his deſires and pleaſures; for wholly to renounce them, I am ſo farre from requiring it in this my wiſe man, that I hold this opinion to be not only fantaſticall, but vitious and vnnaturall. Firſt then we muſt confute this opinion, which baniſheth and whollie condemneth all pleaſures, and afterwards learne how to gouerne them.
               It is a plauſible opinion, and ſtudied by thoſe that would ſeeme to be men of vnderſtanding, and profeſſors of ſingular 1 The firſt part.
                   ſanctitie, generally to contemne and tread vnder-foote all ſorts of pleaſures, and all care of the bodie, retiring the ſpirit vnto it ſelfe, not hauing any commerce with the bodie, but eleuating An opinion of the contempt of the world. it ſelfe to high things, and ſo to paſſe this life as it were inſenſiblie neither taſting it, nor attending it. With theſe kind of people that ordinarie phraſe of paſſing the time, doth very well agree; for it ſeemeth to them, that well to vſe and employ this life, is ſilently to paſſe it ouer, and as it were to eſcape it, and rob themſelues of it, as if it were a miſerable, burthenſome, and tedious thing, being deſirous ſo to ſlide through the world, as that not only recreations and paſtimes are ſuſpected, yea odious vnto them, but alſo naturall neceſſities, which God hath ſeaſoned with ſome pleaſure. They come not where any delight is, but vnwillinglie, and being where it is, they hold their breath till they be gone, as if they were in a place of infection: and to be briefe, their life is offenſiue

vnto them, and death a ſolace, pleaſing themſelues with that ſaying, which may be as well ill taken and vnderſtood, as well, vitam habere in patientia, mortem in deſiderio.
               
               But the iniquitie of this opinion, may many wayes be ſhewed. Firſt, there is nothing ſo faire and lawfull, as well and 2 Reiected.
                   duly to play the man, well to know how to leade this life. It is a diuine knowledge & very difficult, for a man to know how he ſhould lawfully enioy his owne eſſence, leade his life according to the common and naturall modell, to his proper conditions, not ſeeking thoſe that are ſtrange; for all thoſe extrauagancies, all thoſe artificiall and ſtudied endeuors, thoſe wandring wayes from the naturall and common, proceede from follie and paſſion: theſe are maladies, without which whileſt theſe men would liue, not by playing the men, but the diuines, they play the fooles; they would transforme themſelues into angels, and they turne themſelues into beaſts: aut deus aut bestia: homo ſum, humani à me nihil alienum puto: Man is a bodie and a ſoule, and it is not well done to diſmember this building, to diuide and ſeparate this brotherlie and naturall coniunction; but contrariwiſe, we ſhould renue it by mutuall offices, the ſpirit muſt awaken and reuiue the heauie bodie, the bodie muſt ſtay the lightnes of the ſpirit, which many times prooues but a trouble-feaſt; the ſpirit muſt aſſiſt and fauor the bodie, as the husband the wife, and not reiect it, not hate it. It muſt not refuſe to participate the naturall pleaſures thereof, which are iuſt, and ſuch as befit that mariage that is betwixt them, alwaies holding therein, as the more wiſe, a true moderation. A man muſt ſtudie, know, and meditate on this life, to the end he may returne condigne thanks vnto him who hath lent it. There is nothing which God hath made for vs in this preſent life vnworthie our care, and we are accountable for them, euen to the very haires of our head; for it is no friuolous warrant or commiſſion for a man to direct himſelfe and his life according to his naturall condition, but God hath giuen it him ſeriouſly and expreſly.
               But what greater follie is there, and more againſt nature, than to account our actions vitious, becauſe they are naturall 3 Lib. 3. cap. 38.; vnworthie becauſe they are neceſſarie? Now this neceſſitie and pleaſure is an excellent mariage made by God himſelfe.

Nature willeth very wiſely, that thoſe actions which it hath enioyned vs for our neceſſitie, be alſo delightfull, inuiting vs thereunto not only by reaſon, but alſo by appetite; and theſe rules theſe kind of men goe about to breake. It is an equall fault and iniuſtice, to loath and condemne all pleaſures, and to abuſe them, by louing them ouer-much, we muſt neither run to them, nor flre from them, but receiue them, and vſe them diſcreetly and moderatly, as ſhall preſently be ſaid in the rule. Temperance which is the rule of our pleaſures, condemneth as well the inſenſibilitie and priuation of all pleaſure, ſtuporem naturae, which is the failing extremitie, as intemperancie, libidinem, which is the exceeding extremitie. Contra naturam eſt torquere corpus ſuum, faciles odiſſe munditias & ſquallorem appetere: delicat as res cupere luxuriae eſt, vſitatas & non magno parabiles fugere dementiae eſt.
               
               He that deſireth to diſcard his ſoule, let him boldly do it if he can, when his bodie is not in health, but endureth ſome  torment, to the end he may disburthen himſelfe of that contagion: but he cannot do it, as likewiſe he ought not to do it; for to ſpeake according to right and reaſon, it ſhould neuer abandon the bodie; it is apiſhnes to do it, it ſhould behold pleaſure and ſorrow with a like ſetled countenance, in the one line ſeuerely, the other cheerefully: but in all caſes it ſhould aſſiſt the bodie to maintaine it alwaies in order.
               To contemne the world, is a braue propoſition, and many  delight, nay glory to ſpeake, to diſcourſe thereof, but I can not perceiue that they well vnderſtand it, much leſſe that they practiſe it: what is it to contemne the world? What is this world? Is it the heauen, the earth, and in a word the creatures that are therein? No I thinke not ſo; What then? Is it the vſe, the profit, the ſeruice, and commoditie that we gather thereby? If ſo, what ingratitude is this againſt the authour that hath made them to theſe ends? What accuſation againſt nature? What reaſon to contemne them? If (in the end) thou wilt ſay that it is neither the one, nor the other, but it is the abuſe of them, the vanities, follies, exceſſe and wickednes that is in the world; I may anſwere that it were well ſaid, if this were of the world, but they are not ſo, but againſt the world, and the policie thereof, they are thy owne additions, not naturall,

but artificiall. To preſerue thy ſelfe from them as wiſdome and the rule following teacheth, is not to contemne the world, which remaineth whollie entire without it; but it is wel to vſe the world, well to gouerne thy ſelfe in the world, and as diuinitie teacheth, to make vſe and benefit of the world, and not to enioy it, vti, non frui. Now theſe kind of people thinke to practiſe the contempt of the world, by certaine outward particular maners and faſhions, ſeparated from the common courſe of the world: but this is but mockerie. There is nothing in the world ſo exquiſite; the world laugheth not, and is not ſo wanton within it ſelfe, as without, in thoſe places where men make profeſſion of flying it, and trampling it vnder foot, which is ſpoken againſt hypocrites, who haue ſo much degenerated from their beginning, that there remaineth nothing but the habit, and is alſo very much changed, if not in forme, at the leaſt in matter, which ſerueth them for no other vſe, than to puffe them vp, to make them more bold and impudent, which is quite contrarie to their inſtitution, vae vobis qui circuit is mare & aridam, vt faciatis vnum proſelytum, & cùm factus 
                  Mat. 23. 
                  fuerit, facitis filium gehennae: and not againſt the good, much leſſe againſt the eſtate in it ſelfe which is the ſchoole of true and holy Philoſophie. It is then a fantaſticall and vnnaturall opinion, generally to reiect and condemne all deſires and pleaſures. God is the creator and authour of pleaſure, Plantauit dominus paradiſum voluptatis, poſuit hominem in paradiſo voluptatis, protulit omne lignum pulchrum, ſuaue, delectabile, as ſhal be ſaid. But we muſt firſt learne how to cary our ſelues therein.
               This inſtruction may be reduced to foure points (which if 6 The ſecond part the rule in our pleaſures and deſires.
                   theſe mortified men, and great contemners of the world did know how to put in practiſe, they would worke wonders) to know little, naturally, moderately, and by a ſhort relation to himſelfe. Theſe foure go almoſt alwayes together, and make an entire and perfect rule, and he that will may gather and comprehend all theſe foure in this word, Naturally, for nature is the fundamentall and ſufficient rule for all. But yet to make the matter more cleare and eaſie, we will diſtinguiſh theſe foure points. The firſt point of this rule, is to deſire little: A Little. ſhort good, but an aſſured meanes to braue fortune, taking

from it all accidents, and all power ouer vs to hinder the happie content of our life: and in a word, to be wiſe, is to ſhorten our deſires, to deſire either little, or nothing at all. He that deſireth nothing, although he haue nothing, is as rich as he that poſſeſſeth the whole world, for both come to one end: Nihil intereſt an habeas, an non concupiſcas: and therefore it was well ſayd, That it is not multitude and abundance that contenteth and inricheth, but want, yea nothing. It is the want of deſire, for he that is poore in deſires is rich in contentment, ſummae opes inopia cupiditatum. To be briefe, he that deſireth nothing is in ſome ſort like vnto God, and thoſe that are alreadie bleſſed, who are happy and bleſſed, not becauſe they haue and poſſeſſe all, but becauſe they deſire nothing: qui deſiderium ſuum clauſit, cum Ioue de foelicitate contendit. Contrarily, if we let looſe the bridle to our appetite to follow abundance and delicacie, we ſhall continue in perpetuall paine and labour; ſuperfluous things will become neceſſarie, our ſoules will be made ſlaues to our bodies, and we can liue no longer, than that we liue in pleaſure and delight. If we moderate not our pleaſures and deſires, and meaſure them not by the compaſſe of reaſon, opinion will carie vs into a headlong downfall, where there is neither bottome nor brinke: as for example, we will make our ſhooes of veluet, afterwards of cloth of golde, and laſtly of embroderie with pearles and diamonds; we will build our houſes of marble, afterwards of iaſper and porpherie. Now this meane for a man to inrich himſelfe, and to make him content, is very iuſt, and in the power of euery man: he need not to ſeeke this contentment elſewhere and without himſelfe, let him but aske it, and he preſently obteineth it of himſelfe. Let him ſtay the courſe of his deſires; it is iniuſtice to importune God, Nature, the world by vowes and prayers, to giue him any thing, ſince he hath ſo excellent a meane in his owne power to attaine thereunto. Why ſhould I rather deſire another to giue vnto me, than my ſelfe not to deſire? Quare potius a fortuna impetrem vt det, quàm a me ne petam? quare autem petam oblitus fragilitatis humanae? If I can not or will not obteine of my ſelfe not to deſire, how and with what face can I preſſe another to giue, ouer whom I haue no right nor power? The firſt rule then

touching our deſires and pleaſures is, that this (little) or at leaſt a mediocritie and ſufficiencie is that which doth beſt content a wiſe man and keepes him in peace. And this is the reaſon why I haue choſen for my deuice, Peace and pouertie. With a foole nothing ſufficeth, nothing hath certeintie or content: hee is like the Moone, who asked a garment that Plutarch. might fit it; but it was anſwered, That that was not poſſible, becauſe it was ſometimes great, ſometimes little, and alwaies changeable.
               The other point couſen-germane to this, is (naturally): for 7 Naturally.
                   we know that there are two ſorts of deſires and pleaſures, the one naturall, and theſe are iuſt and lawfull, and are likewiſe in beaſts limited and ſhort, whoſe end a man may ſee: according to theſe, no man is indigent, for euery thing yeelds ſomething to content. Nature is contented with little, and hath ſo prouided, that in all things, that which ſufficeth is at hand and in our owne power, parabile est quod natura deſiderat & 
                  Seneca. 
                  expoſitum: ad manum est quod ſat est. It is this which nature demandeth for the preſeruation of it owne eſſence, it is a fauour for which we are to thanke Nature, that thoſe things that are neceſſarie for this life, it hath made eaſie to finde, and ſuch as are hardly obteined are not ſo neceſſarie; and that ſeeking without paſſion that which nature deſireth, fortune can no way depriue vs of it. To theſe kinde of deſires a man may adde (though they be not truly naturall, yet they come very neere) thoſe that reſpect the vſe and condition of euery one of vs, which are ſomewhat beyond, and more at large than thoſe that are exactly naturall, and ſo are iuſt and lawfull in the ſecond place. The other deſires are beyond nature, proceeding from an opinion and fantaſie, artificiall, ſuperfluous, and truly paſſions, which we may to diſtinguiſh them by name from others, call cupidities or luſts, whereof we haue ſpoken before at large in the paſſions: from which a wiſe man muſt wholly and abſolutely defend himſelfe.
               The third, which is moderately and without exceſſe, hath 8 Moderately. See lib. 3. cap. 38. a large field and diuers parts, but which may be drawen to two heads; that is to ſay, to deſire without the hurt of another, of himſelfe; of another without his ſcandall, offence, loſſe, preiudice; of himſelfe, without the loſſe of his health,

his leaſure, his functions and affaires, his honour, his duty.
               The fourth is a ſhort and eſſentiall relation to himſelfe; 9 By relation.
                   beſides that the carriere of our deſires and pleaſures muſt be circumſcribed, limited, and ſhort, their courſe likewiſe muſt be managed, not in a right line, which makes an end elſwhere and without it ſelfe; but in a circle, the two points whereof doe meet and end in our ſelues. Thoſe actions that are directed without this reflexion, and this ſhort and eſſentiall turning, as of couetous and ambitious men, and diuers others, who runne point blanke, and are alwayes without them, are vaine and vnſound.
            
            
               CHAP. VII. To carie himſelfe moderatly and equally in proſperitie and aduerſitie.
               
               THere is a twofolde fortune, wherewith we are to enter the  liſt, good and ill, proſperitie and aduerſitie; theſe are the two combats, the two dangerous times, wherein it ſtandeth vs vpon to ſtand vpon our guard, and to gather our wits about vs: they are the two ſchooles, eſſayes, and touch-ſtones of the ſpirit of man.
               The vulgar ignorant ſort doe acknowledge but one: they 2 The opinion of the vulgar.
                   do not beleeue that we haue any thing to do, that there is any difficultie, any fight or contradiction with proſperitie and good fortune; wherein they are ſo tranſported with ioy, that they know not what they do, there is no rule with them: and in affliction they are as much aſtoniſhed and beaten downe as they that are dangerouſly ſicke, and are in continuall anguiſh, not being able to endure either heat or colde.
               The wiſe men of the world acknowledge both, and impute it to one and the ſame vice and follie, not to know how 3 Which of the two is more difficult to beare, proſperitie, or aduerſitie. Ariſt. Senec. to command in proſperitie, and how to carie our ſelues in aduerſitie: but which is the more difficult and dangerous, they are not wholly of one accord, ſome ſaying it is aduerſitie, by reaſon of the horror and bitterneſſe thereof, difficilius eſt triſtitiam ſuſtinere quàm a delect abilibus abſtinere: maius eſt difficilia perſtringere quàm laeta moderari. Some affirming it to be proſperitie, which by her ſweet and pleaſing flatteries doth

abate and mollifie the ſpirit, and inſenſibly robbeth it of it due temperature, force and vigor, as Dalila did Samſon, in ſuch ſort that many that are obdurate, obſtinate, and inuincible in aduerſitie, haue ſuffered themſelues to be taken by the flattering allurements of proſperitie, magni laboris eſt ferre proſperitatem: ſegetem nimia ſternit vbertas, ſic immoderata felicitas rumpit. And againe, affliction moueth euen our enemies to pitie, proſperitie our friends to enuie. In aduerſitie a man ſeeing himſelfe abandoned by all, and that all his hopes are reduced vnto himſelfe, he taketh heart at graſſe, he rowzeth himſelfe, calles his wits about him, and with all his power addes his owne endeuours to his owne helpe: in proſperitie ſeeing himſelfe aſſiſted by all that laugh at him, and applaud all that he doth, he groweth lazie and careleſſe, truſting in others, without any apprehenſion of danger or difficultie, and perſwading himſelfe that all is in ſafetie, when he is many times therein much deceiued. It may be that according to the diuerſitie of natures and complexions both opinions are true: but touching the vtilitie of either, it is certaine, that aduerſitie hath this preheminence, it is the ſeed, the occaſion, the matter of well-doing, the field of heroicall vertues, vireſcit vulnere virtus, aegrae fortunae ſana conſilia melius in malis ſapimus, ſecunda rectum auferunt.
               
               Now wiſdome teacheth vs to holde our ſelues indifferent and vpright in all our life, and to keepe alwayes one and the 4 The aduice of the wiſe vpon both.
                   ſame countenance, pleaſant and conſtant. A wiſe man is a skilfull artificer, who maketh profit of all; of euery matter he worketh and formeth vertue, as that excellent Painter Phidias, all maner of images; whatſoeuer lighteth into his hands he maketh it a fit ſubiect to doe good, and with one and the ſame countenance hee beholdeth the two different faces of Fortune. Ad vtroſque caſus ſapiens aptus est, bonorum rector, malorum victor: In ſecundis non confidit, in aduerſis non deficit, nec auidus periculi, nec fugax, proſperitatem non expectans, ad vtrumque paratus; aduerſus vtrumque intrepidus, nec illius tumultu, nec huius fulgore percuſſus. Contra calamitates fortis & contumax, luxuriae non aduerſus tantùm, ſed & infestus: hoc praecipuum in humanis rebus erigere animum ſupra minas & promiſſa fortunae. Wiſdome furniſheth vs with armes and diſcipline

for both combats; againſt aduerſitie with a ſpurre, teaching vs to raiſe, to ſtrengthen and incite our courage; and this is the vertue of fortitude: againſt proſperitie, it furniſheth vs with a bridle, and teacheth vs to keepe and clap downe our wings, and to keepe our ſelues within the bounds of modeſtie; and this is the vertue of temperancie: theſe are the two morall vertues, againſt the two fortunes, which that great Philoſopher Epictetus did very wel ſignifie, conteining in two words all morall Philoſophie, ſustine & abstine, beare the euill, that is, aduerſitie; abſtaine from the good, that is, from pleaſure and proſperitie. The particular aduiſements againſt the particular proſperities and aduerſities ſhall be in the third booke following, in the vertue of fortitude and temperancie. Heere we will only ſet downe the generall inſtructions and remedies againſt all proſperitie and aduerſitie, becauſe in this booke we teach the way in generall vnto wiſdome, as hath been ſaid in the preface thereof.
               Againſt all proſperitie, the common doctrine and counſell conſiſteth in three points: The firſt, that honors, riches, and 5 Of Proſperitie. the fauours of fortune, are ill and wrongfullie accounted and called goods, ſince they neither make a man good, nor reforme a wicked man, and are common both to good and wicked. He that calleth them goods, and in them hath placed the good of man, hath faſtned our felicitie to a rotten cable, and ancred it in the quick-ſands. For what is there more vncertaine and inconſtant, than the poſſeſſion of ſuch goods, which come and goe, paſſe and runne on like a riuer? like a riuer they make a noyſe at their comming in, they are full of violence, they are troubled; their entrance is full of vexation, and they vaniſh in a moment; and when they are quite dried vp, there remaineth nothing in the bottome but the mud.
               The ſecond point is to remember, that proſperitie is like a honnied poiſon, ſweet and pleaſant, but dangerous, whereof  we muſt take very good heed. When fortune laugheth, and euery thing falleth out according to our owne hearts, then ſhould we feare moſt, and ſtand vpon our gard, bridle our affections, compoſe our actions by reaſon, aboue all auoid preſumption, which ordinarily followeth the fauour of the time. Proſperitie is a ſlipperie paſe, wherein a man muſt take ſure

footing, for there is no time wherein men doe more forget God. It is a rare and difficult thing to find a man who doth willinglie attribute vnto him the cauſe of his felicitie. And this is the cauſe why in the greateſt proſperitie we muſt vſe the counſell of our friends, and giue them more authoritie ouer vs, than at other times; and therefore we muſt cary our ſelues as in an euill and dangerous way, go with feare and doubt, deſiring the hand and help of another. In theſe times of proſperitie, aduerſitie is a medicine, becauſe it leadeth vs to the knowledge of our ſelues.
               The third is to retaine our deſires, and to ſet a meaſure vnto them. Proſperitie puffeth vp the heart, ſpurreth vs forward,  findeth nothing difficult, breedeth alwayes a deſire of great matters (as they that by eating get an appetite) and it carieth vs beyond our ſelues, and in this ſtate it is where a man loſeth himſelfe, drowneth & maketh a mockery of himſelfe. He playeth the Monkey, who leapeth from bough to bough, till he come to the top of the tree, and then ſheweth his taile. O how many haue been loſt, and haue periſhed miſerablie, by the want of diſcretion to moderate themſelues in their proſperitie! We muſt therefore either ſtay our ſelues, or go forward with a ſlower paſe, if we will inioy the benefit of our proſperitie, and not hold our ſelues alwaies in chaſe and purchaſe. It is wiſdome to know how to ſettle our owne reſt, our owne contentment, which cannot be where there is no ſtay, no end. Si qua finiri non poſſunt, extra ſapientiam ſunt.
               
               Againſt all aduerſitie, theſe are the generall aduiſements. In the firſt place, we muſt take heed of the common and vulgar 8 Of aduerſitie, and that it is no euill.
                   opinion, erroneous and alwaies different from true reaſon, for to diſcredit and to bring into hatred and horror all aduerſitie and afflictions, they call them euils, diſaſters, miſchiefs, although all outward things be neither good nor euill. Neuer did aduerſitie make a man wicked, but hath rather ſerued as a meanes to mend thoſe that are wicked, and are common both to the good and to the wicked.
               Doubtleſſe, croſſes and heauie accidents are common to all, but they worke diuers effects, according to that ſubiect 9 It is common to all, but diuerſly.
                   whereupon they light. To fooles and reprobate perſons they ſerue to driue them into deſpaire, to afflict and enrage them:

Perhaps they enforce them (if they be heauie & extreame) to ſtoope, to crie vnto God, to looke vp vnto Heauen; but that is all: To ſinners and offenders they are ſo many liuely inſtructions, and compulſions to put them in minde of their dutie, and to bring them to the knowledge of God: To vertuous people, they are the liſts and theaters wherein to exerciſe their vertue, to winne vnto themſelues greater commendations and a neerer alliance with God: To wiſe men they are matter of good, and ſometimes ſtages and degrees whereby to paſſe and mount vp to all height and greatneſſe, as wee ſee and may read of diuers, who being aſſailed by ſuch and ſo great croſſes, as a man would haue thought them their vtter ouerthrow and vndoing, haue beene raiſed by the ſelfeſame meanes to the higheſt pitch of their owne deſires, and contrariwiſe without that infelicitie, had ſtill remained vnder hatches, as that great Athenian Captaine knew well when hee ſaid, perier amus niſi perijſſemus. A very excellent example heere of was Ioſeph the ſonne of Iacob. It is true that theſe are blowes from heauen, but the vertue and wiſedome of man ſerueth as a proper inſtrument, from whence came that wiſe ſaying of the Sages, To make of neceſſitie a vertue. It is a very good husbandrie, and the firſt propertie of a wiſe man, to draw good from euill, to handle his affaires with ſuch dexteritie, and ſo to winne the winde, and to ſet the bias, that of that which is ill, he may make good vſe, and better his owne condition.
               Afflictions and aduerſities proceede from three cauſes, 10 It hath three cauſes and three effects.
                   which are the three authors & workers of our puniſhments; ſinne the firſt inuentor which hath brought them into nature; the anger and iuſtice of God, which ſetteth them aworke as his Commiſſaries and executioners; the policie of the world troubled and changed by ſinne, wherein as a generall reuolt, and cruill tumult, things not being in their due places, and not doing their office, all euils do ſpring and ariſe; as in a body the diſiointing of the members, the diſlocation of the bones bringeth great paine, and much vnquietneſſe. Theſe three are not fauourable vnto vs, the firſt is to be hated of all as our enemie, the ſecond to be feared as terrible, the third to be auoided as an impoſture. That a man may the better defend

and quit himſelfe from all three, there is no better way than to vſe their owne proper armes, wherewith they puniſh vs, as Dauid cut off Goliahs head with his owne ſword, making of neceſſity a vertue, profit of paine and affliction, turning them againſt themſelues. Affliction is the true fruit or ſcience of ſinne, being well taken is the death and ruine thereof, and it doth that to the author therof, which the viper doth to his damme that brought him foorth. It is the oile of the Scorpion, which healeth his owne ſting, to the end it may periſh by it owne inuention: perijt arte ſua: patimur quia peccauimus: patimur vt non peccemus. It is the file of the ſoule, which ſcoureth, purifieth and clenſeth it from all ſinne. And conſequently it appeaſeth the anger of God, and freeth vs from the priſons and bands of Iuſtice, to bring vs into the faire and cleare ſun-ſhine of grace and mercy. Finally, it weaneth vs from the world, it plucketh vs from the dug, and maketh vs diſtaſte with the bitterneſſe thereof, like wormwood vpon the teat of the nurſe, the ſweet milke and food of this deceitfull world.
               A great and principall meane for a man to carrie himſelfe well in aduerſitie, is to be an honeſt man. A vertuous man 11 A generall aduice.
                   is more peaceable in aduerſitie, than a vitious in proſperitie: like thoſe that haue a feuer, who feele and find more harme and violence in the heat and cold thereof, and in the extreamitie of their fittes, than ſuch as are ſound in the heat and cold of Summer and Winter. And euen ſo they that haue their conſciences ſicke, are much more tormented, than they that are ſound, that are honeſt men. For hauing the inward part whole and healthfull, they can no way bee endamaged by the outward, eſpecially oppoſing againſt it a good courage.
               Aduerſities are of two ſorts: ſome are true and naturall, as 12 An aduice more ſpeciall.
                   ſickneſſe, griefes, loſſe of thoſe things we loue: others are falſe and fained, either by a common or particular opinion, and not in veritie. That it is ſo, man hath his ſpirit and body as much at command, as before they hapned. To theſe kind of men, only this one word; That which thou complaineſt of, is neither painfull nor troubleſome, but thou makeſt it ſuch, and makeſt thy ſelfe to beleeue it.
               
                  
As touching the true and naturall, the more prompt and popular and more ſound opinions are the more naturall and 13 Naturall.
                   more iuſt. Firſt we muſt remember, that a man indureth nothing againſt the humane and naturall law, ſince euen at the To endure is naturall and humane. birth of man all theſe things are annexed, and giuen as ordinarie. In whatſoeuer doth afflict vs, let vs conſider two things, the nature of that that hapneth vnto vs, and that which is in our ſelues: and vſing things according to nature, we can receiue no tediouſneſſe or offence thereby. For offence is a maladie of the ſoule contrarie to nature, and therefore ſhould by no meanes come neere vnto vs. There is not any accident in the world which may happen vnto vs, wherein nature hath not prepared an aptneſſe in vs to receiue it, and to turne it to our contentment. There is no maner of life ſo ſtrait that hath not ſome ſolace and recreation. There is no priſon ſo ſtrong and darke that giues not place to a ſong ſometimes to comfort a priſoner. Ionas had leaſure to make his prayers vnto God euen in the bellie of the Whale, and was heard. It is a fauor of nature that it findeth a remedie and eaſe vnto our euils in the bearing of them, it being ſo that man is borne to be ſubiect to all ſorts of miſeries, omnia ad quae gemimus, quae expaueſcimus tributa vitaeſunt.
               
               Secondly, we muſt remember, that there is only the leſſer part of man ſubiect to fortune; we haue the principall in our 14 It toucheth but the leſſer part of man.
                   owne power, and it cannot be ouercome without our owne conſent. Fortune may make a man poore, ſick, afflicted, but not vitious, diſſolute, deiected; it cannot take from vs probitie, courage, vertue.
               Afterwards we muſt come to fidelitie, reaſon, iuſtice. Many times a man complaineth vniuſtlie, for though he be ſometimes 15 It is not againſt reaſon and iustice.
                   ſurpriſed with ſome ill accident, yet he is more often with a good, and ſo the one muſt recompence the other. And if a man conſider well thereof, he ſhall find more reaſon to content himſelfe with his good fortunes, than to complaine of his bad: and as we turne our eyes from thoſe things that offend vs, and delight to caſt them vpon greene and pleaſant colours, ſo muſt we diuert our thoughts from heauie and melancholike occurrents, and applie them to thoſe that are pleaſant and pleaſing vnto vs. But we are malicious reſembling

cupping-glaſſes, which draw the corrupt bloud, and leaue the good; like a couetous man who ſelleth the beſt wine, and drinks the worſt, like little children, from whom if you take away one of their play-games, in a furie they caſt away all the reſt. For if any misfortune happen vnto vs, we torment our ſelues, and forget all the reſt that may any way comfort vs: yea ſome there are that for ſmall loſſes terme themſelues vnfortunate in all things, and forget that they euer receiued any good, in ſuch ſort that an ounce of aduerſitie brings them more hartie griefe then ten thouſand of proſperitie, pleaſure or delight.
               We muſt likewiſe caſt our eyes vpon thoſe that are of a 16 It is little in compariſon.
                   far worſe condition than our ſelues, who would thinke themſelues happie if they were in our place.
               
                  Cum tibi diſpliceat rerum fortuna tuarum,
                  Alterius ſpecta, quo ſis diſcrimine peior.
               
               It were good and neceſſarie that theſe complainers did practiſe the ſaying and aduice of a wiſeman, that if all the euils  that men ſuffer ſhould be compared with the bleſſings they enioy, the diuiſion being equallie made, they may ſee by the ouerplus of that good they enioy, the iniuſtice of their complaint.
               After all theſe opinions, we may conclude that there are two great remedies againſt all euils and aduerſities, which may be reduced almoſt to one: Cuſtome for the vulgar and baſer ſort, and meditation for the wiſer. Both of them haue their force from time, the common and ſtrongeſt ſalue againſt all euils; but the wiſe take it before hand, this is foreſight, and the feeble and vulgar ſort after hand. That Cuſtome preuaileth much it doth plainly appeare, in that thoſe things that are moſt tedious and offenſiue, are made thereby eaſie and pleaſing. Natura calamitatum mollimentum conſuetudinem inuenit. Slaues weepe when they enter into the gallies, and before three months be ended they ſing. They that haue not beene accuſtomed to the ſea, are afeard, though it be at the calmeſt, when they wey anckor, whereas the mariners laugh in the middeſt of a tempeſt. The wife groweth deſperate at the death of hir husband, and before a yeare be expired ſhe loues another. Time and Cuſtome brings all things to paſſe;

that which offendeth vs is the noueltie of that which happeneth vnto vs, omnia nouitate grauiora ſunt.
               
               Meditation performeth the ſame office with wiſe men, and by the force thereof things are made familiar and ordinarie, 18 Foreſight or prouidence.
                   
                  quae alij diu patiendo leuia faciunt, ſapiens leuia facit diu cogitando. Hee conſidereth exactly the nature of all things that may offend him, and preſenteth vnto himſelfe whatſoeuer may happen vnto him moſt grieuous and inſupportable, as ſickneſſe, pouerty, exile, iniuries, and examineth in them all that which is according to nature or contrary to it. For foreſight or prouidence is a great remedy againſt all euils, which cannot bring any great alteration or change, hapning to a man that attendeth them; whereas contrarily they wound and hurt him greatly, that ſuffereth himſelfe to bee ſurpriſed by them. Meditation and diſcourſe is that which giueth the true temper to the ſoule, prepareth it, confirmeth it againſt all aſſaults, makes it hard, ſteely, impenetrable againſt whatſoeuer would wound or hurt it. Sudden accidents how great ſoeuer, can giue no great blow to him that keepes himſelfe vpon his guard, and is alwaies readie to receiue them, praemeditati mali mollis ictus venit: quicquid expectatum eſt diu, leuiùs accidit. Now to attaine this foreſight, we muſt firſt know that nature hath placed vs heere, as in a thorny and ſlipppery place; that that which is happened vnto another, may alſo light vpon vs; that that which hangeth ouer all, may fall vpon euery one of vs; and that in all the affaires that wee vndertake wee premeditate the inconueniences and euill encounters which may happen vnto vs, to the end wee bee not ſurpriſed vnawares. O how much are wee deceiued, and how little iudgement haue we, when wee thinke that that which hapneth to others cannot likewiſe fall vpon vs! When wee will not bee wary and prouident, for feare leſt wee ſhould bee thought fearefull. Contrariwiſe, if wee take knowledge of things, as reaſon would haue vs, we would rather wonder that ſo few croſſes happen vnto vs, and that thoſe accidents that follow vs ſo neare, haue ſtaied ſo long before they catch vs, and hauing caught vs, how they ſhould handle vs ſo mildly. He that taketh heede, and conſidereth the aduerſitie of another, as a thing that may happen vnto himſelfe, before it ſhall

happen, is ſufficiently armed. We muſt thinke of all, and expect the worſt; they are fooles and ill aduiſed, that ſay, I had not thought it. It is an old ſaying, that he that is ſuddenly ſurpriſed, is halfe beaten, and he that is warned is halfe armed, nay is two againſt one. A wiſe man in time of peace makes his preparation for warre: A good mariner before hee goe foorth of the hauen, makes prouiſion of what is neceſſarie to reſiſt the violence of a tempeſt: it is too late to prouide againſt an euill, when it is already come. In whatſoeuer we are prepared before hand, wee finde our ſelues apt and admirable, what difficultie ſoeuer it haue; and contrariwiſe there is not any thing ſo eaſie that doth not hurt and hinder vs, if wee bee but noueliſts therein; Id videndum ne quid inopinaium ſit nobis, quia omnia nouitate grauiora ſunt. Doubtleſſe it ſeemeth that if we were ſo prouident as we ſhould and may be, we ſhould wonder at nothing. That which thou ſaweſt before it came, is hapned vnto thee, why then wondereſt thou? Let vs then take a courſe that accidents doe not ſurpriſe vs; let vs euer ſtand vpon our gard, and foreſee what is to come. Animus aduerſus omnia firmandus, vt dicere poſſimus, non vlla laborum, O virgo, noua mi facies inopináue ſurgit, Omnia percepi at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      animo mecum ipſe peregi. Tu hodie iſta denuntias; ego ſemper denuntiaui mihi: hominem paraui ad humana.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. To obey and obſerue the Lawes, Cuſtomes, and Ceremonies of the Country, how and in what ſenſe.
               
               EVen as a ſauage and vntamed beaſt, will not ſuffer himſelfe to be taken, led, and handled by man, but either flieth 1 The beginning, inſtitution and authoritie of the lawes.
                   and hideth himſelfe from him, or armeth himſelfe againſt him, and with furie aſſaulteth him, if he approch neere vnto him; in ſuch ſort that a man muſt vſe force mingled with Art and ſubtiltie to take and tame him: So follie will not be handled by reaſon, or wiſedome, but ſtriueth and ſtirreth againſt it, and addeth follie vnto follie; and therefore it muſt bee taken, and led, like a wilde beaſt, (that which a man is to a beaſt, a wiſe man is to a foole) aſtoniſhed, feared, and kept ſhort, that with the more eaſe it may be inſtructed and won.

Now the proper meane or helpe thereunto, is a great authoritie, a thundring power and grauitie, which may dazell it with the ſplendor of his lightning, Sola authoritas est quae cogit ſtultos vt ad ſapientiam feſtinent. In a popular fight or ſedition August., if ſome great, wiſe, ancient and vertuous perſonage come in preſence, that hath wonne the publike reputation of honour and vertue, preſently the mutinous people being ſtrucken and blinded with the bright ſplendor of this authoritie, are quieted, attending what he will ſay vnto them.
               
                  Veluti magno in populo cùm ſaepe coorta
                  Seditio est, ſaeuit que animis ignobile vulgus,
                  Iamque faces & ſax a volant, furor arma miniſtrat:
                  Tum pietate grauem ac meritis, ſi fortè virum quem
                  Conſpexêre, ſilent, arrectiſque auribus aſtant,
                  Ille regit dictis animos, & pectora mulcet.
               
               There is nothing greater in this world than authoritie, which is an image of God, a meſſenger from Heauen: if it be ſouereigne it it is called maieſtie, if ſubalterne, authoritie: and by two things it is maintained, admiration and feare mingled together. Now this maieſtie and authoritie is firſt and properly in the perſon of the ſoueraigne prince and lawmaker, where it is liuely, actuall and mouing; afterwards in his commandements and ordinances, that is to ſay, in the law, which is the head of the worke of the prince, and the image of a liuely and originall maieſtie. By this are fooles reduced, conducted, and guided. Behold then of what weight, neceſſitie and vtilitie, authoritie and the law is in the world.
               The next authoritie and that which is likeſt to the law, is cuſtome, which is another powerfull and Emperious miſtris; 2 Of Cuſtome.
                   It ſeaſeth vpon this power, and vſurpeth it traiterouſly and violently, for it planteth this authoritie by little and little, by ſtealth, as it were inſenſibly, by a little pleaſing, and humble beginning; hauing ſetled and eſtabliſhed it ſelfe by the helpe of time, it diſcouereth afterwards a furious and tyrannicall viſage, againſt which there is no more libertie or power left, ſo much as to lift vp ones eies; It taketh it authoritie from the poſſeſſion and vſe thereof, it increaſeth and ennobleth it ſelfe by continuance like a riuer; it is dangerous to bring it back to his originall fountaine.
               
                  
Law & cuſtome eſtabliſh their authoritie diuerſly, cuſtome by little and little, with long time, ſweetly and without force 3 A compariſon of them both.
                  , by the common conſent of all, or the greater part, and the authour thereof are the people. The law ſpringeth vp in a moment with authoritie and power, and taketh his force from him that hath power to command all, yea many times againſt the liking of the ſubiects, whereupon ſome compare it to a tyrant, and cuſtome to a king. Againe, cuſtome hath with it neither reward nor puniſhment; the law hath them both, at leaſt puniſhment, neuertheleſſe they may mutuallie help and hinder one another. For cuſtome which is but of ſufferance, authorized by the ſoueraigne, is better confirmed: and the law likewiſe ſetleth it owne authoritie by poſſeſſion and vſe; and contrariwiſe cuſtome may be caſchiered by a contrarie law, and the law loſeth the force thereof by ſuffering a contrarie cuſtome: but ordinarily they are together, that is law and cuſtome; wiſe and ſpirituall men conſidering it as a law, idiots and ſimple men as a cuſtome.
               There is not a thing more ſtrange, than the diuerſitie and ſtrangenes of ſome lawes and cuſtomes in the world; Neither 4 Their diuerſitie and ſtrangeneſſe.
                   is there any opinion or imagination ſo variable, ſo mad, which is not eſtabliſhed by lawes and cuſtomes in ſome place or other. I am content to recite ſome of them, to ſhew thoſe Of lawes and customes in the world. that are hard of beleefe heerein, how farre this propoſition doth go. Yet omitting to ſpeake of thoſe things that belong to religion, which is the ſubiect where the greateſt wonderments and groſſeſt impoſtures are: but becauſe it is without the commerce of men, and that it is not properly a cuſtome, and where it is eaſie to be deceiued, I will not meddle with it. See then a brief of thoſe that for the ſtrangenes are beſt worth the noting. To account it an office of pietie in a certaine age to kill their parents & to eate them. In Innes to pay the ſhot, by yeelding their children, wiues and daughters to the pleaſure of the hoſte: publike brothelhouſes of males: old men lending their wiues vnto yong: women common: an honor to women to haue accompaned with many men, and to cary their locks in the hembes of their garments: daughters to go with their priuie parts vncouered, and maried women carefullie to keepe them couered: to leaue the daughters to their

pleaſures, and being great with child to enforce an obort in the ſight and knowledge of all men; but maried women to keepe themſelues chaſte and faithfull to their husbands: women the firſt night before they companie with their huſbands, to receiue all the males of the eſtate and profeſſion of their husbands, inuited to the mariage, and euer after to be faithfull to their husbands: yong maried women to preſent their virginitie to their prince, before they he with their huſbands: mariages of males: women to go to warre with their husbands: to die and to kill themſelues at the deceaſe of their husbands, or ſhortly after: to permit widowes to marie againe, if their husbands die a violent death, and not otherwiſe: husbands to be diuorced from their wiues without alledging any cauſe: to ſell them if they be barren, to kill them for no other cauſe but becauſe they are women, and afterwards to borrow women of others at their neede: women to be deliuered without paine or feare: to kill their children becauſe they are not faire, well featured, or without cauſe: at meate to wipe their fingers vpon their priuities and their feete: to liue with mans fleſh: to eate fleſh and fiſh raw: many men and women to lie together to the number of tenne or twelue: to ſalute one another by putting the finger to the ground, and afterwards lifting it towards heauen: to turne the back when they ſalute, and neuer to looke him on the face whom a man will honor: to take into the hand the ſpittle of the prince: not to ſpeake to the king but at a peepe-hole: in a mans whole life neuer to cut his haire nor nailes: to cut the haire on one ſide, and the nailes of one hand, and not of the other: men to piſſe ſitting, women ſtanding: to make holes and pits in the fleſh of the face, and the dugs, to hang rings and iewels in: to contemne death, to receiue it with ioy, to ſue for it, to pleade in publike for the honor thereof, as for a dignitie and fauour: to account it an honorable buriall to be eaten with dogs, birds, to be boyled, cut in peeces and pounded, and the powder to be caſt into their ordinarie drinke.
               When we come to iudge of theſe cuſtomes, that is the complaint and the trouble: the vulgar ſot and pedante, are 5 Examinatiō and iudgement. not troubled he
                     •
                  ewith, for euery ſeditious rout condemneth as barbarous and beaſtly whatſoeuer pleaſeth not their palat,

that is to ſay, the common vſe and cuſtome of their countrie. And if a man ſhall tell them, that others do ſpeake and iudge the ſame of ours, and are as much offended with ours, as we with theirs, they cut a man ſhort after their maner, tearming them beaſts and barbarians, which is alwaies to ſay the ſame thing. A wiſe man is more aduiſed, as ſhall be ſaid, he maketh not ſuch haſte to iudge, for feare leſt he wrong his owne iudgment: and to ſay the truth, there are many lawes and cuſtomes which ſeeme at the firſt view to be ſauage, inhumane, and contrarie to all reaſon, which if they were without paſſion, and ſoundly conſidered of, if they were not found to be altogether iuſt and good, yet at the leaſt they would not be without ſome reaſon and defence. Let vs take amongſt the reſt for example the two firſt which wee haue ſpoken of, which ſeeme to be both the ſtrangeſt and fartheſt off from the dutie of pietie; to kill their owne parents at a certaine age, and to eate them. They that haue this cuſtome do take it to be a teſtimonie of pietie and good affection, endeuoring therby firſt of meere pitie to deliuer their old parents, not only vnprofitable to themſelues and others, but burthenſome, languiſhing, and leading a painfull and troubleſome life, and to place them in reſt and eaſe: afterwards giuing them the moſt worthie and commendable ſepulchre, lodging in themſelues and their owne bowels the bodies and reliques of their parents, in a maner reuiuing them againe, and regenerating them by a kind of tranſmutation into their liuing fleſh, by the meanes of the digeſtion and nouriſhment. Theſe reaſons would not ſeeme ouer-light to him that is not poſſeſſed with a contrarie opinion: and it is an eaſie matter to conſider, what crueltie and abomination it had been to theſe people, to ſee their parents before their owne eies to ſuffer ſuch griefe and torment, and they not able to ſuccour them, and afterwards to caſt their ſpoiles to the corruption of the earth, to ſtench and rottennes, and the foode of wormes, which is the worſt that can be done vnto it. Darius made a triall, asking ſome Greekes for what they would be perſwaded to follow the cuſtome of the Indians in eating their dead fathers. To whom they anſwered, that they would not do it for any thing in the world. And on the other ſide aſſaying to perſwade the Indians to burne

the bodies of their dead parents as the Greekes did, it ſeemed to them a matter of ſuch difficultie and horror, as that they would neuer be drawne vnto it. I will adde only one other, which concerneth only matter of decencie and comelineſſe, and is more light and more pleaſant: One that alwaies blew his noſe with his hand, being reprehended for inciuilitie, in the defence of himſelfe, asked what priuiledge that filthie excrement had, that a man muſt affoord it a faire handker chiefe to receiue, and afterwards carefullie wrap & fold it vp, which he thought was a matter of greater lothſomnes than to caſt it frō him. So that we ſee that for all things there may be found ſome ſeeming reaſon, and therefore we are not ſuddenly and lightlie to condemne any thing.
               But who would beleeue how great and imperious the authoritie of cuſtome is? He that ſaid it was another nature, did 6 The authoritie thereof.
                   not ſufficientlie expreſſe it, for it doth more than nature, it conquereth nature: for hence it is that the moſt beautifull daughters of men draw not vnto loue their naturall parents; nor brethren, though excellent in beautie, winne not the loue of their ſiſters. This kind of chaſtirie is not properly of nature, but of the vſe of lawes and cuſtomes, which forbid them, and make of inceſt a great ſinne, as we may ſee in the fact not Gen. 11. 20. 29. 35. Exod. 6. Leuit. 28. only of the children of Adam, where there was an inforced neceſſitie, but of Abraham and Nachor brethren; of Iacob and Iudas Patriarches, Amram the father of Moſes, and other holy men: And it is the law of Moſes which forbad it in theſe firſt degrees; but it hath alſo ſometimes diſpenſed therewith not only in the colaterall line, and betwixt brothers, and their brothers wiues, which was a commandement, and not a diſpenſation Deut. 25. 2. Reg. 12. 3. Reg. 2.: and which is more, betweene the naturall brother and ſiſter of diuers wombs, but alſo in the right line of alliance, that is to ſay, of the ſonne with the mother in law; for in the right line of bloud, it ſeemeth to be altogether againſt nature, notwithſtanding the fact of the daughters of Lot with their father, which neuertheleſſe was produced purely by nature, in that extreame apprehenſion and feare of the end of humane kind, for which cauſe they haue beene excuſed by Chryſoſt. Ambroſe. Auguſt. great and learned doctors. Now againſt nature there is not any diſpenſation, if God the only ſuperior thereunto giue it

not. Finally of caſuall inceſts and not voluntarie the world is full, as Tertullian teacheth. Moreouer, cuſtome doth enforce In Apolog. the rules of nature, witnes thoſe Phyſitians who many times leaue the naturall reaſons of their arte by their owne authoritie, as they that by cuſtome do liue and ſuſtaine their liues with poyſon, Spiders, Emmets, Lyzards, Toades, which is a common practiſe amongſt the people of the Weſt Indies. It likewiſe dulleth our ſenſes, witnes they that liue neere the fall of the riuer of Nilus, neere clocks, armories, milles, and the whole world according to ſome Philoſophers, with the ſound of a heauenly kind of muſick, and the continuall and diuers motions of the heauens dulleth our ſenſes, that we heare not that which we heare. To conclude, (and it is the principall fruit thereof) it ouercommeth all difficultie, maketh things eaſie that ſeeme impoſſible, ſweetneth all ſower, and therefore by the meanes heereof a man liues in all things content, but yet it maſtereth our ſoules, our beliefs, our iudgements, with a moſt vniuſt and tyrannicall authoritie. It doth and vndoeth, authoriſeth and diſauthoriſeth whatſoeuer it pleaſe, without rhythme or reaſon, yea many times againſt all reaſon: It eſtabliſheth in the world againſt reaſon & iudgement all the opinions, religions, beleefs, obſeruances, maners, and ſorts of life moſt fantaſticall and rude, as before hath been ſaid. And contrarily, it wrongfully degradeth, robbeth, beateth downe in things that are truly great and admirable, their price and eſtimation, and maketh them baſe and vile.
               
                  Nil adeo magnum, nec tam mirabile quidquam
                  Principiò, quod non ceſſent mirarier omnes
                  Paulatim.—
               
               So that we ſee that cuſtome is a thing great and powerfull. Plato hauing reprehended a youth for playing at cobnut, or chery-pit, and receiuing this anſwere from him, That he controuled him for a matter of ſmall moment, replied, My child, cuſtome is not a matter of ſmall moment. A ſpeech wel worth the noting for all ſuch as haue youth to bring vp. But it exerciſeth it power with ſo abſolute authoritie, that there is no ſtriuing againſt it, neither is it lawfull to reaſon, or call into queſtion the ordinances thereof: it enchanteth vs in ſuch ſort, that it maketh vs beleeue that what is without the bounds

thereof, is without the bounds of reaſon, and there is nothing good and iuſt, but what it approueth; ratione non componimur, 
                  Senec. 
                  ſed conſuetudine abducimur: honestius putamus quod frequentius: recti apud nos locum tenet error, vbi publicus factus. This is tolerable with idiots and the vulgar ſort, who wanting ſufficiencie to looke into the depth of things, to trie and to iudge, do well to hold and ſettle themſelues to that which is commonlie held and receiued: but to wiſe men, who play another part, it is a baſe thing to ſuffer themſelues to be caried with cuſtomes.
               Now the aduice which I heere giue vnto him that would be wiſe, is to keepe and obſerue both in word and deede the 7 An aduice. lawes & cuſtomes which he findeth eſtabliſhed in the countrie where he is: and in like maner to reſpect and obey the magiſtrates and all ſuperiors, but alwaies with a noble ſpirit, and after a generous maner, and not ſeruilely, pedanticallie, ſuperſtitiouſly, and withall not taking offence, nor lightly condemning other ſtrange lawes and cuſtomes, but freely and ſoundly iudging and examining the one and the other, as hath been ſaid, and not binding his iudgement and beleefe but vnto reaſon only. Heereof a word or two.
               In the firſt place according to all the wiſeſt, the rule of rules, and the generall law of lawes, is to follow and obſerue 1 Lawes and customes are to be obſerued.
                   the lawes and cuſtomes of the countrie where he is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , auoyding carefullie all ſingularitie, and ſtrange extrauagant particularitie, different from the common and ordinarie; for whatſoeuer it be, it alwaies hurteth and woundeth another, is ſuſpected of follie, hypocriſie, ambitious paſſion, though perhaps it proceede from a ſicke and weake ſoule. Non conturbabit ſapiens publicos mores, nec populum in ſe, nouitate vitae conuertet. We muſt alwaies walke vnder the couert of the lawes, cuſtomes, ſuperiours, without diſputation or tergiuerſation, without vndertaking ſometimes to diſpence with the lawes, ſometimes like a frugall ſeruant to enhaunce the price.
               But that it be (which is the ſecond rule) out of a good mind and after a good maner; nobly and wiſely, neither for the loue 2 Not for their iuſtice and equity.
                   nor feare of them, nor for the iuſtice or equitie that is in them, nor for feare of that puniſhment that may follow for not obeiing

them: to be briefe, not of ſuperſtition, nor conſtrained, ſcrupulous, fearefull ſeruitude, eadem quae populus, ſed non eodem modo, nec eodem propoſito faciet ſapiens, but freely and ſimply for publike reuerence, and for their authoritie. Lawes and cuſtomes are maintained in credit, not becauſe they are iuſt and good, but becauſe they are lawes and cuſtomes; this is the myſticall foundation of their authoritie, they haue no other; and ſo is it with ſuperiours, becauſe they are ſuperiours, quia ſupra Cathedram ſedent, not becauſe they are vertuous and honeſt, quae faciunt, nolite facere. Hee that obeyeth them for any other cauſe, obeyeth them not becauſe hee ſhould, this is an euill and a dangerous ſubiect, it is not true obedience, which muſt be pure and ſimple, vnde vocatur depoſitio diſcretionis mera executio, abnegatio ſui. Now to goe about to meaſure one obedience by the iuſtice and goodneſſe of lawes and ſuperiours, were by ſubmitting them to our iudgement, to ſerue them with proceſſe, and to call our obedience into doubt, and diſputation, and conſequently the ſtate and the policie according to the inconſtancie and diuerſitie of iudgements. How many vniuſt and ſtrange lawes are there in the world, not only in the particular iudgements of men, but of vniuerſall reaſon, wherewith the world hath liued a long time in continuall peace and reſt, with as great ſatisfaction as if they had beene very iuſt and reaſonable? And he that ſhould goe about to change or mend them, would be accounted an enemie to the weale-publike, and neuer bee admitted: The nature of man doth accommodate it ſelfe to all with the times, and hauing once caught his fiſh, it is an act of hoſtilitie to goe about to alter any thing: we muſt leaue the world where it is, theſe trouble-houſes and newfangled ſpirits, vnder a pretext of reformation marre all.
               All change and alteration of lawes, beleefes, cuſtomes and Against innouatours. obſeruances is very dangerous, and yeeldeth alwaies more euill than good; it bringeth with it certaine and preſent euils, for a good that is vncertaine and to come. Innouatours haue alwaies glorious and plauſible titles, but they are but the more ſuſpected, and they cannot eſcape the note of ambitious preſumption, in that they thinke to ſee more cleerely than others, and that to eſtabliſh their opinions, the ſtate,

policie, peace and publike quiet muſt be turned topſy turuy.
               I will not ſay for all this that hath beene ſaid before, that 3 Strange things are not lightly to be condemned.
                   we muſt abſolutely obey all lawes, all commandements of ſuperiours, for ſuch as a man knoweth euidently to be either againſt God or nature, hee is not to obey, and yet not to rebell and to trouble the ſtate: how he ſhould gouerne himſelfe in ſuch a caſe ſhall be taught heereafter, in the obedience due vnto princes; for to ſay the truth, this inconuenience and infelicitie, is rather, and more common in the commandements of princes, than in the lawes: neither is it ſufficient to obey the lawes and ſuperiours becauſe of their worth and merrit, nor ſeruilely and for feare, as the common and prophane ſort doe; but a wiſe man doth nothing by force or feare, ſoli hoc ſapienti contingit, vt nil faciat inuitus, recta ſequitur, gaudet officio, he doth that which he ſhould, and keepes the lawes, not for feare of them, but for the loue of himſelfe, being iealous of his dutie; he hath not to doe with the lawes, to doe well; that is that wherein he differeth from the common ſort, who cannot do well, nor know what they ought to do, without lawes; at iuſto & ſapienti non est lex poſita. By right a wiſe man is aboue the lawes, but in outward and publike effect, he is their voluntarie and free obedient ſubiect. In the third place thereof, it is an act of lightneſſe and iniurious preſumption, yea a teſtimonie of weakeneſſe and inſufficiencie, to condemne that which agreeth not with the law and cuſtome of his countrie. This proceedeth either from want of leaſure or ſufficiencie to conſider the reaſons and grounds of others; this is to wrong and ſhame his owne iudgement, whereby he is enforced many times to recant, and not to remember that the nature of man is capable of all things; It is to ſuffer the eie of his ſpirit to be hood winked, and brought aſleepe by a long cuſtome, and preſcription to haue power ouer iudgement.
               Finally it is the office of a generous ſpirit and a wiſe man 4 Wiſely to examine all things.
                   (whom I heere endeuour to deſcribe) to examine all things, to conſider apart, and afterwards to compare together all the lawes and cuſtomes of the world, which ſhall come to his knowledge, and to iudge of them (not to rule his obedience by them, as hath beene ſaid, but to exerciſe his office, ſince

he hath a ſpirit to that end) faithfully and without paſſion, according to the rule of truth and vniuerfall reaſon and nature, whereunto he is firſt obliged, not flattering himſelfe, or ſtaining his iudgement with error: and to content himſelfe to yeeld obedience vnto thoſe whereunto hee is ſecondly and particularly bound, whereby none ſhall haue cauſe to complaine of him. It may fall out ſometimes, that wee may doe that, by a ſecond particular and municipall obligation (obeying the lawes and cuſtomes of the country) which is againſt the firſt and more ancient, that is to ſay, vniuerſall nature and reaſon; but yet we ſatisfie nature by keeping our iudgements and opinions true and iuſt according to it. For wee haue nothing ſo much ours, and whereof we may freely diſpoſe; the world hath nothing to do with out thoughts, but the outward man is engaged to the publicke courſe of the world, and muſt giue an account thereof: ſo that manie times, wee doe iuſtlie that, which iuſtly we approoue not. There is no remedie, for ſo goes the world.
               After theſe two miſtreſſes, Law and Cuſtome, comes the 8 Of Ceremonies.
                   third, which hath no leſſe authority & power with many, yea is more rough & tyrannicall to thoſe that too much tie themſelues thereunto. This is the ceremony of the world, which to ſay the truth, is for the moſt part but vanity; yet holdeth ſuch place, and vſurpeth ſuch authority, by the remiſneſſe and contagious corruption of the world, that manie thinke that wiſedome conſiſteth in the obſeruation thereof, and in ſuch ſort do voluntarilie enthrall themſelues thereunto, that rather than they wil contradict it, they preiudice their health, benefit, buſineſſe, libertie, conſcience and all; which is a very great follie, and the fault and infelicity of manie Courtiers, who aboue others are the idolaters of ceremonie. Now my will is, that this my Wiſe-man, do carefullie defend himſelfe from this captiuity. I doe not meane, that out of a kind of looſe inciuilitie, he abuſe a ceremonie, for we muſt forgiue the world in ſome thing, and as much as may be outwardlie conforme our ſelues to that which is in practiſe; but my will is, that he tie not, and enthrall himſelfe thereunto, but that with a gallant and generous boldneſſe hee know how to leaue it when he will, and when it is fit, and in ſuch maner, as that he

giue all men to know, that it is not out of careleſnes, or delicacie, or ignorance, or contempt, but becauſe he would not ſeeme ignorant how to eſteeme of it as is fit, not ſuffer his iudgement and will to be corrupted with ſuch a vanitie, and that he lendeth himſelfe to the world when it pleaſeth him, but neuer giueth himſelfe.
            
            
               CHAP. IX. To carie himſelfe well with another.
               
               THis matter belongeth to the vertue of iuſtice, which teacheth how to liue well with all, and to giue to euery one that which appertaineth vnto him, which ſhall be handled in the booke following, where ſhall be ſet downe the particular and diuers opinions according to the diuerſitie of perſons. Heere are only the generall, following the purpoſe and ſubiect of this booke.
               There is heere a two-fold conſideration (and conſequently two parts in this Chapter) according to the two maners of  conuerſing with the world, the one is ſimple, generall and common; the ordinarie commerce of the world, whereunto the times, the affaires, the voyages, and encounters do daily leade, and change acquaintance from thoſe we know, to thoſe we know not, ſtrangers, without our choice, or voluntarie conſents: the other ſpeciall is in affected and deſired companie and acquaintance, either ſought after and choſen, or being offered and preſented, hath beene embraced, and that either for ſpirituall or corporall profit or pleaſure, wherein there is conference, communication, priuitie, and familiaritie: each of them haue their aduiſements apart. But before we enter into them, it ſhall not be amiſſe by way of preface, to giue you ſome generall and fundamentall aduice of all thereſt.
               It is a great vice (whereof this our Wiſe-man muſt take heed) and a defect inconuenient both to himſelfe and to another 3 Facilitie and vniuerſalitie of humours.
                  , to be bound and ſubiect to certaine humours and complexions, to one only courſe, that is, to be a ſlaue to himſelfe, ſo to be captiuated to his proper inclinations, that he cannot be bent to any other, a teſtimonie of an anxious ſcrupulous mind, and ill bred, too amorous, and too partiall to it ſelfe.

Theſe kind of people haue much to endure and to conteſt; and contrariwiſe it is a great ſufficiencie and wiſdome to accommodate himſelfe to all, I ſtud eſt ſapere, qui vbicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      opus ſit animum poſſis flectere, to be ſupple and manaiable, to know how to riſe and fall, to bring himſelfe into order when there is neede. The faireſt minds, and the beſt borne, are the more vniuerſall, the more common, appliable to all vnderſtandings, communicatiue and open to all people. It is a beautifull qualitie, which reſembleth and imitateth the goodnes of God, it is the honor which was giuen to old Cato, huic verſatile ingenium, ſic pariter adomnia fuit, vt natum ad id vnum diceres, quodcunque ageret.
               
               Let vs ſee the aduiſements of the firſt conſideration, of the ſimple and common conuerſation, I wil heere ſet downe ſome 4 The firſt part. Aduice touching ſimple and common conuerſation.
                  , whereof the firſt ſhall be, to keepe ſilence and modeſtie.
               The ſecond, not to be ouer-formall, in not applying himſelfe to the follies, indiſcretions and lightneſſes which may be committed in his preſence; for it is an indiſcretion to condemne all that pleaſeth not our palat. 
               
               The third, to ſpare, and thriftily to order that which a man  knoweth, and that ſufficiencie that he hath attained, and to be more willing to heare than to ſpeake, to learne than to teach; for it is a vice to be more readie and forward to make himſelfe knowne, to talke of himſelfe, and to ſhew all that is in him, than to learne knowledge of another, and to ſpend his owne ſtock than to get new.
               The fourth, not to enter into diſcourſe and conteſtation againſt all, neither againſt great men to whom we owe a dutie  and reſpect, nor againſt our inferiours, where the match is not equall.
               The fift, to be honeſtlie curious in the enquirie of all things , and knowing them, to order them frugallie, to make profit by them.
               The ſixt and principall is, to employ his iudgement in all things, which is the chiefe part which worketh, ruleth, and  doth all; without the vnderſtanding all other things are blind, deafe, and without a ſoule, it is leaſt to know the hiſtorie, the iudgement is all.
               
                  
The ſeuenth is, neuer to ſpeake affirmatiuely, and imperiouſly, with obſtinacie and reſolution; that hurteth and woundeth all.
               Peremptorie affirmation and obſtinacie in opinion, are ordinarie ſignes of ſenſleſneſſe and ignorance. The ſtile of the ancient Romans was, that the witneſſes depoſing, and the iudges determining that which of their owne proper knowledge they knew to be true, they expreſſed their mind by this word, It ſeemeth (it a videtur). And if theſe did thus, what ſhould others do? It were good to learne to vſe ſuch words as may ſweeten and moderate the temeritie of our propoſitions, as, It may be, It is ſaid, I thinke, It ſeemeth, and the like: and in anſwering, I vnderſtand it not, What is that to ſay? It may be, It is true. I will ſhut vp this generall part in theſe few The concluſion. words; To haue the countenance and the outward ſhew open and agreeable to all, his mind and thought couered and hid from all, his tongue ſober and diſcreet, alwaies to keepe himſelfe to himſelfe, and to ſtand on his gard, frons aperta, lingua parca, mens clauſa, nulli fidere, to ſee and heare much, to ſpeake little, to iudge of all, vide, audi, iudica.
               
               Let vs come to the other conſideration, and kind of conuerſation more ſpeciall, whereof the inſtructions are theſe. 11 The ſecond part, of ſpeciall conuerſation.
                   The firſt is to ſeeke, to conferre, and conuerſe with men of conſtancie and dexteritie; for thereby the mind is confirmed and fortified, and is eleuated aboue it ſelfe, as with baſe and weake ſpirits it is debaſed, and vtterly loſt: the contagion heerein is, as in the bodie, and alſo more.
               The ſecond is not to be aſtoniſhed at the opinions of another, for how contrarie ſoeuer to the common ſort, how ſtrange, how friuolous or extrauagant they ſeeme, yet they are ſutable to the ſpirit of man, which is capable to produce all things, and therfore it is weaknes to be aſtoniſhed at them.
               The third is not to feare or to be troubled with the rude inciuilitie and bitter ſpeeches of men, whereunto he muſt harden  and accuſtome himſelfe. Gallant men beare them with courage; this tendernes, and fearefull & ceremonious mildnes is for women. This ſocietie and familiaritie muſt be valiant and manly, it muſt be couragious both to giue hard ſpeeches,

and to endure them, to correct and to be corrected. It is a fading pleaſure, to haue to do with a people that yeeld, flatter, and applaud a man in all things.
               The fourth is to aime alwaies at the truth, to acknowledge it, ingenuouſly and cheerefully to yeeld vnto it, of what ſide  ſoeuer it be; vſing alwaies and in all things ſinceritie, and not as many, eſpeciallie pedanties, by right or by wrong to defend himſelfe, and to quell his aduerſarie. It is a fairer victorie to range himſelfe according to reaſon, and to vanquiſh himſelfe, than to ouercome his aduerſarie, whereunto his own weakneſſe doth many times help, being farre from all paſſion. To acknowledge his fault, to confeſſe his doubt and ignorance, to yeeld when there is occaſion, are actes of iudgement, gentlenes and ſinceritie, which are the principall qualities of an honeſt and wiſe man; whereas obſtinacie in opinion accuſeth a man of many vices and imperfections.
               The fift is, in diſputation not to employ all the meanes that a man may haue, but ſuch as are beſt and fitteſt, that are more  pertinent and preſſing, and that with breuitie; for euen in a good cauſe a man may ſay too much; for long diſcourſes, amplifications and repetitions are a teſtimonie of oſtentation, deſire to ſpeake, and tedious to the whole companie.
               The ſixt and principall is, in all things to keepe a forme , order and aptnes. O what a troubleſome thing it is to diſpute and conferre with a foole, a trifler, that vttereth nothing but matter impertinent to the matter! It is the only iuſt excuſe to cut off all conference: for what can a man gaine but torment, that knowes not how, or what to ſpeake as he ſhould? Not to vnderſtand the argument that is made, to wed himſelfe to his owne opinion, not to anſwere directly, to tye himſelfe to words, and to leaue the principall, to mingle and trouble the conference with vaine amplifications, to denie all, not to follow the forme of diſputation, to vſe vnprofitable prefaces and digreſſions, to be obſtinate in opinion, and to mouth it out, to tye himſelfe to formes, and neuer to diue into the bottome, are things that are ordinarily practiſed by pedanties and Sophiſters. See heere how wiſdome is diſcerned from follie; this is preſumptuous, raſh, obſtinate, aſſured; that neuer ſatisfieth it ſelfe, is fearefull, aduiſed, modeſt: this pleaſeth

it ſelfe, goes foorth of the liſts merrily and gloriouſly, as hauing wonne the victorie, when it neuer came neere it.
               The ſeuenth, if there be place of contradiction, hee muſt  take heede that he be not bold, obſtinate, bitter, for either of theſe three makes it vnwelcome, & doth more hurt himſelfe, than an other. That it may winne good entertainment of the companie, it muſt ariſe from that very houre of the controuerſie that is handled, from the preſent occaſion, and not from elſewhere, nor from any former precedent ground; neither muſt it touch the perſon, but the matter onely, with ſome commendation of the perſon, if there be cauſe.
            
            
               CHAP. X. To cary himſelfe wiſely in his affaires.
               
               THis doth properly belong to the vertue of prudence, whereof wee ſhall ſpeake in the beginning of the booke following, where ſhall bee ſet downe in particular diuers counſels and aduiſements according to the diuers kindes of prudence and occurrents in our affaires. But I will heere ſet downe the principall points and heads of wiſedome, which are generall & common aduiſements to inſtruct in groſſe our diſciple, to carrie himſelfe well and wiſely in the trafficke and commerce of the world, and the managing of all affaires; and they are eight.
               The firſt conſiſteth in vnderſtanding, that is, well to know the perſons with whom a man hath to deale, their proper and 1 Knowledge of the persōs and affaires.
                   particular nature, their humour, their ſpirit, inclinatino, deſignement, and intention, their proceedings: to know likewiſe the nature of the buſineſſe which he hath in hand, and which is propoſed vnto him, not only in their ſuperficiall and outward appearance, but to penetrate into the inſide thereof, not only to ſee and know things in themſelues, but the accidents and conſequents that belong thereunto. The better to doe this, he muſt looke into them with all maner of viſages, conſider them in all ſenſes; for there are ſome that in one ſide are very pretious and pleaſing, and on the other baſe and pernicious. Now it is certaine, that according to the diuers natures of the perſons and affaires, we muſt change our

ſtile and maner of proceeding, like a Seaman, who according to the diuers ſtate of the ſea, and the diuerſitie of the windes, doth diuerſly turne and guide his ſailes and his oares. For he that in all things ſhall direct and carrie himſelfe after one and the ſame faſhion, would quickly marre all, play the foole, and make himſelfe ridiculous. Now this twofold knowledge of the perſons and affaires is no eaſie matter, ſo much is man diſguiſed and counterfeited; but the way to attaine thereunto, is to conſider them attentiuely and aduiſedly, reuoluing them many times in our mindes, and that without paſſion.
               Wee muſt likewiſe learne to eſteeme of things according to their true worth, giuing vnto them that price and place 2 Eſtimation of things.
                   which appertaineth vnto them, which is the true office of wiſedome and ſufficiencie. This is a high point of philoſophie; but the better to attaine thereunto, we muſt take heede of paſſion, and the iudgement of the vulgar ſort. There are Not according to the vulgar iudgement. ſix or ſeuen things which mooue and leade vulgar ſpirits, and make them to eſteeme of things by falſe enſignes, whereof wiſe men will take heed; which are, noueltie, raritie, ſtrangeneſſe, difficultie, Art, inuention, abſence, and priuation or deniall, and aboue all, report, ſhew, and prouiſion. They eſteeme not of things if they be not poliſhed by Art and ſcience, if they be not pointed and pa
                     •
                  nted out. The ſimple and naturall, of what value ſoeuer they be, they attend not; they eſcape and droppe away inſenſibly, or at leaſt are accounted plaine, baſe, and fooliſh; a great teſtimonie of humane vanitie and imbecillitie, which is paied with winde, with falſe and counterfeit mony, in ſteede of currant, from whence it is, that a man preferreth Art before nature, that which is ſtudied and difficult, before that which is eaſie; vehement motions, and impulſions, before complexion, conſtitution, habit; the extraordinary before the ordinary; oſtentation & pompe, before true and ſecret veritie; another mans, and that which is ſtrange, which is borrowed, before that which is proper and naturall. And what greater follie can there bee than all this? Now the rule of the wiſe is not to ſuffer themſelues by all this, to be caught and carried, but to meaſure and iudge But according to the wiſe. and eſteeme of things, firſt by their true, naturall and eſſentiall value, which is many times inward and ſecret; and then

by their profit and commoditie; the reſt is but deceit or mockerie. This is a matter of difficultie, all things being ſo diſguiſed and ſophiſticated: many times the falſe and wicked being more plauſible, than the true and good. And Ariſtotle ſaith, that there are many falſhoods, which are more probable, and haue a better outward appearance, than verities. But as it is difficult, ſo is it excellent and diuine: Si ſeparaueris pretioſum 
                  
                     Difficult. Excellent. N
                           •
                        ceſſary. 
                     
                        •
                     eneca. 
                  a vili, quaſi os meum eris: And neceſſarie before all workes; quàm neceſſarium pretiarebus imponere; for to ſmall purpoſe doth a man endeuour to know the precepts of a good life, if firſt he know not in what ranke to place things, riches, health, beauty, nobility, ſcience, and ſo foorth, with 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   their contraries. This precedency & preheminence of things is a high and excellent knowledge, and yet difficult, eſpecially when many preſent themſelues, for plurality hindreth, and heerein men are neuer of one accord. The particular taſtes and iudgements of men are diuers, and it is fit and commodious it ſhould be ſo, to the end that all runne not together after one and the ſame thing, and ſo bee a let or hindrance to another. For example, let vs take the eight principall heads, of Eight principall heads of goods ſpirituall and corporall. all goods ſpirituall and corporall, foure of each kind, that is to ſay, Honeſty, Health, Wiſedome, Beauty, Ability or Aptneſſe, Nobility, Science, Riches. We do heere take the words according to the common ſenſe and vſe, wiſdome for a prudent and diſcreet maner of life and carriage with and towards all; Abilitie for ſufficiency in affaires; Science for the knowledge of things acquired out of bookes: the other are cleare enough. Now touching the ranging of theſe eight, how many diuers opinions are there? I haue told my owne, and I haue mingled and in ſuch ſort enterlaced them together, that after and next vnto a ſpirituall, there is a corporall corroſpondent therunto, to the end we may couple the ſoule and the body together. Health is in the body, that which honeſtie is in the ſoule; the health of the ſoule, is the honeſtie of the body, mens ſana in corpore ſano: Beauty, is as wiſedome, the meaſure, proportion, and comelineſſe of the body, and wiſedome a ſpirituall beauty. Nobility is a great aptneſſe and diſpoſition to vertue. Sciences are the riches of the ſpirit. Others do range theſe parts otherwiſe, ſome place all the ſpirituall firſt, before they come

to the firſt corporall, and the leaſt of the ſpirit aboue the greateſt of the bodie: ſome place them apart, and all diuerſly, euery one aboundeth in his owne ſenſe.
               After and from this ſufficiencie and part of prudence, to know well how to eſteeme of things, doth ſpring and ariſe 3 Choice and election of things.
                   another, that is, to know well how to chooſe, where not only the conſcience, but alſo the ſufficiencie and prudence is likewiſe many times ſhewed. There are choices very eaſie, as of a difficultie, & of a vice, of that which is honeſt, and that which is commodious, of dutie and of profit: for the preheminence of the one is ſo great aboue the other, that when they come to encounter, honeſtie alwaies winneth the field, except (it may be) ſome exception very rare, and with great circumſtance, and in publike affaires only, as ſhall be ſaid heereafter in the vertue of Prudence: but there are other choices farre more hard and troubleſome, as when a man is caught or driuen into a narrow ſtreit betweene two vices, as was that Doctor Origen, either to become an Idolater, or to proſtitute hunſelfe to the carnall pleaſure of a baſe impure Aethiopian. The rule is, that when a man findeth himſelfe in any doubt or perplexitie touching the choice of thoſe things that are not euill, he muſt chooſe that part that hath moſt honeſtie and iuſtice in it; for though it fall out otherwiſe than well, yet it ſhall be alwaies ſome comfort and glorie to a man to haue choſen the better; and beſides a man knoweth not (if he had choſen the contrarie part) what would haue hapned, or whether he had eſcaped his deſtinie: when a man doubteth which is the better and ſhorteſt way, hee muſt take the ſtreiteſt. And in thoſe things that are euill (whereof there is neuer any choice) a man muſt auoid the more baſe and vniuſt: this is a rule of conſcience, and belongeth to honeſtie. But to know which is the more honeſt, iuſt, and profitable, which the more diſhoneſt, vniuſt, and vnprofitable, it is many times very difficult, and belongeth to prudence and ſufficiencie. It ſeemeth that in ſuch like ſtreits and extremities the ſurer and better way is to follow nature, and to iudge that the more iuſt and honeſt which commeth neereſt vnto nature, that the more vniuſt and diſhoneſt which is fartheſt from it. Before we leaue this diſcourſe of the choice & election of things, in two words let

vs remoue this queſtion: From whence commeth in our ſoules the choice of two indifferent things in all things alike? The Stoicks ſay, from an extraordinarie, immoderate, ſtrange and raſh operation of the ſoule. But a man may ſay, that neuer do two things preſent themſelues vnto vs, wherein there is not ſome difference or other be it neuer ſo little, and that there is alwaies ſomething in the one, which moueth vs to that choice, although it be inſenſible, and ſuch as we cannot expreſle. He that is equallie ballanced betwixt two deſires, can neuer chooſe, for euery choice and inclination doth inferre an inequalitie.
               Another precept in this matter, is to take aduice and counſell of another: for, for a man to beleeue himſelfe, and to truſt 4 Conſultation.
                   only in himſelfe, is very dangerous. Now heere are required two aduertiſements of Prudence; the one is in the choice of thoſe, to whom a man muſt addreſſe himſelfe for counſell; for there are ſome whoſe counſell we ſhould rather auoid, and flie from. Firſt, they muſt be honeſt and faithfull men (which is heere all one) and ſecondly, men ſenſible, aduiſed, wiſe, and of experience. Theſe are the two qualities of good counſellers, honeſtie, and ſufficiencie. A man may adde a third, and that is, that neither they nor their neereſt and inward friends haue any particular intereſt in the buſineſſe; for although a man may ſay, that this cannot hinder them to giue good counſell, being, as is ſaid, honeſt men; yet I may anſwere, that beſides that this ſo great and philoſophicall honeſtie, which is no way touched with it owne proper intereſt, be very rare, it is alſo a great point of follie to bring it into doubt and anxictie, and as it were to put the finger betwixt two ſtones. The other aduertiſement is, well to heare and entertaine the counſels, receiuing them without attending the euent, with iudgement and gentlenes, delighting in the free deliuerie of the truth. Hauing entertained and followed it as good, and comming from a good hand and a friendly, he muſt not repent himſelfe of it, although it ſucceed not well, and according to expectation. Many times good counſels haue bad euents. But a wiſe man muſt rather content himſelfe to haue followed good counſell which hath brought foorth bad effects, than bad counſell which hath had a happie euent, as Marius; ſic
                  
                  correcti Marij temeritas gloriam ex culpa inuenit, and not to do like fooles, who hauing aduiſedly deliberated and choſen, thinke afterwards to haue choſen the worſe, becauſe they weigh only the reaſons of the contrarie opinion, neuer counterpoiſing them with thoſe with firſt induced them thereunto. Thus much breefly be ſaid of thoſe that ſeeke counſell: Lib. 3. ca. 2. art. 17. of thoſe that giue it, we ſhal ſpeake in the vertue of Prudence, whereof the counſell is a great and ſufficient part.
               The fift aduice which I heere giue, to carie himſelfe well in his affaires, is a temperature and mediocritie betwixt too 5 Temperature betwixt feare and aſſurance. great a confidence, and diſtruſt, feare and aſſurance. To truſt and ſecure himſelfe, doth many times hurt, and to diſtruſt offendeth: he muſt take ſpeciall heed of making any ſhew of diſtruſt, euen when there is cauſe; for it diſpleaſeth, yea offendeth much, and many times maketh a friend an enemy. But yet a man is not to be ouer-credulous, and confident, except it be of his beſt aſſured friends, he muſt alwaies keepe the bridle in his hands, holding it neither too looſe nor too ſtreight. He muſt neuer ſpeake all, and let that which he ſpeaketh be euer true. He muſt neuer deceiue, but yet let him take heed he be not deceiued. He muſt euer temper and moderate that columbine innocencie and ſimplicitie, in not offending any man with his ſerpentine wiſdome and ſubtiltie, and keeping himſelfe vpon his gard, and preſeruing himſelfe from the deceits, treaſons, and ambuſhments of another. Subtiltie to defend, is as commendable, as it is diſhoneſt to offend. He muſt neuer therefore aduance and engage himſelfe ſo farre, but that he haue alwaies a meane when he will, and when it ſhall be neceſſarie to retire himſelfe without great dammage or diſlike. He muſt neuer forſake his owne hold, nor ſo much deſpiſe another, and preſume of himſelfe, that he fall into a kind of preſumption and careleſnes of his affaires; like thoſe that thinke that no man ſees ſo cleere as themſelues, that looke that euery man ſhould yeeld vnto them, that no man ſhould dare to entertaine a thought to diſpleaſe them, and by that meanes become diſſolute, and caſt away care, and in the end they are blinded, ſurpriſed, and deceiued.
               Another aduice and very important, is to take all things in

their times and ſeaſons, and to good purpoſe, and for that To take time and occaſion. cauſe, he muſt aboue all things auoid precipitation, an enemie to wiſdome, the ſtep-mother of all good actions, a vice much to be feared in yong and youthfull people. It is in truth the Againſt precipitation. worke of a skilfull and actiue man, to applie euery thing to his true end, well to manage all occaſions and commodities, to make vſe both of the times and the meanes. All things haue their ſeaſons, and euen the good which a man may doe without purpoſe. Now too much ſpeed and precipitation is contrarie heereunto, which troubleth, marreth, and confoundeth all: canis festinans caecos facit catulos. It proceedeth commonly for that paſſion which carieth vs, Nam qui cupit festinat: qui festinat euertit: vnde festinatio improuida & caeca: duo aduerſiſſima rectae menticeleritas & ira: and often enough from inſufficiencie. The contrarie vice, lazineſſe, ſloth, careleſneſſe, Idleneſſe. which ſeemeth ſometimes to haue ſome aire of maturitie and wiſdome, is likewiſe pernitious and dangerous eſpeciallie in the execution. For it is ſaid, that it is lawfull to be ſlow and long in deliberation and conſultation, but not in the execution; and therefore the wiſeſt ſay, That a man muſt conſult ſlowly, execute ſpeedely, deliberate with leiſure, and with ſpeede accompliſh. It falleth out ſometimes that the contrarie is practiſed with good ſucceſſe, and that a man is happie in the euent, though he haue been ſuddaine and raſh in his deliberation; Subiti conſilijs, euentu faelices, but this is very ſeldome, and by chaunce or fortune; according to which wee muſt not rule and direct ourſelues; but take heed leſt enuie and emulation ouertake vs; for commonly a long and vnprofitable repentance is the reward of headlong haſtineſſe. Behold then two rocks and extremities which we muſt equallie auoid; for it is as great a fault to take occaſions before they be readie, whileſt they be greene and raw, as to ſuffer them to grow till they be ouer-ripe & paſt the taking. The firſt fault, yoong men and forward hot-ſpurres commit, who for want of patience, giue no leaſure to time and the heauens to do any thing for them, they runne, but they catch nothing: The ſecond, heauie, lazie dull ſpirited men do commonly fall into. To know the occaſion, and to take it, a man muſt haue his ſpirit

valiant and vigilant, and likewiſe patient: he muſt foreſee it, watch, attend it, ſee it comming, and prepare for it, and ſo take it iuſt at that inſtant when it is readie.
               The ſeuenth aduice is, well to cary himſelfe with theſe two maſters & ſuperintendants of the affaires of the world, which 7 Industrie and Fortune. are induſtrie or vertue, and fortune. It is an ancient queſtion which of theſe two hath moſt credit, force, and authoritie: for it is out of all doubt, that both haue; and it is clearely falſe, that one only doth all, and the other nothing. It were perhaps to be wiſhed that it were true, and that one only had the whole empire, the buſineſſe would go the better, a man would wholly attend that, whereby it would be the more eaſie; the difficultie is to ioyne them together, and to attend them both. Commonly they that ſettle themſelues vnto the one, contemne the other, the yonger and bolder ſort reſpect and truſt to fortune, hoping much good from it, and many times by them it worketh great matters, in ſomuch that it ſeemes to fauour them; the more ancient and ſtayed, truſt to their induſtrie; and theſe of the two, haue the more reaſon. If we ſhould compare them, and chuſe one of the two, induſtrie is the more honeſt, the more certaine, glorious; for though fortune be contrarie to it, and ſhall make all induſtrie & diligence vaine, yet neuertheleſſe there remaineth great contentment, in that a man hath not kept holy day, hath performed his office or dutie, hath caried himſelfe like a man of courage. They that follow the other part, are in danger to attend in vaine, and though perhaps things ſucceed according to their owne deſires, yet they want that honor and glory that the former hath. Now the aduice of wiſdome is, not wholly, and ſo much to ſettle our ſelues to the one, that we contemne, and exclude the other; for they haue both a good part, yea many times they help, and do mutually attend one the other. A wiſe man then muſt cary himſelfe with them both, but yet vnequally, for the aduantage and preheminence muſt be giuen, as hath beene ſaid, to vertue, induſtrie; virtute duce, comite fortuna. This aduice likewiſe is required, to keepe diſcretion, which ſeaſoneth and giueth a taſte or reliſh to all things; this is not a particular qualitie, but common, which mingleth it ſelfe in all: Indiſcretion marreth all, and taketh away the grace from

the beſt actions, whether it be to doe good to another; for all gratifications are not well beſtowed vpon all ſorts of people; or to excuſe himſelfe; for inconſiderate excuſes ſerue for accuſations, or to play the part of an honeſt and curteous man, for a man may exceede and degenerate into ruſticitie, or whether it be to offer, or to accept.
            
            
               CHAP. XI. To keepe himſelfe alwaies ready for death, a fruit of wiſedome.
               
               THe day of death is the maſter day, and iudge of all other 1 The day of death.
                   daies, the triall and touchſtone of all the actions of our life. Then doe we make our greateſt aſſay, and gather the whole fruit of all our ſtudies. He that iudgeth of the life of a man, muſt looke how he carried himſelfe at his death; for the end crowneth the worke, and a good death honoureth a mans whole life, as an euill defameth and diſhonoureth it: A man cannot well iudge of any, without wronging of him, before hee hath plaied the laſt act of his Comedie, which is without all doubt the moſt difficult. Epaminondas one of the wiſe men of Greece, being demanded whom of three men he eſteemed moſt, himſelfe, Chabrias, or Iphicrates, anſwered, We muſt firſt ſee all three die, before we reſolue that queſtion: the reaſon is, becauſe in all the reſt a man may be masked, but in this laſt part, it is to no purpoſe to diſſemble,
               
                  Nam verae voces tum demum pectore ab imo
                  Eijciuntur, & eripitur perſona; manet res.
               
               Fortune from farre ſeemeth to watch, and lie in wait for vs, againſt this laſt day, as a day long ſince named and appointed, to ſhew her power, and in a moment to ouerthrow all that wee haue built, and gathered together in many yeers, and to make vs crie out with Laberius, Nimirum hac die vna plùs vixi mihi, quàm viuendum fuit: And ſo was it well and wiſely ſaid of Solon to Croeſus; Ante obitum nemo beatus.
               
               It is an excellent thing to learne to die, it is the ſtudie of wiſedome, which aimeth wholly at this end: hee hath not 2 To know how to die.
                   ſpent his life ill, that hath learned to die well; and hee hath loſt his whole time, that knowes not well how to end it. Malè
                  
                  viuet, quiſquis neſciet bene mori: non fruſtra naſcitur qui bene 
                  Senec. 
                  moritur: nec inutiliter vixit, qui foeliciter desijt: Mori tota vita diſcendum est, & praecipuum ex vitae officijs est. Hee ſhootes not well, that lookes not on the marke; and he cannot liue well that hath not an eie to his death. To be briefe, the ſcience of dying is the ſcience of libertie, the way to feare nothing, to liue well, contentedly and peaceably; without this knowledge there is no more pleaſure in life, than in the fruition of that thing which a man feareth alwaies to loſe.
               Firſt and aboue all, we muſt endeuour, that our ſinnes die before our ſelues: Secondly, that we be alwaies ready and  prepared for death. O what an excellent thing is it for a man to end his life before his death, in ſuch ſort, that at that houre he haue no other thing to doe, but to die! that hee haue no more neede of any thing, not of time, not of himſelfe, but ſweetly and contentedly departeth this life, ſaying:
               
                  Vixi, & quem dederat curſum fortuna peregi.
               
               Thirdly, wee muſt endeuour, that our death be voluntarie; for to die well, is to die willingly.
               It ſeemeth that a man may carry himſelfe in death fiue diuers waies: He may feare and flie it, as a very great euill; attend 4 A fiue fold maner of carriage in death.
                   it ſweetly and patiently, as a thing naturall, ineuitable, reaſonable; contemne it, as a thing indifferent, and of no great importance; deſire and ſeeke after it, as the only hauen of reſt from all the torments of this life, yea a very great gaine; giue it to himſelfe, by taking away his owne life. Of theſe fiue, the three middlemoſt are good, befitting a good and ſetled ſoule, although diuerſly, and in a different condition of life; the two extreames are vitious and out of weakeneſſe, though it be with diuers viſages. A word or two of them all.
               The firſt is not approued by men of vnderſtanding, though by the greater part it be practiſed: a teſtimonie of great weakneſſe. 5 To feare death.
                   Againſt theſe kinde of men, and for your better comfort, either againſt your owne death, or the death of another, thus much briefly. There is not a thing that men feare more, or haue more in horrour than death: neuertheleſſe, there is not a thing where there is leſſe occaſion or matter of feare, or that contrarily yeeldeth greater reaſons to perſwade vs with

reſolution to accept of it. And therefore we muſt ſay, that it is a meere opinion, and a vulgar errour that hath woon the world thus to thinke of it. Wee giue too much credit to the It is opinion. inconſiderate vulgar ſort, who tell vs, That it is a very great euill; and to little credit to wiſedome it ſelfe which teacheth vs, that it is a freedome from all euils and the hauen of life. Neuer did a preſent death do hurt to any man; and ſome that haue made triall, and partly knew what it is, complaine not of it: and if death be counted an euill, it is of all the euils the only that doth no harme, that hath no euill in it; it is the imagination only of death before it come, that maketh vs to feare it when it is come. It is then but opinion, not verity; and it is truely where opinion bandeth it ſelfe moſt againſt reaſon, and goeth about to deface it in vs, with the maske of death: there cannot be any reaſon to feare it, becauſe no man knowes what it is, that hee ſhould feare it: for why, or how ſhould a man feare that he knoweth not? And therefore wiſely ſaid he, that of all others was accounted the wiſeſt, that to feare death is to make ſhew of greater vnderſtanding and ſufficiency than can be in a man, by ſeeming to know that, that no man knoweth: and what he ſpake he practiſed himſelfe; for being ſollicited at his death by his friends, to pleade before the Iudges, for his iuſtification, and for his life, this oration he made vnto them: My maſters and friends, if I ſhould plead for my life, and deſire you that I may not die, I doubt I may ſpeak againſt my ſelfe, and deſire my owne loſſe and hinderance, becauſe I know not what it is to die, nor what good or ill there is in death: they that feare to die preſume to know it, as for my ſelfe I am vtterly ignorant what it is, or what is done in the other world; perhaps death is a thing indifferent, perhaps a good thing, and to be deſired. Thoſe things that I know to be euill, as to offend my neighbour, I flie and auoid; thoſe that I know not to be euill, as death, I cannot feare. And therefore I commit my ſelfe vnto your ſelues; and becauſe I cannot know whether it is more expedient for me to die, or not to dy, determine you thereof as you ſhall thinke good.
               For a man to torment himſelfe with the feare of death, it is 6 It is weaknes.
                   firſt great weakneſſe and cowardlineſſe: There is not a woman that in few daies is not appeaſed and content with the

death, yea the moſt painefull that may be, either of her huſband or her child; And why ſhould not reaſon and wiſdome do that in an houre, at an inſtant (as we haue a thouſand examples) which time performeth in a foole, in the weakeſt ſex? What vſe is there of wiſdome and conſtancie in man, to what end ſerue they, if they ſpeed him not in a good action, if he can do no more with their help, than a foole with his follie? From this weaknes it is, that the moſt part of men dying, cannot reſolue themſelues, that it is their laſt houre, and there is not any thing where this deceitfull hope doth more buſie man; which it may be, doth likewiſe proceed from this, that we account our death a great matter, and that all things haue an intereſt in vs, and at our death muſt ſuffer with vs, ſo much do we eſteeme our ſelues.
               Againe a man ſheweth himſelfe heerein vniuſt; for if death be a good thing, as it is, why doth he feare it? If an euill thing, 7 Iniustice.
                   why doth he make it worſe, and adde vnto death euill vpon euill, ſorrow and griefe where there is none? like him that being robbed of a part of his goods by the enemie, caſteth the reſt into the ſea, to let men know how little he is greeued with his loſſes.
               Finally to feare death, is for a man to be an enemy to himſelfe, 8 To be enemy to his owne life.
                   and to his owne life: for he can neuer liue at eaſe and contentedlie, that feareth to dye. That man is only a free man, which feareth not death; and contrarily, life is but a ſlauery if it were not made free by death: For death is the only ſtay of our libertie, the common and readie receptacle of all euils: It is then a miſerie (and miſerable are all that do it) to trouble our life with the care and feare of death, and our death with the care of life.
               But to ſay the truth, what complaints and murmuring would there be againſt nature, if death were not, if we ſhould  haue continued heere will we, nill we, with and againſt our owne wils? doubtleſſe men would haue curſed nature for it. Imagin with thy ſelfe how much more inſupportable, and painefull a durable life would haue beene, then a life with a condition to leaue it. Chiron refuſed immortalitie, being informed of the conditions therof by the god of Time, Saturne his father. Doubtleſſe death is a very beautifull and rich inuention

of nature, optimum naturae inuentum nuſquam ſatis laudatum, and a very proper and profitable neceſſarie to many things; If it were quite taken from vs, we ſhould deſire it more, than now we feare it, yea thirſt after it more than life it ſelfe; ſuch a remedie is it againſt ſo many euils; ſuch a meane to ſo many goods. What were it on the other ſide, if there were not mingled with death ſome little bitterneſſe? doubtleſſe men would runne vnto it with great deſire and indiſcretion. To keepe therefore a moderation, that is, that men might neither loue life too much, nor flie it, feare death, nor runne after it, both of them, ſweetnes and ſharpnes, are therein tempered together.
               The remedie that the vulgar ſort do giue heerein, is too ſimple; and that is, neuer to thinke or ſpeake thereof: Beſides 10 Remedies not to feare death.
                   that ſuch a kind of careleſnes cannot lodge in the head of a man of vnderſtanding, it would likewiſe at the laſt coſt him deere: for death comming vnawares, and vnexpected, what torments, outcryes, furies and diſpaires are there commonlie ſeene? Wiſdome aduiſeth much better, that is, to attend and expect death with a conſtant foot, and to encounter it: and the better to do this, it giueth vs contrarie counſell to the vulgar ſort, that is, to haue it alwaies in our thoughts, to practiſe it, to accuſtome our ſelues vnto it, to tame it, to preſent it vnto vs at all houres, to expect it, not only in places ſuſpected and dangerous, but in the middeſt of feaſts and ſports: that the burthen of our ſong be, Remember thy end; that others are dead, that thought to haue liued as long as our ſelues; that, that which hapned then to them may happen now to vs; following heerein the cuſtome of the Egyptians, who in their ſolemne banquets placed the image of death before their eies; and of the Chriſtians and all other, who haue their Church-yards neere their temples, and other publike and frequented places, that men might alwaies (as ſaith Licurgus) be put in mind of death. It is vncertaine in what place death attends vs, and therefore let vs attend death in all places, and be alwaies readie to receiue it.
               
                  Omnem crede diem tibi diluxiſſe ſupremum.
                  Grata ſuperueniet quae non ſperabitur hora.
               
               But let vs conſider the excuſes and greeuances that theſe 
                  
poore people alleadge to couer and colour their complaints, which are all vaine and friuolous: It grieueth them to die The greeuances and excuſes of fearefull men anſwered. young, and they complaine as well in regard of others as themſelues, that death preuenteth them and cutteth them off in the flowre and ſtrength of their yeares. The complaint of the vulgar ſort, who meaſure all by the ell, and account nothing pretious, but that which is long, and durable, whereas contrarily, things exquiſite and excellent are commonly thin, fine, and delicate. It is the marke of a skilfull worke-maſter to encloſe much in a little ſpace: and a man may ſay, that it is fatall to great and glorious men, not to liue long; Great vertue, and great or long life do ſeldome or neuer meet together. Life is meaſured by the end, prouided that that be good, and all the reſt hath a proportion thereunto: the quantitie is nothing to make it more or leſſe happie, no more than the greatnes of a circle makes the circle more round than the leſſe; the figure heere doth all: A little man is as perfect a man as a greater: Neither men nor their liues are meaſured by the ell.
               Againe, it troubleth them to die farre from their friends,  or to be ſlaine, and to remaine vnburied: they deſire to die in peace, in their beds, amongſt their friends, being comforted by them & comforting them. All they that follow the warres, and ride poſt to be in the battell, are not of this mind: theſe men runne willinglie to their end, and ſeeke a tombe amongſt the dead bodies of their enemies. Little children feare men when they are masked; diſcouer their faces, and they feare them no more: And euen ſo beleeue it, fire and ſword aſtoniſh vs, when we thinke of them; take off their maske, the death wherewith they threaten vs, is but the ſame death wherewith women and children die.
               They are troubled to thinke they muſt leaue all the world. And why? They haue ſeene all, one day is like another, there  is no other light, nor other night, nor other ſunne, nor other courſe of the world. One yeare telleth vs that all things grow euery yeare worſe and worſe, they haue ſeene the childhood, the youth, the virilitie, the old age of the world: there is no arte, no way to begin againe.
               Yea, but they leaue their parents and their friends. Where they go they ſhall find more, and ſuch as they haue neuer yet 
                  
ſeene, and they they leaue behind them and deſire ſo much ſhall ſhortly follow them.
               But what ſhall become of their ſmall children and orphans  left without guide, without ſupport? As if thoſe their children were more theirs than Gods, or as if they could loue them more than he that is their firſt and their trueſt father; and how many ſuch ſo left haue riſen to higher place and greater abilitie than other men?
               But it may be they feare to go alone. This is great ſimplicitie,  ſo many people dying with them, and at the ſelfe-ſame houre.
               Finallie, they go into a place where they ſhall not deſire this life. How deſire it? If it were lawfull to reſume it, they  would refuſe it; and if a man were worthie to know what it is before he receiueth it, he would neuer accept of it, vitam nemo acciperet, ſi daretur ſcientibus. Why, or how ſhould they deſire it, ſince they are either wholly nothing as miſcreants beleeue, or in farre better ſtate than before, as the wiſeſt of the world do affirme? Why then are they offended with death, ſince it quits them of all griefe? The ſelfe-ſame iourney they haue made from death, that is to ſay, from nothing to life, without paſſion, without feare, they make againe from life vnto death; reuerti vnde veneris, quid graue eſt?
               
               But it may be that the ſpectacle of death diſpleaſeth them,  becauſe they that die looke gaſtlie. It is true, but this is not death, but the maske of death, that which is hid vnder it, is very beautifull, for death hath nothing in it that is fearefull: we haue ſent idle and poore ſpies to know it, who report not what they haue ſeene, but what they haue heard, and what they feare.
               But it taketh out of our hands ſo many things, or rather taketh vs from them, and vs from our ſelues, it taketh vs from  that we know, and haue been accuſtomed vnto, and bringeth vs to an eſtate vnknowne, at horremus ignota, it taketh vs from the light, to bring vs into darknes; and to conclude, it is our end, our ruine, our diſſolution. Theſe are the weightieſt obiections: whereunto in a word a man may anſwere, that death being the ineuitable law of nature (as ſhall be ſaid hereafter) we neede not diſpute ſo much thereof, for it is a follie to

feare that which a man cannot auoid. Dementis eſt timere mortem, quia certa expectantur, dubia metuuntur, mors habet neceſſitatem aequam & inuictam. But theſe kind of people make not their count well, for it is quite contrarie to that which they ſay, for in ſteed of taking any thing from vs, it giueth vs all; in ſtead of taking vs from our ſelues, it ſets vs in libertie, and makes vs free to our ſelues; in ſteed of bringing vs into darknes, it taketh it from vs, and puts vs into the light; and it doth the ſame to vs, that we do to all fruits, ſpoyling them of their barks, their ſhells, their foldings, their ſperes, their skinnes, to bring them into ſight, vſe, nature; ita ſolet ſieri, pereunt ſemper velamenta naſcentium; it taketh vs from a ſtrait, incommodious, rumatike darke place, where we ſee but a ſmall part of the heauens, and the light but afarre off, through the two narrow holes of our eyes, to bring vs into an open libertie, an aſſured health, a perpetuall light, into ſuch a place, ſuch an eſtate, where we may wholly ſee the whole heauens, and the light in his naturall place; aequaliter tibi ſplendebit omne caeli latus, totam lucem ſuo loco propè totus aſpicies quam nunc per anguſtiſſimas oculorum vias procul intueris & miraris. To conclude, it taketh vs from that death, which began in the wombe of our mother, and now endeth, to bring vs to that life which ſhall neuer end. Dies iste quem tanquam extremum reformidas, aeterni natalis eſt.
               
               The ſecond maner of the cariage of man in this matter of 12 2 To attend death it is good.
                   death, is of a good, ſweete, and moderate ſoule, and is iuſtly practiſed in a common and peaceable life, by thoſe that with reaſon account of this condition of life, and content themſelues to indure it, but gouerning themſelues according to reaſon, and accepting of death when it commeth. This is a well tempered mediocritie, ſutable to ſuch a condition of life, betweene the extremities (which are to deſire and feare, to ſeeke and to flie, vitious and faultie, ſummum ne metuas diem, nec optes (mortem concupiſcentes, & timentes aequè obiurgat Epicurus) if they be not couered and excuſed by ſome reaſon not common and ordinarie, as ſhall be ſaid in his place. To ſeeke and deſire death is ill; it is iniuſtice to deſire death without a cauſe, and to be out of charitie with the world, which our liues may be beneficiall vnto. It is to be vnthankfull to nature to

contemne it, and not to make the beſt vſe thereof; to be ouer anxious and ſcrupulous, and not to endure that eſtate that is not burthenſome, and wee are called vnto. To flie and feare death on the other ſide, is againſt nature, reaſon, iuſtice, and all dutie.
               For to die is a thing naturall, neceſſarie, and ineuitable, iuſt 13 Death is naturall.
                   and reaſonable; Naturall, for it is a part of the order of the whole Vniuerſe, & of the life of the world: wilt thou then that the world be ruinated, and a new made for thy ſelfe? Death holdeth a high place in the policie & great common-wealth of the world, and it is very profitable for the ſucceſſion and continuance of the workes of nature: the fading or corruption of one life, is the paſſage to a thouſand others: Sicrerum ſumma nouatur. And it is not only a part of this great whole Vniuerſe, but of our particular eſſence, not leſſe eſſential than to liue, to be borne. In flying death, thou flieſt thy ſelfe; thy eſſence is equally parted into theſe two, life and death, it is the condition of thy creation. If it grieueth thee to die, why wert thou borne? Men come not into the world with any other purpoſe but to goe foorth againe, and therefore he that is not willing to goe foorth, let him not come in. The firſt day of thy birth bindeth thee, and ſetteth thee as well in the way to deat, as to life.
               
                  
                     Naſeentes morimur ſiniſque ab origine pendet.
                  
                  
                     Sola mors ius aequum est generis humani, viuere noluit qui mori non vult, vita cum exceptione mortis data est, tam ſtultus qui timet mortem, quàm qui ſenectutem.
                  
               
               To be vnwilling to die, is to be vnwilling to be a man, for all men are mortall, and therefore a wiſe man ſaid, and that without paſſion, hauing receiued newes of the death of his ſonne; I knew I begot, and bred him vp a mortall man. Death being then a thing ſo naturall and eſſentiall, both for the world in groſſe, and forthy ſelf in particular, why ſhould it be horrible vnto thee? Thou goeſt againſt nature, the feare of griefe and paine is naturall, but not of death: for being ſo ſeruiceable to nature, and nature hauing inſtituted it, to what end ſhould it imprint in vs a hatred and horror thereof? Children and beaſts feare not death, yea many times they ſuffer it cheerefully: it is not then nature that teacheth

vs to feare it, but rather to attend and receiue it, as being ſent by it.
               Secondly, it is neceſſarie, fatale, ineuitable; and this thou knoweſt that feareſt and weepeſt. What greater follie can 14 Neceſſarie.
                   there be, than for a man to torment himſelfe for nothing, and that willingly and of purpoſe, to pray and importune him, whom he knowes to bee inexorable; to knocke at that dore that cannot be opened? What is there more inexorable and deafe than death? Wee muſt therefore feare things vncertaine, doe our beſt endeuours in things that are not remedileſſe; but ſuch as are certaine, as death, we muſt attend, and grow reſolute in things paſt remedie. The ſot feareth and flieth death, the foole ſeekes it and runs after it; the wiſe man attendeth it: It is follie to grieue at that, that cannot be mended; to feare that, that cannot be auoided; Feras non culpes, quod vitari non potest. The example of Dauid is excellent, who vnderſtanding of the death of his deare childe, put on his beſt apparell, and made himſelfe merry, ſaying to thoſe that wondered at this kinde of carriage, that whileſt his ſon liued, he importuned God for his recouerie, but being dead, that care was ended, and there was no remedie. The foole thinks he maketh a better anſwer to ſay, that that is the cauſe of his griefe, and that he tormenteth himſelfe, becauſe there is no remedie; but he doubleth and perfecteth his owne follie thereby, Scienter fruſtra niti extremae dementiae eſt. Now death being ſo neceſſarie and ineuitable, it is not only to no purpoſe to feare, but making of neceſſitie a vertue, wee muſt welcome it and receiue it kindely; for it is better for vs to goe to death, than that death ſhould come to vs, to catch that, before that catch vs.
               Thirdly, to die is a thing reaſonable and iuſt, it is reaſon to 15 Iust and r
                        •
                     aſonable. ariue to that place, towards which we are alwaies walking; and if a man feare to come thither, let him not walke, but ſtay himſelfe, or turne backe againe, which is impoſſible to doe. It is reaſon that thou giue place to others, ſince others haue giuen place to thee: If thou haue made thy commoditie of this life, thou muſt be ſatisfied and be gone, as he that is inuited to a banquet takes his refection and departeth. If thou haue not knowen how to make vſe and profit thereof, what needeſt

thou care, if thou loſe it, or to what end wouldeſt thou keepe it? It is a debt that muſt be paid, a pawne that muſt bee reſtored, whenſoeuer it is demanded. Why pleadeſt thou againſt thy own ſchedule, thy faith, thy duty? It is then againſt reaſon to ſpurne againſt death, ſince that thereby thou acquiteſt thy ſelfe of ſo much, and diſchargeſt thy ſelfe of ſo great an account. It is a thing generall and common to all to die, why then troubleſt thou thy ſelfe? Wilt thou haue a new priuiledge, that was yet neuer ſeene, and bee a lone man by thy ſelfe? Why feareſt thou to goe whither all the world goeth, where ſo many millions are gone before thee, and ſo many millions ſhall follow thee? Death is equally certaine to all, and equallity is the firſt part of equity, omnes eodem cogimur: omnium verſatur vrna: ſerius ocyus ſors exitura, &c.
               
               The third is the part of a valiant and generous minde, which is practiſed with reaſon, in a publike, eleuated, difficult, 16 To contemne death is good, if it be for a thing that deſerues it.
                   and buſie condition of life, where there are many things to be preferred before life, and for which a man ſhould not doubt to die. In ſuch a caſe howſoeuer matters go a man muſt more account thereof than of his life, which is placed vpon the ſtage and ſcaffold of this world: hee muſt runne his race with reſolution, that he may giue a luſtre to his other actions, and performe thoſe things that are profitable and exemplary. Hee muſt lay downe his life, and let it runne his fortune. He that knoweth not how to contemne death, ſhall neuer not only performe any thing of worth, but he expoſeth himſelfe to diuers dangers; for whileſt he goeth about to keepe his life ſafe and ſure, hee laieth open and hazardeth his deuoire, his honour, his vertue and honeſtie. The contempt of death is that which produceth the boldeſt, and moſt honourable exploits whether in good or euill. Hee that feareth not to die, feares nothing: he doth whatſoeuer he will, hee makes him-himſelfe a maſter both of his owne life, and of anothers: the contempt of death is the true and liuely ſource of all the beautifull and generous actions of men: from hence are deriued the braue reſolutions and free ſpeeches of vertue vttered by ſo many great perſonages. Fluidius Priſcus whom the Emperour Veſpaſian had commanded not to come to the ſenat, or comming, to ſpeake as he would haue him, anſwered, That

as he was a Senator it was fit he ſhould be at the Senate; and if being there he were required to giue his aduice, he would ſpeake freely that which his conſcience commaunded him. Being threatned by the ſame man, that if he ſpake he ſhould die; Did I euer tell you (ſaith he) that I was immortall? Do you what you will, and I will do what I ought: It is in your power to put me vniuſtlie to death, and in me to die conſtantlie. The Lacedemonians being threatned much hard dealing, if they did not ſpeedily yeeld themſelues to Philip the father of Alexander, who was entred into their countrie with a great power; one for the reſt anſwered, What hard dealing can they ſuffer that feare not to die? And being told by the ſame Philip that he would breake and hinder all their deſignments; What, ſay they, will he likewiſe hinder vs from dying? Another being asked by what meanes a man may liue free, anſwered, By contemning death. And another youth being taken and ſold for a ſlaue, ſaid to him that bought him, Thou ſhalt ſee what thou haſt bought, I were a foole to liue a ſlaue whileſt I may be free, and whileſt he ſpake caſt himſelf down from the top of the houſe. A wiſe man ſaid vnto another, deliberating with himſelfe how he might take away his life to free himſelfe from an euil that at that time preſſed him ſore, Thou doeſt not deliberate of any great matter: it is no great thing to liue, thy ſlaues, thy beaſts do liue, but it is a great matter to die honeſtlie, wiſely, conſtantly. To conclude and crowne this article, our religion hath not had a more firme and aſſured foundation, and wherein the authour thereof hath more inſiſted, than the contempt of this life. But many there are that make a ſhew of contemning death, when they feare it. Many there are that care not to be dead, yea they wiſh they were dead, but it greeueth them to die. Emori nolo, ſed me eſſe mortuum nihili astimo. Many deliberate in their health and ſoundeſt iudgements to ſuffer death with conſtancie, nay to murther themſelues, a part played by many, & for which end Heliogabalus made many ſumptuous preparations; but being come to the point, ſome wer terrified by the bleeding of their noſe, as Lucius Domitius, who repented that he had poyſoned himſelfe. Others haue turned away their eyes and their thoughts, as if they would ſteale vpon it, ſwallowing it downe

inſenſiblie as men take pilles, according to that ſaying of Caeſar, that the beſt death was the ſhorteſt; and of Plinie, that a ſhort death was the happieſt houre of a mans life. Now no man can be ſaid to be reſolute to die, that feareth to confront it, and to ſuffer with his eyes open, as Socrates did, who had thirtie whole daies to ruminate and to digeſt the ſentence of his death, which he did without any paſſion or alteration, yea without any ſhew of endeuor, mildly and cheerfullie. Pomponius Atticus, Tullius Marcellinus, Romans, Cleantes the Philoſopher, all three almoſt after one maner: for hauing aſſayed to die by abſtinence, hoping thereby to quit themſelues of thoſe maladies that did torment them, but finding themſelues rather cured thereby, neuertheleſſe they would not deſiſt till they had ended that they went about, taking pleaſure by little and little to pine away, and to conſider the courſe and progreſſe of death. Otho and Cato hauing prepared all things fit for their death, vpon the very point of the execution ſetled themſelues to ſleepe, and ſlept profoundly, being no more aſtoniſhed at death, than at any other ordinarie and light accident.
               The fourth is the part of a valiant and reſolute mind, practiſed in former times by great and holie perſonages, and that 17 To deſire death.
                   in two caſes; the one the more naturall and lawfull is a painfull and troubleſome life, or an apprehenſion of a far worſe death: To be briefe, a miſerable eſtate which a man cannot remedie. This is to deſire death as the retrait and only hauen from the torments of this life, the ſoueraigne good of nature, the only ſtay and pillar of our libertie. It is imbecillitie to yeeld vnto euils, but it is follie to nouriſh them. It is a good time to die, when to liue is rather a burthen than a bleſſing, and there is more ill in life than good; for, to preſerue our life, to increaſe our torment, is againſt nature. There are ſome that ſay, that we ſhould deſire to die, to auoid thoſe pleaſures that are according to nature; how much more then to flie thoſe miſeries that are againſt nature? There are many things in life farre worſe than death, for which we ſhould rather die and not liue at all, than liue. And therefore the Lacedemonians being cruelly threatned by Antipater, if they yeelded not to his demaund, anſwered, If thou threaten vs with any thing that is worſe

than death, death ſhall be welcome vnto vs. And the wiſeſt were woont to ſay, That a wiſe man liueth as long as he ſhould, not ſo long as he can, death being more at his commaund and in his power, than life. Life hath but one entrance, and that too dependeth vpon the will of another. Our death dependeth on our owne willes, and the more voluntarie it is, the more honorable; and there are a thouſand waies vnto it. We may want meanes whereby to liue, but not to die. Life may be taken away from euery man by euery man, but not death, vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      mors eſt, optime hoc cauit deus, eripere vitam nemo non homini poteſt, at nemo mortem: mille ad hanc aditus patent. The moſt fauorable preſent that nature hath beſtowed vpon vs, and that taketh away from vs all meanes of complaint, is, that it hath left vnto vs the key of the cloſet, libertie to die when we will. Wherefore complaineſt thou in this world? It holdeth thee not; if thou liue in paine, thy idlenes and feare is the cauſe; for to die, there is nothing neceſſarie, but a will.
               The other caſe is a liuely apprehenſion and deſire of the life to come, which maketh a man to thirſt after death, as after a great gaine, the ſeed of a better life, the bridge vnto paradiſe, the way to all good, and an earneſt pennie of the reſurrection. A firme beleefe and hope of theſe things is incompatible with the feare and horror of death: it perſwadeth vs rather to be wearie of this life, and to deſire death, vitam habere in patientia, & mortem in deſiderio, to haue life in affliction, and death in affection: their life is a croſſe, their death a comfort, and therefore their vowes and their voices are, cupio diſſolui: mihi mors lucrum: quis me liberabit de corpore montis huius? And for this cauſe thoſe Philoſophers and Chriſtians haue been iuſtlie reproched (which is to be vnderſtood of thoſe that are weake and idle, and not of all) that play the publike diſſemblers, and do not in veritie beleeue that which they do ſo much talke of, and ſo highlie commend touching that happie immortalitie, and thoſe vnſpeakable pleaſures in the ſecond life, ſince they doubt, and feare death ſo much, the neceſſarie paſſage thereunto.
               The fift and laſt, is the execution of this precedent deſire, 18 To kill himſelfe.
                   which is for a man to be his owne executioner, and the authour of his owne death. This ſeemeth to proceed from vertue,

and the greatnes of a mans courage, hauing been ancientlie practiſed by the greateſt and moſt excellent men and women of euerie nation and religion, Greekes, Romanes, Egyptians, Perſians, Medes, French, Indians, Philoſophers of all ſects, Iewes, witnes that good old man Razis, called the father of the Iewes for his vertue; and his wiues, who vnder Antiochus, hauing circumciſed their children, caſt themſelues hedlong from the rock with them: And Chriſtians too, witnes thoſe two canonized Saints, Pelagius and Sophronia, whereof the firſt, with his mother and ſiſters caſt himſelfe into the riuer, and the other killed hir ſelfe with a knife, to auoid the violence of Maxentius the Emperour: Yea witnes diuers people and whole cities, as Capona in Italy, Astupa, Numantia in Spaine beſieged by the Romans; the Abideens enforced by Philip, a citie in India beſieged by Alexander. But this reſolution hath been likewiſe approued and authorized by many common-weales, by lawes and rules eſtabliſhed thereupon, as at Marſeilles, in the Ile of Cea; in Nigropont, and other nations, as in the Hyperborean Ilands, and iuſtified by many great reaſons, drawne from the precedent article, which is of the iuſt deſire of death. For if it be permitted to deſire, to aske, to ſeeke after death, why ſhould it be an ill acte to giue it vnto our ſelues? If a mans owne death be iuſt in the will, why ſhould it not be as iuſt in the hand, and the execution? Why ſhould I expect that from another, which I can do my ſelfe? and why ſhould it not be better to giue it, than to ſuffer another to giue it; to meete, than to attend it? for the faireſt death is the more voluntarie. Finallie, I offend not the law made againſt theeues and robbers, when I take but my owne goods, and cut but my owne purſe; neither am I guiltie of the lawes made againſt murtherers by taking away my owne life. But this opinion is reproued by diuers, not only Chriſtians, but Iewes, as Ioſephus diſputeth againſt his captaines in the caue du Puis: and Philoſophers, as Plato, Scipio, who held this proceeding not only for a vice of cowardlines and impatiencie, for it is for a man to hide himſelfe from the blowes of fortune. Now a true and liuely vertue muſt neuer yeeld, for euils and croſſes are nouriſhments thereunto, and it is greater conſtancie well to vſe the chaine wherewith we are tied, than to

breake it; and more ſetled reſolution in Regulus, than in Cato.
               
               
                  Rebus in aduerſis facile eſt contemnere vitam,
                  Fortius ille facit, qui miſer eſſe poteſt.
                  Si fractus illabitur orbis
                  Impauidum ferient ruinae.
               
               But alſo for a fault of deſertion; for a man ought not to abandon his charge without the expreſſe commaundement of him that gaue it him; we are not heere for our ſelues, nor our owne maſters. This then is not a matter beyond all doubt or diſputation.
               It is firſt beyond all doubt, that wee are not to attempt this laſt exploit without very great and iuſt cauſe (nay I cannot  ſee how any cauſe ſhould be great and iuſt enough) to the end that it be as they ſay 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , an honeſt and reaſonable departure. It muſt not then be for any light occaſion, whatſoeuer ſome ſay, that a man may die for light cauſes, ſince they that hold vs in life are not weightie. It is ingratitude to nature not to accept and vſe hir preſent, it is a ſigne of lightnes to be too anxious and ſcrupulous, to breake companie for matters of no moment, and not for ſuch as are iuſt and lawfull, if there be any ſuch. And therefore they had not a ſufficient excuſe, and iuſt cauſe of their death of whom I made mention before, Pomponius Atticus, Marcellinus, and Cleantes, 
                   who would not ſtay the courſe of their death, for this only reaſon, becauſe they were alreadie neere vnto it. The wiues of Petus, of Scaurus, of Labio, of Fuluius the friend of Augustus, 
                   of Seneca, and diuers others, who died only to accompanie their husbands in death, or rather to encourage them therein. Cato and others, who died becauſe their buſineſſe ſucceeded  not well, and becauſe they would not fall into the hands of their enemies, notwithſtanding they feared no ill vſage at their hands. They that haue murthered themſelues becauſe  they would not liue at the mercie, and by the grace and fauor of thoſe whom they hated, as Grauius Siluanius, and Statius Proximus, being pardoned by Nero. They that die to recouer  a ſhame and diſhonor paſt, as that Romane Lucretia, Sparzapizes the ſonne of Queene Tomyris, Boges the Lieutenant of king Xerxes. They that for no particular cauſe, but only becauſe  they ſee the weale-publike in a bad and declining eſtate

murther themſelues, as Nerua that great Lawyer, Vibius Vircus, Iubellius in the taking of Capona. They that are weary with liuing, or for priuate cauſes loath to liue any longer.  Neither is it ſufficient that the cauſe be great and iuſt, but that it be neceſſarie and remedileſſe, and that all maner of meanes to preſerue life be firſt put in practiſe. For precipitation and anticipated deſpaire is very vitious, as in Brutus and Caſſius, who killing themſelues before the time and occaſion, loſt the reliques of the Romane libertie whereof they were protectors. A man, ſaith Cleomenes, muſt manage his life, and make vſe thereof to the vttermoſt: for to take it away, a man neuer wants time, it is a remedie which he hath alwaies in his owne hands; but the ſtate of things may change and grow better. Ioſeph and diuers others haue to their great benefit practiſed this counſell: things that ſeeme altogether deſperate, do many times change and haue a happie ſucceſſe; aliquis carnifici ſuo ſuperstes fuit.
               
               
                  Multa dies variuſque labor mutabilis aeui
                  Retulit in melius.
               
               A man muſt carie himſelfe in his place and calling as a defendant againſt him that aſſaileth him, cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae, he muſt trie all maner of meanes before he come to this extremitie. Secondly and without doubt it is farre better and more commendable to ſuffer, and to continue conſtant and firme to the end, than fearefullie & cowardlie to flie or die: but foraſmuch as it is a gift not giuen vnto all no more than continencie is, non omnes capiunt verbum istud, vnde melius nubere quam vri: the queſtion is, whether an inſupportable and remedileſſe euill hapning, which may vtterlie vndoe and turne topſy-turuie our whole reſolution, and driue vs into deſpaire, deſpite and murmuring againſt God, it be more expedient, or a leſſe euill for a man couragiouſlie to deliuer himſelfe, hauing his ſenſes ſound and ſetled, than by ſtanding to it, for feare of failing in his dutie, expoſe himſelfe to the danger of ſinking and being vtterly loſt. It is not a leſſe euill to quit the place, than to be obſtinate and periſh, to flie, than to be taken. It is true that it ſeemeth by all humane and philoſoph call reaſon to be practiſed, as hath been ſaid, by ſo many famous people of all countries and climats. But Chriſtianitie

doth no way approue it, nor alloweth therein any diſpenſation.
               Finally, it is a great point of wiſdome to learne to know the point and period, to chuſe a fit houre to die: Euery man  hath his time and ſeaſon to die; ſome preuent it, others prolong it: there is weakeneſſe and valour in them both, but there is required diſcretion. How many men haue ſuruiued their glorie, and by a deſire to lengthen their life but a little, haue darkened it againe, and liued to helpe bury their owne honour? And that which laſtly ſticketh by them, hath no reliſh or feeling of what is paſt, but continueth like an old filthie clout ſowed to the hemme of a rich and beautifull ornament. There is a time to gather fruit from the tree, which if it hang too long, it rotteth and growes worſe and worſe; and the loſſe is as great too, if it bee gathered too ſoone. Many ſaints and holy men haue fled from death, becauſe they are yet profitable to the church and weale-publike, though in reſpect of their owne particular they could be content to die. It is an act of charitie to deſire to liue for the benefit of an other: Si populo tuo ſum neceſſarius, non recuſo laborem.
               
               Death hath diuers formes, ſome more eaſie than other, and 21 Formes of deaths diuers.
                   taketh diuers qualities according to the fantaſie of euery one. Among thoſe that are naturall they that proceed from weakneſſe and a numneſſe of the members, are the ſweeteſt and the eaſieſt: among thoſe that are violent, the beſt is the ſhorteſt, & the leaſt premeditated. Some deſire to make an exemplarie and demonſtratiue death of conſtancie and ſufficiencie; this is to conſider another thing, and to ſeeke their owne reputation: but this is vanitie, for this is no act of ſocietie, but of one only perſon, who hath enough to doe with himſelfe, to miniſter to himſelfe inward comfort, and hath no neede to trouble himſelfe with what belongeth to another, eſpecially all the intereſt hee hath in his reputation, ceaſing with his death. That is the beſt death which is well recollected in it ſelfe, quiet, ſolitarie, and attendeth wholly to that, which at that time is fitteſt. That great aſſiſtance of parents & friends, bringeth a thouſand diſcommodities, it oppreſſeth and ſmoothereth him that is dying, one tormenteth his eares, another his eies, another his mouth; their cries and complaints, if they

be true, ſtifle the heart; if fained, afflict and torment it. Many great perſonages haue ſought to die farre from their friends, to auoide this inconuenience, accounting it a childiſh thing, and a fooliſh humour, to be willing by their miſeries to moue ſorrow and compaſſion in their friends; wee commend conſtancie to ſuffer bad fortune, wee accuſe and hate it in our friends, and when it is our owne caſe, it is not ſufficient that they ſuffer with vs, but they muſt afflict themſelues too: A wiſe man that is ſicke, ſhould content himſelfe with the ſetled countenance of his aſſiſtants.
            
            
               CHAP. XII. To maintaine himſelfe in true tranquillitie of ſpirit, the fruit and crowne of wiſedome, and the concluſion of this booke.
               
               THe tranquillitie of the ſpirit is the ſouereigne good of  man. This is that great and rich treaſure, which the wiſeſt ſeeke by ſea and by land, on foote and a horſebacke; all our care ſhould tend thereunto, it is the fruit of all our labors and ſtudies, the crowne of wiſdome. But leſt a man ſhould miſtake himſelfe heerein, you muſt know that this tranquillitie is not a retrait or vacation from all affaires, a delightfull ſolitarineſſe and corporally pleaſant, or a profound careleſneſſe of all things: if it were ſo, many women, idle, diſſolute and voluptuous perſons, would at their pleaſure enioy as great a good, as the wiſeſt can aſpire vnto with all their ſtudie: Neither multitude nor ſcarſitie of buſineſſe doth any thing heerein. It is a beautifull, ſweete, equall, iuſt, firme and pleaſant eſtate of the ſoule, which neither buſineſſe nor idleneſſe, nor good accidents, nor ill, nor time can any way trouble, alter, mend, or depreſſe; Vera tranquillitas non concuti.
               
               The meanes to attaine thereunto, to get and preſerue it, are  the points that I haue handled in this ſecond booke, whereof this is a briefe collection. They conſiſt in freeing and disfurniſhing of a man from all lets and impediments, and furniſhing him with thoſe things that entertaine and preſerue it. The things that doe moſt hinder and trouble the reſt and tranquillitie of the ſpirit, are common and vulgar opinions, which for the moſt part are erroneous; and ſecondly deſires and paſſions, which ingender in vs a kinde of delicacy and difficulty:

which are the cauſe that a man is neuer content, and theſe are kindled and ſtirred in him by thoſe two contrary fortunes, proſperity and aduerfity, as with two violent and mighty winds: and finally that vile and baſe captiuity wherwith the ſpirit (that is to ſay, the iudgement and will) is enthralled like a beaſt vnder the yoke of certaine locall and particular rules and opinions. Now he muſt emancipate and free himſelfe from theſe ſtockes and vniuſt ſubiections, and bring his ſpirit into libertie, reſtore himſelfe to himſelfe, free, vniuerſall, open, ſeeing into all, and wandring through the beautifull and vniuerſall circuit of the world and of nature. In commune genitus mundum vt vnam domum ſpectans toti ſe inferens mundo, & in omnes eius actus contemplationem ſuam mittens.
               
               The place being thus trimmed and made ready, the firſt foundations that are to be laid, are a true honeſty, and to liue  in ſuch an eſtate and vocation whereunto a man is fit. The principall parts wherwith he muſt raiſe, aſſure, and ſettle this building, are firſt true piety, whereby, with a ſoule not aſtoniſhed, but ſetled, pure, free, deuout, a man contemplateth God, the great, ſoueraigne, and abſolute work-maſter of all things, who can neither be ſeene nor knowen: but yet he muſt be knowen, adored, worſhipped, ſerued with the whole heart, from whom he is to hope for all maner of good, and to feare no euill: afterwards he muſt walke roundly in ſimplicity and truth, according to the lawes and cuſtomes, liue with a heart open both to the eies of God and the world, Conſcientiam ſuam aperiens ſemperque tanquam in publico viuens, ſe magis veritus, quàm alios. Againe hee muſt keepe in himſelfe and with others, and generally in all things, in his thoughts, ſpeeches, deſignments, actions, a moderation the mother or nurſe of tranquillity, laying aſide all pompe and vanity, rule his deſires, content himſelfe with a mediocrity and ſufficiency, quod ſit eſſe velit, nihil
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      malit, reioice in his fortunes. A tempeſt hath a great deale leſſe force, and doth leſſe hurt when the ſailes are taken downe, than when they are hoiſed vp, and laid open to the windes. He muſt bee conſtant againſt whatſoeuer may wound or hurt him, raiſe himſelfe aboue and beyond all feare, contemning all the blowes of fortuen, of death, holding it as the end of all euils, and not the cauſe of any, contemptor
                  
                  omnium, quibus torquetur vitae, ſupra omnia quae contingunt accidunt
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eminens. Imperturbatus, intrepidus. And ſo hold himſelfe firme vnto himſelfe, agree with himſelfe, liue at eaſe without any paine or inward contention, full of ioy, of peace, of comfort and content in himſelfe; Sapiens plenus gaudio, hilaris, placidus cum dijs ex pari viuit: Sapientiae effectus gaudij aequalitas, ſolus ſapiens gaudet: He muſt I ſay entertaine himſelfe, and continue content in himſelfe, which is the proper fruit and effect of wiſdome; Niſi ſapienti ſua non placent: omnis ſtultitia laborat fastidio ſui. Non eſt beatus, eſſe ſe qui non put at.
               
               To conclude, to this tranquillitie of ſpirit two things are neceſſarie, innocencie, and a good conſcience, this is the firſt and principall part which doth maruellouſly arme and confirme him with aſſurance; but this is not alwaies ſufficient, in the force of the tempeſt, as it is many times ſeene in diuers that are troubled and loſt: Erit tanta tribulatio vt ſeducantur iusti. And therefore the other is likewiſe neceſſarie, which is force and conſtancie of courage, as likewiſe this alone were not ſufficient: for the force and reſiſtance of the conſcience is maruellous, it makes vs to betray, to accuſe our ſelues, & for want of other witneſſes, it is as a thouſand witneſſes againſt vs.
               Occultum quatiens animo tortore flagellum.
               It frameth an enditement, condemneth & executeth vs, there is no cloſet cloſe enough for wicked men, ſaith Epicurus, becauſe they neuer can aſſure themſelues to be hid, their owne conſcience alwaies diſcouering them to themſelues. Prima eſt haec vltio, quod ſe iudice nemo nocens abſoluitur. So likewiſe neither a weake & fearefull ſoule, be it neuer ſo holy, nor a ſtrong and couragious, if it be not ſound & pure, can neuer enioy this ſo rich & happie tranquillitie, but he that hath them all worketh wonders, as Socrates, Epaminondas, Cato, Scipio, of whom ther are three admirable exploits touching this ſubiect. Theſe two Romanes being publikely accuſed, made their accuſers to bluſh, woon the Iudges and the whole aſſemblie being ſtrucken with an admiration. He had a heart too great by nature, ſaith Titus Liuius of Scipio, to know how to be faultie, and to debaſe himſelfe ſo much, as to defend his owne innocencie.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            OF WISDOME, THE THIRD BOOKE. Wherein are handled the particular aduiſements of Wiſdome, by the foure morall vertues.
            
            
               THE PREFACE.
               
                  FOraſmuch as our purpoſe in this Booke, is by peecemeale to inſtruct vnto wiſedome, and to giue the particular aduiſements after the generall handled in the Second Booke, that we may the better hold a certaine courſe and order therein, we haue thought that we cannot do better, than to follow the foure miſtris and morall vertues, Prudence, Iuſtice, Fortitude; and Temperance; for in theſe ſoure almoſt all the duties of our life are comprehended. Prudence, is as a generall guide and conduct of the other vertues, and of our whole life, though properlie it be exerciſed in the affaires that belong thereunto. Iuſtice concerneth the perſons of men; for it is to giue vnto euery one that which belongeth vnto him. Fortitude and Temperance, concerneth all accidents good and euill, pleaſant and painefull, good and ill fortune. Now in theſe three, perſons, affaires, and accidents,

is conteined all our life and humane condition, and the trafficke of this world.
            
            
               Of Prudence, the firſt vertue.
               
                  CHAP. I.
                  
                     Of Prudence in generall.
                     PRudence is with reaſon put in the firſt rancke, as the generall Queene, ſuperintendent, and guide of all other vertues, 1 The excellencie thereof.
                         
                        auriga virtutum; without which there is nothing good, beautifull, fit, and decent; it is the ſalt of our life, the luſtre, the ornament, the ſauce or ſeaſoning of our actions, the ſquare and rule of our affaires; and in a word, the Arte of our life, as Phyſicke the arte of our health.
                     It is the knowledge and choice of thoſe things we muſt 2 The definition.
                         either deſire, or flie; it is the iuſt eſtimation & triall of things; it is the eye that ſeeth all, that directeth and ordaineth all. It conſiſteth in three things, which are all of one ranke; to conſult and deliberate well, to iudge and reſolue well, to conduct and execute well.
                     It is a vniuerſall vertue, for it extendeth it ſelfe generally to all humane things, not only in groſſe, but by peecemeale to 3 It is vniuerſall.
                         euery particular thing, & is as infinite, as are the indiuiduals.
                     It is very difficult, both by reaſon of the aforeſaid infinitnes, for the particulars are without knowledge, as without 4 Difficult. Senec. number, ſi qua finiri non poſſunt, extra ſapientiam ſunt; and of the great vncertaintie and inconſtancie of humaine things, which are the greater by reaſon of their accidents, circumſtances, appertenances, dependancies, times, places, perſons; in ſuch ſort, that in the change of one only, and that the leaſt circumſtance, the whole thing it ſelfe is altered: And likewiſe in the office thereof, which is the gathering together and temperature of contrarie things, the diſtinction and triall of thoſe that are like one another; the contrarietie and reſemblance hindereth much.
                     It is very obſcure, becauſe the cauſes and iuriſdictions of things are vnknowne, the ſeeds and roots are hidden, and ſuch 5 Obſcure.
                         as the nature of man cannot find, nor ought to ſeeke after. Occultat
                        
                        eorum ſemina deus, & plerunque bonorum malorum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            cauſae 
                        Plin. in Paneg. 
                        ſub diuerſa ſpecie latent. Moreouer, fortune, deſtinie, (vſe what words you will) a ſoueraigne ſecret, and vnknowne power and authoritie hath alwaies the aduantage, and maintaineth it againſt all counſels, foreſights, and preuentions whatſoeuer: whereby it many times comes to paſſe, that the beſt counſels haue the worſt iſſues, that one and the ſame counſell doth very happily ſucceede to one, vnhappily to another, in one and the ſame caſe, and with one and the ſame man, things went luckily yeſterday, vnluckily to day. It is an opinion iuſtly receiued, that we ought not to iudge of counſels, nor of the ſufficiencie and capacitie of perſons by the euents. And therefore one anſwered thoſe well that maruelled and were aſtoniſhed at the ill ſucceſſe of their buſineſſe, conſidering with how wiſe and mature deliberation they were vndertaken, That they were maſters of their deliberatiōs, not of the ſucceſſe of their affaires: for that was in the power of fortune, which ſeemeth to ſport it ſelfe with all our faireſt deſignments & counſels, ouerthroweth in a moment that which hath a long time been proiected and deliberated, and ſeemeth to be ſtrongly fortified, choking, as they ſay, our artillarie. And indeed fortune to ſhew it authoritie in all things, and to abate our preſumption, not being able to make men wiſe, that are not apt thereunto, maketh them neuertheleſſe happie in deſpite of vertue, whereby it many times comes to paſſe, that ſimple men bring to a happie end great matters both publike and priuate. Prudence then is a ſea without either bottome or brinke, and which cannot be limited and preſcribed by precepts and aduiſements. It doth but compaſſe things and goeth about them, like a darke cloude, many times vaine and friuolous.
                     Neuertheleſſe it is of ſuch weight and neceſſitie, that alone and of it ſelfe it can do much, and without it all the reſt is nothing, 6 Neceſſarie. Horat. 3. od. Euripid. Liuius. no not riches, meanes, force, vis conſilij expers mole ruit ſua, Mens vna ſapiens plurim vincit manus. Et multa quae natura impedita ſunt, conſilio expediūtur. And the principall cauſe of this neceſſitie is the peruerſe nature of man, the rougheſt and hardeſt to tame of all other creatures; Impatiens aequi, nedum 
                        Senec. 1. de clemēt. 
                        ſeruitutis; and which muſt be handled with arte and induſtrie,

for it doth not more willinglie ſet it ſelfe againſt any, than againſt thoſe that would contemne it. Now Prudence is the arte to handle it, and a gentle bridle, that holdeth it within Xenoph. in poedag. the compaſſe of obedience.
                     Now though the ſeed of Prudence, as of other vertues, be in vs by nature, yet it is acquired and learnt more than any 7 The acquiſition thereof.
                         other, and that in ſome ſort by precepts and aduiſements; this is the Theorick: but much better and principally (though with more time) by experience and practiſe, which is two-fold: the one, and the true, is that which is proper and perſonall, whereof it takes the name; this is the knowledge of thoſe things which we haue ſeene and handled: the other is ſtrange by the acte of another; this is hiſtorie which we know by relation or by reading. Now experience and vſe is more firme and more aſſured; vſus efficaciſſimus omnium rerum magister, the father and miſtris of the artes, but more long; it is old, ſeris venit vſus ab annis, more difficult, painefull, rare. The knowledge of hiſtorie, as it is leſſe firme and aſſured, ſo is it more eaſie, more frequent, open and common to all. A man is made more reſolute and aſſured at his owne charges, but it is more eaſie at the charge of another. Now from theſe two properly, Experience, and Hiſtorie, doth Prudence ariſe, vſus me genuit, mater peperit memoria, ſeu memoriae anima & vita hiſtoria.
                     
                     Now Prudence may and muſt be diuerſlie diſtinguiſhed 8 The diſtinction.
                         according to the perſons and the affaires. In regard of the perſons there is priuate prudence, whether it be ſolitarie and indiuiduall, which can hardlie be tearmed prudence; or ſociable & Economical among a ſmall companie, and prudence publike and politike. This more high, excellent, difficult, and vnto which thoſe foreſaid qualities do properlie belong; and it is two-fold, peaceable, and militarie.
                     In regard of the affaires, foraſmuch as they are of two ſorts, the one ordinarie, eaſie; the other extraordinarie. Theſe are accidents which bring with them ſome new difficultie and ambiguitie. A man may likewiſe ſay that there is an ordinarie and eaſie prudence, which walketh according to the lawes, cuſtomes, and courſe alreadie eſtabliſhed, another extraordinarie and more difficult.
                     
                        
There is likewiſe another diſtinction of prudence both in reſpect of the perſons, and of the affaires, which concerneth Heſiod. Liuius. Cicero. rather the degrees, than the kindes thereof, that is to ſay, proper prudence whereby a man is wiſe, and taketh counſell of himſelfe; the other borowed, whereby a man followeth the counſell of another. The wiſe ſay that there are two ſorts and degrees of wiſe men; the firſt and chiefeſt is of thoſe that haue a cleere inſight into all things, and know of themſelues how to finde the remedies and helps; but where are theſe to be found? Doubtleſſe they are rare and ſingular: the other is of thoſe that know how to take, to follow, to make vſe of the good counſels of another; for they that know neither how to giue, nor to take counſell, are fooles.
                     The generall and common aduiſements, which belong to all ſorts of prudence, all ſorts of perſons and affaires, hath  beene touched and briefly deliuered in the ſecond booke, and they are eight; firſt, knowledge of the perſons and affaires; ſecondly, eſtimation of things; thirdly, choice and elections; Chap. 10. fourthly, from them to take counſell vpon all; fiftly, temperature betweene feare and aſſurance, confidence and diffidence; ſixtly, to take all things in their ſeaſon, and to ſeaſe vpon the occaſion; ſeuenthly, to carrie himſelfe well, with induſtrie and fortune; laſtly, diſcretion in all. Wee muſt now handle the particulars, firſt of publike wiſdome, which reſpecteth the perſons, afterwards of that which reſpecteth the affaires.
                  
                  
                     
                        Of the politike prudence of a ſouereigne to gouerne ſtates. THE PREFACE.
                     THis doctrine belongeth to ſouereignes and gouernours of ſtates. It is vncertaine, infinite, difficult, and almoſt impoſſible to be ranged into order, to be limited and preſcribed by rules and precepts: but wee muſt endeuour to giue ſome ſmall light, and briefe inſtruction thereof. Wee may referre this whole doctrine to two principall heads, which are the two duties of a ſouereigne. The one comprehendeth and intreateth of the props and pillars of a ſtate, principall &

eſſentiall parts of publike gouernment, as the bones and ſinewes of this great bodie, to the end that a ſouereigne may prouide for himſelfe and his ſtate; which are ſeuen principall, that is to ſay, knowledge of the ſtate; vertue; maners and faſhions; counſels; treaſure; forces and armes; alliances. The three firſt are in the perſon of the ſouereigne, the fourth in him and neere him, the three latter without him. The other is to act, well to employ and to make vſe of the aforeſaid meanes, that is to ſay, in groſſe, and in a word, well to gouerne and maintaine himſelfe in authoritie, and the loue both of his ſubiects and of ſtrangers, but diſtinctly; this part is twofold, peaceable and militarie. Behold heere ſummarily and groſſely the worke cut out, and the firſt great draughts that are to be handled heereafter. We will diuide then this politicke matter, and of ſtate, into two parts; the firſt ſhall be of prouiſion, that is to ſay, of the ſeuen neceſſarie things; the ſecond, and which preſuppoſeth the firſt, ſhall be of the action of the prince. This matter is excellently handled by Lipſius, according as he thought good: the marrow of his booke is heere: I haue not taken, nor wholly followed his method, nor his order, as you may already ſee in this generall diuiſion, and more you ſhall heereafter: I haue likewiſe left ſomewhat of his, and added ſomething of my owne, and other mens.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     The firſt part of this politicke prudence and gouernment of ſtate, which is of prouiſion.
                     THe firſt thing that is required before all others, is the knowledge of the ſtate: for the firſt rule of all prudence 1 The chiefe point of this prouiſion, to know the ſtate.
                         conſiſteth in knowledge, as hath beene ſaid in the ſecond booke. The firſt in all things, is to know with whom a man hath to deale. For in as much as this ruling and moderating prudence of ſtates, which is a knowledge and ſufficiency to gouerne in publike, is a thing relatiue, which is handled betweene the ſouereigne and the ſubiects; the firſt dutie and office thereof is in the knowledge of the two parts, that is, of the people, and the ſouereigntie, that is to ſay, of the ſtate.

Firſt then the humours and natures of the people muſt bee knowne. This knowledge formeth, and giueth aduice vnto him that ſhould gouerne them. The nature of the people in generall, hath beene deſcribed at large in the firſt booke, (light, inconſtant, mutinous, vaine, a louer of nouelties, fierce and inſupportable in proſperitie, cowardly and deiected in aduerſitie) but it muſt likewiſe be knowne in particular: ſo many cities and perſons, ſo many diuers humours. There are people cholericke, audacious, warriers, fearefull, giuen to wine, ſubiect to women, ſome more than others, noſcenda natura vulgi eſt, & quibus modis temperanter habeatur. And in this ſenſe is that ſaying of the wiſe to be vnderſtood: He that hath not obeied, cannot tell how to command; nemo bene imperat, niſi qui ante paruerit imperio. Not becauſe ſoueraignes Senec. ſhould or can alwaies take vpon them the name of ſubiects; for many are borne kings and princes: and many ſtates are ſucceſſiue: but that he that wil wel command, ſhould acquaint himſelfe with the humors and willes of his ſubiects, as if himſelfe were of their ranke, and in their place. He muſt likewiſe know the nature of the ſtate, not only in generall, ſuch as it hath beene deſcribed, but in particular that which hee hath now in hand, the forme, eſtabliſhment, birth thereof; that is to ſay, whether it be old or new, fallen by ſucceſſion, or by election, obtained by the lawes, or by armes, of what extent it is, what neighbours, meanes, power it hath. For according to theſe and other circumſtances, hee muſt diuerſlie manage the ſcepter, looſe and ſtraiten the raines of his gouernment.
                     After this knowledge of the ſtate, which is as a preamble, 2 The ſecond head of this prouiſion is vertue.
                         the firſt of thoſe things that are required, is vertue, neceſſary in a ſoueraigne, as well for himſelfe as for the ſtate. It is firſt neceſſary and conuenient that hee that is aboue all ſhould bee better than all, according to the ſaying of Cyrus. And then it ſtandeth him vpon for his credit and reputation. For common fame and report gathereth and ſpreadeth abroad the ſpeeches and actions of him that gouerneth. Hee is in the eie of all, and can no more hide himſelfe than the ſun: and therefore what good or ill ſoeuer he doth, ſhall not want meanes to blaſen it, ſhall bee talked of enough. And it importeth him

much, both in reſpect of himſelfe and his ſtate, that his ſubiects haue a good opinion of him. Now a ſoueraigne ought not only in himſelfe, and in his life and conuerſation to be vertuous, but he muſt likewiſe endeuour that his ſubiects be like vnto himſelfe. For as all the wiſeſt of the world haue euer taught, a ſtate, a city, a company cannot long continue nor Saluſt. ad Caeſar. proſper where vertue is baniſhed; and they do groſly aequiuocate, who thinke that princes are ſo much the more aſſured in their ſtates, by how much the more wicked their ſubiects are, becauſe, ſay they, they are more proper and as it were borne to ſeruitude and the yoke, patientiores ſeruitutis, quos 
                        Plin. Pan. 
                        non decet niſi eſſe ſeruos. For contrarily, wicked men beare their yoke impatientlie; and they that are good and debonaire feare much more than their cauſe is. Peſſimus quiſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            aſperrime 
                        Saluſt ad Caeſar. 
                        rectorem patitur: Contrà facile imperium in bonos, qui metuentes magis quàm metuendi. Now the moſt powerfull meanes to induce them, and to forme them vnto vertue, is the example of the Prince; for as experience telleth vs, all men doe frame themſelues to the paterne and modell of the Prince. The reaſon is, becauſe example preſſeth more than law. It is a mute law which carieth more credit than a commaund, nec tam imperio 
                        Pli. Paneg. 
                        nobis opus quàm exemplo: & mitius iubetur exemplo. Now the eyes and thoughts of the leſſer are alwaies vpon the great; they admire and ſimplie beleeue, that all is good and excellent that they do: and on the other ſide, they that commaund, thinke they ſufficientlie enioyne and bind their inferiors to imitate them by acting only. Vertue then is honorable and profitable in a ſoueraigne, yea, all vertue.
                     But eſpeciallie and aboue all, Pietie, Iuſtice, Valour, Clemencie. Theſe are the foure principall and princely vertues 3 Eſpecially 4. vertues.
                         in principalitie. And therefore that great Prince Augustus was wont to ſay, that Pietie and Iuſtice did deifie Princes. And Seneca ſaith, that clemencie agreeth better with a Prince, than any other. The pietie of a ſoueraigne conſiſteth in his care for the maintenance and preſeruation of religion, as the protector thereof. This maketh for his owne honor, and preſeruation of himſelfe: for they that feare God, dare not attempt, nay thinke of any thing either againſt their Prince, who is the image of God vpon earth, or againſt the ſtate. For

as Lactantius doth many times teach, it is a religion that maintaineth humane ſocietie, which cannot otherwiſe ſubſiſt, and would ſoone be filled with all maner of wickednes and ſauage cruelties, if the reſpect and feare of religion did not bridle men and keepe them in order. The ſtate of the Romans did increaſe, and flouriſh more by religion, ſaith Cicero himſelfe, than by all other meanes. Wherefore a Prince muſt take care and endeuor that religion be preſerued in it puritie, according to the ancient lawes and ceremonies of the countrie, and hinder all innouation, and controuerſies therein, roughlie chaſtiſing thoſe that goe about to breake the peace thereof. For doubtleſſe change in religion, and a wrong done thereunto, draweth with it a change and declination in the Commonwealth, Dion. as Mecenas well diſcourſeth to Augustus.
                     
                     After pietie commeth Iuſtice, without which ſtates are but 4 Iustice.
                         robberies; which a Prince muſt keepe and practiſe both in himſelfe and others: In himſelfe, for he muſt deteſt all thoſe tyrannicall & barbarous ſpeeches, which diſpence with ſoueraignes, quitting them from all lawes, reaſon, equitie, obligation; which tell them that they are not bound vnto any other dutie, than to their owne willes and pleaſures; that there is no law for them; that all is good and iuſt that ſerueth their turnes; that their equitie is their force, their dutie is in their power. Principi leges nemo ſcripſit: licet, ſi libet. In ſumma fortuna, 
                        Plin. Pan. Tacitus. Senec. in tr. 
                        id aequius quod validius: nihil iniustum quod fructuoſum: Sanctitas, pietas, fides, priuata bona ſunt: quà iuuat reges eant. And he muſt oppoſe againſt them thoſe excellent and holy counſels of the wiſe, that he that hath moſt power in him to breake lawes, ſhould take moſt care to keepe them, and liue moſt in order. The greateſt power ſhould be the ſtreighteſt bridle; the rule of power is dutie: minimum decet liberè, cui 
                        Senec. Euripides. 
                        nimium licet, non fas potentes poſſe, fieri quod nefas. The Prince then muſt firſt be iuſt, keeping well and inuiolablie his faith, the foundation of iuſtice to all and euery one whoſoeuer he be. Then he muſt cauſe that his iuſtice be kept and maintained in others, for it is his proper charge, and for that cauſe he is inſtalled. He muſt vnderſtand the cauſes and the perſons, giue vnto euery one that which appertaineth to him, iuſtly according to the lawes, without delay, labyrinths of ſuits and

controuerſies, inuolution of proceſſe; aboliſhing that villanous and pernitious myſterie of pleading, which is an open fayre, or marchandize, a lawfull and honorable robberie, conceſſum latrocinium; auoiding the multiplicitie of lawes and ordinances, a teſtimonie of a ſicke Common-weale, Corruptiſſimae 
                        Colum. Tacit. 
                        reipublicae plurimae leges, as medicines and plaiſters of a bodie ill diſpoſed: and all this, to the end that that which is eſtabliſhed by good lawes be not deſtroyed by too many Plin. Pan. lawes. But you muſt know, that the iuſtice, vertue, and probitie of a ſoueraigne goeth after another maner, than that of An aduertiſement. priuate men: it hath a gate more large and more free, by reaſon of the great weight and dangerous charge which he carieth and ſwayeth, for which cauſe it is fit to march with a paſe, which ſeemeth to others vneaſie and irregular, but yet is neceſſarie and lawfull for him. He muſt ſometimes ſtep aſide, and goe out of the way, mingle prudence with iuſtice, and as they ſay, couer himſelfe with the skin of the Lion, if that of the Foxe ſerue not the turne. But this is not alwaies to be done, and in all caſes, but with theſe three conditions, that it be for the euident and important neceſſitie of the wealepublike, For the weale-pub. (that is to ſay, of the State and of the Prince, which are things conioyned) vnto which he muſt runne; this is a naturall obligation, and not to be diſpenſed with: and to procure the good of the Common-weale, is but to do his dutie.
                     Salus populi ſuprema lex esto.
                     That it be to defend, and not to offend; to preſerue himſelfe, and not to increaſe his greatnes, to ſaue and ſhield himſelfe For defence and conſeruation. either from deceits and ſubtilties, or from wicked and dangerous enterpriſes, and not to practiſe them. It is lawfull by ſubtiltie to preuent ſubtiltie, and among foxes to counterfet the foxe. The world is full of arte and malicious couſenage; and by deceits and cunning ſubtilties, ſtates are commonlie ouerthrowne, ſaith Aristotle. Why then ſhould it not be lawfull, nay why ſhould it not be neceſſarie to hinder, and to diuert ſuch euill, and to ſaue the weale-publike by the ſelfeſame meanes that others would vndermine and ouerthrow it? Alwaies to deale ſimplie and plainly with ſuch people, and to follow the ſtreight line of true reaſon and equitie, were many times to betray the State, and to vndo it.
                     
                        
Thirdly it muſt be with diſcretion, to the end that others abuſe it not, and ſuch as are wicked take from thence occaſion 5 Diſcreetly without wickednes.
                         to giue credit and countenance to their owne wickednes. For it is neuer permitted to leaue vertue and honeſtie, to follow vice and diſhoneſtie. There is no compoſition or compenſation betwixt theſe two extremities. And therefore away with all iniuſtice, treacherie, treaſon, and diſloyaltie. Curſed be the doctrine of thoſe, who teach (as hath beene ſaid) that all things are good and lawfull for ſoueraignes: but yet it is ſometimes neceſſarie and required, that he mingle profit with honeſtie, and that he enter into compoſition with both. He muſt neuer turne his back to honeſtie, but yet ſometimes goe about and coaſt it, employing therein his skill and cunning, which is good, honeſt and lawfull, as ſaith that great S. Baſil, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ; and doing for the wealepublike as mothers and phyſitians, who feede their children and ſick with faire ſpeeches, & deceiue them for their health. To be brief, doing that cloſely which he may not do openly, ioyne wiſdome to valor, arte and ſpirit, where nature and the hand ſufficeth not; be, as Pindarus ſaith, a Lyon in his blowes, a Fox in his counſell; a Doue and a Serpent as diuine veritie ſpeaketh.
                     And to this matter more diſtinctly, there is required in a ſoueraigne diſtruſt, and that he keepe himſelfe cloſe, yet ſo, as 6 Diſtruſt required in a Prince.
                         that he be ſtill vertuous and iuſt. Diſtruſt, which is the firſt, is wholly neceſſary, as the contrary, which is credulitie; and a careleſſe truſt or confidence, is vitious, and very dangerous in a ſoueraigne. He watcheth ouer all, and muſt anſwere for all, his faults are not light, and therefore he muſt be well aduiſed. If he truſt much, he diſcouereth himſelfe, and is expoſed to ſhame, and many dangers, opportunus fit iniuriae, yea, he encourageth ſuch as are falſe and treacherous, who may with little danger, and much recompence commit great wickedneſſe, aditum nocendi perfido praestat fides. It is neceſſary therefore Senec. that he couer himſelfe with this buckler of diſtruſt, which the wiſeſt haue thought to be a great part of prudence, and the ſinowes of wiſdome, that is to ſay, that he watch, beleeue nothing, take heed of all: and heereunto doth the nature of the Epichar. Euripid. Cicero. world induce him, wholly compoſed of lies, coloured, counterfait,

and dangerous, namely ſuch as are neere vnto him in the court and houſes of great perſonages. He muſt then truſt but few, and thoſe knowne by long experience and often trials: Neither is it neceſſarie that he abandon them, and in ſuch ſort leaue all the cord, that he ſtill hold it not by one end, and haue an eye vnto them: But he muſt couer and diſguiſe his diffidence, yea when he diſtruſteth, he muſt make a ſhew and countenance of great truſt and confidence. For open diſtruſt wrongeth, and inuiteth as much to deceiue, as an ouer-careleſſe confidence, and many by making too great a ſhew of feare to be deceiued, ſhew the way how they may be deceiued. Multi fallere docuerunt dum timent falli: as contrarily a profeſſed and open truſt, hath taken away the deſire to deceiue, Senec. hath obliged to loyaltie, and ingendred fidelitie; vult quiſque ſibi credi, & habita fides ipſam plerumque obligat fidem.
                     
                     From diſtruſt comes diſſimulation the ſcience or ſeed therof; for if that were not, and that there were truſt and fidelitie 7 And diſſimulation. in all, diſſimulation which openeth the front, and couereth the thought, could haue no place. Now diſſimulation which is vitious in priuat perſons, is very neceſſarie in Princes, who otherwiſe could not know how to reigne, or well to commaund. And they muſt many times diſſemble not only in warre, with ſtrangers and enemies, but alſo in time of peace, and with their ſubiects, though more ſparinglie. Simple and open men, and ſuch as cary, as they ſay, their hearts in their foreheads, are not in any ſort fit for this myſterie of commanding, and betray many times both themſelues and their ſtate: But yet he muſt play this part with arte and dexteritie, and to the purpoſe, neither ſo openly nor ſo ſimplie as that it may be diſcerned. For to what purpoſe doeſt thou hide and couer thy ſelfe, if a man may ſee thee obliquely or ſidewaies? Wilie deceipts and cunning ſubtilties, are no more deceits and ſubtilties when they are knowne and vented out. A Prince then the better to couer his arte, muſt make profeſſion of louing ſimplicitie, muſt make much of free and open minded men, as being enemies to diſſimulation; and in matters of leſſe importance he muſt proceed openly, to the end he may be taken for ſuch as he ſeemeth.
                     All this is in omiſſion, in reteining himſelfe, not acting: but 8 Practiſe.
                        
                        
it is likewiſe required ſometimes that he paſſe farther and come to action, and this is two-fold. The one is to make and frame ſecret practiſes and intelligences, cunningly to winne and draw vnto him the hearts and ſeruices either of the officers, ſeruants, and truſtieſt friends of other Princes and forraine Lords, or of his owne ſubiects. This is a ſubtiltie which is much in requeſt and authoritie, and very common among Princes, and a great point of prudence, ſaith Cicero. It is wrought in ſome ſort by perſwaſion, but eſpeciallie by preſents and penſions, meanes ſo powerfull, that not only the Secretaries, the chiefe of the counſell, the moſt inward friends and fauorites, haue been thereby drawne to giue aduice, and to diuert the deſignments of their maſter, yea, great captaines to giue their helping hand in the warre, but alſo wiues haue beene woon to diſcouer the ſecrets of their husbands. Now this ſubtile policie is all allowed and approoued by many without difficultie or ſcruple. And to ſay the truth, if it be againſt an enemie, againſt a ſubiect whom he ſuſpecteth, and likewiſe againſt any ſtranger, with whom he hath no alliance nor league of fidelitie and amitie, it is not greatly to be doubted: But againſt his alliance, his friends and confederates, it cannot be good; and it is a kind of treacherie, which is neuer permitted.
                     The other is to winne ſome aduantage, and to obtaine his purpoſe, by cloſe and couert meanes, by equiuocations and 9 Subtilties. ſubtilties, to circumuent by faire ſpeeches and promiſes, letters, ambaſſages, working and obtaining by ſubtile meanes, that which the difficultie of times and affaires will not permit him otherwiſe to doe, and to doe that cloſely which he cannot doe openly. Many great and wiſe men ſay that this is lawfull and to be permitted, Crebro mendacio & fraude vti imperantes 
                        Plato. Plin. Val. Max. 
                        debent ad commodum ſubditorum. Decipere pro moribus temporum, prudentia est. It were ouerboldneſſe ſimply to affirme that it is permitted. But a man may ſay, that in a caſe of great neceſſitie, in troubleſome and tumultuous times, when it is not only to procure the great good, but to diuert a great miſchiefe from the ſtate, and againſt ſuch as are wicked and traiterous, that it is no great fault, if it be a fault.
                     But there is a greater doubt and difficultie in other things, 
                        
becauſe they haue a ſmell of much iniuſtice in them. I ſay much, and not wholly, becauſe with their iniuſtice there are Iniuſtice profitable to the wealepublike. mingled in them ſome graines of iuſtice. That which is wholly and apparently iniuſt, is reproued of all, euen of the wicked, at leaſt wiſe in word and ſhew, if not in earneſt and in deede. But of theſe actions ill mingled, there are ſo many reaſons and authorities on the one ſide and the other, that a man hardly knoweth how to reſolue himſelfe. I will reduce them heere to certaine heads. To diſpatch and ſecretly to put to death, or otherwiſe without forme of iuſtice, ſome certaine man that is troubleſome and dangerous to the ſtate, and who well deſerueth death, but yet cannot without trouble and danger be enterpriſed and repreſſed by an ordinarie courſe; heerein there is nothing violated but the forme. And the prince, is he not aboue formes?
                     To cut the wings, and to leſſen the great meanes of any one, that ſhall raiſe and fortifie himſelfe too much in the ſtate, and maketh himſelfe fearefull to his ſouereigne; not ſtaying till hee bee inuincible and able to attempt any thing againſt the ſtate, and the head of his ſouereigne when it pleaſeth him.
                     To take by authoritie the riches of the richeſt in a great neceſſitie and pouertie of the ſtate.
                     To weaken and cancell the lawes and priuiledges of ſome ſubiects, who hold them to the preiudice and diminution of the authoritie of the ſouereigne.
                     To take by preuention, and to poſſeſſe himſelfe of a place, city or prouince, very commodious for the ſtate, rather than to ſuffer another ſtrong and fearefull neighbour to take and poſſeſſe it, to the great hurt, ſubiection and perpetuall alarum of the ſaid ſtate.
                     All theſe things are approued as iuſt and lawfull by many great and wiſe men, prouided that they ſucceede well and happily; of whom theſe are the ſayings and ſentences: To doe iuſtice in great matters, a man may ſometimes goe aſtray Plutarch. in ſmall; and To execute iuſtice in groſſe, it is permitted to doe wrong by retaile: for commonly the greateſt actions Tacit. and examples haue ſome iniuſtice, which ſatisfieth particular men by the profit which ariſeth to all in generall, Omne magnum
                        
                        exemplum habet aliquid ex iniquo, quod aduerſus ſingulos vtilitate publica rependitur: That a prudent and wiſe prince Plutarch. in flam. ſhould not only know how to command according to the lawes, but alſo the lawes themſelues, if neceſſitie require; and they muſt make the lawes to will it, when they cannot doe that they would In confuſed and deſperate affaires, a prince muſt not follow that which may be well ſpoken of, but that Sence. which is neceſſarie to be executed. Neceſſitie, a great ſupport, and excuſe to humane fragility infringeth all law, and therefore he is not very wicked, that doth ill by conſtraint. Neceſſitas magnum imbecillitatis humanae patrocinium, omnem legem frangit: non eſt nocens quicunque non ſponte eſt nocens. If a Ariſtot. in Politico. Democrit. prince cannot be wholly good, it ſufficeth if he be halfe good, and that he be not wholly wicked: That it cannot poſſibly be that good princes ſhould commit no iniuſtice. To all this I would adde for their iuſtification, or diminution of their faults that princes finding themſelues in ſuch extremities, they ought not to proceed in ſuch actions, but with great vnwillingneſſe and griefe of mind, acknowledging that it is an infelicity and a disfauour from heauen, and ſo carrying themſelues therein as a father when hee is enforced to cauteriſe or cut off a member of his childe, to ſaue his life, or to plucke out a tooth to purchaſe eaſe. As for other ſpeeches more bolde, which referre all to profit, which they either equall or preferre before honeſtie, an honeſt man muſt euer abhorre them.
                     Wee haue ſtaied long vpon this point of the vertue of iuſtice, becauſe of the doubts & difficulties that ariſe from the accidents and neceſſities of ſtates, and which doe many times hinder the moſt reſolute and beſt aduiſed.
                     After iuſtice commeth valour. I meane that militarie vertue, wiſdome, courage, and ſufficiency to play the warriour, 11 Valour.
                         neceſſarie in a Prince for the defence and ſafetie of himſelfe, the ſtate, his ſubiects, of the publicke peace and libertie, and without which hee can hardly deſerue the name of a prince.
                     But let vs come to the fourth princely vertue, which is clemency, a vertue which enclineth the Prince to a ſweet kinde 12 Clemency.
                         of mildneſſe and lenity, whereby he leſſeneth and qualifieth

the rigor of iuſtice, with iudgement and diſcretion. It moderateth and ſweetly manageth all things, deliuereth thoſe that are faulty, relieueth thoſe that are fallen, ſaueth thoſe that are like to be loſt. It is that in a prince, which humanity is in a common perſon. It is contrary to cruelty, and extreame rigour, not to iuſtice, from which it differeth not much, but it ſweetneth and moderateth it. It is neceſſarie by reaſon of our humane infirmity, the frequency of offences, the facilitie to offend; for an ouer great and continuall rigour and ſeueritie, ruinateth all, and maketh chaſtiſements contemptible; Seuerit as amittit aſſiduitate authoritatem: It ſtirreth malice and Senec. rancor, moueth rebellions, and men by deſpite are made wicked. For feare that keepeth men in their dutie, muſt be ſweete and temperate; if it be too ſharp and continuall, it is changed into rage and reuenge. Temperatus timor eſt qui cohibet, aſſiduus & acer in vindictam excitat. It is likewiſe very profitable Senec. to a Prince and a State, it winneth the loue and good willes of his ſubiects, and conſequently confirmeth and aſſureth the ſtate, firmiſſimum id imperium quo obedientes gaudent, as ſhall be ſaid heereafter. It is likewiſe very honorable to a Tit. Liuius ca. 3. in the beginning. ſoueraigne, for his ſubiects will honour and adore him as a god, as their tutor, their father, and in ſtead of fearing him, they will feare all for him, leſt any ill happen vnto him. This then ſhall be the leſſon of the Prince, to know all that paſſeth, not to beleeue all, yea, many times to diſſemble, wiſhing rather Tacit. in Agricol. to be thought to haue found good ſubiects, than to haue made them ſuch, to pardon light faults, to leſſen the rigour of the great: not to be ouer-ſtreight and exact in puniſhing, (which is as great a diſhonor and infamie to a Prince, as to a Phyſitian many patients that die vnder his hand) to content himſelfe many times with repentance as a ſufficient chaſtiſement.
                     
                        —ignoſcere pulchrum
                        I am miſero, poenae
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            genus vidiſſe precantem.
                     
                     And let him not feare that which ſome obiect very vntruly, that it debaſeth, vilifieth, and weakneth the authoritie of the ſoueraigne and of the ſtate; for contrarily it fortifieth it, and giues credit and vigour thereunto: And a Prince beloued, ſhall do more by loue, than by feare, which makes men feare

and tremble, but not obey: and as Saluſt diſcourſed to Caeſar, 
                        Saluſt. ad Caeſar. thoſe ſtates that are gouerned with feare, are neuer durable. No man can be feared by many, but he muſt likewiſe feare many, and that feare which he would put vpon all, falleth vpon his owne head. That life is doubtfull wherein a man neither before nor behind, nor on any ſide is couered, but is alwaies in agitation, in danger, in feare. It is true, as hath been ſaid in the beginning, that it muſt be with iudgement; for, as tempered and well conducted it is very venerable, ſo being too looſe, too remiſſe, it is very pernicious.
                     After theſe foure principall and royall vertues, there are 13 After which are required alſo liberalitie.
                         alſo others, though leſſe worthie and neceſſarie, yet in a ſecond place very profitable, and requiſit in a ſoueraigne, that is to ſay, liberalitie, ſo fit and neceſſarie for a Prince, as it is leſſe befitting him to be vanquiſhed by armes, than by magnificence. But yet there is heerein required a great diſcretion, otherwiſe it will be more hurtfull, than commodious.
                     There is a two-fold liberalitie, the one conſiſteth in charge and ſhew, and this ſerues to ſmall purpoſe. For it is an idle Liberalitie two-fold. thing in ſoueraignes, and to little end, to indeuor by great and exceſſiue charges to make ſhew of themſelues, or to increaſe their credit eſpeciallie with their ſubiects where they haue power to doe what they liſt. It is a teſtimonie of puſillanimitie, and that they vnderſtand not what they are, and beſides that, it ſeemeth to their ſubiects, the ſpectators of theſe triumphs, that they make this glorious ſhew with their owne ſpoiles, that they feaſt it at their charges, that they feede their eyes with that, that ſhould feede their bellies. And againe a Prince ſhould thinke that he hath nothing properlie his: he oweth himſelfe to another. The other liberalitie, conſiſteth in gifts beſtowed vpon another, and this is farre more commodious and commendable, but then it muſt be well gouerned, and he muſt be well aduiſed to whom, how, and how much he muſt giue. He muſt giue to thoſe that haue deſerued it, that haue done ſeruice to the weale-publike, that haue runne their fortunes, and ſpent themſelues in the warres. No man will enuy them, if they be not very wicked. Whereas contrarily, great gifts, beſtowed without reſpect and merit, ſhame the giuer, and purchaſe enuie to the receiuer, and is receiued

without thankfulneſſe and acknowledgement. Some tyrants haue been ſacrificed to the malice of the people, euen by thoſe whom they haue aduanced, railing on them with the reſt of the people, and ſecuring their goods, by making knowne how much they contemne and hate him from whom they receiued them. Againe, this liberalitie muſt be with meaſure, for if it be not, and that he giue vnto all, and vpon all occaſions, the ruine of the ſtate and ſoueraigne muſt needs enſue: This is to play, and to loſe all. For men will neuer be ſatisfied, but be as exceſſiue in asking as the Prince ſhall be in giuing, framing themſelues not according to reaſon, but example; ſo that when the common treaſurie ſhall faile, he ſhall be enforced to lay hands vpon the goods of another, and ſupplie by iniuſtice, that which ambition and prodigalitie did diſſipate, quod ambitione exhaustum, per ſcelera ſupplendum. Now it is farre better not to giue at all, than to take away to giue, for a man ſhall neuer inioy in ſo high a degree the loue and good will of thoſe whom he hath clothed, as the hatred and ill will of thoſe whom he hath robbed and ſpoiled. And againe, this liberalitie without meaſure, worketh the ruine of himſelfe, for a fountaine drieth vp if it be ouer-much drawne. Liberalitate liberalitas perit. Liberalitie likewiſe muſt be ſpun Hieronym. with a gentle thread by little & little, and not all together, for that which is done ouer-ſpeedily, be it neuer ſo great, is in a maner inſenſible, and ſoone forgotten. Pleaſant and pleaſing things muſt be exerciſed with eaſe and leaſure, that a man may haue time to taſte them: Things rude and cruell (if they muſt needs be done) muſt contrarily be executed ſpeedily. There is then arte and prudence in giuing, and in the practiſe of liberalitie. Falluntur quibus luxuria ſpecie liberalitatis imponit: perdere multi ſciunt, donare neſciunt. And to ſay the truth, Tacit. liberalitie is not properlie any of the royall vertues, for it agreeth and carieth it ſelfe well with tyrannie it ſelfe. And ſuch as are the gouernours of young Princes do wrong in working ſo ſtrong an impreſſion of this vertue of bountie in their minds and willes, that they ſhould refuſe no meanes to put it in practiſe, and thinke nothing well employed but that which they giue (this is their common language) but they do it either for their owne benefit, or elſe they know not to whom

they ſpeake it. For it is a dangerous thing to imprint liberalitie in the mind of him that hath meanes to furniſh himſelfe as much as he will at the charges of another. A prodigall or liberall Prince without diſcretion and meaſure, is worſe than a couetous: but if this liberalitie be well ruled and ordered, as hath been ſaid, it is well beſeeming a Prince, and very profitable both to himſelfe, and the ſtate.
                     Another vertue requiſite in a Prince in a ſecond degree, is magnanimitie and greatnes of courage, to contemne iniuries 14 Magnanimitie and moderation of choler. Senec. and bad ſpeaches, and to moderate his choler; neuer to vex himſelfe for the outrages and indiſcretions of another, magnam fortunam magnus animus decet: Iniurias & offenſiones ſuperne deſpicere indignus Caeſaris irae. For a man to afflict himſelfe, and to be moued, is to confeſſe himſelfe to be faultie, whereas by neglect and light account it eaſily vaniſheth. Conuitia ſi iraſcare, agnita videntur: ſpreta exoleſcunt. And if Tacit. there be fit place, and a man muſt be angrie, let it be openly, and without diſſimulation, in ſuch ſort that he giue not occaſion to ſuſpect a hidden grudge and purpoſe of reuenge: this is a token of a bad and incurable nature, and beſt befitting the baſer ſort: Obſcuri & irreuocabiles reponunt odia: Saeuae cogitationis 
                        Tacit. 
                        indicium ſecreto ſuo ſatiari. It doth better become a great perſonage to offend, than to hate. The other vertues are leſſe royall and more common.
                     After vertue come the maners, cariages, and countenances that become and belong vnto Maieſtie, very requiſit in a 15 The third head of this prouiſion: The maners of the Prince
                         Prince. I will not ſtand vpon this point: I only ſay as it were paſſing by, that not only nature helpeth much heereunto, but alſo arte and ſtudie. Heereunto do appertaine the good and beautifull compoſition of the viſage, his port, paſe, ſpeech, habilliments. The generall rule in all theſe points, is a ſweet, moderate and venerable grauitie, walking betwixt feare and loue, worthie of all honor and reuerence. There is likewiſe his reſidence and conuerſation or familiaritie. Touching his reſidence or abode, let it be in ſome glorious, magnificent, and eminent place, and as neere as may be in the middle of the whole ſtate, to the end he may haue an eye ouer all, like the Sunne, which from the middle of heauen giueth light to all: for keeping himſelfe at one end, he giueth occaſion to thoſe

that are fartheſt from him to riſe againſt him, as he that ſtandeth vpon one end of a table, maketh the other end to riſe vp. His conuerſation and companie, let it be rare, for to ſhew and to communicate himſelfe too much, breedeth contempt and deiecteth maieſtie, continuus aſpectus minùs verendos magnos homines ipſa ſatietate facit. Maieſtati maior ex longinquo reuerentia, 
                        Liuius. Tacit. 
                        quia omne ignotum pro magnifico est.
                     
                     After theſe three things, knowledge of the ſtate, vertue and maners, which are in the perſon of the prince, come thoſe 16 The fourth head of this prouiſion, Counſell.
                         things which are neere and about the prince; That is to ſay, in the fourth place Counſell, the great and principall point of this politique doctrine, and ſo important that it is in a maner all in all. It is the ſoule of the ſtate, and the ſpirit that giueth life, motion and action to al the other parts: and for that cauſe it is ſaid that the managing of affaires conſiſteth in prudence. Now it were to be wiſhed that a prince had in himſelfe counſell and prudence ſufficient to gouerne and to prouide for all, which is the firſt and higheſt degree of wiſdome, as hath beene ſaid; and if ſo it were, the affaires would goe farre better: Chap. 1. but this is rather to be wiſhed than hoped for, whether it be for want of a good nature, or a good inſtitution; and it is almoſt impoſſible that one only head ſhould be ſufficiently furniſhed for ſo many matters, Nequit princeps ſua ſcientia cuncta complecti, nec vnius mens tantae molis est capax. A lone Tacit. man ſeeth and heareth but little. Now kings haue neede of many eies, and many eares; and great burthens, and great affaires haue neede of great helpes. And therefore it is requiſite that he prouide and furniſh himſelfe with good counſell, and ſuch men as know how to giue it: for he, whoſoeuer hee be, that will take all vpon himſelfe, is rather held to bee proud, than diſcreet or wiſe. A Prince then had neede of faithfull friends and ſeruitours to be his aſſiſtants, quos aſſumat in partem curarum. Theſe are his true treaſures, and profitable inſtruments Tit. Liui. Tacit. of the ſtate. In the choice whereof hee ſhould eſpecially labour and imploy his whole iudgement, to the end he may haue them good. There are two ſorts of them, Plin. the one aide the prince with their dutie, counſell and tongue, and are called Counſellers; the other ſerue him with their hands and actions, and may be called Officers. The firſt are

farre more honourable: for the two greateſt philoſophers ſay, that it is a ſacred and diuine thing, well to deliberate, and to giue good counſell.
                     Now Counſellers muſt be firſt faithfull, that is to ſay in a word, honeſt men, Optimum quemque fideliſſimum puto. Secondly, 17 The condition of good counſellers. Fidelitie. Plin. Sufficiencie.
                         they muſt be ſufficient in this point, that is to ſay, skilfull in the ſtate, diuerſly experimented and tried (for difficulties and afflictions are excellent leſſons and inſtructions; mihi fortuna multis rebus ereptis vſum dedit bene ſuadendi) And in a word, they muſt be wiſe and prudent, indifferent quicke and not ouer ſharpe: for ſuch kind of men are too moueable, nouandis quàm gerendis rebus aptiora ingenia illa ignea. And that Curtius. they may be ſuch, it is requiſite, that they bee old and ripe, for beſides that yong men by reaſon of the ſoft and delicate tenderneſſe of their age, are eaſily deceiued, they do as eaſily beleeue and receiue euery impreſſion. It is good that about Princes there be ſome wiſe, ſome ſubtile; but much more ſuch as are wiſe, who are required for honour and for all times, the ſubtile only ſometimes for neceſſitie. Thirdly, it is neceſſary that in propoſing and giuing good and holeſome counſell, they carrie themſelues freely and couragiouſly, without flattery, Liberty. or ambiguity, or diſguiſement, not accommodating their language to the preſent ſtate of the prince; Ne cum fortuna potius principis loquantur quàm cum ipſo, but without ſparing the Tacit. truth, ſpeake that which is fit and requiſite. For although liberty, roundneſſe of ſpeech and fidelity, hurt and offend for the time, thoſe againſt whom it oppoſeth it ſelfe, yet afterwards it is reuerenced and eſteemed. In praeſentia quibus riſiſtis, offendis, deinde illis ipſis ſuſpicitur laudaturque. And fourthly, conſtantly, without yeelding, varying and changing at euery meeting to pleaſe and follow the humour, pleaſure and paſſion of another, but without opinatiue obſtinacy, and a ſpirit of contradiction, which troubleth and hindereth all good deliberation, he muſt ſometimes change his opinion, which is not inconſtancy but prudence. For a wiſe man marcheth not alwaies with one and the ſame paſe, although hee follow the ſame waie, he changeth not, but accommodateth himſelfe; Senec. 
                        non ſemper it vno gradu, ſed vna via; non ſe mutat, ſed aptat. As a good mariner ordereth his ſailes according to the times, and

the winde, it is neceſſary many times to turne and winde, and to arriue to that place, obliquely by fetching a compaſſe, when he can not doe it directly, and by a ſtraight line. Again, a religious dexteritie to keepe ſecret the counſels and deliberations Silence. of Princes, is a thing verie neceſſarie in the managing of affaires, res magnae ſuſtineri nequeunt ab eo cui tacere graue eſt. And it ſufficeth not to bee ſecret, but hee muſt not prie and Curtius. ſearch into the ſecrets of his Prince, this is an ill, and a dangerous thing; exquirere abditos principis ſenſus illicitum & anceps: 
                        Tacit. yea he muſt be vnwilling and auoid all meanes to know them. And theſe are the principall good conditions and qualities of a counſeller, as the euill which they muſt warily auoid are preſumptuous confidence, which maketh a man to deliberate and determine ouer boldly and obſtinately; for a 
                           The vices that counſellers must auoid. Preſumptuous confidence. Tit. Liuius. wiſe man in deliberating, thinketh and rethinketh, redoubting whatſoeuer may happen, that he may be the bolder to execute. Nam animus vereri qui ſcit, ſcit tutò aggredi. Contrarily the foole is hardie and violent in his deliberations: but when he comes to the iſſue, his noſe fals a bleeding, Conſilia calida & audacia prima ſpecie laeta ſunt, tractâtu dura, enentu triſtia. Secondly, all paſſion of choler, enuy, hatred, auarice, concupiſcence, and all priuate and particular affection, Paſſion. the deadly poiſon of iudgement, and all good vnderſtanding, priuatae res ſemper offecere officientque publicis conſilijs, peſſimum veri affectus & iudicij venenum ſua cuique vtilitas. Laſtly precipitation Tacit. Precipitation. Sec lib. 2. cap. 10. Tacit. an enemie to all good counſell, and only fit to doe miſchiefe. And thus you ſee what maner of men good counſellers ought to be.
                     Now a prince muſt make choice of ſuch as are good, either by his owne knowledge and iudgement, or if hee cannot ſo 18 The duty of the prince in abuſing good counſellers.
                         doe, by their reputation, which doth ſeldome deceiue; whereupon one of them ſaid to his prince, Hold vs for ſuch as we are eſteemed to be. Nam ſinguli decipere & decipipoſſunt, nemo omnes, neminem omnes fefellerunt. And let him take heede that he chuſe not his minions and fauorites, courtiers, flatterers, ſlaues who ſhame their maſters and betray them. There is nothing more dangerous than the counſell of the cabinet. And hauing choſen and found them, he muſt wiſely make vſe of them, by taking counſell of them at due times and houres,

not attending the euent and execution, and loſing the time whileſt he harkneth to them; and this muſt he do with iudgement, not ſuffering himſelfe to be caried ouer-looſely by their counſels, as that ſimple Emperour Claudius was; and with mildneſſe, without roughneſſe, being more reaſonable, as that wiſe Marc. Antonius was woont to ſay, to follow the counſell of a good number of friends, than ſuch as are conſtrained to bend vnto his will. And making vſe of them, do it with an indifferent authoritie, neither rewarding them with preſents for their good counſell, leſt by the hope of the like preſents he draw ſuch as are wicked vnto him, nor vſe them ouer-roughlie for their bad counſels; for he ſhall hardlie find any Curtius. to giue him counſell, if there be danger in giuing it: and againe, many times bad counſell hath a better ſucceſſe than good, by the prouident care and direction of the ſoueraigne. And ſuch as giue good counſell, that is to ſay, happie and certaine, are not therefore alwaies the beſt, and moſt faithfull ſeruitours, nor for their libertie of ſpeech neither, which hee ſhould rather agree vnto, looking into ſuch as are fearefull and flatterers with a warie eye. For miſerable is that prince with whom men hide or diſguiſe the truth, cuius aures ita formatae 
                        Tacit. 
                        ſunt, vt aſpera quae vtilia, & nil niſi iucundum & laeſurum accipiant. And laſtly, he muſt conceale his owne iudgement and reſolution, ſecrecie being the ſoule of counſell, nulla meliora 
                        Veget. 
                        conſilia, quàm quae ignorauerit aduerſarius antequam fierent.
                     
                     As touching officers which are in the next place, and who 19 Of Officers.
                         ſerue the Prince and ſtate in ſome charge, hee muſt make choice of honeſt men, of good and honeſt families. It is to be thought that ſuch as ſerue the Prince, are the beſt ſort of people, and it is not fit that baſe people ſhould be neere him, and commaund others, except they raiſe themſelues by ſome great, and ſingular vertue, which may ſupplie the want of Nobilitie: but by no meanes let them be infamous, double, dangerous, and men of ſome odious condition. So likewiſe they ſhould be men of vnderſtanding, and employed according to their natures. For ſome are fit for the affaires of the warre, others for peace. Some are of opinion that it is beſt to chooſe men of a ſweet cariage, and indifferent vertue, for theſe excellent ſurpaſſing ſpirits, that keepe themſelues alwaies vpon the

point, and will pardon nothing, are not commonly fit for affaires, vt pares negotijs, ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ſupra: ſint recti, non erecti.
                     
                     After counſell, we place treaſure, a great & puiſſant meane. This is the ſinewes, the feet, the hands of the ſtate. There is 20 The fi
                                 ••
                               head of p
                                 ••
                              uiſion: Treaſure.
                         no ſword ſo ſharp and penetrable, as that of ſiluer, nor maſter ſo imperious, nor orator that winneth the hearts and willes of men, or conquer Caſtles and Cities, as riches. And therefore a Prince muſt prouide that his treaſurie neuer faile, neuer be dried vp. This ſcience conſiſteth in three points, to lay the foundation of them, to imploy them well, to haue alwaies areſeruation, Exchequer knowledge in three points. and to lay vp ſome good part thereof for all needs and occaſions that may happen. In all theſe three a Prince muſt auoid two things, iniuſtice, and baſe nigardlines, in preſeruing right towards all, and honor for himſelfe.
                     Touching the firſt, which is to lay the foundation and to increaſe the treaſurie, there are diuers meanes, and the ſources 21 1 To lay the foundation.
                         are diuers, which are not all perpetuall, nor alike aſſured; that is to ſay, the demaine and publike reuenue of the ſtate, which  muſt be managed and vſed, without the alienating of it in any ſort, foraſmuch as by nature it is ſacred and inalienable. Conqueſts  made vpon the enemie, which muſt be profitablie employed, and not prodigallie diſſipated, as the ancient Romans were woont to doe, carying to the Exchequer very great ſummes, and the treaſuries of conquered cities and countries, as Liuy reporteth of Camillus Flaminius, Paulus Emillius, of the Scipioes, Lucullus, Caeſar; and afterwards receiuing from thoſe conquered countries, whether from their naturall countries left behind them, or from colonies ſent thither, a certaine annuall reuenue. Preſents, gratuities, penſions, free donations, tributes of friends, allies, and ſubiects, by teſtaments,  by donations amongſt the liuing, as the lawyers tearme it, or otherwiſe. The entrance, comming and going, and paſſages of merchandize, into docks, hauens, riuers, as well vpon ſtrangers  as ſubiects, a meanes iuſt, lawfull, ancient, generall, and very commodious with theſe conditions: Not to permit the trafficke and tranſportation of things neceſſarie for life, that the ſubiects may be furniſhed; nor of raw vnwrought wares, to the end the ſubiect may be ſet on worke, and gaine the profit of his owne labours. But to permit the trafficke of things

wrought and dreſſed, and the bringing in of ſuch wares as are rawe, and not of ſuch as are wrought; and in all things to charge the ſtranger much more than the ſubiect. For a great forraine impoſition increaſeth the treaſure, & comforteth the ſubiect: to moderate neuertheleſſe the impoſts vpon thoſe things that are brought in, neceſſarie for life. Theſe foure meanes are not only permitted, but iuſt, lawfull, and honeſt. The fift which is hardly honeſt, is the trafficke which the ſoueraigne 5 Antoninus Pius. Seuerus. Auguſt. vſeth by his factors, and is practiſed in diuers maners more or leſſe baſe; but the vileſt and moſt pernitious is of honors, eſtates, offices, benefices. There is a meane that commeth neere to trafficke, and therefore may be placed in this ranke, which is not very diſhoneſt, and hath beene practiſed by very great and wiſe princes, which is, to imploy the coine of the treaſure or exchequer to ſome ſmall profit, as fiue in the hundred, and to take good ſecuritie for it, either gages, or ſome other ſound and ſufficient aſſurance. This hath a three-fold vſe, it increaſeth the treaſure, giueth meanes to particular men to traffick and to make gaine; and which is beſt of all, it ſaueth the publike treaſure from the pawes of our theeuing courtiers, the importunate demaunds and flatteries of fauorites, and the ouer-great facilitie of the prince. And for this only cauſe, ſome princes haue lent their publike treaſure without any profit or intereſt, but only vpō paine of a double forfeiture for not paiment at the day. The ſixt and laſt is in  the lones and ſubſidies of ſubiects, whereunto he muſt not come but vnwillinglie, and then when other meanes do faile, and neceſſitie preſſeth the ſtate. For in this caſe it is iuſt, according to that rule, That all is iuſt that is neceſſarie. But it is requiſit, that theſe conditions be added, after this firſt of neceſſitie, To leuy by way of lone (for this way will yeeld moſt  ſiluer, becauſe of the hope men haue to recouer their owne againe, and that they ſhall loſe nothing, beſides the credit they receiue by ſuccoring the weale-publike) and afterwards the neceſſitie being paſt, and the warres ended, to repay it againe, as the Romans did, being put to an extremitie by Hanibal. And if the common treaſurie be ſo poore that it cannot repay it, and that they muſt needs proceed by way of impoſition,  it is neceſſarie that it be with the conſent of the ſubiects,

making knowne vnto them the pouertie and neceſſitie, and preaching the word of that king of kings, Dominus ijs opus habet, inſomuch that they make them ſee, if need be, both the receit, and the charge. And, if it may be, let perſwaſion preuaile without conſtraint, as Themistocles ſaid, Impetrare melius quàm imperare. It is true that the prayers of ſoueraignes are commandements, Satis imperat qui rogat potentiâ, armatae ſunt preces regum; but yet let it be in the forme of a free donation, at the leaſt that they be extraordinarie monies; for a certaine prefixt time, and not ordinarie; and neuer preſcribe this law vpon the ſubiects, except it be with their owne conſent. Thirdly, that ſuch impoſitions be leuied vpon the goods, and not the heads of men (capitation being odious to all honeſt  people) be reall and not perſonall (being vniuſt that the rich, the great, the nobles, ſhould not pay at all, and the poorer people of the countrie ſhould pay all.) Fourthly that they be equallie vpon all. Inequalitie afflicteth much, and to theſe  ends theſe monies muſt be beſtowed vpon ſuch things as the whole world hath need of, as ſalt, wine, to the end that all may contribute to the preſent neceſſitie. Well may a man, and he ought, to lay ordinarie impoſts and great, vpon ſuch marchandize and other things as are vitious, and that ſerue to no other end, than to corrupt the ſubiects, as whatſoeuer ſerueth for the increaſe of luxurie, inſolencie, curioſitie, ſuperfluitie in viands, apparell, pleaſures, and all maner of licentious liuing, without any other prohibition of theſe things. For the deniall of a thing ſharpneth the appetite.
                     The ſecond point of this ſcience, is well to employ the treaſure. And theſe in order are the articles of this employment 22 To employ the treaſure.
                         and charge; The maintenance of the kings houſe, the pay of men of warre, the wages of officers, the iuſt rewards of thoſe that haue deſerued well of the Common-weale, penſions and charitable ſuccors to poore, yet commendable perſons. Theſe fiue are neceſſarie, after which come thoſe that are very profitable, to repaire cities, to fortifie and to defend the frontiers, to mend the high waies, bridges, and paſſages, to eſtabliſh colledges of honor, of vertue, and learning; to build publike houſes. From theſe fiue ſorts of reparations, fortifications, and foundations, commeth very great profit,

beſides the publike good: artes and artificers are maintained; the enuie and malice of the people becauſe of the leuie of monies ceaſeth, when they ſee them well employed; and theſe two plagues of a common-weale, idleneſſe and pouertie, are driuen away. Contrarily, the great bounties, and vnreaſonable gifts, to ſome particular fauorites; the great, proud, and vnneceſſarie edifices, ſuperfluous and vaine charges are odious to the ſubiects, who murmure that a man ſhould ſpoile a thouſand to cloath one; that others ſhould braue it with their ſubſtance, build vpon their bloud and their labours.
                     The third point conſiſteth in the reſeruation, which a man 23 3 To make ſpare and reſeruation.
                         muſt make for neceſſitie, to the end he be not conſtrained at a need to haue recourſe to ready, vniuſt, & violent means & remedies: this is that which is called the treaſury or exchequer. Now as to gather together too great abundance of treaſure of gold and ſiluer, though it be by honeſt and iuſt meanes, is not alwaies the beſt, becauſe it is an occaſion of warre actiue or paſſiue, either by breeding enuie in others to ſee it done, when there is no cauſe, there being plentie of other meanes, or elſe becauſe it is a bait to allure an enemie to come, and it were Eſay 30. more honorable to employ them as hath been ſaid: So to ſpend all and to leaue nothing in the Exchequer is far worſe, for this were to play to loſe all; wiſe princes take heed of this. The greateſt treaſuries that haue beene in former times, are that of Darius the laſt king of the Perſians, where Alexander found foure ſcore millions of gold. That of Tiberius 67. millions; of Traian 55. millions kept in Egypt. But that of Dauid 
                        2. Paralip. did farre exceed all theſe (a thing almoſt incredible in ſo ſmall a ſtate) wherein there were ſixe ſcore millions. Now to prouide that theſe great treaſuries be not ſpent, violated or robbed, the ancients cauſed them to be melted, and caſt into great wedges and bowles, as the Perſians and Romans: or they put them into the temples of their gods as the ſafeſt places, as the Greekes in the temple of Apollo, which neuertheleſſe hath bin many times pilled and robbed; the Romans in the temple of Saturne. But the beſt and ſecureſt way and moſt profitable is, as hath been ſaid, to lend them with ſome ſmall profit to particular perſons, vpon good gages, or ſufficient ſecuritie. So likewiſe for the ſafer cuſtodie of the treaſures from theeues

and robbers; the managing of them, and the exchequer offices muſt not be ſold to baſe and mechanicall perſons, but giuen to gentlemen, and men of honor, as the ancient Romans were accuſtomed to do, who choſe out young men from amongſt their nobles and great houſes, and ſuch as aſpired to the greateſt honors and charges of the common-wealth.
                     After counſell and treaſure I thinke it not amiſſe to put armes, which cannot ſubſiſt, nor be well and happily leuied 24 The ſixt head of this prouiſion. An armed power.
                         and conducted without theſe two. Now an armed power is very neceſſarie for a prince, to guard his perſon and his ſtate: for it is an abuſe to thinke to gouerne a ſtate long without armes. There is neuer any ſurety betweene the weake and the ſtrong; and there are alwaies ſome that will bee ſtirring either within or without the ſtate. Now this power is either ordinarie at all times, or extraordinarie in times of warre. The ordinarie conſiſteth in the perſons and places; The perſons are of two ſorts; the guard for the bodie and perſon of the ſouereigne, which ſerue not only for the ſurety and conſeruation, but alſo for his honour and ornament: for that good ſaying of Ageſilaus is not perpetually true, and it were too dangerous to trie & truſt vnto it, That a prince may liue ſafely enough without guard, if hee command his ſubiects, as a good father doth his children (for the malice of man ſtayeth not it ſelfe in ſo faire a way). And certaine companies, maintained and alwaies ready for thoſe neceſſities and ſudden occurrences that may fall out. For at ſuch times to be buſied in leuying powers is great imprudencie. Touching the places, they are the fortreſſes and cittadels in the frontiers, in place of which, ſome, and they ancient too, doe more allow of the colonies. The extraordinarie force conſiſteth in armes, which he muſt leuie and furniſh in times of warre. How he In the chapter following. ſhould gouerne himſelfe therein, that is to ſay, enterpriſe and make warre, it belongeth to the ſecond part, which is of the action: this firſt belongeth to prouiſion. Only I heere ſay, that a wiſe prince ſhould beſides the guards of his body, haue certaine people alwaies prepared, and experienced in armes, either in great number or leſſe, according to the extent or largeneſſe of his ſtate, to repreſſe a ſudden rebellion or commotion, which may happen either without or within his

ſtate, reſeruing the raiſing of greater forces, vntill hee muſt make warre, either offenſiue or defenſiue, willingly and of purpoſe; and in the meane time keeping his arſenals and ſtorehouſes well furniſhed, and prouided with all ſorts of offenſiue and defenſiue armes, to furniſh both foote and horſemen, as likewiſe with munitions, engins, and inſtruments for warre. Such preparation is not only neceſſarie to make warre, (for theſe things are not found and prepared in a ſhort time) but to let and hinder it. For no man is ſo foole-hardy, as to attempt a ſtate, which he knoweth to be ready to receiue him, and throughly furniſhed. A man muſt arme himſelfe againſt warres, to the end he may not be troubled with it, qui cupit pacem, paret bellum.
                     
                     After all theſe neceſſarie and eſſentiall prouiſions, wee will 25 The ſeuenth head of this prouiſion. Alliance or leagues. With whom.
                         laſtly put alliances or leagues, which is no ſmall proppe and ſtay of a ſtate. But wiſdome is very neceſſarie in the choice thereof, to build well and to take heede with whom and how he ioyne in alliance; which hee muſt doe with thoſe that are neighbours and puiſſant: For if they be weake and farre off, wherewith can they giue aide? It is rather likely, that if they be aſſaulted, that from their ruine ours may follow. For then are wee bound to ſuccour them, and to ioyne with them becauſe of this league, whoſoeuer they be. And if there be danger in making this alliance openly, let it be done ſecretly, for it is the part of a wiſe man to treat of peace and alliance with one, in the view and knowledge of all, with another ſecretly; but yet ſo, as that it be without treacherie and wickedneſſe, which is vtterly forbidden, but not wiſdome and policie, eſpecially for the defence and ſurety of his ſtate.
                     Finally, there are many ſorts and degrees of leagues or alliances: 2. How.
                         the leſſer and more ſimple is for commerce and traffike only, but commonly it comprehendeth amitie, commerce and hoſpitalitie; and it is either defenſiue only, or defenſiue and offenſiue together, and with exception of certaine princes and ſtates, or without exception. The more ſtrait and perfect is that which is offenſiue and defenſiue towards all, and againſt all, to be a friend to his friends, and an enemie to his enemies: and ſuch it is good to make with thoſe that are ſtrong and puiſſant, and by equall alliance. Leagues are

likewiſe either perpetuall, or limited to certaine times; commonly they are perpetuall, but the better and ſureſt is, to limit it to certaine times, to the end he may haue meanes to reforme, to take away, or adde to the articles, or wholly to depart if neede be, as he ſhall ſee it moſt expedient. And though a man would iudge them to be ſuch, as ſhould be perpetuall, yet it is better to renew them (which a man may and muſt do before the time be expired) than to make them perpetuall. For they languiſh and grow cold, and whoſoeuer findeth himſelfe aggrieued will ſooner breake them, if they be perpetuall than if they bee limited, in which caſe hee will rather ſtay the time. And thus much of theſe ſeuen neceſſarie prouiſions.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. III. The ſecond part of this politike prudence and gouernment of the ſtate, which concerneth the action and gouernment of the Prince.
                  
                  HAuing diſcourſed of the prouiſion, and inſtructed a ſoueraigne with what and how he ſhould furniſh and defend 1 A ſummary deſcription of the action of the prince.
                      himſelfe and his ſtate, let vs come to the action, and let vs ſee how hee ſhould emploie himſelfe, and make vſe of theſe things, that is to ſaie, in a word, well to command and gouern. But before we come to handle this diſtinctlie, according to the diuiſion which we haue made, wee may ſay in groſſe that well to gouerne and to maintaine himſelfe in his ſtate, conſiſteth in the acquiſition of two things, goodwill and authoritie. Goodwill is a loue and affection towards the ſoueraigne Beneuolence, Authoritie two pillars of a prince and ſtate. and his ſtate. Authoritie is a great and good opinion, an honourable eſteeme of the ſoueraigne and his ſtate. By the firſt, the ſoueraigne and the ſtate is loued, by the ſecond feared. Theſe are not contrary things, but different, as loue and feare. Both of them reſpect the ſubiects and ſtrangers, but it ſeemeth that more properlie, Beneuolence belongeth to the ſubiect, and authoritie to the ſtranger; amorem apud populares, metum apud hoſtes quaerat. To ſpeake ſimplie and abſolutelie, Tacit. authoritie is the more ſtrong and vigorous, more large and durable. The temperature and harmonie of both is a perfect thing, but according to the diuerſity of ſtates, of peoples, their

natures and humours, the one is more eaſie and more neceſſarie in ſome places, than in others. The meanes to attaine them both, are contained and handled in that which hath beene ſaid before, eſpeciallie of the maners and vertue of a ſoueraigne; neuertheleſſe of each we will ſpeake a little.
                  Beneuolence or goodwill (a thing very profitable and almoſt 2 Beneuolence is attained by clemency.
                      wholly neceſſarie, inſomuch that of it ſelfe it preuaileth much, and without it all the reſt hath but little aſſurance) is attained by three meanes, gentlenes or clemencie, not only in words and deeds, but much more in his commaunds and the adminiſtration of the ſtate; for ſo doe the natures of men require, who are impatient both of ſeruing wholly, and maintaining themſelues in entire libertie, nec totam ſeruitutem pati, 
                     Tacit. 
                     nec totam libertatem. They obey willingly as ſubiects, not as ſlaues, domiti vt pareant, non vt ſeruiant. And to ſay the truth, a man doth more willinglie obey him which commandeth gentlie and mildly; remiſſius imperanti melius paretur: qui vult 
                     Senec. 
                     amari languida regnet manu. Power (ſaith Caeſar a great doctor in this matter) indifferentlie exerciſed preſerueth all; but he that keepeth not a moderation in his commaunds, is neuer beloued nor aſſured. But yet it muſt not be an ouer-looſe, and ſoft effeminate mildnes, leſt a man thereby come into contempt, which is worſe than feare, Sed incorrupto ducis honore. 
                     Tacit. It is the part of wiſdome to temper this, neither ſeeking to be feared by making himſelfe terrible, nor loued by too much debaſing himſelfe.
                  The ſecond meane to attaine beneuolence is beneficence, 3 Beneficence.
                      I meane firſt towards all, eſpeciallie the meaner people, by prouidence and good policie, whereby corne and all other neceſſarie things for the ſuſtenance of this life may not be wanting, but ſold at an indifferent price, yea may abound if it be poſſible, that deareneſſe and dearth afflict not the ſubiect. For the meaner ſort haue no care for the publike good, but for this end, vulgo vna ex republica annonae cura. 
                     Tacit.
                  
                  The third meane is liberalitie (beneficence more ſpeciall) 4 Liberality.
                      which is a bait, yea, an enchantment, to draw, to winne and captiuate the willes of men: So ſweet a thing is it to receiue, honorable to giue. In ſuch ſort, that a wiſe man hath ſaid, That a ſtate did better defend it ſelfe by good deeds, than by

armes. This vertue is alwaies requiſite, but eſpeciallie in the entrance and in a new ſtate. To whom, how much, and how liberalitie muſt be exerciſed, hath beene ſaid before. The meanes of beneuolence haue beene wiſely practiſed by Augustus, 
                     Chap. 2. act. 23. Tacit. 
                     qui militem donis, populum annona, cunctos dulcedine otij pellexit.
                  
                  Authoritie is another pillar of ſtate, maiestas imperij, ſalutis 
                     5 Authority.
                      
                     tutela; The inuincible fortreſſe of a prince, whereby he bringeth into reaſon all thoſe, that dare to contemne or make head againſt him. Yea becauſe of this they dare not attempt, and all men deſire to be in grace and fauor with him. It is compoſed of feare and reſpect, by which two a prince and his ſtate is feared of all, and ſecured. To attaine this authoritie, beſides the prouiſion of things aboue named, there are three meanes which muſt carefully be kept in the forme of commaunding. By what it is acquired.
                  
                  The firſt is ſeueritie, which is better, more wholſome, aſſured, durable, than common lenitie, and great facilitie, 6 Seuerity.
                      which proceedeth firſt from the nature of the people, which as Aristotle ſaith, is not ſo well borne and bred, as to be ranged into dutie and obedience by loue, or ſhame, but by force and feare of puniſhment; and ſecondly from the generall corruption of the maners, and contagious licentiouſnes of the world, which a man muſt not thinke to mend by mildnes and lenitie, which doth rather giue aid to ill attempts. It ingendreth contempt, and hope of impunitie, which is the plague of Common-weales and ſtates, Illecebra peccandi maxima ſpes 
                     Cicero. 
                     impunitatis. It is a fauour done to many, and the whole weale-publike ſometimes well to chaſtice ſome one. And he muſt ſometimes cut off a finger, leſt the Gangreene ſpread it ſelfe through the whole arme, according to that excellent anſwere of a king of Thrace, whom one telling that he played the mad man, and not the king, anſwered, That his madnes made his ſubiects ſound and wiſe. Seueritie keepeth officers and magiſtrates in their deuoire, driueth away flatterers, courtiers, wicked perſons, impudent demaunders, and petytyrannies. Whereas contrariwiſe too great facilitie openeth the gate to all theſe kind of people, whereupon followeth an exhauſting of the treaſuries, impunitie of the wicked, impoueriſhing

of the people, as rheumes & fluxes in a rheumatike & diſeaſed bodie, fall vpon thoſe parts that are weakeſt. The goodnes of Pertinax, the licentious libertie of Heliogabalus are thought to haue vndone and ruinated the Empire: The ſeueritie of Seuerus, and afterwards of Alexander, did reeſtabliſh it, and brought it into good eſtate. But yet this ſeueritie muſt be with ſome moderation, intermiſſion, and to purpoſe, to the end that rigour towards a few might hold the whole world in feare, vt poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes. And the more ſeldome puniſhments ſerue more for the reformation of a ſtate, ſaith an ancient writer, than the more frequent. This is to be vnderſtood, if vices gather not ſtrength, and men grow not opinatiuely obſtinate in them; for then he muſt not ſpare either ſword or fire, crudelem medicum intemperans aeger facit.
                  
                  The ſecond is conſtancie, which is a ſtayed reſolution, whereby the prince marching alwaies with one and the ſame 7 Constancy.
                      paſe, without altering or changing, mainteineth alwaies, and enforceth the obſeruation of the ancient lawes and cuſtomes. To change and to be readuiſed, beſides that it is an argument of inconſtancie and irreſolution, it bringeth both to the lawes and to the ſoueraigne, and to the ſtate contempt and ſiniſter opinion. And this is the reaſon why the wiſer ſort do ſo much forbid the change, and rechange of any thing in the lawes and cuſtomes, though it were for the better: for the change or remoue bringeth alwaies more euill and diſcommoditie, beſides the vncertaintie and the danger, than the noueltie can bring good. And therefore all innouators are ſuſpected, dangerous, and to be chaſed away. And there cannot be any cauſe or occaſion ſtrong and ſufficient enough to change, if it be not for a very great, euident, and certaine vtilitie, or publike neceſſitie. And in this caſe likewiſe he muſt proceed as it were ſtealingly, ſweetly and ſlowly, by little and little and almoſt inſenſiblie, leuiter & lentè.
                  
                  The third is to hold alwaies faſt in the hand the ſterne of  the ſtate, the raines of gouernment, that is to ſay, the honour and power to commaund and to ordaine, and not to truſt or commit it to another, referring all things to his counſell, to the end that all may haue their eye vpon him, and may know that all dependeth vpon him. That ſoueraigne that loſeth neuer ſo little of his authoritie marreth all. And therefore it

ſtandeth him vpon, not ouer-much to raiſe and make great any perſon, Communis custodia principatus neminem vnum magnum facere. And if there be alreadie any ſuch, he muſt Ariſtot. draw him backe and bring him into order, but yet ſweetly and gently; and neuer make great and high charges and offices perpetuall or for many yeares, to the end a man may not get meanes to fortifie himſelfe againſt his maſter, as it many times falleth out. Nil tam vtile, quàm breuem potestatem eſſe, 
                     Senec. 
                     quae magna ſit.
                  
                  Behold heere the iuſt and honeſt meanes in a ſoueraigne to maintaine with beneuolence and loue his authoritie, and to 9 Againſt vniuſt authority and tyraunie.
                      make himſelfe to be loued and feared altogether: for the one without the other is neither ſecure nor reaſonable. And therefore we abhorre a tyrannicall authoritie, and that feare that is an enemy to loue and beneuolence, and is with a publike hate, oderint quem metuant, which the wicked ſeeke after abuſing their power. The conditions of a good prince and of a tyrant are nothing alike, and eaſily diſtinguiſhed. They may be all reduced to theſe two points, the one to keepe the lawes of God and of nature, or to trample them vnder foot; the other to do all for the publike good and profit of the ſubiects, or to employ all to his particular profit & pleaſure. Now a prince that he may be ſuch as he ſhould, muſt alwaies remember, that as it is a felicitie to haue power to do what a man will, ſo it is true greatnes to will that that a man ſhould; Caeſari cum 
                     Plin. de Traia. 
                     omnia licent, propter hoc minus licet: vt felicitatis eſt poſſe quantum velis, ſic magnitudinis velle quantum poſſis, vel potius quantū debeas. The greateſt infelicitie that can happen to a prince, is to beleeue that all things are lawfull that he can, and that pleaſeth him. So ſoone as he conſenteth to this thought, of good he is made wicked. Now this opinion is ſetled in them by the help of flatterers, who neuer ceaſe alwaies to preach vnto them the greatnes of their power; and very few faithfull ſeruitours there are, that dare to tell them what their dutie is. But there is not in the world a more dangerous flattery, than that where with a man flattereth himſelfe, when the flatterer and flattered is one and the ſame; there is no remedie for this diſeaſe. Neuertheleſſe it falleth out ſometimes in conſideration of the times, perſons, places, occaſions, that a good

king muſt do thoſe things which in outward appearance may ſeeme tyrannicall, as when it is a queſtion of repreſſing another tyrannie, that is to ſay, of a furious people, the licentious libertie of whom, is a true tyrannie: or of the noble and rich, who tyrannize ouer the poore and meaner people: or when the king is poore and needie, not knowing where to get ſiluer, to raiſe loanes vpon the richeſt. And we muſt not thinke that the ſeueritie of a prince is alwaies tyrannie, or his gards & fortreſſes, or the maieſtie of his imperious commaunds, which are ſometimes profitable, yea neceſſarie, and are more to be deſired than the ſweet prayers of tyrants.
                  Theſe are the two true ſtayes and pillars of a prince, and of a ſtate, if by them a prince know how to maintaine and preſerue 10 Hate and contempt, two murtherers of ae prince.
                      himſelfe from the two contraries, which are the murtherers of a prince and ſtate, that is to ſay, hatred and contempt, whereof the better to auoid them, and to take heed of them, a word or two. Hatred contrarie to beneuolence, is a wicked and obſtinate affection of ſubiects againſt the prince, and his A riſt. lib. 5. Pol. Hatred.
                      ſtate: It ordinarily proceedeth from feare of what is to come, or deſire of reuenge of what is paſt, or from them both. This hatred when it is great, and of many, a prince can hardly eſcape it, Multorum odijs nullae opes poſſunt reſistere. He is expoſed Cicero. to all, and there needs but one to make an end of all. Multae illis manus, illi vna ceruix. It ſtandeth him vpon therefore to preſerue himſelfe, which he ſhall do by flying thoſe things that ingender it, that is to ſay, crueltie and auarice, the contraries to the aforeſaid inſtruments of beneuolence.
                  He muſt preſerue himſelfe pure and free from baſe cruelty, 11 Hatred proceedeth from crueltie. Cap. 2. art. 12. vnworthie greatnes, very infamous to a prince: But contrarily he muſt arme himſelfe with clemencie, as hath been ſaid before, in the vertues required in a prince. But for aſ much as puniſhments, though they be iuſt and neceſſarie in a ſtate, haue ſome image of crueltie, he muſt take heed to carie himſelfe therein with dexteritie, and for this end I will giue him this aduice: Let him not put his hand to the ſword of iuſtice, 
                        An aduice for puniſhments. Senec. but very ſeldome and vnwillinglie: libenter damnat qui cito: ergo illi parſimonia etiam viliſſimi ſanguinis: 2. Enforced for the publike good, and rather for example, & to terrifie others from the like offence: 3. That it be to puniſh the faultie, and

that without choler, or ioy, or other paſſion: And if he muſt needs ſhew ſome paſſion, that it be compaſſion: 4. That it be according to the accuſtomed maner of the countrie, and not after a new, for new puniſhments are teſtimonies of crueltie: 5. Without giuing his aſſiſtance, or being preſent at the execution: 6. And if he muſt puniſh many, he muſt diſpatch it ſpeedily, and all at a blow; for to make delayes, and to vſe one correction after another, is a token that he taketh delight, pleaſeth and feedeth himſelfe therewith.
                  He muſt likewiſe preſerue himſelfe from auarice, a ſinne ill 12 Auarice.
                      befitting a great perſonage. It is ſhewed either by exacting and gathering ouermuch, or by giuing too little. The firſt doth much diſpleaſe the people, by nature couetous, to whom their goods are as their blood and their life: The ſecond, men of ſeruice and merit, who haue laboured for the publike good, and haue reaſon to thinke that they deſerue ſome recompence. Now how a prince ſhould gouerne himſelfe heerein, and in his treaſure and exchequer affaires, either in laying their foundation, or ſpending or preſeruing them, hath beene more at large diſcourſed in the ſecond chapter. I will heere only ſay, that a prince muſt carefully preſerue himſelfe from three things; Firſt, from reſembling, by ouer great and exceſſiue impoſitions, theſe tyrants, ſubiectmongers, canibals, qui deuorant plebem ſicut eſcam panis 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , quorum aerarium ſpoliarium ciuium cruentarum que praedarum receptaculum, for this breeds danger of tumult, witneſſe ſo many examples, and miſerable accidents: Secondly, from baſe vnhoneſt parſimony, as well in gathering together, (indignum lucrum ex omni occaſioue odorari; & vt dicitur, etiam à mortuo auferre; and therefore hee muſt not ſerue his turne heerein, with accuſations, confiſcations, vniuſt ſpoiles) as in giuing nothing, or too little, and that mercenarily, and with long and importunate ſuite: Thirdly, from violence in the leuie of his prouiſion, and that if it be poſſible, he neuer ſeaſe vpon the moueables and vtenſils of husbandrie. This doth principally belong to receiuers and puruoyers, who by their rigorous courſes, expoſe the prince to the hatred of the people, and diſhonour him, a people ſubtile, cruell, with ſix hands and three heads, as one ſaith. A prince

therefore muſt prouide that they be honeſt men, and if they faile in their duties, to correct them ſeuerely, with rough chaſtiſement, and great amends, to the the end they may reſtore and diſgorge like ſpunges, that which they haue ſucked and drawne vniuſtly from the people.
                  Let vs come to the other worſe enemie, contempt; which 13 Contempt.
                      is a ſiniſter, baſe, and abiect opinion of the prince, and the ſtate: This is the death of a ſtate, as authoritie is the ſoule and life thereof. What doth maintaine one only man, yea an old and worne man, ouer ſo many thouſands of men, if not authoritie and the great eſteeme of his perſon? which if it be once loſt by contempt, the prince and ſtate muſt neceſſarily fall to the ground. And euen as authoritie, as hath been ſaid, 
                        Art 5. is more ſtrong and large than beneuolence, ſo contempt is more contrarie and dangerous than hatred, which dareth not any thing, being held backe by feare, if contempt which ſhaketh off feare, arme it not, and giue it courage to execute. It is true that contempt is not ſo common, eſpecially if he be a true and lawfull prince, except he be ſuch a one, as doth wholly degrade and proſtitute himſelfe, & videatur exire de 
                     Plin. in Panch. 
                     imperio. Neuertheleſſe wee muſt ſee from whence this contempt doth come, that wee may the better know how to auoid it. It proceedeth from things contrarie to thoſe meanes that winne and get authoritie, and eſpecially from three, that is to ſay, from too looſe, effeminate, milde, languiſhing and careleſſe, or very light forme of gouernment, without any An ill forme of gouernment. hold or ſtay; this is a ſtate without a ſtate, vnder ſuch princes the ſubiects are made bold, and inſolent, all things being permitted, becauſe the prince takes care of nothing. Malum principem habere, ſub quo nihil vlli liceat: peius ſub quo omnia omnibus. Secondly, from the ill hap and infelicitie of the Infelicitie. prince, whether it be in his affaires, which ſucceede not well, or in his line and iſſue, if hee haue no children, who are a great proppe and ſtay to a prince, or in the vncertaintie of his ſucceſſours, whereof Alexander the great complained, Orbitas mea quòd ſine liberis ſum, ſpernitur: Munimen aulae 
                     Máners. 
                     regij liberi. Thirdly, from maners, eſpecially diſſolute, looſe and voluptuous, drunkenneſſe, gluttonie, as alſo ruſticitie, childiſhneſſe, ſcurrilitie.
                  
                     
Thus in groſſe haue I ſpoken of the action of a prince. To handle it more diſtinctly and particularly, wee muſt remember, 14 The diſtinction of the action of a prince.
                      as hath beene ſaid in the beginning, that it is two-fold, peaceable and militarie; by the peaceable I heere vnderſtand that ordinarie action, which is euerie day done, and at all times of peace and of warre; by the militarie, that which is not exerciſed, but in time of warre.
                  The peaceable and ordinarie action of a ſouereigne cannot Of the peaceable. be whollie preſcribed, it is an infinite thing, and conſiſteth as well in taking heed to doe, as to doe. Wee will heere giue the principall and more neceſſary aduiſements. Firſt therefore An aduice. a Prince muſt prouide that he be faithfullie and diligentlie aduertiſed of all things. This all things may bee reduced to two heads, whereupon there are two ſorts of aduertiſements and aduertiſers, who muſt be faithfull and aſſured, wiſe and ſecret, though in ſome there be required, a greater libertie and conſtancy than in others. Some are to aduertiſe him of his honor and duty, of his defects, and to tell him the truth. There are no kind of people in the world, who haue ſo much need of ſuch friends, as Princes haue; who neither ſee nor vnderſtand, but by the eies and eares of another. They maintain and hold vp a publike life, are to ſatisfie ſo many people, haue ſo many things hid from them, that before they be aware, they fall into the hatred and deteſtation of their people, for matters that would be eaſily remedied and cured, if they had been in time aduertiſed of them. On the other ſide free aduertiſements, which are the beſt offices of true amity, are perillous about ſoueraignes, though Princes be ouer delicate & ſhew great infirmitie, if for their good and profit, they cannot endure a free aduertiſment, which enforceth nothing, it being in their power, whatſoeuer they heare, to do what they liſt. Others are to aduertiſe the Prince of whatſoeuer paſſeth, not onely amongſt his ſubiects, and within the circuit of his ſtate, but with his bordering neighbours. I ſay of all, that concerneth either a farre off, or neere at hand, his owne ſtate or his neighbours. Theſe two kind of people anſwer in ſome ſort to thoſe two friends of Alexander, Epheſtion and Crateras, of whom the one loued the King, the other Alexander, that is to ſay, the one the ſtate, the other the perſon.
                  
                     
Secondly, a Prince muſt alwaies haue in his hand a little 15 2 To haue a memoriall of the 1 Affaires.
                      booke or memoriall containing three things: firſt and principallie a briefe regiſter of the affaires of the ſtate: to the end he may know what he muſt doe, what is begun to bee done, and that there remaine nothing imperfect, and ill executed: A catalogue or bedrowle of the moſt worthy perſonages that 2 Perſons.
                      haue well deſerued, or are likely to deſerue well of the wealepublike: A memoriall of the gifts which he hath beſtowed, to whom and wherefore; otherwiſe without theſe three, there 3 Gifts.
                      muſt neceſſarilie follow many inconueniences. The greateſt princes and wiſeſt polititians haue vſed it, Auguſtus, Tiberius, Veſpaſian, Traian, Adrian, the Antonies.
                  
                  Thirdly, in aſmuch as one of the principall duties of a 16 3 To appoint rewards and puniſhments.
                      prince, is to appoint and order both rewards and puniſhments, the one whereof is fauorable, the other odious, a prince muſt retaine vnto himſelfe the diſtribution of rewards, as eſtates, honours, immunities, reſtitutions, graces and fauours, and leaue vnto his officers, to execute and pronounce condemnations, forfeitures, confiſcations, depriuations, and other puniſhments.
                  Fourthly in the diſtribution of rewards, gifts, and good 17 4 To distribute rewards.
                      deeds, he muſt alwaies be readie and willing, giue them before they be asked, if he can, and not to looke that he ſhould refuſe them; and he muſt giue them himſelfe, if it may be, or cauſe them to be giuen in his preſence. By this meanes gifts and good turnes ſhall be better receiued, and giuen to better purpoſe, and he ſhall auoid two great and common inconueniences, which depriue men of honour and worth of thoſe rewards that are due vnto them: the one is a long purſuit, difficult and chargeable, which a man muſt vndergoe, to obtaine that which he would, and thinketh to haue deſerued, which is no ſmall griefe to honorable minds, and men of ſpirit: The other, that after a man hath obtained of the prince a gift, before he can poſſeſſe it, it coſteth the one halfe, and more, of that it is worth, and many times comes to nothing.
                  Let vs come to the militarie action, wholly neceſſarie for 18 Of the militarie action which conſiſteth in three points.
                      the preſeruation and defence of a prince, of the ſubiects, and the whole ſtate, let vs ſpeake thereof briefly. All this matter or ſubiect may be reduced to three heads, To enterpriſe,

make, finiſh warre. In the enterpiſe there muſt be two things, iuſtice and prudence, and an auoidance of their contraries, iniuſtice To enterpriſe, where two things are required. and temeritie. Firſt, the warre muſt be iuſt, yea iuſtice muſt march before valour, as deliberation before execution. Theſe reaſons muſt be of no force, yea abhorred, That right conſiſteth in force; That the iſſue or euent decideth it; That the ſtronger carieth it away. But a prince muſt looke into the cauſe, into the ground and foundation, and not into the iſſue; Warre hath it lawes and ordinances as well as peace. God fauoreth iuſt warres, and giueth the victorie to whom it pleaſeth him, and therefore we muſt firſt make our ſelues capable of this fauor by the equitie of the enterpriſe. Warre then muſt not be begun and vndertaken for all cauſes, vpon euery occaſion, non ex omni occaſione quaerere triumphum: And aboue all a Plin. in Pan. prince muſt take heed that ambition, auarice, choler, poſſeſſe him not, and cary him beyond reaſon, which are alwaies, to ſay the truth, the more ordinarie motiues to warre: vna & ea 
                     Saluſt. 
                     vetus cauſa bellandi eſt profunda cupido imperij & diuitiarum: maximam gloriam in maximo imperio putant: Repere foedus impius lucri furor, & ira praeceps.
                  
                  That a warre may be in all points iuſt, three things are neceſſarie, 19 Three things make an enterpriſe iuſt.
                      that it be denounced and vndertaken by him that hath power to do it, which is only the ſoueraigne.
                  That it be for a iuſt cauſe, ſuch as a defenſiue war is, which is abſolute iuſt, being iuſtified by all reaſon amongſt the wiſe,  by neceſſitie amongſt barbarians, by nature amongſt beaſts: Cic. pro Milo. I ſay defenſiue, of himſelfe, that is, of his life, his libertie, his parents, his countrie: of his allies and confederates, in regard of that faith he hath giuen; of ſuch as are vniuſtlie oppreſſed, Qui non defendit, nec obſistit, ſi poteſt, iniuriae, tam eſt in vitio, quàm ſi parentes, aut patriam, aut ſocios deſerat. Theſe three In officijs. heads of defence are within the bounds of iuſtice, according to S. Ambroſe, Fortitudo, quae per bella tuetur à barbaris patria, vel defendit infirmos, vel à latronibus ſocios, plena iustitiae eſt. Another more briefly, diuideth it into two heads, faith & health; Nullum bellum à ciuitate optima ſuſcipitur, niſi aut pro fide, aut pro ſalute: and to offenſiue warre he puts two conditions; Saluſt. That it proceede from ſome former offence giuen, as outrage or vſurpation, and hauing redemaunded openly by a herald

that which hath beene ſurpriſed and taken away (poſt clarigatum) 
                     Plin. l. 22. nat. hiſt. ca. 2. and ſought it by way of iuſtice, which muſt euer goe formoſt. For if men be willing to ſubmit themſelues vnto iuſtice, and reaſon, there let them ſtay themſelues; if not, the laſt, and therefore neceſſarie, is iuſt and lawfull, iustum bellum, 
                     Liuius. 
                     quibus neceſſarium; pia arma quibus nulla niſi in armis relinquitur ſpes.
                  
                  Thirdly to a good end, that is to ſay, peace and quietnes.  
                     Sapientes pacis cauſa bellum gerunt, & laborem ſpe otij ſustentant: vt in pace ſine iniuria viuant.
                  
                  After iuſtice commeth prudence, whereby a man doth aduiſedly 22 Prudence.
                      deliberate before by ſound of trumpet he publiſheth the warre. And therefore, that nothing be done out of paſſion, and ouer-raſhly, it is neceſſarie that he conſider of the points: of forces and meanes, as well his owne, as his enemies; ſecondly of the hazard and dangerous reuolution of humane things eſpeciallie of armes, which are variable, and wherein fortune hath greateſt credit, and exerciſeth more hir empire, than in any other thing, wherein the iſſue may be ſuch, that in an houre it carieth all, ſimul parta ac ſperata decora vnius horae 
                     Liuius. 
                     fortuna euertere poteſt.
                  
                  Thirdly, of thoſe great euils, infelicities, and publike and particular miſeries, which warre doth neceſſarily bring with it, and which be ſuch as the only imagination is lamentable. Fourthly of the calumnies, maledictions, and reproches that are ſpred abroad againſt the authours of the warre, by reaſon of thoſe euils and miſeries that follow it. For there is nothing more ſubiect to the toongs and iudgements of men than war. But all lighteth vpon the Chieftaine, iniquiſſima bellorum conditio 
                     Tacit. 
                     haec eſt, proſpera omnes ſibi vendicant, aduerſa vni imputantur. All theſe things together make the iuſteſt warre that may be, deteſtable, ſaith S. Augustine; and therefore it ſtandeth a ſoueraigne vpon, not to enter into warres but vpon great neceſſitie, as it is ſaid of Augustus; and not to ſuffer himſelfe to be caried by thoſe incendiaries and fire-brands of warre, who for ſome particular paſſion, are readie to kindle and enflame him: quibus in pace durius ſeruitium eſt, in id nati, vt nec 
                     Pindar. 
                     ipſi quieſcant, neque alios ſinant. And theſe men are commonly ſuch, whoſe noſes do bleed when they come to the fact it ſelf.

                     Dulce bellum inexpertis. A wiſe ſoueraigne will keepe himſelfe in peace, neither prouoking, nor fearing warre, neither diſquieting either his owne ſtate, or anothers, betwixt hope and feare, nor comming to thoſe extremities of periſhing himſelfe, or making others to periſh.
                  The ſecond head of militarie action, is to make war, whereunto are required three things, Munitions, Men, Rules of war. 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      The firſt is prouiſion and munition of all things neceſſarie for warre, which muſt be done in good time and at leaſure, for it were great indiſcretion in extremities to be employed about the ſearch and prouiſion of thoſe things which he ſhould haue alwaies readie. Diu apparandum eſt, vt vincas celeriùs. Now of the ordinarie and perpetuall prouiſion required for the good of the prince and the ſtate at all times, hath beene ſpoken in the firſt part of this Chapter, which is wholly of this ſubiect. The principall prouiſions and munitions of war are three, Monie, which is the vitall ſpirit, and ſinewes of war, whereof hath been ſpoken in the ſecond Chapter. 2. Armes both offenſiue and defenſiue, whereof likewiſe heeretofore. Theſe two are ordinarie, and at all times. 3. Victualls, without which a man can neither conquer, nor liue, whole armies are ouerthrowne without a blow ſtrucken, ſouldiers grow licentious, and vnrulie, and it is not poſſible to doe any good. Diſciplinam non ſeruat ieiunus exercitus. 
                     Caſſiod.But this is an extraordinarie  prouiſion, and not perpetuall, and is not made but for warre. It is neceſſarie therefore that in the deliberating of warre, that there be great ſtore-houſes made for victuals, corne, poudered fleſh, both for the armie which is in the field, and for the gariſons in the frontiers, which may be beſieged.
                  The ſecond thing required to make warre, are men fit to aſſaile and to defend: we muſt diſtinguiſh them. The firſt diſtinction 24 Men.
                      is, into ſouldiers, and leaders or captaines, both are neceſſarie. The ſouldiers are the bodie, the captaines the ſoule, the life of the armie, who giue motion and action: wee wil ſpeake firſt of the ſouldiers who make the bodie in groſſe. There are diuers ſorts of them: There are footmen and horſemen; naturall of the ſame countrie, and ſtrangers; ordinarie and ſubſidiarie. We muſt firſt compare them all together, to the end we may know which are the better, and to be preferred,

and afterwards we will ſee how to make our choice, and laſtly how to gouerne and diſcipline them.
                  In this compariſon all are not of one accord. Some, eſpeciallie 25 Rather foote than horſe.
                      rude and barbarous people, preferre horſemen before footmen; others quite contrarie. A man may ſay that the foote are ſimplie and abſolutely the better, for they ſerue both throughout the warre, and in all places, and at all occaſions; whereas in hillie, rough, craggie, and ſtrait places, and in ſieges, the caualarie is almoſt vnprofitable. They are likewiſe more readie and leſſe chargeable: and if they be well led and armed, as it is fit they ſhould, they endure the chock of the horſemen. They are likewiſe preferred by ſuch as are doctors in this arte. A man may ſay that the caualarie is better in a combat; and for a ſpeedie diſpatch; Equestrium virium proprium citò parare, citò cedere victoriam. For the foote are not ſo ſpeedie, but what they do they performe more ſurely.
                  As for naturall ſouldiers and ſtrangers, diuers men are likewiſe 26 And naturall than ſtrangers.
                      of diuers opinions touching their precedencie; but without all doubt the naturall are much better, becauſe they are more loyall than mercenarie ſtrangers.
                  Venaleſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      manus, ibi fas, vbi maxima merces.
                  More patient and obedient, carying themſelues with more honor and reſpect towards their leaders, more courage in combats, more affection to the victorie, and good of their countrie: They coſt leſſe, and are more readie than ſtrangers, who are many times mutinous, yea in greateſt neceſſities, making more ſtir, than doing ſeruice, and the moſt part of them are importunate, and burthenſome to the Common-weale, cruell to thoſe of the countrie, whom they forrage as enemies. Their comming and departure is chargeable, and many times they are expected and attended with great loſſe and inconuenience. If in ſome extremitie there be neede of them, be it ſo, but yet let them be in farre leſſe number than the naturall, and let them make but a member and part of the armie, not the bodie. For there is danger that if they ſhall ſee themſelues equall in force, or more ſtrong than the naturall, they will make themſelues their maſters that called them, as many times it hath fallen out. For he is maſter of the ſtate, that is maſter of the forces. And againe, if it be poſſible, let them be

drawne from allies and confederates, who bring with them more truſt and ſeruice than they that are ſimplie ſtrangers. For to make more vſe of ſtrangers, or to employ them more than naturall ſubiects, is to play the tyrants, who feare their ſubiects, and becauſe they handle them like enemies, they make themſelues odious vnto them, whereby they feare to arme them, or to employ them in the warres.
                  As touching ordinarie ſouldiers and ſubſidiaries, both are 27 As well ordinary as ſubſidiary.
                      neceſſarie; but the difference betweene them is, that the ordinarie are in leſſe number, are alway a foote and in armes both in peace and in warre: and of theſe we haue ſpoken in the prouiſion, a people wholly deſtinated and confined to the warres, formed to all exerciſe of armes, reſolute. This is the ordinarie force of the prince, his honor in peace, his ſafegard in warre: ſuch were the Romane legions. Theſe ſhould be diuided by troopes in times of peace, to the end they raiſe no commotions. The ſubſidiaries are in farre greater number, but they are not perpetuall, and wholly deſtinated to warre: they haue other vocations: At a neede and in times of warre they are called by the ſound of a trumpet, enroled, muſtred, and inſtructed to the warres; and in times of peace they returne, and retire themſelues to their vocations.
                  We haue vnderſtood their diſtinctions and differences, 28 Well to chooſe.
                      we muſt now conſider of the good choice of them: A matter whereof we muſt be carefullie aduiſed, not to gather many, and in great numbers, for number winneth not the victorie, but valour; and commonly they are but few that giue the ouerthrow. An vnbridled multitude doth more hurt than good. Non vires habet ſed pondus, potiùs impedimentum quàm auxilium. Victorie then conſiſteth not in the number, but in the force and valor, manibus opus eſt bello, non multis nominibus. There muſt therefore be a great care in the choice of them (not preſſing them pell-mell) that they bee not voluntarie aduenturers, ignorant of warre, taken forth of cities, corrupt, vitious, diſſolute in their maners, arrogant boaſters, hardie and bold to pillage, farre enough off from blowes, leuerets in dangers, Aſſuet
                           •
                         latrocinijs bellorum, inſolentes, galeati lepores, purgamenta vrbium, quibus ob egestatem & flagitia maxima peccandi neceſſitudo.
                  
                  
                     
To chooſe them well, there needs iudgement, attention and inſtruction, and to this end fiue things muſt be conſidered of, 29 Election of ſouldiers conſiſteth in fiue things. 1 Country. Veget. that is to ſay, the place of their birth and education. They muſt be taken out of the fields, the mountaines, barren and hard places, countries neere adioining to the ſea, and brought vp in all maner of labor. Exagris ſupplendum praecipuè robur exercitus, aptior armis rustica plebs ſub dio & in laboribus enutrita, ipſo terrae ſuae ſolo & coelo acrius animantur. Et minus mortem timet, qui minus deliciarum nouit in vita. For they that are brought vp in Cities, in the pleaſant ſhadow and delights thereof, in gaine, are more idle, inſolent, effeminate; Vernaculo 
                     Tacit. 2 Age.
                      
                     multitudo, laſciuiae ſueta, laborum intolerans. Secondly the age, that they be taken young, at eighteene yeares of age, when they are moſt pliant and obedient: the elder are poſſeſſed with many vices, and not ſo fit for diſcipline. Thirdly the bodies, 3 Bodies.
                      which ſome will haue to be of a great ſtature, as Marius and Pirrhus: but though it be but indifferent, ſo the bodie be ſtrong, drie, vigorous, ſinowie, of a fierce looke, it is all one. Dura corpora ſtricti artus, minax vultus, maior animi vigor. Fourthly the ſpirit, which muſt be liuely, reſolute, bold, glorious, 4 Spirit.
                      fearing nothing ſo much as diſhonour and reproch. Fiftly the condition, which importeth much; for they that 5 Condition.
                      are of a baſe and infamous condition, of diſhoneſt qualities, or ſuch as are mingled with effeminate artes, ſeruing for delicacie and for women, are no way fit for this profeſſion.
                  After the choice and elections commeth diſcipline: for it is not enough to haue choſen thoſe that are capable, and likely 30 Well diſciplined.
                      to prooue good ſouldiers, if a man make them not good; and if he make them good, if he keepe and continue them not ſuch. Nature makes few men valiant, it is good inſtitution Veget. and diſcipline that doth it. Now it is hard to ſay how neceſſarie and profitable good diſcipline is in warre: This is all in all, it is this that made Rome to flouriſh, and that woon it the ſeignorie of the world: yea, it was in greater account, than the loue of their children. Now the principall point of diſcipline is obedience, to which end ſerued that ancient precept, That a ſouldier muſt more feare his captaine, than his enemie.
                  Now this diſcipline muſt tend to two ends; to make the 
                     
ſouldiers valiant, and honeſt men: and therefore it hath two 
                        Diſcipline hath two parts. 1 Valour which is attained by exerciſe.
                      parts, valour, and maners. To valour three things are required; daily exerciſe in armes, wherein they muſt alwaies keepe themſelues in practiſe without intermiſſion; and from hence commeth the Latin word Exercitus, which ſignifieth an armie. This exerciſe in armes, is an inſtruction to manage and vſe them well, to prepare themſelues for combats, to draw benefit from armes, with dexteritie to defend themſelues, to diſcouer and preſent vnto them whatſoeuer may fal out in the fight, and come to the triall, as in a ranged battell: to propoſe rewards to the moſt apt and actiue, to enflame them. Secondly, trauell or paines, which is as well to harden 2 Trauell.
                      them to labour, to ſweatings, to duſt, exercitue labore proficit, otio conſeneſcit, as for the good and ſeruice of the army, and fortification of the field, whereby they muſt learne to digge, to plant a palliſade, to order a barricado, to runne, to carrie heauie burthens. Theſe are neceſſarie things, as well to defend themſelues, as to offend and ſurpriſe the enemie. Thirdly order, which is of great vſe, and muſt be kept in warre for 3 Order.
                      diuers cauſes, and after a diuers maner. Firſt, in the diſtribution of the troopes, into battallions, regiments, enſignes, camerades. Secondly, in the ſituation of the campe, that it be diſpoſed into quarters with proportion, hauing the places, entries, iſſues, lodgings fitted both for the horſemen and footemen, whereby it may bee eaſie for euerie man to finde his quarter, his companion. Thirdly, in the march in the field, and againſt the enemie, that euery one hold his ranke; that they be equally diſtant the one from the other, neither too neere, nor too farre from one an other. Now this order is very neceſſarie and ſerues for many purpoſes. It is very pleaſing to the eie, cheereth vp friends, aſtoniſheth the enemie, ſecureth the armie, maketh all the remooues, and the commands of the captaines eaſie; in ſuch ſort, that without ſtir, without confuſion the Generall commandeth, and from hand to hand his intents and purpoſes come euen to the leaſt. Imperium ducis ſimul omne copiae ſentiunt; & ad nutum regentis ſine tumultu reſpondent. To be briefe, this order well kept, maketh an armie almoſt inuincible; and contrarily, many haue loſt the field for want of this order, and good intelligence.
                  
                     
The ſecond part of this military diſcipline concerneth maners, which are commonly very diſſolute and in armies hardly Maners the ſecond part of diſcipline. ordered, aſſiduè dimicantibus difficile morum cuſtodire menſuram. Neuertheleſſe there muſt be paines taken, and eſpecially to enſtale (if it may be) three vertues, Continencie, whereby Continencie. all gluttonie, drunkenneſſe, whordome, and all maner of diſhoneſt pleaſures are chaſed away, which doe make a ſouldier looſe and licentious. Degenerat à robore ac virtute miles aſſuetudine voluptatum; witneſſe Hannibal who by delicacie Tacit. and delights in a winter was effeminated, and he by vice was vanquiſhed, that was inuincible, and by armes vanquiſhed all others. Modeſtie in words, driuing away all vanitie, vaine Modeſtie. boaſting, brauerie of ſpeech; for true valour ſtirreth not the tongue, but the hands, doth not ſpeake but execute. Viri nati militae factis magni, ad verborum linguaeque certamina rudes: diſcrimen ipſum certaminis differt: viri fortes, in opere acres, ante id placidi. And contrarily great ſpeakers are ſmall doers. Nimij verbis linguaferoces. Now the tongue is for counſell, the hand for combat, ſaith Homer; Modeſtie in action, (that is, a ſimple and readie obedience, without merchandizing or contradicting the commands of the captaines) haec ſunt bonae militiae, velle, vereri, obedire. Abſtinencie, whereby ſouldiers keepe their hands cleane from all violence, forraging, roberie. Abſtinencie. And this is a briefe ſumme in the militarie diſcipline; the which the Generall muſt ſtrengthen by rewards and recompences of honour towards the good and valorous, and by ſeuere puniſhments againſt offenders: for indulgence vndoeth ſouldiers.
                  Let this ſuffice of ſouldiers: Now a word or two of captaines, without whom the ſouldier can doe nothing: they 33 Of captaines.
                      are a body without a ſoule, a ſhip with oares without a maſter to hold the ſterne. There are two ſorts, the Generall and firſt, and afterwards the ſubalterne, the maſter of the Campe, Collonels: But the General (who muſt neuer be but one, vnder Of the Generall. paine of loſing all) is all in all. And therefore it is ſaid, that an armie can doe as much as a General can doe; and as much account muſt be made of him as of all the reſt, plus in duce repones, 
                     Tacit. 
                     quàm in exercitu. Now this Generall is either the prince himſelfe and ſouereigne, or ſuch as hee hath committed the

charge vnto, and made choice of. The preſence of a prince is of great importance to the obtaining of a victorie; it doubleth the force and courage of his men; and it ſeemeth to be requiſite when it ſtandeth vpon the ſafegard and health of his ſtate, and of a prouince. In warres of leſſe conſequence he may depute another: dubijs praeliorum exemtus ſummae rerum 
                     Tacit. 
                     & imperij ſeipſum reſeruet. Finallie, a Generall muſt haue theſe qualities, he muſt be wiſe and experienced in the arte militarie, hauing ſeene and ſuffered both fortunes: Secundarum ambiguarumque rerum ſciens eoque interitus. Secondly, hee muſt be prouident and well aduiſed; and therefore ſtaid, cold, Tacit. and ſetled; farre from all temerity and precipitation, which is not only fooliſh, but vnfortunate. For faults in warre cannot be mended; Non licet in bello his peccare. And therefore hee Sertori. in Plut. muſt rather looke backe, than before him, Ducem oportet potius reſpicere, quàm proſpicere. Thirdly, hee muſt be vigilant and actiue, and by his owne example, teaching his ſouldiers to doe his will. Fourthlie happie, good fortune comes from heauen, but yet willinglie it followeth and accompanieth theſe three firſt qualities.
                  After the munitions and men of warre, let vs come to the 34 The third head of the rules and counſels to make warre.
                      rules and generall aduiſements to make warre. This third point is a very great and neceſſarie inſtrument of war, without which both munitions and men, are but phantaſies, Plura conſilio quàm vi perficiuntur. Now to preſcribe certaine rules and perpetuall, it is impoſſible. For they depend of ſo many things that are to be conſidered of, and wherunto a man muſt accommodate himſelfe, wherupon it was well ſaid, That men giue not counſell to the affaires, but the affaires to men, that a man muſt order his warre by his eie. A man muſt take his counſell in the field, Conſilium in arena: for new occurrents yeeld new counſels. Neuertheleſſe there are ſome ſo generall, and certaine, that a man cannot faile in the deliuerie and obſeruation of them. We will brieflie ſet down ſome few of them, whereunto a man may adde as occaſions ſhall fall out. Some are to be obſerued throughout a warre, which we will ſpeake of in the firſt place, others are for certaine occaſions and affaires. Rules for the whole time of warre.
                  
                  1 The firſt is carefully to watch and to meet the occaſions

not to loſe any, nor to permit, if it be poſſible, the enemie to take his: occaſion hath a great place in all humane affaires, eſpeciallie in warre, where it helpeth more than force.
                  2 To make profit of rumours and reports that runne abroad, for whether they be true or falſe, they may doe much, eſpeciallie in the beginning. Fama bella constant, fama bellum conficit, in ſpem metumuè impellit animos.
                  
                  3 But when a man is entred his courſe, let not reports trouble him: he may conſider of them, but let them not hinder him to do that he ſhould, and what he can, and let him ſtand firme to that which reaſon hath counſelled him.
                  4 Aboue all, he muſt take heed of too great a confidence and aſſurance, whereby he growes into contempt of his enemie, and thereby becomes negligent and careleſſe; it is the moſt dangerous euill that can fall out in warre. He that contemneth his enemie, diſcouereth and betrayeth himſelfe, Frequentiſſimum initium calamitatis ſecuritas. Nemo celeriùs opprimitur quam qui non timet. Nil tutò in hoste deſpicitur: quem ſpreueris, valentiorem negligentia facies. There is nothing in warre that muſt be deſpiſed: for therein there is nothing little: and many times that which ſeemeth to a man to be of ſmall moment, yeeldeth great effects. Saepe paruis momentis magni caſus: vt nihil timendi, ſic nihil contemnendi.
                  
                  5 To enquire very carefullie, and to know the eſtate and affaires of the enemie, eſpeciallie theſe points, 1. The nature, capacitie, and deſignments of the Chieftaine. 2. The nature, maners, and maner of life of his enemies. 3. The ſituation of the places, & the nature of the countrie where he is. Hannibal was excellent in this.
                  6 Touching the fight or maine battell, many things are 35 For the fight.
                      aduiſedly to be conſidered of, when, where, againſt whom, and how, to the end it be not to ſmall purpoſe. And a man muſt not come to this extremitie, but with great deliberation, but rather make choice of any other meane, and ſeeke to breake the force of his enemie by patience, and to ſuffer him to beate himſelfe with time, with the place, with the want of many things, before he come to this hazard. For the iſſue of battailes is very vncertaine, and dangerous: Incertiexitus pugnarum.
                     
                     Mars communis, qui ſaepe ſpoliantem & iam exultantem euertit; & perculit ab abiecto.
                  
                  7 A man then muſt not come to the battell, but ſeldome, that is to ſay, in great neceſſities, or for ſome great occaſion. When. In neceſſitie, as if the difficulties grow on his part; his viands, his treaſure faileth; his men begin to diſtaſte the warres, and will be gone, and he cannot long continue, capienda rebus in malis praeceps via eſt; vpon great occaſion, as if his part be clearely the ſtronger; that the victorie ſeemeth to offer it ſelf, that the enemie is weake, and will ſhortly be ſtronger, and will offer the battell; that he is out of doubt and feare, and thinketh his enemie farre off; that he is weary and faint, reuictualleth himſelfe; his horſes feede vpon their litter.
                  8 He muſt conſider the place, for this is a matter of great conſequence in battels. In generall, he muſt not attend (if he Where. may preuent it) his enemie till he enter within his owne territories. He muſt goe foorth to meete him, or at leaſt ſtay him in the entrance. And if he be alreadie entered, not hazard the battell, before he haue another armie in readineſſe, to make a ſupplie; otherwiſe he puts his ſtate in hazard. More particularlie hee muſt conſider the field where the battell is to be fought, whether it be fit for himſelfe, or his enemie: for the field many times giues a great aduantage. The plaine champion is good for the caualarie; ſtrait and narrow places, ſet with piles, full of diches, trees, for the infanterie.
                  9 He muſt conſider with whom he is to fight, not with the ſtrongeſt, I meane not the ſtrongeſt men, but the ſtrongeſt With and againſt whom. and ſtouteſt courages. Now there is not any thing that giueth more heart and courage, than neceſſitie, an enemie inuincible. And therefore I ſay, that a man muſt neuer fight with ſuch as are deſperate. This agreeth with the former, that is, not to hazard a battell within his owne countrie, for an enemie being entered fighteth deſperatly, knowing if he be vanquiſhed, he cannot eſcape death, hauing neither fortreſſe, nor any place of retrait or ſuccor, vnde neceſſitas in loco, ſpes in virtute, ſalus ex victoria.
                  
                  10 The maner of fight that brings beſt aduantage with it, How. whatſoeuer it be, is the beſt; whether it be ſurpriſe, ſubtiltie,

cloſe and couert faining to feare, to the end he may draw the enemie, and catch him in his ginne, ſpe victoriae inducere, vt vincantur; to watch and marke his ouerſights and faults, that he may the better preuaile againſt him, and giue the charge.
                  For ranged battels theſe things are required. The firſt and principall is a good and comely ordering of his people. 2. A 36 Rules for ranged battailes.
                      ſupplie and ſuccor alwaies readie, but cloſe and hidden, to the end that comming ſuddainly and vnawares, it may aſtoniſh and confound the enemie. For all ſuddaine things though they be vaine and ridiculous, bring feare and aſtoniſhment with them.
                  Primi in omnibus praelijs oculi vincuntur & aures.
                  3. To be firſt in the field, and ranged in battell ray. This a Generall doth with ſo much the more eaſe, and it much increaſeth the courage of his ſouldiers, and abateth his enemies: for this is to make himſelfe the aſſailant, who hath alwaies more heart than the defendant. 4. A beawtifull, gallant, bold, reſolued countenance of the Generall and other leaders. 5. An oration to encourage the ſouldiers, and to lay open vnto them the honor, commoditie and ſuertie that there is in valor; That diſhonor, danger, death, are the reward of cowards; minus timoris minus periculi, audaciam pro muro eſſe, effugere mortem, qui eam contemnit.
                  
                  Being come to hand-ſtrokes, if the army wauer, the Generall muſt hold himſelfe firm, do the dutie of a reſolute Leader, 37 Hauing ioyned battaile.
                      & braue man at armes, runne before his aſtoniſhed ſouldiers, ſtay them recoyling, thruſt himſelfe into the throng, make all to know, both his owne, and his enemies, that his head, his hand, his tongue trembleth not.
                  And if it fall out that he haue the better, and the field be his, he muſt ſtay and with-hold them, leſt they ſcatter and disband themſelues, by too obſtinate a purſuit of the vanquiſhed. That is to be feared, which hath many times come to paſſe, that the vanquiſhed gathering heart, make vſe of deſpaire, gather to a head, and vanquiſh the vanquiſhers, for this neceſſitie is a violent ſchoole-miſtris. Clauſis ex deſperatione eneſcit audacia: & cùm ſpei nihil eſt, ſumit arma formido. It is better to giue paſſage vnto them, and to remoue all lets and hindrances that may ſtay their flight. Much leſſe muſt a Generall

ſuffer himſelfe or his men to attend the booty, or to be allured therby ouer haſtily, if he be conqueror. He muſt vſe his victorie wiſely, leſt the abuſe thereof turne to his own harme. And therfore he muſt not defile it with cruelty, depriuing the enemy of all hope, for there is danger in it. Ignauiam neceſſitas acuit; ſaepe deſperatio ſpei cauſſa eſt, grauiſſim ſunt morſus irritatae neceſſitatis. But contrarilie, he muſt leaue ſome occaſion of hope, and ouerture vnto peace, not ſpoiling and ranſaking the country which he hath conquered; for fury and rage are dangerous beaſts. Againe he muſt not ſtaine his victorie with inſolency, but carie himſelfe modeſtly and alwaies remember the perpetuall flux and reflux of this world, & that alternatiue reuolution, wherby from aduerſity ſpringeth proſperity, from proſperity aduerſity. There are ſome that cannot digeſt a good fortune, Magnam foelicitatem concoquere non poſſunt. fortuna vttrea eſt, tunc cum ſplendet frangitur: O infidam fiduciam! & ſaepe victor victus. If he be vanquiſhed, wiſdome is neceſſarie well to waigh and conſider of his loſſe, it is ſottiſhneſſe to make himſelfe beleeue that it is nothing, and to feed himſelfe with vaine hopes, to ſuppreſſe the newes of the ouerthrow. Hee muſt conſider thereof as it is at the worſt, otherwiſe how ſhall he remedie it? And afterwards with a good courage hope for better fortunes, renew his forces, make a new leuy, ſeeke new ſuccours, put good and ſtrong garriſons into his ſtrongeſt places. And though the heauens bee contrary vnto him, as ſometimes they ſeeme to oppoſe themſelues to holy and iuſt armes; it is neuertheleſſe neuer forbidden to die in the bed of honour, which is farre better than to liue in diſhonour.
                  And thus wee haue ended the ſecond head of this ſubiect, which is to make warre, except one ſcruple that remaineth: 38 A queſtion of the ſtratagems of warre.
                      That is to ſay, whether it bee lawfull to vſe ſubtilty, policie, ſtratagems in warre. There bee ſome that hold it negatiuely, that it is vnworthy men of honour and vertue, reiecting that excellent ſaying, Dolus, an virtus quis in hoſte requirat? Alexander would take no aduantages of the obſcurity of the night, ſaying, that he liked not of theeuing victories, malo me fortunae pigeat, quàm victoriae pudeat. So likewiſe the firſt Romanes ſent their ſchoolemaſter to the Phaliſcians; to Pyrrhus his traiterous Phyſitian, making profeſſion of vertue, diſauowing

thoſe of their country that did otherwiſe, reprouing the ſubtilty of the Greekes and Aphricanes, and teaching that true victorie is by vertue, quae ſalua fide & integra dignitate paratur, that which is gotten by wit and ſubtiltie, is neither generous, nor honorable, nor ſecure. The vanquiſhed hold not themſelues to be well vanquiſhed, non virtute, ſed occaſione & arte ducis ſe victos rati: ergo non fraude neque occultis ſed palam & armatum hoſtes ſuos vlciſci. Now all this is well ſaid and true, but to be vnderſtood in two caſes, in priuat quarrels, and againſt priuat enemies, or where faith is not giuen, or a league and alliance made. But without theſe two caſes, that is to ſay, in warre, and without the preiudice of a mans faith, it is permitted by any means whatſoeuer to conquer the enemy that is alreadie condemned. This, beſides the iudgement of the greateſt warriers (who contrarily haue preferred the victorie Polyb. lib. Plut. in Marcell. Vlp. lib. 1. de Prob. Aug. quaeſt. ſup. Ioſue. gotten by occaſion, and by ſubtile ſtratagems, before that which is woon by open force; whereupon to that they haue ordained an oxe for a ſacrifice, to this onlie a cocke) is the opinion of that great Chriſtian Doctor, Cum iuſtum bellum ſuſcipitur, vt aperte pugnet quis, aut ex inſidijs, nihil ad iuſtitiam intereſt. Warre hath naturallie reaſonable priuiledges, to the preiudice of reaſon. In time and place it is permitted to make vſe and aduantage of the ſottiſhneſſe of an enemy, as well as of his weakneſſe or idleneſſe.
                  Let vs come to the third head of this militarie matter, 39 The third head of this military ſubiect, to finiſh war.
                      more ſhort and pleaſing than the reſt, which is to finiſh the warre by peace. The word is ſweet, the thing pleaſant, and good in all reſpects, pax optima rerum quas homini nouiſſe datum eſt, Pax vna triumphis innumeris potior, and verie commodious to both parts, the conquerors and conquered. But firſt Of peace in reſpect of the vanquiſhed. to the vanquiſhed, who are the weaker: to whom I doe firſt giue this counſell, to continue armed, to make ſhew of ſecuritie, aſſurance and reſolution. For he that deſireth peace, muſt be alwaies readie for war, wherupon it hath beene ſaid, That treatiſes of peace do well and happily ſucceed when they are concluded vnder a buckler. But this peace muſt bee honeſt, and vpon reaſonable conditions: otherwiſe, though it bee ſaid, that a baſe peace is more profitable than a iuſt war, yet it is better to die freelie and with honour, than to ſerue diſhonourablie.

And againe it muſt be pure and free, without fraud and hypocriſie, which finiſheth the warre, deferreth it not, pace ſuſpecta tutius bellum. Neuertheleſſe in times of neceſſitie a man muſt accomodate himſelfe as he may. When a pilot feareth a ſhipwracke, hee caſteth himſelfe into the ſea to ſaue himſelfe; and manie times it ſucceedeth well, when a man committeth himſelfe to the diſcretion of a generous aduerſarie. Victores qui ſunt alto animo ſecundae res in miſerationem ex ira vertunt. To the vanquiſhers I giue this counſell, that they In reſpect of the vanquiſhers. be not ouer hardly perſwaded to peace, for though perhaps it be leſſe profitable vnto them, than to the vanquiſhed, yet ſome commoditie it bringeth, for the continuance of warre is odious and troubleſome. And Lycurgus forbiddeth to make warre often againſt one and the ſame enemies, becauſe they learne thereby to defend thēſelues, & in the end to aſſaile too. The bitings of dying beaſts are mortall. Fractis rebus violentior vltima virtus. And againe the iſſue is alwaies vncertaine, Melior tutiorque certa pax ſperata victoria, illa in tua, haec in decrum manu eſt. And many times the poiſon lieth in the taile, and the more fauourable fortune is, the more it is to bee feared: Nemo ſe tuto diu periculis offerre tam crebris poteſt. But it is truly honorable, it is a glory hauing a victorie in his hands, Honorable. to be facill and eaſily perſwaded vnto peace: it is to make knowen that he vndertaketh a warre iuſtly, and doth wiſely finiſh it. And contrarilie, to refuſe it, and afterwards by ſome ill ſucceſſe to repent the refuſall, it is very diſhonourable, and will be ſaid that glory hath vndone him. Hee refuſed peace, S. Bernard. and would haue honour, and ſo hath loſt them both. But hee muſt offer a gratious and a debonaire peace, to the end it may be durable. For if it be ouer rough and cruell, at the firſt aduantage that may be offered, the vanquiſhed will reuolt. Si bonam de deritis, fidam & perpetuam, ſi malam, haud diuturnam. 
                     Liuius.
                  
                  It is as great greatneſſe to ſhew as much lenitie towards the ſuppliant vanquiſhed, as valour againſt the enemie. The Romanes did verie well put this in practiſe, and it did them no harme.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IIII. Of that prudence which is required in difficult affaires and ill accidents, publicke and priuate. THE PREFACE.
                  HAuing ſpoken of that politicke prudence required in a ſoueraigne, for the cariage of himſelfe and his good gouernment, wee will heere ſeuerally ſpeake of that prudence that is neceſſarie for the preſeruation of himſelfe, and the remedying of thoſe affaires, and difficult and dangerous accidents which may happen either to himſelfe, or his particular ſubiects.
                  Firſt theſe affaires and accidents are very diuers: they are either publike or particular: either to come, and ſuch as threaten The diuiſion of this matter by diſtinction of the accidents. vs, or preſent and preſſing vs: the one are onely doubtfull and ambiguous, the other dangerous and important becauſe of their violence. And they that are the greater and more difficult, are either ſecret and hid; and they are two, that is to ſay, conſpiracy againſt the perſon of the Prince, or the ſtate, and treaſon againſt the places and companies: or manifeſt and open, and theſe are of diuers ſorts. For they bee either without forme of warre and certaine order, as popular commotions for ſmall and light occaſions, factions and leagues betweene ſubiects, of the one againſt the other, in ſmall and great number, great or little; ſeditions of the people againſt the prince or magiſtrate, rebellion againſt the authoritie and head of the Prince: or they are ripe and formed into a warre, and are called ciuill warres: which are of ſo many kindes, as the aboue named troubles and commotions, which are the cauſes, foundations and ſeedes of them: but haue growen, and are come into conſequence and continuance. Of them all wee will ſpeake diſtinctly, and wee will giue aduice and counſell, as well to ſoueraignes, as particular perſons, great and ſmall, how to carrie themſelues wiſely therein.
                  
                     
                     I. Of the euils and accidents that doe threaten vs.
                     IN thoſe croſſe and contrarie accidents, whereunto wee are ſubiect, there are two diuers maners of cariage: & they may be both good, according to the diuers natures both of the accidents, and of thoſe to whom they happen. The one is ſtrongly to conteſt, and to oppoſe a mans ſelfe againſt the accident, to remoue all things that may hinder the diuerting thereof, or at leaſt to blunt the point, to dead the blow thereof, either to eſcape it, or to force it. This requireth a ſtrong and obſtinate mind, and hath need of hard and painfull care. The other is incontinently to take and receiue theſe accidents at the woorſt, and to reſolue himſelfe to beare them ſweetly and patiently, and in the meane time to attend peaceablie whatſoeuer ſhall happen, without tormenting himſelfe, or hindering it. The former ſtudieth how to range the accidents; this himſelfe. That ſeemeth to be more couragious; this more ſure. That continueth in ſuſpence, is toſſed betweene feare and hope; this putteth himſelfe into ſafetie, and lieth ſo low that he cannot fall lower. The loweſt march is the ſureſt, and the ſeat of conſtancie. That laboureth to eſcape; this to ſuffer: and many times this maketh the better bargaine. Often times it falleth out, that there is greater inconuenience and loſſe in pleading and contending, than in loſing; in flying for ſafety, than in ſuffering. A couetous man tormenteth himſelfe more than a poore, a zealous than a cuckold. In the former, prudence is more requiſite, becauſe hee is in action; in this patience. But what hindreth, but that a man may performe both in order: and that where prudence and vigilancie can do nothing, there patience may ſucceed? Doubtleſſe in publike euils a man muſt aſſay the firſt, which ſuch are bound to do, as haue the charge and can do it; in particular let euerie one chuſe the beſt.
                  
                  
                     II. Of euils and accidents preſent, preſſing, and extreame.
                     THe proper meanes to lighten euils, and to ſweeten paſſions, is not for a man to oppoſe himſelfe, for oppoſition

enflameth and increaſeth them much more. A man by the iealouſie of contention and contradiction ſharpneth and ſtirreth the euill: but it is either in diuerting them elſe-where, as Phyſitians vſe to doe, who knowing not how to purge, and wholly to cure a diſeaſe, ſeeke to diuert it into ſome other part leſſe dangerous, which muſt be done ſweetly and inſenſiblie. This is an excellent remedie againſt all euils, and which is practiſed in all things, if a man marke it well, whereby we are made to ſwallow the ſowreſt morſels, yea death it ſelfe, and that inſenſiblie: abducendus animus eſt ad alia ſtudia, curas, negotia, loci denique mutatione tanquam aegroti non conualeſcentes ſaepe curandus eſt. As a man counſelleth thoſe that are to paſſe ouer ſome fearefull deepe place, either to ſhut or to diuert their eies. When a man hath occaſion to launce a ſore in a child, he flattereth him, and withdraweth his mind to ſome other matter. A man muſt practiſe the experiment and ſubtiltie of Hypomenes, who being to runne with Atlanta, a damſell of excellent beautie, and to loſe his life if he loſt the goale, to marrie the damſell if he woon it, furniſhed himſelfe with three faire apples of gold, which at diuers times he let fall, to ſtay the courſe of the damſell whileſt ſhe tooke them vp, and ſo by diuerting hir, get the aduantage of hir, and gained hir ſelfe: ſo if the conſideration of ſome preſent vnhappie accident, or the memorie of any that is paſt do much afflict vs, or ſome violent paſſion, which a man cannot tame, do moue and torment vs, we muſt change and turne our thoughts to ſome thing elſe, and ſubſtitute vnto our ſelues ſome other accident and paſſion leſſe dangerous. If a man cannot vanquiſh it, he muſt eſcape it, goe out of the way, deale cunning lie, or weaken and diſſolue it, with other thoughts and alienations of the mind, yea breake it into many pieces; and all this by diuerſions. The other aduice, in the laſt and more dangerous extremities that are in a maner paſt hope, is a little to caſt downe the head, to lend vnto the blow, to yeeld vnto neceſſitie, for there is great danger, that by too much obſtinacie in not relenting at all, a man giueth occaſion to violence to trample all vnder foot. It is better to make the lawes to will that they can, ſince they cannot do that they would. It was a reproch vnto Cato to haue been ouer-rough in the ciuill warres of his

time, and that he rather ſuffered the common-weale to runne into all extremities, than ſuccored it by tying himſelfe ouerſtrictlie to the lawes. Contrarily Epaminondas in a neceſſitie, continued his charge beyond his time, though the law vpon the paine of his life did prohibit him: and Philopemenes is commended, that being borne to commaund, he did not only know how to gouerne according to the lawes, but alſo command the lawes themſelues, when publike neceſſitie did require it. A Leader at a neceſſitie muſt ſtoupe a little, applie himſelfe to the occaſion, turne the table of the law, if not take it away, goe a little out of the way, that he loſe not all; for this is prudence, which is no way contrarie either to reaſon or iuſtice.
                  
                  
                     III. Doubtfull and ambiguous affaires.
                     IN things doubtfull, where the reaſons are ſtrong on all parts, and the inabilitie to ſee and chooſe that which is moſt commodious, bringeth with it vncertaintie and perplexitie, the beſt and ſafeſt way is to leane to that part where there is moſt honeſtie and iuſtice: for notwithſtanding it fall not out happily, yet there ſhall alwaies remaine an inward content, and an outward glorie to haue choſen the better part. Beſides, a man knoweth not, if he had taken the contrarie part, what would haue hapned, and whether he had eſcaped his deſtinie. When a man doubteth which is the better and the ſhorter way, let him take the ſtreighter.
                  
                  
                     IIII. Difficult and dangerous affaires.
                     IN difficult affaires, as in agreements, to be ouer-carefull to make them ouer-ſure, is to make them leſſe firme, leſſe aſſured, becauſe a man employeth therein more time, more people are hindred, more things, more clauſes are mingled and interpoſed, than are needfull, from whence ariſe all differences. Adde heereunto, that a man ſeemeth heereby to ſcorne fortune, and to exempt himſelfe from hir iuriſdiction, which cannot be, vim ſuorum ingruentem refringi non vult. It is better to make them briefly and quietly with a little danger, than to be ſo exact and curious.
                     
                        
In dangerous affaires a man muſt be wiſe and couragious, he muſt foreſee and know all dangers, make them neither leſſe nor greater than they are by want of iudgement, thinke that they will not all happen, or ſhall not all haue their effects, that a man may auoid many by induſtrie or by diligence, or otherwiſe; what they are from whom he may receiue aid and ſuccour, and thereupon take courage, grow reſolute, not fainting for them in an honeſt enterpriſe. A wiſe man is couragious, for he thinketh, diſcourſeth, and prepareth himſelfe for all, and a couragious man muſt likewiſe be wiſe.
                  
                  
                     V. Coniurations.
                     VVE are come now to the greateſt, moſt important, and dangerous accidents, which we will handle in order, expreſly deſcribing them one after the other, giuing afterwards in euery one of them ſome aduiſements fit for a ſoueraigne, and in the end for euery particular perſon.
                     Coniuration is a conſpiracie and enterpriſe of one or many againſt the perſon of the prince or the ſtate; It is a dangerous 1 The decſription.
                         thing hardly auoided or remedied, becauſe it is cloſe and hidden. How ſhould a man defend himſelfe againſt a couert enemie, ſuch a one as carieth the countenance of a moſt officious friend? How can a man know the will and thoughts of another? And againe, he that contemneth his owne life, is maſter of the life of another, contemnit omnes ille, qui mortem prius. In ſuch ſort that the prince is expoſed to the mercie of a priuat man, whoſoeuer he be.
                     
                        Machiauell ſetteth downe at large, how a man ſhould frame and order, and conduct a conſpiracie; wee, how it may be broken, hindered, preuented.
                     1 The counſels and remedies heereupon are, firſt a priuie ſearch and countermine by faithfull and diſcreet perſons fit 2 Remedies and aduiſements.
                         for ſuch a purpoſe, who are the eies and eares of the prince; Theſe muſt diſcouer whatſoeuer is ſaid and done, eſpeciallie by the principall officers. Conſpiratours do willinglie heere and there defame the prince, or lend their eares to thoſe, that blame and accuſe him. Their diſcourſe and conference then touching the prince muſt be knowne, and a prince muſt not

ſticke to be bountifull in his rewards and immunities to ſuch diſcouerers: But yet he muſt not ouer-lightlie giue credit to all reports; He muſt lend his eare to all, not his beliefe, and diligentlie examine, to the end he oppreſſe not the innocent, and ſo purchaſe vnto himſelfe the hatred and hard ſpeech of the people.
                     2 The ſecond aduice is, that he endeuor by clemencie and innocencie to winne the loue of all, euen of his enemies, fidiſſima custodia principis innocentia. By offending no man, a man taketh a courſe to be offended by none: And it is to ſmall purpoſe for a man to ſhew his power by wrongs and outrages, malè vim ſuam potestas aliorum contumelijs experitur.
                     
                     3 The third is to make a good ſhew, to ſhew a good countenance according to the accuſtomed maner, not changing or depreſſing any thing; and to publiſh in all places, that he is well perſwaded of thoſe meetings and aſſemblies that men appoint, and to make them beleeue that he hath them not in the wind, that he deſcrieth not their plots and purpoſes. This was an experiment which Denys the tyrant made good vſe of againſt an enemie of his, which coſt him deere.
                     4 The fourth is to attend without aſtoniſhment & trouble whatſoeuer may happen vnto him. Caeſar did well put in practiſe theſe three latter meanes, but not the firſt. It is better, ſaith he, to die once, than to liue, nay to die alwaies in a trance, and a continuall feuer of an accident, which is paſt remedie, and muſt be wholly referred vnto God. They that haue taken another courſe, and haue endeuored to preuent it by puniſhments and reuenge, haue very ſeldome found it the beſt way, and haue not for all that eſcaped the danger, as many Romane Emperours can well witneſſe.
                     But the conſpiracie being diſcouered, the truth found out, what is to be done? The conſpiratours muſt rigorouſlie be 3 Puniſhment of conſpirators, and the aduice thereupon.
                         puniſhed: To ſpare ſuch people, is cruelly to betray the wealpublike. They are enemies to the libertie, good, and peace of all: Iuſtice requireth it. But yet wiſdome and diſcretion is neceſſarie heerein; and a man muſt not alwaies carie himſelfe after one and the ſame maner. Sometimes he muſt execute ſuddainely, eſpeciallie if the number of the conſpiratours be ſmall. But whether the number be little or great, he muſt not

ſeeke by tortures to know the confederates (if otherwiſe and ſecretlie he may know them, and to make as though he knew them not, is good) for a man ſeeketh that which he would not find. It is ſufficient that by the puniſhment of a ſmall number good ſubiects are conteined in their dutie, and they diuerted from their attempts, that either are not, or thinke not themſelues bewrayed. To know all by tortures doth perhaps ſtirre vp mens hearts againſt him. Sometimes he muſt delay the puniſhment, but yet neuer be ſlow in procuring his ſafetie. But yet the conſpiratours may be ſuch, and the treaſon diſcouered at ſuch a time, that a man muſt not diſſemble, and to puniſh them inſtantlie is to play and loſe all. The beſt way of all others is, to preuent the conſpiracie, to fruſtrate it, faining neuertheleſſe not to know the conſpiratours, but ſo to cary himſelfe, as if he would prouide for another thing, as the Carthaginians did to Hannon their Captaine, optimum & ſolum ſaepe 
                        Iuſtin. li. 1. Tacit. 
                        inſidiarum remedium, ſi non intelligantur. And which is more, a prince muſt ſometimes pardon, eſpeciallie if he be a great man, that hath deſerued well of the prince and ſtate, and to whom they are both in ſome ſort bound, whoſe children, parents, friends, are mightie. For what ſhould he do? How ſhould he breake this band? If with ſafetie he may, let him pardon, or at leaſt leſſen the puniſhment. Clemencie in this caſe is ſometimes not only glorious to a prince, nil glorioſius principe impunè laeſo; but it helpeth much for ſafetie to come, diuerteth others from the like deſignments, and worketh either ſhame in them or repentance; the example of Augustus towards Cinna is very excellent.
                  
                  
                     VI. Treaſon.
                     TReaſon is a ſecret conſpiracy or enterpriſe againſt a place, or a troup or company: it is as a coniuration, a ſecret 1 Deſcription.
                         euill, dangerous and hardly auoided: for many times a traitour is in the middle and boſome of the company, or place which he ſelleth and betraieth. To this vnhappie myſterie are willingly ſubiect, ſuch as are couetous, light ſpirits, hypocrites: and this is commonly in them, that they make a faire ſhew of truſt and fidelity, they commend and keepe it

carefully in ſmall matters, and by that meanes endeuouring to couer, they diſcouer themſelues. It is the marke whereby to know them.
                     The aduiſements are almoſt the ſame, that belong to coniurations: except in the puniſhments, which heere muſt bee 2 Aduiſements and remedies.
                         ſpeedie, grieuous, and irremiſſible: for they are a kinde of people ill borne and bred, incorrigible, pernicious to the world, whom to pitie, it is crueltie.
                  
                  
                     VII. Commotions of the people.
                     THere are many ſorts, according to the diuerſitie of the  cauſes, perſons, maner and continuance, as wee ſhall ſee heereafter: faction, confederacie, ſedition, tyrannie, ciuill warres. But we will ſpeake heere ſimplie and in generall of 2 Aduiſements and remedies.
                         thoſe that are raiſed in a heat, as ſudden tumults, that endure not long. The aduiſements and remedies are to procure ſome one or other to ſpeake, and ſhew himſelfe vnto them, that is of authoritie, vertue, and ſingular reputation, eloquent, hauing grauitie mingled with grace, and induſtrie with ſmooth ſpeech to winne the people: for at the preſence of ſuch a man, as at a ſudden lightning, the people grow calme and quiet:
                     
                        Veluti magno in populo cum ſaepe coorta
                        Seditio eſt, ſaeuitque animis ignobile vulgus
                        Iam
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            faces, & ſaxa volant: furor arma miniſtrat.
                        Tum pietate grauem, ac meritis ſi fortè virum quem
                        Conſpexere, ſilent, arrectiſque auribus adſtant.
                        Ille regit dictis animos, & pectora mulcet.
                     
                     Sometimes the captaine himſelfe muſt vndertake this buſineſſe. But it muſt be done with an open front, a ſtrong aſſurance, hauing his mind free and pure from all imagination of death, and the worſt that may happen vnto him: for to goe amongſt them with a fearefull, and vnconſtant countenance, with flatterie and humble cariage, is to wrong himſelfe, and to doe little good. This Caeſar did excellently put in practiſe vpon thoſe mutinous legions and armies that roſe vp againſt him.
                     
                        
                           
—ſtetit aggere fulti
                        Ceſpitis intrepidus vultu, meruit
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            timeri
                        Nil metuens.—
                     
                     And Auguſtus did as much to his Actiaque legions, ſaith Tacitus. There are then two meanes to quiet and appeaſe a moued and furious people: the one is by rough vſage, and pure authority and reaſon. This is the better and more noble, and becommeth a captaine, if it ſtand him vpon; but yet he muſt take heed how he do it, as hath beene ſaid. The other more ordinarie is by flatterie and faire ſpeeches, for hee muſt not make an open reſiſtance. Sauage beaſts are neuer tamed with blowes: and therefore a man muſt not be ſparing of good words, and faire promiſes. In this caſe the wiſe haue permitted a man to lie, as men vſe to doe with children and ſicke folke. Heerein Pericles was excellent, who woone the people, by the eies, the eares, and the bellie, that is to ſay, by ſhewes, comedies, feaſts, and heereby did what he liſt. This meanes more baſe and ſeruile, but yet neceſſarie, muſt be practiſed by him whom the captaine ſendeth, as Menenius Agrippa did at Rome. For if he thinke to winne them by maine force, when they are without the bounds of reaſon, no way yeelding vnto them, as Appius, Corcolanus, Cato, Phocion endeuoured to doe, he is miſtaken, and deceiueth himſelfe.
                  
                  
                     VIII. Faction and confederacy.
                     FAction or confedracie is a complot and aſſociation, of one Deſcription. againſt another betweene the ſubiects, whether it bee betweene the great or the ſmall, in great numbers or little. It ariſeth ſometimes from the hatreds that are betweene priuate men and certaine families, but for the moſt part from ambition (the plague of ſtates) euerie one coueting the firſt ranke. That which falleth out betweene great perſonages, is more pernitious. There are ſome that ſticke not to ſay, that it is in ſome ſort profitable for a ſoueraigne, and it doth the ſelfe ſame ſeruice to a common-weale that brawles of ſeruants doe in families, ſaith Cato: But that cannot be true, except it bee in tyrants, who feare leſt their ſubiects ſhould agree too well, or in ſmall and light quarrels betweene cities, or betweene ladies

of the Court to know newes. But not important factions, which muſt bee extinguiſhed in their firſt birth with their markes, names, habiliments, which are many times the ſeeds of villanous effects, witneſſe that great deflagration, and thoſe bloudy murthers happened in Conſtantinople, for the colours of greene and blew, vnder Iuſtinian. The aduiſements heereupon are, that if the factions be betwixt two great perſonages, 2 The aduiſements and remedies.
                         the Prince muſt endeuour by good words or threatnings to make peace and atonement betwixt them, as Alexander the Great did betwixt Epheſtion and Craterus, and Archidamus betwixt two of his friends. If he cannot doe it, let him appoint arbitrators, ſuch as are free from ſuſpition and paſſion. The like he ſhould do, if the faction be betwixt diuers ſubiects, or cities and communities. And if it fall out that it be neceſſarie that hee ſpeake himſelfe, hee muſt doe it with counſell, being called, to auoid the malice and hatred of thoſe that are condemned. If the faction be betweene great multitudes, and that it be ſo ſtrong, that it cannot be appeaſed by iuſtice, the prince is to employ his force for the vtter extinguiſhment thereof. But he muſt take heed that he cary himſelfe indifferent, not more affectioned to one than to another; for therein there is great danger, and many haue vndone themſelues: And to ſay the truth, it is vnworthie the greatnes of a prince, and he that is maſter of all to make himſelfe a companion to the one, and an enemie to the other: And if ſome muſt needs be puniſhed, let it light vpon thoſe that are the principall heads, and let that ſuffice.
                  
                  
                     IX. Sedition.
                     SEdition is a violent commotion of a multitude againſt a 1 The deſcription.
                         prince or a magiſtrate. It ariſeth and groweth either from oppreſſion or feare: For they that haue committed any great offence, feare puniſhment; others thinke & feare they ſhalbe oppreſſed, and both of them by the apprehenſion of an euill, are ſtirred to ſedition to preuent the blow. It likewiſe ſpringeth from a licentious libertie, from want and neceſſitie, in ſuch ſort, that men fit for this buſines, are ſuch as are indebted, malecontents, and men ill accommodated in all things,

light perſons, and ſuch as are blowen vp, and feare iuſtice. Theſe kind of people cannot continue long in peace: peace is warre vnto them, they cannot ſleepe but in the middeſt of ſedition, they are not in liberty but by the meanes of confuſion. The better to bring their purpoſes to paſſe, they conferre together in ſecret, they make great complaints, vſe doubtfull ſpeeches, afterwards ſpeake more openly, ſeeme zealous of their libertie, and of the publike good, and caſe of the people, and by theſe faire pretences they draw many vnto them. The aduiſements and remedies are, Firſt the ſelfeſame that ſerued 2 Aduiſements and remedies.
                         for popular commotions, to cauſe ſuch to ſhew themſelues and to ſpeake vnto them, that are fit for ſuch a purpoſe, as hath been ſaid. Secondly, if that profit not, he muſt arme and  fortifie himſelfe, and for all that, not proceed againſt them, but  rather giue them leaſure and time to put water in their wine, to the wicked to repent, to the good to reunite themſelues. Time is a great Phyſitian, eſpeciallie in people more ready to mutine and rebell, than to fight. Ferocior plebs ad rebellandum, quàm bellandū: tentare magis quàm tueri libertatem. Thirdly, he muſt in the mean time trie all means to ſhake & diſſolue them,  both by hope and feare; for theſe are the 2. waies, ſpem offer, metum intende. Fourthly, endeuour to diſioine them, and to breake the courſe of their intelligence. Fiftly, he muſt winne  and draw vnto him vnder hand, ſome few amongſt them by  faire promiſes and ſecret rewards, whereby ſome of them withdrawing themſelues from their company, and comming vnto him, others remaining with them to ſerue him and to giue intelligence of their cariages and purpoſes, they may the better be brought a ſleepe, and their heat be ſomewhat allaied. Sixtly, to draw and winne the reſt, by yeelding vnto  them ſome part of that which they demand, and that with faire promiſes and doubtfull tearmes. It ſhall afterwards bee eaſie iuſtlie to reuoke that, which they haue iniuſtlie by ſedition extorted, Irrita facies quae per ſeditionem expreſſerint, and to make all whole with lenitie and clemencie. Laſtly, if they returne vnto reaſon and obedience, and become honeſt men,  they muſt be handled gentlie, and a man muſt be contented with the chaſtiſement and correction of ſome few of the principall authours and firebrands, without any further inquirie

into the reſt of the confederates, that all may thinke themſelues in ſafety and in grace and fauour.
                  
                  
                     X. Tyranny and rebellion.
                     TYrannie, that is to ſay, a violent rule or domination againſt the lawes and cuſtomes, is many times the cauſe The deſcription. of great and publike commotions, from whence commeth rebellion, which is an inſurrection of the people againſt the Prince, becauſe of his tyrannie, to the end they may driue him away and plucke him from his throne. And it differeth from ſedition in this, they will not acknowledge the Prince for their maſter; whereas ſedition proceedeth not ſo farre, being raiſed only from a diſcontent of the gouernment, complaining and deſiring an amendment thereof. Now this tyranny is pactiſed by people ill bred, cruell, who loue wicked men, turbulent ſpirits, tale-bearers, hate and feare men of honeſty and honour, quibus ſemper aliena virtus formidoloſa, nobilitas, opes, omiſſi geſtique honores pro crimine, ob virtutes certiſſimum exitium: & non minus ex magna fama quàm mala. But they cary their puniſhment with them: being hated of all, and enemies to all. They liue in continuall feare and apprehenſion of terrour, they ſuſpect all things: they are pricked and gauled inwardly in their conſciences, and at laſt die an euill death, and that verie ſoone; For an old tyrant is ſeldome ſeene.
                     The aduiſements and remedies in this cafe, ſhall bee ſet downe at large heereafter in his proper place. The counſels  are reduced to two, at his entrance to ſtay and hinder him leſt he get the maſtrie; being enſtalled and acknowledged, to Chap. 16. Plutarch. in Bruto. ſuffer and obey him. It is better to tolerate him, than to moue ſedition and ciuill warre, peius, deteriuſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            tyrannide, ſiue iniuſto imperio bellum ciuile, for there is nothing gotten by rebelling or ſpurning againſt him, but it rather incenſeth wicked princes and makes them more cruell: Nihil tam exaſperat feruorem vulneris, quàm ferendi impatientia. Modeſtie and obedience allaieth and pacifieth the fierce nature of a prince: for the clemency of a prince, ſaith that great prince Alexander, doth not onely conſiſt in their owne natures, but alſo in the

natures of their ſubiects, who many times by their ill cariage and bad ſpeeches, do prouoke a prince, and make him farre worſe, obſequto mitigantur imperia, & contrà contumaciâ inferiorum lenitatem imperitantis diminui: contumaciam cum pernicie 
                        Curt. Tacit. 
                        quàm obſequium cum ſecuritate malunt.
                     
                  
                  
                     XI. Ciuill warres.
                     VVHen one of theſe forenamed publike commotions, popular inſurrections, faction, ſedition, rebellion, 1 The deſcription.
                         comes to fortifie it ſelfe, and to continue vntill it get an ordinarie traine and forme, it is a ciuill warre: which is no other thing, but a preſſe and conduct of armies by the ſubiects, either amongſt themſelues; and this is a popular commotion, or faction and confederacy: or againſt the prince, the ſtate, the magiſtrate; and this is ſedition or rebellion. Now there is not a miſchiefe more miſerable, nor more ſhamefull, it is a ſea of infelicities. And a wiſe man ſaid very well, That it is not properly warre, but a maladie of the ſtate, a fierie ſickneſſe, and frenſie. And to ſay the truth, hee that is the author thereof, ſhould be put out from the number of men, and baniſhed out of the borders of humane nature. There is no kind of wickedneſſe that it is freed from, impietie and crueltie betweene parents themſelues, murthers with all maner of impunitie, Occidere palam, ignoſcere non niſi fallendo licet, non aetas, non dignitas quenquam protegit, nobilitas cum plebe perit, late
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            vagatur enſis. All kind of diſloialtie, diſcipline aboliſheth, In omne fas, nefaſque auidos aut venales, non ſacro, non prophano abſtinentes. The inferiour and baſeſt ſort, are companions with the beſt. Rheni mihi Caeſar in vndis dux erat, his ſocius. Facinus quos inquinat, aequat. He dareth not to open his mouth, for he is of the ſame profeſſion, though he approoue it not, obnoxijs ducibus & prohibere non auſis. It is a horrible confuſion, Metu ac neceſſitate huc illuc mutantur. To conclude, it is nothing but miſerie. But there is nothing ſo miſerable as the victory. For though it fall into the hands of him that hath the right on his ſide, yet there followeth this inconuenience, that it maketh him inſolent, cruell, inhumane, yea though hee were before of a mild and generous nature. So much doth this inteſtine

warre fleſh a man in bloud, yea, it is a poiſon that conſumeth all humanitie. Neither is it in the power of the captaines to withhold the reſt.
                     There are two cauſes to be conſidered of ciuill warres. The one is ſecret, which as it is neither knowne nor ſeene, ſo it cannot 2 The cauſes.
                         be hindred nor remedied: It is deſtinie, the will of God, who will chaſtiſe or wholly diſpeople a ſtate. In ſe magna ruunt, laetis hunc numina rebus creſcendi poſuere modum. The other is well vnderſtood by the wiſe, and may happily be remedied, if men will, and they to whom it appertaineth ſet to their helping hand. This is the diſſolution and generall corruption of maners, whereby men of no woorth, and that haue nothing to do, endeuor to turne all topſy turuie, to put all into combuſtion, couer their wounds with the hurt of the ſtate, for they loue better to be ouerwhelmed with the publike ruine, than their owne particular. Miſcere cuncta & priuata vulnera reipublicae malis operire: nam ita ſe res habet, vt publicaruina quiſque malit quàm ſua proteri, & idem paſſurus minus conspici.
                     
                     Now the aduiſements and remedies for this miſchiefe of ciuill warre, are to end it as ſoone as may be, which is done by 3 The counſels and remedies.
                         two meanes, agreement, and victorie. The firſt is the better, although it be not ſuch as a man deſireth, time will help the reſt. A man ſometimes muſt ſuffer himſelfe to be deceiued, to the end he may end a ciuill warre, as it is ſaid of Antipater, bellum finire cupienti, opus erat decipi. Victorie is dangerous, becauſe it is to be feared that the conquerour will abuſe it, wherby a tyrannie may enſue. To the end a man may cary himſelfe well heerein, hee muſt quit himſelfe of all the authours of troubles and other commotions, and ſuch like bloud-ſuckers, as well on the one part as the other, whether it be by ſending them farre off with ſome charge, or vnder ſome faire pretext, and ſo diuiding them; or by employing them againſt the ſtranger; and handling the meaner ſort with lenitie and gentlenes.
                  
                  
                     XII. Aduiſements for particular perſons touching the foreſaid publike diuiſions.
                     THus we haue ſeene many kinds of publike troubles and diuiſions, for which and euery one of them, we haue giuen

counſels and remedies in reſpect of the prince, it remaineth that we now giue them for particular perſons. This cannot be determined in a word: there are two queſtions; the Two queſtions. one, whether it be lawfull for an honeſt man to ioyne himſelfe to one part, or to remaine quiet and indifferent; the ſecond, how a man muſt cary himſelfe in both caſes, that is to ſay, being ioyned to one part, or not ioyned to either. Touching the The firſt. firſt point, it is propoſed for ſuch as are free, and are not yet ingaged to any part, for if they be, this firſt queſtion belongs not to them, but we ſend them to the ſecond. This I ſay, becauſe a man may ioyne himſelfe to the one part, not of purpoſe and by election, yea to that part which he approueth not, but only becauſe he findeth himſelfe caried and bound with ſtrong and puiſant bands, which hee may not eaſily breake, which cary with them a ſufficient excuſe, being naturall and equiualent. Now the firſt queſtion hath contrarie reaſons and examples. It ſeemeth on the one ſide, that an honeſt man cannot do better than to keepe himſelfe quiet, for he knoweth not how to betake himſelfe to either part without offence, becauſe all theſe diuiſions are in their owne natures vnlawfull, and cannot be caried, nor ſubſiſt without inhumanitie and iniuſtice. And many good people haue abhorred it, as Aſinius Pollio anſwered Augustus, who deſired him to follow him againſt Marc Anthony. On the other ſide, is it not a thing reaſonable for a man to ioyne with the good, and ſuch as haue right on their ſide? Wiſe Solon hath iudged affirmatiuely, yea roughlie chaſtiſed him, that retireth himſelfe and taketh not part. The profeſſor of vertue, Cato hath likewiſe put it in practice, not being content to take one part, but commaunding it. To determine this doubt, it ſeemeth that men of worth and renowme, who haue both publike charge and credit, and ſufficiencie in the ſtate, may and ought to range themſelues into that part which they ſhall iudge the better: for they muſt not abandon in a tempeſt the ſterne of that ſhip which in a calme ſea they are content to gouerne; eſpeciallie being an honorable part to prouide for the ſafetie of the ſtate; And ſecondly that priuat men, and ſuch as are of a lower degree in the charge of the ſtate, ſhould ſtay and retire themſelues into ſome peaceable and ſecure place, during the diuiſion:

and both of them ſo to cary themſelues as ſhall be ſaid heereafter. Finally touching the choice of the part, ſometimes there is no difficultie, for the one is ſo vniuſt, and ſo vnfortunate, that a man can not with any reaſon ioyne himſelfe thereunto: But at another time the difficultie is very great, and there are many things to be thought of beſides the iuſtice and equitie of the parts.
                     Let vs come to the other point, which concerneth the cariage of all. This is determined in a word, by the counſell and The ſecond. rule of moderation, following the example of Atticus, ſo renowmed for his modeſtie and prudence in ſuch tempeſts, alwaies held to fauour the good part, yet neuer troubling, nor intangling himſelfe with armes, and without the offence of the contrarie part.
                     1. For they that are knowen to be of one part, muſt not be moued ouer-much, but cary themſelues with moderation, not Outragious. Moderate. buſying themſelues with the affaires, if they be not wholly caried and preſſed vnto it, and in this caſe cary themſelues in ſuch order and temperature, that the tempeſt being paſſed ouer their heads, without offence they haue not any part in theſe great diſorders and inſolencies that are committed, but contrarily ſweetning & diuerting them as they can. 2. They that are not ingaged to any part (whoſe condition is ſweeteſt and beſt) though it may be inwardly and in affection they incline rather to one then another, muſt not remaine as neuters, that is, taking no care of the iſſue, and of the ſtate of either Neuters. the one or the other, liuing to themſelues, and as ſpectators in a Theater, feeding vpon the miſeries of other men. Theſe kind of men are odious to all, and at the laſt they runne a dangerous fortune, as we reade of the Thebanes in the warre of Xerxes, and of Iabes Gilead. Neutralitas nec ami
                              •
                           os parit, 
                        Iudg. 21. Tit. Liu. 
                        nec inimicos tollit. Neutraliltie is neither faire nor honeſt, if it be not with conſent of parts, as Caeſar, who held neuters for his friends, contrarie to Pompey, who held them for enemies; or that he be a ſtranger, or ſuch a one, as for his greatnes and dignitie ought not to mingle himſelfe with ſuch a rout, but rather reclaime them if he can, arbitrating, and moderating all. Much leſſe muſt men in ſuch a caſe be inconſtant, wauering mungerels, Prothees, farre more odious than neuters, and offenſiue to Inconstant.
                        
all. But they muſt (continuing partakers in affection if they will, for thought and affection is wholly our owne) be common Common. in their actions, offenſiue to none, officious and gracious to all, complaining of the common infelicitie. Theſe kind of people neither get enemies, nor loſe their friends. They are fit to be mediatours, and louing arbitratours, who are better than Mediators. the common. So that of ſuch as are not partakers, who are foure, two are euill, neuters, and inconſtant perſons; two good, common, and mediatours: but alwaies the one more than the other; as of partakers there are two ſorts, headie outragious, and moderate.
                  
                  
                     XIII. Of priuate troubles and diuiſions.
                     IN priuate diuiſions a man may commodiouſly and loyallie cary himſelfe betweene enemies, if not with equall affection, yet in ſuch a temperate maner, as that he engage not himſelfe ſo much to one more than to another, as that either part may thinke they haue more intereſt in him, and ſo contenting himſelfe with an indifferent meaſure of their grace, report nothing but indifferent things, and ſuch as are knowen, or that ſerue in common to both parts, ſpeaking nothing to the one that he may not ſay to the other in it due time, changing only the accent and the forme thereof.
                  
               
            
            
               Of Iustice, the ſecond vertue.
               
                  CHAP. V. Of Iustice in generall.
                  
                  IVſtice is to giue to euery one that which appertaineth vnto 1 The deſcription.
                      him, to himſelfe firſt, and afterwards to others: ſo that it comprehendeth all the duties and offices of euery particular perſon: which are two-fold, the firſt to himſelfe, the ſecond to another, and they are conteined in that generall commaundement, which is the ſummarie of all iuſtice, Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe, which doth not only ſet downe the dutie of a man towards another in the ſecond place, but it

ſheweth and ruleth it according to the paterne of that dutie and loue he oweth towards himſelfe: for as the Hebrews ſay, a man muſt begin charitie with himſelfe.
                  The beginning then of all iuſtice, the firſt and moſt ancient commaundement, is that of reaſon ouer ſenſualitie. Before a 2 The firſt and originall iustice.
                      man can well commaund others, he muſt learne to commaund himſelfe, yeelding vnto reaſon the power of commaunding, and ſubduing the appetite, & making it plaint to obedience. This is the firſt originall, inward, proper, and moſt beautifull iuſtice that may be. This commaund of the Spirit ouer the brutall and ſenſuall part, from whence the paſſions do ariſe, is compared to an eſquire or horſeman, who by reaſon that he keepeth his horſe and mounteth him often, and is euer in the ſaddle, he turneth and manageth him at his pleaſure.
                  To ſpeake of that iuſtice which is outwardly practiſed and with another, we muſt firſt know that there is a two-fold 3 The distinction of iustice.
                      iuſtice; the one naturall, vniuerſall, noble, philoſophicall; the other after a ſort artificiall, particular, politike, made and reſtrained to the neceſſitie of policies and ſtates; That hath better rules, is more firme, pure and beautifull, but it is out of vſe, vnprofitable to the world ſuch as it is; Veri iuris germanaeque iustitiae ſolidam & expreſſam effigiem nullam tenemus; vmbris & imaginibus vtimur; is not in a maner capable thereof, as hath been ſaid. That is the rule of Polycletus, inflexible, inuariable. This is more looſe and flexible accommodating it ſelfe to humane weaknes, and vulgar neceſſitie. It is the leaden Lesbian rule, which yeeldeth & bendeth it ſelfe as there is need, and as the times, perſons, affaires, & accidents do require. This permitteth vpon a neceſſitie, and approueth many things, which that wholly reiecteth and condemneth. It hath many vices lawfull, and many good actions vnlawfull. That reſpecteth wholly and purely reaſon, honeſtie; This profit, ioyning it as much as may be with honeſtie. Of that, which is but an Idea and in contemplation we ſhall not need to ſpeake.
                  The vſuall iuſtice, and which is practiſed in the world, is firſt two-fold, that is to ſay, equall, bound, and reſtrained to 4 Iustice in practiſe diſtinguiſhed.
                      the tearmes of the law; according to which iudges and magiſtrates are to proceede: the other iuſt and conſcionable, which not enthralling it ſelfe to the words of the law, marcheth

more freelie, according to the exegencie of the caſe, yea ſometimes againſt the words of the law. Now to ſpeake better, it handleth and ruleth the law as need requireth: And therefore ſaith a wiſe man, the lawes themſelues and iuſtice haue neede to be ordered and handled iuſtlie, that is to ſay, with equitie, quae expoſitio & emendatiolegis eſt, exponit ſenſum, emendat defectum. This is the fine floure of iuſtice, which is in the hand of thoſe that iudge in ſoueraigntie. Againe to ſpeake more particularlie, there is a two-fold iuſtice; the one commutatiue, betwixt priuat men, which is handled and practiſed by Arithmeticke proportion; the other diſtributiue, publikely adminiſtred by Geometricall proportion, it hath two parts, reward, and puniſhment.
                  Now this vſuall and practiſed iuſtice, is not truly and perfectlie iuſtice: humane nature is not capable thereof no more 5 There is no true iustice in the world. than of all other things in their puritie. As humane iuſtice is mingled with ſome graine of iniuſtice, fauour, rigour, too much, or too little, and there is no pure and true mediocritie; from whence haue ſprung theſe ancient prouerbs, That he is enforced to do wrong by retaile, that will do iuſtice in groſſe: & iniuſtice in ſmall things that will do iuſtice in great. Lawyers to giue courſe and paſſage to commutatiue iuſtice, doe couertlie and ſilentlie ſuffer themſelues to deceiue one another, and that in a certaine meaſure, ſo that they paſſe not the moitie of the iuſt price; and the reaſon is, becauſe they know not how to do better. And in diſtributiue iuſtice, how many innocents are apprehended and condemned, how many guiltie quit and ſet at libertie, and that without the fault of the Iudges, neuer dreaming either of that too much, or too little, which is almoſt perpetuall in the pureſt iuſtice? Iuſtice is a let and hindrance to it ſelfe, and humane ſufficiencie cannot ſee and prouide for all. And heere we may take notice among other matters, of a great defect in diſtributiue iuſtice, in that it puniſheth only and rewardeth not, although theſe are the two parts and the two hands of iuſtice: but as it is commonly practiſed it is ſame, and inclineth wholly vnto puniſhment. The greateſt fauour that a man receiueth from it, is indemnitie, which is a play too ſhort for ſuch as deſerue better than the common ſort. But yet this is not all; for if a man bee

falſely accuſed, and vpon that accuſation committed, he is ſure to endure puniſhment ſufficient: at the laſt his innocencie being knowne, he eſcapeth perhaps his vttermoſt puniſhment, but without any amends of that wrongfull affliction he hath indured, euen ſuch perhaps as ſhall neuer leaue him. And the accuſer in the meane time, be the colour and ground of his accuſation neuer ſo light (which is eaſie to do) eſcapeth without puniſhment; ſo ſparing is iuſtice in rewarding, as that it conſiſteth wholly in chaſticement, whereof that common ſpeech ariſeth, That to do iuſtice, and to be ſubiect vnto iuſtice, is alwaies to be vnderſtood of puniſhment. And it is an eaſie matter for any man that will, to bring another man into danger and puniſhment, euen to ſuch an eſtate, as that he ſhall neuer know which way to get foorth, but with loſſe.
                  Of iuſtice and dutie there are three principall parts: for 6 The diuiſion of this matter.
                      man is indebted to three, to God, to himſelfe, to his neighbour: to one aboue himſelfe, to himſelfe, and to others beſide himſelfe: of his dutie towards God, which is pietie and religion, hath ſufficientlie beene ſpoken before. It remaineth that we now ſpeake of his dutie towards himſelfe and his L 2. c. 5. neighbour.
               
               
                  CHAP. VI.
                  
                     Of the iuſtice and dutie of man towards himſelfe.
                     THis is ſufficientlie conteined in this whole worke; in the firſt booke which teacheth a man to know himſelfe, and all humane condition; in the ſecond, which teacheth a man to be wiſe, and to that end giueth aduiſements and rules; and in the reſt of this booke, eſpeciallie in the vertues of fortitude and temperance. Neuertheleſſe I will heere ſummarilie ſet downe ſome aduiſement, more expreſſe and formall.
                     The firſt and fundamentall aduice is, to reſolue not to liue careleſſie, after an vncertaine faſhion, and by chance and aduenture, as almoſt all are accuſtomed to doe, who ſeeme to mocke and deceiue themſelues, and not to liue in good earneſt, not leading their life ſeriouſlie and attentiuely, but liuing from day to day, as it falleth out. They taſte not, they poſſeſſe not, they enioy not their life: but they vſe it to make

vſe of other things. Their deſignments and occupations doe many times trouble, and hurt their life more than doe it ſeruice. Theſe kind of people doe all things in good earneſt, except it be to liue. All their actions, and the leſſer parts of their life are ſerious, but the whole body thereof paſſeth away as if they thought not thereof: it is a bare ſuppoſition, that is not worth the thinking of. That which is but an accident is principall vnto them, and the principall as an acceſſarie. They affect and incline themſelues to all things, ſome to get knowledge, honours, dignities, riches: others to take their pleaſures, to hunt, to ſport themſelues, to paſſe away the time; others to ſpeculations, imaginations, inuentions: others to manage and order affaires: others to other things; but to liue is the leaſt they thinke of. They liue as it were inſenſibly, being wholly addicted, and faſtning their thoughts vpon other things. Life is vnto them but as a tearme, and a procraſtination or delaie to employ it about other things. Now all this is very vniuſt, it is an infelicity and treaſon againſt a mans ſelfe: it is for a man to loſe his life, and to goe againſt that which euery man ſhould doe, that is, liue ſeriouſly, attentiuelie, and cheerefully, bene viuere & laetari: ſibi ſemper valere & viuere doctus, to the end he may liue well, and well die: it is the fault of euery man. A man muſt lead and order his life, as if it were a buſineſſe of great waight and conſequence, and as a bargaine made whereof he muſt giue an account exactly by parts and parcels. It is our greateſt buſineſſe, in reſpect wherof all the reſt are but toies, things acceſſarie and ſuperficiall. There are ſome that deliberate and purpoſe to doe it, but it is when they muſt liue no longer, wherein they reſemble thoſe that put off their buying and ſelling till the market bee paſt, and when they ſee their follie, they complaine ſaying, Shall I neuer haue leiſure to make my retrait, to liue vnto my ſelfe? quàm ſerum eſt incipere viuere cùm deſinendum eſt? quàm ſtulta mortalitatis obliuio? dum differtur, vita tranſcurrit. And 
                           See lib. 1. chap. 36. this is the reaſon why the wiſe crie out vnto vs, well to vſe the time, tempori parce; That wee haue not need of any thing ſo much as time, ſaith Zenon. For life is ſhort, and arte is long; not the arte to heale, but rather to liue, which is wiſdome.

To this firſt and principall aduice, theſe following doe ſerue:
                     To learne to dwell, to content, to delight himſelfe alone, yea to quit himſelfe of the world if need bee; the greateſt  thing is for a man to know how to bee to himſelfe; vertue is content with it ſelfe, let vs winne ſo much of our ſelues, as to be able in good earneſt and willingly to liue alone, and to liue at our eaſe. Let vs learne to quit our ſelues of all thoſe bands that faſten and binde vs to another, and that our contentment depend of our ſelues, neither ſeeking nor diſdaining or refuſing company, but cheerefully to goe on with or without companie, as either our owne, or anothers need do require: but yet not ſo to ſhut vp our ſelues, and to ſettle and eſtabliſh our pleaſure as ſome that are halfe loſt being alone. A man muſt haue within himſelfe wherwith to entertaine & content himſelfe, & in ſinu ſuo gaudere, He that hath woon this point pleaſeth himſelfe in all places and in all things. He muſt cary a countenance conformable to the company and the affaires that are in hand and preſent themſelues, and accommodate himſelfe vnto another, be ſad if need be, but inwardly to keep himſelfe one and the ſame: this is the meditation and conſideration, which is the nouriſhment and life of the ſpirit, cuius viuere eſt cogitare. Now for the benefit of nature, there is not any buſineſſe which we do more often, continue longer, that is more eaſie, more naturall, and more our owne, than to meditate, and to entertaine our thoughts. But this meditation is not in all after one maner, but very diuers, according to the diuerſity of ſpirits. In ſome it is weake, in others ſtrong; in ſome it is languiſhing idleneſſe, a vacancy and want of other buſineſſe. But the greater ſpirits make it their principall vacation and moſt ſerious ſtudy, whereby they are neuer more buſied, nor leſſe alone, (as it is ſaid of Scipio) than when they are alone, and quitting themſelues of affaires, in imitation of God himſelfe, who liueth and feedeth himſelfe with his eternall thoughts and meditations. It is the buſineſſe of the goddes (ſaith Ariſtotle) from whence doth ſpring both their, 3 To know and culture himſelfe.
                         and our bleſſedneſſe.
                     Now this ſolitary imployment, and this cheerefull entertainment

of a mans ſelfe, muſt not be in vanity, much leſſe in any thing that is vitious; but in ſtudy and profound knowledge, and afterwards in the diligent culture of himſelfe. This is the price agreed, the principall, firſt and plaineſt trauell of euerie man. Hee muſt alwaies watch, taſte, ſound himſelfe, neuer abandon, but be alwaies neere, and keepe himſelfe to himſelfe: and finding that manie things go not well, whether by reaſon of vice, and defect of nature, or the contagion of another, or other caſuall accident that troubleth him, hee muſt quietlie and ſweetlie correct them, and prouide for them. He muſt reaſon with himſelfe, correct and recall himſelfe couragiouſlie, and not ſuffer himſelfe to be caried away either with diſdaine or careleſneſſe.
                     He muſt likewiſe in auoiding all idleneſſe, which doth but 4 To keepe himſelfe in exerciſe.
                         ruſt and marre both the ſoule and body, keepe himſelfe alwaies in breath, in office and exerciſe, but yet not ouer bent, violent and painfull, but aboue all, honeſt, vertuous and ſerious. And that he may the better do it, he muſt quit himſelfe of other buſineſſe, and propoſe vnto himſelfe ſuch deſignments as may delight him, conferring with honeſt men, and good bookes, diſpenſing his time well, and well ordering his houres, and not liue tumultuouſlie and by chaunce and hazard.
                     Again, he muſt well husband, and make profit of all things 5 To make vſe of all things. that are preſented vnto him, done, ſaid, and make them an inſtruction vnto him, applie them vnto himſelfe, without any ſhew or ſemblance thereof.
                     And to particulariſe a little more, we know that the duty of man towards himſelfe conſiſteth in three points, according 6 To gouerne his ſpirit, that is, his iudgement.
                         to his three parts, to rule and gouerne his ſpirit, his body, his goods. Touching his ſpirit (the firſt and principall, whereunto eſpecially do belong theſe generall aduiſements which we are to deliuer) we know that all the motions thereof are reduced to two, to thinke, and to deſire, the vnderſtanding and the will; whereunto do anſwer ſcience and vertue, the two ornaments of the ſpirit. Touching the former, which is the vnderſtanding, he muſt preſerue it from two things, in ſome ſort contrarie and extreame, that is, ſottiſhneſſe and follie, that is to ſay, from vanities and childiſh follies, on the

one ſide; this is to baſtardiſe and to loſe it: it was not made to play the nouice or baboun, non ad iocum & luſum genitus, ſed ad ſeueritatem potius; and from phantaſticall, abſurd, and extrauagant opinions, on the other ſide; this is to pollute and debaſe it. It muſt be fed and entertained with things profitable and ſerious, and furniſhed and indued with ſound, ſweet, and naturall opinions: and ſo much care muſt not be taken to eleuate and mount it, to extend it beyond the reach as to rule, and order it. For order and continencie is the effect of wiſdome, and which giueth price to the ſoule, and aboue all to be free from preſumption and obſtinacie in opinion; vices very familiar with thoſe that haue any extraordinarie force and vigor of ſpirit; and rather to continue in doubt and ſuſpence, eſpeciallie in things that are doubtfull, and capable of oppoſitions and reaſons on both parts, not eaſily digeſted and determined. It is an excellent thing, and the ſecureſt way, well to know how to doubt, and to be ignorant, and the moſt noble philoſophers, haue not beene aſhamed to make profeſſion thereof, yea it is the principall fruit and effect of ſcience.
                     Touching the will, it muſt in all things be gouerned and  ſubmit it ſelfe to the rule of reaſon, which is the office of vertue, and not vnto fleeting inconſtant opinion, which is commonly falſe, and much leſſe vnto paſſion. Theſe are the three that moue and gouerne our ſoules. But yet this is the difference, that a wiſe man ruleth and rangeth himſelfe according to nature and reaſon, regardeth his duty, holdeth for apocryphall, and ſuſpects whatſoeuer dependeth vpon opinion, or paſſion: and therfore he liueth in peace, paſſeth away his life cheerefully and pleaſingly, is not ſubiect to repentance, recantations, changes; becauſe whatſoeuer falleth out, he could neither do, nor chooſe better, and therfore he is neuer kindled nor ſtirred; for reaſon is alwaies peaceable. The foole that ſuffereth himſelfe to bee led by theſe two, doth nothing but wander and warre with himſelfe, and neuer reſteth. He is alwaies readuiſing, changing, mending, repenting, and is neuer contented; which, to ſay the truth, belongeth to a wiſe man, who hath reaſon and vertue to make himſelfe ſuch a one. Nulla placidior quies niſi quam ratio compoſuit. An honeſt man muſt gouerne and reſpect himſelfe, and feare his reaſon

and his conſcience, which is his bonus genius, his good ſpirit, in ſuch ſort that hee cannot without ſhame ſtumble in their preſence, rarum eſt, vt ſatis ſe quiſque vereatur.
                     
                     As touching the bodie, we owe thereunto aſſiſtance, and  conduct or direction. It is follie to goe about to ſeparate and ſunder theſe two principall parts the one from the other; but contrarily it is fit and neceſſarie they be vnited and ioyned together. Nature hath giuen vs a bodie as a neceſſarie inſtrument to life: and it is fit that the ſpirit as the principall ſhould take vpon it the guardianſhip & protection of the bodie. So farre ſhould it be from ſeruing the bodie, which is the moſt baſe, vniuſt, ſhamefull, and burthenſome ſeruitude that is, that it ſhould aſſiſt, counſell it, and be as a husband vnto it. So that it oweth thereunto care, not ſeruice: It muſt handle it as a lord, not as a tyrant; nouriſh it, not pamper it, giuing it to vnderſtand, that it liueth not for it, but that it cannot liue heere below without it. This is an inſtruction to the workeman, to know how to vſe, and make vſe of his inſtruments. And it is likewiſe no ſmall aduantage to a man, to know how to vſe his bodie, and to make it a fit inſtrument for the exerciſe of vertue. Finallie, the bodie is preſerued in good eſtate by moderate nouriſhment and orderly exerciſe. How the ſpirit muſt haue a part, and beare it companie in thoſe pleaſures that belong vnto it, hath been ſaid before, and ſhall heereafter be ſet downe in the vertue of temperance.
                     Touching goods and the dutie of euery man in this caſe, there are many and diuers offices, for to gather riches, to keep  them, to husband them, to employ them, to yeeld vnto them all that is fit, are different ſciences. One is wiſe in the one of them, that in the other vnderſtandeth nothing, neither is it fit he ſhould. The acquiſition of riches hath more parts than the reſt. The employment is more glorious and ambitious. The preſeruation and cuſtodie, which is proper to the woman, is the arbour to couer them.
                     Theſe are two extremities alike vitious, to loue and affect riches: to hate and reiect them. By riches I vnderſtand that which is more than enough, and more than is needfull. A wiſe man will do neither of both, according to that wiſh and praier of Salomon, Giue me neither riches nor pouertie: but he will

hold them in their place, eſteeming them as they are, a thing of it ſelfe indifferent, matter of good and euill, and to many good things commodious.
                     The euils and miſeries that follow the affecting and hating of them, haue been ſpoken of before. Now in fiue words we ſet downe a rule touching a mediocritie therein. 1. To deſire them, but not to loue them, ſapiens non amat diuitias, ſed mauult. As a little man and weake of bodie, would willinglie be higher and ſtronger, but this his deſire is without care or paine vnto himſelfe, ſeeking that without paſſion which nature deſireth, and fortune knoweth not how to take from him. 2. And much leſſe to ſeeke them at the coſt and dammage of another, or by arte, and bad and baſe meanes, to the end no man ſhould complaine or enuie his gaines. 3. When they come vpon him, entring at an honeſt gate, not to reiect them, but cheerfullie to accept them, and to receiue them into his houſe, not his heart; into his poſſeſſion, not his loue, as being vnworthie thereof. 4. When he poſſeſſeth them, to employ them honeſtlie and diſcreetlie, to the good of other men; that their departure may, at the leaſt, be as honeſt as their entrance. 5. If they happen to depart without leaue, be loſt or ſtollen from him, that he be not ſorrowfull, but that he ſuffer them to depart with themſelues, without any thing of his, ſi diuitiae effluxerint, non auferent niſi ſemetipſas. To conclude, he deſerueth not to be accepted of God, and is vnworthie his loue, and the profeſſion of vertue, that makes account of the riches of this world.
                     Aude hospes contemnere, & te quoque dignum ſinge deo.
                  
                  
                     Of the iustice and dutie of man towards man. An aduertiſment.
                     THis dutie is great, and hath many parts, we will reduce them to two great ones: In the firſt we will place the generall, ſimple, and common duties required in all, and euery one, towards all and euery one, whether in heart, word, or

deed, which are amitie, faith, veritie, and free admonition, good deeds, humanitie, liberalitie, acknowledgement or thankfulnes. In the ſecond ſhall be the ſpeciall duties required for ſome ſpeciall and expreſſe reaſon and obligation betweene certaine perſons, as betweene a man and his wife, parents and children, maſters and ſeruants, princes and ſubiects, magiſtrates, the great and powerfull, and the leſſe.
                     
                        The firſt part, which is of the generall and common duties of all towards all, and firſt
                     
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. VII. Of loue or friendſhip.
                  
                  AMitie is a ſacred flame, kindled in our breaſts firſt by nature, and hath expreſſed it firſt heate betweene the huſband 1 The deſcription.
                      and the wife, parents and children, brothers and ſiſters; and afterwards growing cold hath recouered heate by arte, and the inuention of alliances, companies, fraternities, colleges, and communities. But foraſmuch as in all this being diuided into many parts, it was weakned, and mingled with other profitable & pleaſant conſiderations, to the end it might reſtrengthen it ſelfe and grow more feruent, it hath recollected it ſelfe, and vnited it owne forces into a narrower roome, betwixt two true friends. And this is perfect amitie, which is ſo much more feruent and ſpirituall than other, by how much the heart is hotter than the liuer, and the bloud than the vaines.
                  Amitie is the ſoule and life of the world, more neceſſarie (ſay the wiſe) than fire and water: amicitia, neceſſitudo, amici 
                      
                     neceſſary, it is the ſumme, the ſtaffe, the ſalt of our life: for without it all is darknes, and there is no ioy, no ſtay, no taſte of life: amicitia iustitiae conſors, naturae vinculum, ciuitatis praefidium, ſenectutis ſolatium, vitae humanae portus: ea omnia conſtant, diſcordia cadunt. And we muſt not thinke that friendſhip 3 How neceſſary to the weale-pub.
                      is profitable and delightfull to priuat men only, for it is more

commodious to the weale-publike: it is the true nurſing mother of humane ſocietie, the preſeruer of ſtates and policies. Neither is it ſuſpected, nor diſpleaſeth any but tyrants and monſters, not becauſe they honor not it in their hearts, but becauſe they cannot be of that number, for only friendſhip ſufficeth to preſerue the world. And if it were euery where in force, there would be no need of a law, which hath not been ordained but as a help, and as a ſecond remedie for want of friendſhip, to the end it might enforce and conſtraine by the authoritie thereof that which for loue and friendſhip ſhould be freelie and voluntarie; but howſoeuer, the law taketh place farre below friendſhip. For friendſhip ruleth the heart, the tongue, the hand, the will, and the effects, the law cannot prouide but for that which is without. This is the reaſon why Aristotle ſaid, That good law-makers haue euer had more care of friendſhip, than of iuſtice: And becauſe the law and iuſtice do many times loſe their credit, the third remedie and leaſt of all hath been in armes and force, altogether contrarie to the former, which is friendſhip. Thus we ſee by degrees the three meanes of publike gouerment. But loue or friendſhip is worth more than the reſt; for ſecond and ſubſidiarie helps are no way comparable to the firſt and principall.
                  The diuerſitie and diſtinction of friendſhip is great: That of the ancients into foure kinds, Naturall, Sociable, Hoſpitall, 4 The firſt diſtinction of the cauſes.
                      Venereous, is not ſufficient. We may note three; The firſt is drawne from the cauſes which ingender it, which are foure, nature, vertue, profit, pleaſure, which ſometimes goe together in troope; ſometimes two, or three, and very often one alone: But vertue is the more noble and the ſtronger, for that is ſpirituall, and in the heart as friendſhip is: Nature in the bloud, profit in the purſe, pleaſure in ſome part, or ſenſe of the body. So likewiſe vertue is more liberall, more free, and pure, and without it the other cauſes are poore, and idle; and fraile. He that loueth for vertue is neuer weary with louing, and if friendſhip be broken, complaineth not. He that loueth for profit, if it faile, complaineth, and it turneth to his reproch, that when he hath done all he can, he hath loſt all. He that loueth for pleaſure, if his pleaſure ceaſe, his loue ceaſeth with it, and without complaint enſtrangeth himſelfe.
                  
                     
The ſecond diſtinction which is in regard of the perſons, is 5 2 Of perſons
                      in three kinds; the one is in a ſtraight line betweene ſuperiours and inferiours, and it is either naturall, as betweene parents and children, vncles and nephues; or lawfull, as between the prince and the ſubiects, the lord & his vaſſals, the maſter and his ſeruants, the doctor and the diſciple, the prelat or gouernor and the people. Now this kind to ſpeake properly, is not friendſhip, both becauſe of the great diſparitie that is betwixt them, which hindreth that inwardnes and familiaritie and entire communication, which is the principall fruit and effect of friendſhip, as likewiſe becauſe of the obligation that is therein, which is the cauſe why there is leſſe libertie and leſſe choice and affection therein. And this is the reaſon why men giue it other names than of friendſhip: for in inferiours there is required of them honor, reſpect, obedience; in ſuperiours care and vigilancie ouer their inferiours. The ſecond kind of friendſhip in regard of the perſons, is in a collaterall  line betweene equals, or ſuch as are neere equals. And this is likewiſe two-fold, for either it is naturall, as betweene brothers, ſiſters, coſens, and this comes neerer to friendſhip than the former, becauſe there is leſſe diſparitie. But yet there is a bond of nature, which as on the one ſide it knitteth and faſtneth, ſo on the other it looſeth: for by reaſon of goods, and diuiſions, and affaires, it is not poſſible but brothers and kinſfolke muſt ſometimes differ; Beſides that many times the correſpondencie and relation of humours and wills, which is the eſſence of friendſhip, is not found amongſt them; He is my brother or my kinſman, but yet he is a wicked man, a foole: Or it is free and voluntarie, as betweene companions and friends, who touch not in bloud, and hold of nothing but only of friendſhip and loue: and this is properly and truly friendſhip.
                  3 The third kind of friendſhip in regard of the perſons is mixt, and as it were compounded of the other two, whereby  it is, or it ſhould be more ſtrong; this is matrimoniall of maried couples, which holdeth of loue or friendſhip in a ſtreight line, becauſe of the ſuperioritie of the husband, and the inferioritie of the wife; and of collaterall friendſhip, being both of them companions ioined together by equall bands. And therefore

the wife was not taken out of the head, nor foote, but the ſide of man. Againe, ſuch as are maried, in all things and by turnes exerciſe and ſhew both theſe friendſhips, that which is in a ſtreight line in publike; for a wiſe woman honoreth and reſpecteth hir husband; that which is collaterall in priuat, by priuat familiaritie. This matrimoniall friendſhip is likewiſe after another faſhion double and compounded; for it is ſpirituall & corporall, which is not in other friendſhips, ſaue only in that which is reproued by all good lawes, and by nature it ſelfe. Matrimoniall friendſhip then is great, ſtrong, and puiſſant. There are neuertheleſſe two or three things that ſtay and hinder it, that it cannot attaine to the perfection of friendſhip; The one, that there is no part of mariage free but the entrance, for the progreſſe and continuance thereof is altogether conſtrained, enforced, I meane in chriſtian mariages; for euery where elſe it is leſſe enforced, by reaſon of thoſe diuorcements which are permitted: The other is the weaknes and inſufficiencie of the wiſe, which can no way correſpond to that perfect conference and communication of thoughts and iudgements: hir ſoule is not ſtrong and conſtant enough to endure the ſtreightnes of a knot ſo faſt, ſo ſtrong, ſo durable: it is as if a man ſhould ſow a ſtrong and courſe peece of cloth to a ſoft and delicate. This filleth not the place, but vaniſheth and is eaſily torne from the other. Againe, this inconuenience followeth the friendſhip of maried cupples, that it is mingled with ſo many other ſtrange matters, children, parents of the one ſide & the other, and ſo many other diſtaffe buſines that doe many times trouble and interrupt a liuely affection.
                  The third diſtinction of friendſhip reſpecteth the force and intention, or the weaknes and diminution of friendſhip. 7 3 Of degrees.
                      According to this reaſon, there is a two-fold friendſhip, the common and imperfect, which we may call good will, familiaritie, priuate acquaintance: and it hath infinite degrees, one more ſtrict, intimate and ſtrong than another: and the perfect, which is inuiſible, and is a Phenix in the world, yea hardly conceiued by imagination.
                  We ſhall know them both by confronting them together, 8 The differē
                           ces of friendſhip common and perfect.
                      and by knowing their differences. The common may be attained

in a ſhort time. Of the perfect it is ſaid, that we muſt take long time to deliberate, and they muſt eate much ſalt togther before it be perfected.
                  2 The common is attained, built, and ordered by diuers profitable and delightfull occaſions & occurrents; and therefore a wiſe man hath ſet downe two meanes to attaine vnto it, to ſpeake things pleaſant, and to doe things profitable; the perfect is acquired by an only true and liuely vertue reciprocallie knowne.
                  3 The common may be with and betweene diuers, the perfect is with one only, who is another ſelfe, and betweene two only, who are but one. It would intangle and hinder it ſelfe amongſt many, for if two at one time ſhould deſire to be ſuccoured, if they ſhould requeſt of me contrarie offices, if the one ſhould commit to my ſecrecie a thing that is expedient for another to know, what courſe, what order may be kept heerein? Doubtleſſe, diuiſion is an enemie to perfection, and vnion hir coſen-germaine.
                  4 The common is capable of more and leſſe, of exceptions, reſtraints, and modifications, it is kindled and cooled, ſubiect to acceſſion and receſſion, like a feuer, according to the preſence or abſence, merits, good deeds, and ſo forth. The perfect not ſo, alwaies the ſame, marching with an equall paſe, firme, hawtie, and inconſtant.
                  5 The common receiueth, and hath need of many rules and cautions giuen by the wiſe, whereof one is, to loue without reſpect of pietie, veritie, vertue, amicus vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad aras. Another, ſo to loue as that a man may hate, ſo to hate, as that he may likewiſe loue, that is, to hold alwaies the bridle in his hand, and not to abandon himſelfe ſo profuſely, that he may haue cauſe to repent, if the knot of friendſhip happen to vntie.
                  Againe to aid and ſuccour at a need without intreaty: for a friend is baſhfull, and it coſtes him deare, to requeſt that that he thinkes to be his due. Againe, not to bee important to his friends, as they that are alwaies complaining, after the maner of women. Now all theſe leſſons are very wholeſome in ordinary friendſhips, but haue no place in this ſoueraigne and perfect.
                  
                     
We ſhall know this better by the portrait & deſcription of perfect friendſhip, which is a very free, plaine, and vniuerſall 9 The deſcription of perfect friendſhip.
                      confuſion of two ſoules. See here three words. 1. A confuſion, not only a coniunction, & ioining together, as of ſolid things, which howſoeuer they be faſtned, mingled, & knit together, may be ſeparated and knowen apart. For the ſoules of men in this perfect amity are in ſuch ſort plunged and drowned the one within the other, that they can no more be diuided, neither would they, than things liquid that are mingled together. 2. Very free, and built vpon the pure choice and libertie of the will, without any other obligation, occaſion, or ſtrange cauſe. There is nothing more free and voluntarie than affection. 3. Vniuerſall, without any exception of all things, goods, honors, iudgements, thoughts, willes, life. From this vniuerſall and full confuſion it proceedeth, that the one cannot lend or giue to the other, and there is no ſpeech betwixt them of good turnes, obligations, acknowledgements, thankfulnes, and other the like duties, which are the nouriſhers of common friendſhips, but yet teſtimonies of diuiſion and difference, as I know not how to thanke my ſelfe for the ſeruice I do vnto my ſelfe, neither doth that loue which I beare vnto my ſelfe increaſe by thoſe ſuccors and helps I giue vnto my ſelfe. And in mariage it ſelfe, to giue ſome reſemblance of this diuine knot, though it come farre ſhort thereof: donations are forbid betweene the husband and the wife: and if there were place for the one to giue vnto the other, he is the giuer that giues cauſe to his friend to expreſſe and imploy his loue, and he receiueth the good turne, that by giuing binds his companion: for the one and the other ſeeking aboue all things euen with a greedie deſire to do good to one another, he that giueth the occaſion and yeeldeth the matter, is he that is liberall, giuing that contentment to his friend, to effect that which he moſt deſireth.
                  Of this perfect friendſhip and communion, antiquitie yeeldeth ſome examples. Bloſius taken for a great friend of 10 Examples.
                      
                     Tiberius Gracchus then condemned to die, and being asked what hee would doe for his ſake, and hee anſwering that hee would refuſe nothing, it was demanded what he would doe if Gracchus ſhould intreat him to fire the Temples? To whom

he anſwered, that Gracchus would neuer intreat ſuch a matter at his hands, but if he ſhould he would obey him. A verie bold and dangerous anſwer. He might boldlie haue ſaid, that Gracchus would neuer haue required ſuch a matter, and that ſhould haue beene his anſwer, for according to this our deſcription, a perfect friend doth not onlie fullie know the will of his friend, which might haue ſufficed for an anſwer, but he holdeth in his ſleeue, and wholly poſſeſſeth it. And in that he added, that if Gracchus would haue required it, hee would haue done it, it is as if he had ſaid nothing, it neither altereth nor hurteth his firſt anſwer concerning that aſſurance that he had of the will of Gracchus. This of willes and iudgements. 3. Touching goods, There were three friends (this word three is ſome impeachment to our rule, and may make vs thinke that this was no perfect amity) two rich, & one poore charged with an old mother, and a daughter to marrie; this man dying made his will, wherein hee bequeathed to one of his friends his mother to be fed and maintained by him; to the other his daughter, to be married by him, enioining him withall to beſtow vpon hir the beſt dowrie that his ability would affoord, and if it ſhould happen that the one of them ſhould die, he ſhould ſubſtitute the other. The people made themſelues merry with this will or teſtament; the legataries accepted of it with great contentment, and each of them receiued vnto them their legacy; but he that had taken the mother, departing this life within fiue daies after, the other ſuruiuing and remaining the ſole vniuerſall inheritour, did carefullie intertaine the mother; and within a few daies after hee married in one day his owne and only daughter, and hir that was bequeathed vnto him, diuiding betwixt them by equall portions all his goods. The wiſe according to this deſcription haue iudged that the firſt dying, expreſſed greateſt loue, and was the more liberall, making his friends his heires, and giuing them that contentment, as to employ them for the ſupplie of his wants. 4. Touching life, that hiſtory is ſufficiently knowen of thoſe two friends, wherof the one being condemned by the tyrant to die at a certaine day and houre, he requeſted that giuing baile, hee might in the meane time goe and diſpoſe of his domeſticall affaires, which the tyrant

agreeing vnto vpon this condition, that if he did not returne by that time his baile ſhould ſuffer the puniſhment. The priſoner deliuered his friend, who entred into priſon vpon that condition: and the time being come, and the friend who was the baile reſoluing to die, his condemned friend failed not to offer himſelfe, and ſo quit his friend of that danger. Whereat the tyrant being more than aſtoniſhed, and deliuering them both from death, deſired them to receiue, and to adopt him in their friendſhip as a third friend.
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII. Of faith, truſt, treachery, ſecrecy.
                  
                  ALl men yea the moſt treacherous know and confeſſe that faith is the band of humaine ſociety, the foundation 1 The dignity of fidelity.
                      of all iuſtice, and that aboue all things it ought to be religiouſly obſerued. Nihil auguſtius fide, quae iuſtitiae fundamentum eſt, nec vlla res vehementius rempublicam continet & vitam. Sanctiſſimum humani pectoris bonum:
                  
                  
                     Ante Iouem generata decus diuum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hominum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         
                        Cic.
                     
                     Qua ſine non tellus pacem non aequora norunt,
                     Iuſtitiae conſors tacitum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in pectore numen.
                  
                  Neuertheleſſe the world is full of treacheries. There are 2 Fidelity rare
                      but few that do well and truly keepe their faith. They break it diuers waies, and they perceiue it not. So they find ſome pretext and colour thereof, they thinke they are ſafe enough. Others ſeeke corners, euaſions, ſubtilties; Quaerunt latebras periurio. Now to remoue all the difficulties, that are in this matter, and truly to know how a man ſhould carrie himſelfe, The diuiſion of this matter. there are foure conſiderations, whereunto all the reſt may be referred: The perſons, as well he that giueth faith, as he that receiueth it; the ſubiect whereof the queſtion is made, and the maner according to which the faith is giuen.
                  As touching him that giueth faith, it is neceſſarie that hee haue power to doe it. If he be ſubiect to another, hee cannot 3 He that giueth faith.
                      giue it, and hauing giuen it without the leaue and approbation of his maſter, it is of none effect; as it did well appeare in the Tribune Saturnine and his complices, who comming foorth of the Capitoll (which they had taken by rebellion)

vpon the faith giuen by the Conſuls, ſubiects, and officers of the Common-weale, were iuſtly ſlaine. But euery free man muſt keepe his faith, how great and honourable ſo euer he be: yea the greater he is, the more he is bound to keep it, becauſe he is the more free to giue it. And it was well ſaid, That the ſimple word of a prince ſhould be of as great force, as the oth of a priuate man.
                  As touching him to whom faith is giuen, whoſoeuer he be 4 He that receiueth it.
                     , it muſt carefully be kept, and there are but two exceptions which are cleare enough, the one if he receiued it not, and were not contented with it, but demanded other caution and aſſurance. For faith is a ſacred thing, muſt ſimplie bee receiued; otherwiſe it is no more faith, nor truſt, when hoſtages are demanded, ſuerties are giuen; to take gages or cautions with faith, is a thing ridiculous. Hee that is held vnder the guard of men, or wals, if hee eſcape and ſaue himſelfe is not faultie. The reaſon of that Roman is good: Vult ſibi quiſque credi, & habita fides ipſam ſibi obligat fidem: fides requirit fiduciam, & relatiua ſunt. The other if hauing accepted it, he firſt brake it, Frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem: quando tu me non habes pro Senatore, nec ego te pro Conſule. A treacherous man deſerueth not by the law of nature that faith ſhould bee kept vnto him, except it be after an agreement, which couereth the treacherie and maketh reuenge vnlawfull. Now theſe two caſes excepted, a man muſt keepe his faith to whomſoeuer, to his ſubiect as ſhall be ſaid. 2. To an enemy, witneſſe that act of Attilius Regulus, the proclamation of the Senat of Cap. 14. 
                     Rome againſt all thoſe that had beene licenced by Pyrrhus vpon their faith giuen to depart; and Camillus, who would not ſo much as make vſe of the treacherie of another, but reſent the children of the Faliſſians with their maſter. 3. To a theefe and publike offender, witneſſe that fact of Pompey to the pirates and robbers, and of Auguſtus to Crocotas. 4. To the enemies of religion, according to the example of Ioſua againſt the Gabaonites. But faith ought not to be giuen to theſe two latter, theeues and heretickes, or apoſtates, nor taken of them: for we ought not to capitulate, nor to treat wittinglie of peace and alliance with ſuch kind of people, except it bee in extreame neceſſitie, or for the winning of them to the

truth, or for the publike good; but being giuen it ought to be kept.
                  As touching the thing ſubiect, if it be vniuſt or impoſſible, a man is quit: and being vniuſt, it is well done to flie from it, 5 The ſubiect of faith.
                      and a double fault to keepe it. All other excuſes beſides theſe two, are of no account, as loſſe, damage, diſpleaſure, diſcommoditie, difficultie; as the Romanes haue manie times practiſed, who haue reiected many great aduantages to auoid the breach of faith, quibus tanta vtilitate fides antiquior 
                     Liuy. 
                     fuit.
                  
                  Touching the maner of giuing faith, there is ſome doubt: 6 The maner of giuing faith.
                      for many thinke that if it haue beene extorted either by force and feare, or by fraud and ſudden ſurpriſe, a man is not bound vnto it, becauſe in both caſes, he that promiſed hath not a will whereby all things are to be iudged. Others are of a contrary opinion: and to ſay the truth, Ioſua kept his faith and promiſe to the Gabaonites, though it were extorted from him by a great ſurpriſe, and falſe intelligence, and it was afterwards declared that he did therein what he ought to do. And therefore it ſeemeth that a man may ſay, that where there is only a ſimple word and promiſe paſt a man is not bound, but if faith or promiſe giuen bee confirmed and authoriſed by an oath, as in the fact of Ioſua, hee is bound to performe it in regard of the name of God: but yet that it is afterwards in iudgement to ſeeke meanes to right himſelfe of that either deceit or violence. Faith giuen with an oath, and the interpoſition of the name of God, bindeth more than a ſimple promiſe; and the breach thereof which includeth periury with treacherie, is farre worſe. But to thinke to giue aſſurance of faith by new and ſtrange oathes, as many doe, is ſuperfluous amongſt honeſt men, and vnprofitable, if a man will bee diſloyall. The beſt way is to ſweare by the eternall God, the reuenger of thoſe that vainlie vſe his name, and breake their faith.
                  Treachery and periurie is in a certaine ſenſe, more baſe and execrable than atheiſm. The Atheiſt that beleeueth there 7 Treachery iniurious to God.
                      is no God, is not ſo iniurious againſt him in thinking there is no God, as he that knoweth him, beleeueth in him, and in mockery and contempt doth periuriouſly abuſe his name.

He that ſweareth to deceiue, mocketh God, and feareth man. It is a leſſe ſinne to contemne God, than to mocke him. The horrour of treachery and periury cannot bee better deciphered, than it was by him that ſaid, It was to giue a teſtimony of the contempt of God, and the feare of men. And what thing is more monſtrous than to be a coward with men, and reſolute and valorous with God? Treachery is ſecondly the traitour and capitall enemy of humane ſociety. For it breaketh To man. and deſtroieth the band thereof, and all commerce which dependeth vpon the word and promiſes of men, which if it faile we haue nothing elſe to ſticke vnto.
                  To the keeping of faith belongeth the faithfull guard of 8 To keepe ſecrets.
                      the ſecrets of another, which is a charge ful of inconuenience, eſpecially of great perſonages, which though it may wiſely be performed, yet it is good to flie the knowledge of them, as ſometimes that Poet did the ſecrets of Lyſimachus. He that takes into his cuſtody the ſecrets of another, drawes a greater trouble vpon him, than he dreams of: for beſides the care that he takes vnto himſelfe, to keepe them well, hee bindes himſelfe to faine, and to deny his owne thoughts, a thing very irkſome to a noble and generous heart. Neuertheleſſe hee that takes that charge vpon him, muſt keepe it religiouſly, and to the end he may do it well, and play the good ſecretary, he muſt be ſuch a one by nature, not by arte and obligation.
               
               
                  CHAP. IX. Verity and free admonition.
                  
                  FRee and hearty admonition is a very wholeſome and excellent 1 An excellent thing.
                      medicine, and the beſt office of amity. For to wound and offend a little, to profit much, is to loue ſoundlie. It is one of the principall and moſt profitable Euangelicall commandements: Si peccauerit in te frater tuus, corripe illum, &c.
                  
                  All haue ſometimes need of this remedy, but eſpecially all 2 To whom profitable.
                      thoſe that are in proſperity, for it is a very hard thing to bee happie and wiſe together. And princes who lead a life ſo publicke and are to furniſh themſelues with ſo many things, and haue ſo many things hid from them, cannot ſee nor vnderſtand,

but by the eies and eares of another. And therefore they haue great need of aduertiſements, otherwiſe they may chaunce to runne ſtrange and hard fortunes, if they be not very wiſe.
                  This office is vndertaken by very few; There are required thereunto (as the wiſe affirme) three things, iudgement or diſcretion, 3 Rare, difficult, dangerous.
                      couragious libertie, amitie and fidelitie. Theſe are tempered and mingled together, but few there are that do it, for feare of offending, or want of true amitie; and of thoſe that do it, few there are that know how to do it well. Now if it be ill done, like a medicine ill applied, it woundeth without profit, and produceth almoſt the ſame effect with griefe, that flattery doth with pleaſure. To be commended, and to be reprehended vnfittinglie and to ſmall purpoſe, is the ſelfe-ſame wound, and a matter alike faultie in him that doth it. Veritie how noble ſoeuer it be, yet it hath not this priuiledge, to be imployed at all houres and in all faſhions. A wholſome holie reprehenſion may be vitiouſlie applied.
                  The counſels and cautions for a man well to gouerne himſelfe heerein (it is to be vnderſtood where there is no great 4 The rules of true admonition.
                      inwardneſſe, familiaritie, confidence, or authoritie and power, for in theſe caſes there is no place for the carefull obſeruation of theſe rules following) are theſe: 1. To obſerue place and time; that it be neither in times nor places of feaſting and great ioy, for that were (as they ſay) to trouble the feaſt; nor of ſorrow and aduerſitie, for that were a point of hoſtilitie, and the way to make an end of all; that is rather a fit time to ſuccour and comfort a man. Crudelis in re aduerſa, obiurgatio, damnare eſt obiurgare, cùm auxilio eſt opus. King Perſeus ſeeing himſelfe thus handled by two of his familiar friends, killed them both. 2. Not to reprehend all faults indifferentlie, not ſmall and light offences, this were to be enuious, and an importunate, ambitious reprehender; not great and dangerous, which a man of himſelfe doth ſufficientlie feele, and feares a worſe puniſhment to come, this were to make a man thinke he lies in wait to catch him. 3. Secretlie and not before witnes, to the end he make him not aſhamed, as it hapned to a young man, who was ſo much abaſhed, that he was reprehended by Pythagoras, that he hanged himſelf. And Plutarch
                     
is of opinion, that it was for this cauſe that Alexander killed his friend Clitus, becauſe he reprehended him in companie: but eſpeciallie that it be not before thoſe whoſe good opinion he that is reprehended deſireth to retaine, and with whom he deſires to continue his credit, as before his wife, his children, his diſciples. 4. Out of a ſimple careleſſe nature and freedome of heart, without any particular intereſt, or paſſion of the mind, be it neuer ſo little. 5. To comprehend himſelfe in the ſame fault, and to vſe generall termes, as, We forget our ſelues; What do we thinke of? 6. To begin with commendations, and to end with proffers of ſeruice and help, this tempereth the tartneſſe of correction, and giues a better entertainment: Such and ſuch a thing becomes you well, but not ſo well ſuch and ſuch a thing. 7. To expreſſe the fault with better words than the nature of the offence doth require; as, You haue not been altogether well aduiſed; in ſteed of, You haue done wickedlie: Receiue not this woman into your companie, for ſhe wil vndoe you; in ſteed of, Allure hir not, perſwade hir not to yeeld to your deſires, for thereby you will vndoe your ſelfe: Enter not into diſpute with ſuch a man; in ſteed of, Quarrell not, enuie not ſuch a man. 8. The admonition being ended, be not preſentlie gone, but ſtay and fall into ſome other common and pleaſant diſcourſe.
               
               
                  CHAP. X. Of Flattery, lying, and diſſimulation.
                  
                  FLatterie is a very dangerous poiſon to euery particular perſon, and almoſt the only cauſe of the ruine of a prince 1 Flattery a pernicious and villanous thing.
                      and the ſtate: it is worſe than falſe witneſſe, which corrupteth not the Iudge, but deceiueth him only, cauſing him to giue a wicked ſentence againſt his will and iudgement: but flattery corrupteth the iudgement, enchanteth the ſpirit, and makes him vnapt to be farther inſtructed in the truth. And if a prince be once corrupted by flattery, it neceſſarily followeth that all that are about him, if they will liue in grace and fauour, muſt be flatterers. It is therefore a thing as pernicious as truth is excellent, for it is the corruption of truth. It is alſo a villanous vice of a baſe beggerlie mind, as foule and ill beſeeming

a man, as impudencie a woman. Vt matrona meretrici diſpar erit at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         diſcolor, infido ſcurrae distabit amicus. Flatterers are likewiſe compared to harlots, ſorcerers, oyle-ſellers, to woolfes; and another ſaith, That a man were better fall among crowes than flatterers.
                  There are two ſorts of people ſubiect to be flattered, that is to ſay, ſuch as neuer want people to furniſh them with this 2 Eſpecially to two ſorts of people.
                      kind of merchandize, and eaſily ſuffer themſelues to be taken by it; that is to ſay, princes, with whom wicked men get credit thereby; and women, for there is nothing ſo proper and ordinarie to corrupt the chaſtitie of women, than to feede and entertaine them with their owne commendations.
                  Flattery is hardlie auoided, and it is a matter of difficultie to be preſerued from it, not only to women by reaſon of their 3 Hardly avoided.
                      weakneſſe, and their natures full of vanitie and deſirous of praiſe; and to princes, becauſe they are their kinſfolke, friends, principall officers, whom they cannot auoid, that profeſſe this myſterie; (Alexander that great king and philoſopher could not defend himſelfe from it, and there is not any priuat man that would not yeeld much more vnto it than kings, if he were daily aſſaulted and corrupted by ſuch baſe raſcall ſort of people as they are) but generallie vnto all; yea to the wiſeſt, both by reaſon of the ſweetnes thereof; in ſuch ſort, that though a man withſtand it, yet it pleaſeth, and though he oppoſe himſelfe againſt it, yet he neuer ſhutteth it quite out of dores, vnde ſaepe excluſa nouiſſimè recipitur; and becauſe of the hypocriſie thereof, whereby it is hardlie diſcouered: for it is ſo well counterfaited and couered with the viſage of amitie, that it is no eaſie matter to diſcerne it.
                  It vſurpeth the offices, it hath the voice, it carieth the name and counterfait thereof ſo artificiallie, that you will ſay that it It imitateth and reſembleth amitie, but it is the plague thereof. is the ſame. It ſtudieth to content and pleaſe, it honoreth and commendeth; It buſieth it ſelfe much and takes much paines to do ſeruice, it accomodateth it ſelfe to the willes and humours of men: What more? It takes vpon it euen the higheſt and moſt proper point of amitie, which is to chide, and freely to reprehend. To be briefe, a flatterer will ſeeme to exceede in loue him that he flattereth, whereas contrariwiſe, there is nothing more oppoſite vnto loue, not detraction, not iniurie,

not profeſſed enmitie: It is the plague and poiſon of true amitie; they are altogether incompatible, non potes me ſimul amico & adulatore vti. Better are the ſharp admonitions of a friend, than the kiſſes of a flatterer: Melior a vulnera diligentis, quàm oſcula blandientis.
                  
                  Wherefore not to miſtake it, let vs by the true picture therof, 4 The deſcription and antitheſis of flattery and amitie.
                      find out the meanes to know it, and to diſcerne it from true amitie. 1. Flattery reſpecteth for the moſt part it owne particular benefit, and thereby it is knowne; but true friendſhip ſeeketh not the good of it ſelfe. 2. The flatterer is changeable and diuers in his iudgements, like wax, or a looking-glaſſe that receiueth all formes: He is a Camelion, a Polypus: faine to praiſe or diſpraiſe, and he will do the like, accommodating himſelfe to the mind of him he flattereth. A friend is firme and conſtant. 3. He carrieth himſelfe too violentlie and ambitiouſlie in all that he doth, in the view and knowledge of him he flattereth, euer praiſing and offering his ſeruice, non imitatur amicitiam, ſed praeterit. He hath no moderation in his outward actions, and contrariwiſe inwardlie he hath no affection, which are conditions quite contrarie to a true friend. 4. He yeeldeth and alwaies giueth the victorie to him he flattereth, alwaies applauding him, hauing no other end than to pleaſe, in ſuch ſort that he commendeth all and more than all, yea ſometimes to his owne coſt, blaming and humbling himſelfe like a wreſtler, that ſtoopeth the better to ouerthrow his companion. A friend goes roundlie to worke, cares not whether he haue the firſt or the ſecond place, and reſpecteth not ſo much how he may pleaſe, as how he may profit, whether it be by faire meanes, or by foule, as a good Phyſitian vſeth to doe to cure his patient. 5. A flatterer ſometimes vſurpeth the liberty of a friend to reprehend; but it is with the left hand and vntowardly. For he ſtaies himſelfe at ſmall and light matters that are not worthy reprehenſion, faining want of knowledge of any greater; but yet hee will bee rude and rough enough in the cenſuring of the kindred and ſeruants of him he flattereth, as failing much in that duty they ſhould do vnto him. Or he faineth to haue vnderſtood ſome light accuſations againſt him, and that hee could not be quiet vntill hee knew the truth thereof, and if it fall out that hee that is flattered

deny them, or excuſe himſelfe, hee taketh occaſion to commend him the more. I was much aſtoniſhed at it (ſaith he) and I could not beleeue it, for I ſee the contrarie. For how ſhould I thinke that you will take from another man, when you giue all that is your owne, and take more care to giue than to take? Or at leaſtwiſe he will make his reprehenſion to ſerue his turne, that hee may flatter the better, telling him that he takes not care enough of himſelfe, he is not ſparing enough of his perſon and preſence ſo neceſſarie to the common-weale, as once a Senatour did to Tiberius in a full Senat, but with an ill ſent and a bad ſucceſſe. 6. Finally, to conclude in a word, a friend alwaies reſpecteth, procureth, and attempteth that which is reaſon, and honeſty, and dutie; the flatterer that which belongs to paſſion and pleaſure, and that which is already a maladie in the mind of him that is flattered. And therefore hee is a proper inſtrument for all things that belong to pleaſure and licentious libertie, and not for that which is honeſt or painfull and dangerous. Hee is like an ape, who being vnfit for any other ſeruice, as other beaſts are, ſerues for a play-game and to make ſport.
                  A neere neighbour and alliance to flatterie is lying, a baſe vice; and therefore ſaid an ancient Philoſopher, That it was 5 Of lying, the fowleneſſe and hurt thereof.
                      the part of ſlaues to lie, of freemen to ſpeake the truth. For what greater wickedneſſe is there, than for a man to belie his owne knowledge? The firſt ſteppe to the corruption of good maners is the baniſhment of truth, as contrarilie, ſaith Pindarus, To be true is the beginning of vertue. It is likewiſe pernicious to humane ſociety. We are not men, neither can we knit and ioine together in humane ſociety, as hath beene ſaid, if this be wanting. Doubtleſſe ſilence is more ſociable, than vntrue ſpeech. If a lie had but one viſage as truth hath, there were ſome remedy for it; for we would take the contrarie to that which a lier ſpeaketh to bee the certaine truth. But the contrary to truth hath a hundred thouſand figures, and an indefinit & vnlimited field. That which is good, that is to ſay, vertue and verity is finite and certaine, becauſe there is but one way to the marke: That which is euill, that is to ſay, vice and errour, and lying is infinite and vncertaine, becauſe there are a thouſand waies to miſſe the marke. Doubtleſſe

if men knew the horrour of lying, they would purſue it with ſword and fire. And therfore ſuch as haue the charge of youth are with all inſtance and diligence to hinder it, and to withſtand the firſt birth and progreſſe of this vice, as likewiſe of opinatiue obſtinacy, and that in time, for they neuer leaue growing.
                  There is likewiſe a couered and diſguiſed lie, which is hypocriſie and diſſimulation (a notable quality of Courtiers, and 6 Of hypocriſy
                      in as great credit amongſt them as vertue) the vice of licentious and baſe mindes; for a man to diſguiſe and hide himſelfe vnder a maske, as not daring to ſhew himſelf to be that which he is, it is a cowardly and ſeruile humour.
                  Now he that makes profeſſion of this goodly myſterie, liues in great paine; for it is a great vnquietneſſe for a man to 7 The difficulty thereof.
                      endeuour to ſeeme other than that hee is, and to haue an eie vnto himſelfe, for feare leſt he ſhould be diſcouered. It is a torment for a man to hide his owne nature, to be diſcouered, a confuſion. There is no ſuch pleaſure as to liue according to his nature, and it is better to bee leſſe eſteemed and to liue openly, than to take ſo much paines to counterfait and liue vnder a canopie; ſo excellent and ſo noble a thing is freedome.
                  But the myſterie of theſe kind of men is but poore; for diſſimulation 8 The diſcommodity.
                      continues not long vndiſcouered, according to that ſaying, Things fained and violent dure not long, and the reward of ſuch people is, that no man will truſt them, nor giue them credit when they ſpeake the truth, for whatſoeuer comes from them is held for apocryphall and mockerie.
                  Now heere is need of indifferency and wiſdome. For if 9 The counſell heereupon.
                      nature be deformed, vitious and offenſiue to another, it muſt bee conſtrained, and to ſpeake better, corrected. There is a difference betweene liuing freely and careleſlie. Againe, a man muſt not alwaies ſpeake all hee knowes, that is a follie, but that which hee ſpeaketh, let it bee that which hee thinketh.
                  There are two ſorts of people in whom diſſimulation is excuſable, 10 Diſſimulation befitting women.
                      yea ſometimes requiſite, but yet for diuers reaſons, that is to ſay, in the prince for the publike benefit, and the

good and peace of himſelfe or the ſtate, as before hath beene ſaid; and in women for the conueniency thereof, becauſe an ouer free and bold libertie becomes them not, but rather inclines to impudency. Thoſe ſmall diſguiſements, fained cariages, hypocriſies, which well befit their ſhamefaſtneſſe and modeſtie, deceiue none but fooles, beſeeme them well and defend their honors. But yet it is a thing which they are not to take great paines to learne, becauſe hypocriſie is naturall in them. They are wholly made for it, and they all make vſe of it, and too much, their viſage, their veſtments, their words, countenance, laughter, weeping; and they practiſe it not only towards their husbands liuing, but after their death too. They faine great ſorrow, and many times inwardly laugh. Iuctantius moerent quae minus dolent.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XI.
                  
                     Of Benefits, obligation and thankefulneſſe.
                     THe ſcience and matter of benefits or good turnes, and the thankfull acknowledgement of the obligation, actiue & paſſiue is great, of great vſe, and very ſubtile. It is that wherin we faile moſt. We neither know how to doe good, nor to be thankfull for it: It ſhould ſeeme that the grace as well of the merit, as of the acknowledgement is decaied, and reuenge and ingratitude is wholly in requeſt, ſo much more ready and ardent are we thereunto. Gratia oneri eſt, vltio in quaeſtu 
                        Tacit. Sen. 
                        habetur: altius iniuriae quàm merita deſcendunt. Firſt then we will ſpeake of merit and good deeds, where we will comprehend humanity, liberality, almes deeds, and their contraries, inhumanity, crueltie: and afterwards of obligation, acknowledgement, and forgetfulneſſe, or ingratitude and reuenge.
                     God, nature and reaſon, doe inuite vs to do good, and to deſerue well of another; God by his example, and his nature, 1 An exhortation to good workes by diuers reaſons.
                         which is wholly good, neither do we know any better means how to imitate God, nulla re propius ad Dei naturam accedimus, quàm beneficentia. Deus eſt mortalem ſuccurrere mortali; nature, witneſſe this one thing, that euerie one delighteth to ſee him, to whom he hath done good: it beſt agreeth with nature, nihil tam ſecundùm naturam, quàm iuuare conſortem naturae.
                        
It is the worke of an honeſt and generous man to doe good, and to deſerue well of another, yea to ſeeke occaſions thereunto, liberalis etiam dandi cauſas quaerit. And it is ſaid that good bloud cannot lie, nor faile at a need. It is greatneſſe Ambroſ. to giue, baſeneſſe to take, Beatius eſt dare quàm accipere. Hee that giueth honoureth himſelfe, makes himſelfe maſter ouer the receiuer, he that takes ſelles himſelfe. He, ſaith one, that firſt inuented benefits or good turnes, made ſtockes and manacles to tie and captiuate another man. And therefore diuers haue refuſed to take, leſt they ſhould wound their liberty, eſpecially from thoſe whom they would not loue, and bee beholding vnto, according to the counſell of the wiſe, which aduiſeth a man not to receiue any thing, from a wicked man, leſt he be thereby bound vnto him. Caeſar was woont to ſay, that there came no ſound more pleaſing vnto his eares, than praiers and petitions: It is the mot of greatneſſe, Aske mee, inuocame in die tribulationis (eruam te) & honorificabis me. It is likewiſe the moſt noble, and honourable vſe of our meanes or ſubſtance, which ſo long as wee hold and poſſeſſe them priuatly, they carrie with them baſe and abiect names, houſen, lands, money, but being brought into light, and emploied to the good and comfort of another, they are enobled, with new and glorious titles, benefits, liberalities, magnificences. It is the beſt, and moſt commodious imploiment that may bee: ars quaeſtuoſiſſima, optima negotiatio, whereby the principall is aſſured, and the profit is very great. And to ſay the truth, a man hath nothing that is truly his owne, but that which hee giues, for that which he retaines, and keepes to himſelfe, benefits neither himſelfe, nor another; and if he imploy them otherwiſe, they conſume and diminiſh, paſſe through manie dangerous accidents, and at laſt death it ſelfe. But that which is giuen, it can neuer periſh, neuer wax old. And therefore Marc. Antony being beaten downe by fortune, and nothing remaining to him, but his power to die, cried out that he had nothing, but that which he had giuen, hoc habeo quodcun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            dedi. And therefore this ſweet, debonaire and readie will to do good vnto all, is a right excellent and honourable thing in all reſpects; as contrarilie, there is not a more baſe and deteſtable vice, more againſt nature, than crueltie, for which cauſe

it is called inhumanity, which proceedeth from a contrarie cauſe, to that of bountie and benefits, that is to ſay, daſtardlie cowardlineſſe, as hath beene ſaid.
                     There is a two-fold maner of doing good vnto another, by profiting and by pleaſing him: for the firſt a man is admired 2 The diſtinction of benefits.
                         and eſteemed; for the ſecond beloued. The firſt is farre the better, it regardeth the neceſſitie and want of a man, it is to play the part of a father and true friend. Againe, there are two ſorts of bounties or good turnes, the one are duties, that proceed out of a naturall or lawfull obligation; the other are merits and free, which proceed out of pure affection. Theſe ſeeme the more noble; neuertheleſſe if the other be done with attention and affection, though they be duties, yet they are excellent.
                     The benefit and the merit is not properly that, that is giuen, is ſeene, is toucht; this is but the groſſe matter, the marke, 3 Inward and outward benefits.
                         the ſhew thereof, but it is the good will. That which is outward is many times but ſmall, that which is inward very great; for this hath commonlie with it a kind of hunger and affection, and is alwaies ſeeking occaſions to do good; It giueth ſo much as it can, and what is needfull, forgetting it owne benefit, in beneficio hoc ſuſpiciendum quod alteri dedit, ablaturus ſibi, vtilitatis ſuae oblitus. Contrarily where the gift is great, the grace may be ſmall; for it is commonly giuen with an ill will, with an expectation of much intreatie, and leaſure enough to conſider whether he may giue it or no. This is to make too great preparation thereunto, and too great vſe thereof, to giue it rather to himſelfe, and his ambition, than to the good and neceſſitie of the receiuer. Againe that which is outward may incontinentlie vaniſh, that which is inward remaine firme: The libertie, health, honor, which is to be giuen, may all at an inſtant, by ſome accident or other, be taken away, the benefit neuertheleſſe remaining entire.
                     The aduiſements whereby a man ſhould direct himſelfe, in his bounties and benefits he beſtoweth, according to the 4 Rules of benefits. 1. To whom.
                         rules and inſtruction of the wiſe, are theſe: Firſt, to whom muſt he giue? to all? It ſeemeth that to do good vnto the wicked and vnworthie, is at one inſtant to commit many faults, for it brings an ill name vpon the giuer, entertaineth

and kindleth malice, giues that which belongs to vertue and merit, to vice alſo. Doubtleſſe free and fauorable graces are not due, but to the good and worthie; but in a time of neceſſitie, and in a generalitie all in common. In theſe two caſes the wicked and vngratefull haue a part, if they be in neceſſitie, or if they be in ſuch ſort mingled with the good, that the one can hardlie receiue without the other. For it is better to do good to thoſe that are vnworthie, for their ſakes that are good, than to depriue the good for their ſakes that are euill. So doth God good vnto all, he ſuffereth the ſunne to ſhine, & the raine to fall indifferentlie vpō all: But yet his ſpeciall gifts he giueth not but to thoſe whom he hath choſen for his; non eſt bonum ſumere panem filiorum & proijcere canibus: multum refert vtrùm aliquem non excludas an eligas. At a need therefore, in a time of affliction and neceſſitie we muſt do good vnto all, hominibus prodeſſe natura iubet, vbicun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            homini beneficio locus. Nature, and humanitie teach vs, to regard and to offer our ſelues vnto them, that ſtretch out their armes vnto vs, and not vnto thoſe that turne their backs towards vs; rather vnto thoſe to whom we may do good, than vnto thoſe that are able to do good vnto vs. It is the part of a generous mind to take part with the weaker ſide, to ſuccour the afflicted, and to help to abate the pride and violence of the conquerour, as Chelonis once did, the daughter and wife of a king, whoſe father and husband being at variance and warres, one againſt the other, whenſoeuer hir husband had got the better againſt hir father, like a good daughter ſhe followed and ſerued hir father in al things, in his afflictions; but the chaunce turning, and hir father getting the maſtrie, like a good wife, ſhe turned to hir husband, and accompanied him in his hard eſt fortunes.
                     Secondly, he muſt do good willinglie and cheerefullie, non ex tristitia aut neceſſitate; hilarem datorem diligit deus: Bis eſt 
                        5 2. Willingly.
                         
                        gratum, quod opus eſt, ſi vltro offeras, not ſuffering himſelfe to be ouer-intreated, and importuned; otherwiſe it will neuer be pleaſing; Nemo libenter debet quod non accepit ſed expreſſit: That which is yeelded by force of intreatie and praiers is dearely ſold; non tulit gratis qui accepit rogans, imo nihil charius emitur, quàm quod precibus. He that prayeth and intreateth, humbleth himſelfe, confeſſeth himſelfe an inferior, couereth

his face with ſhame, honoreth him whom he intreateth: whereupon Caeſar was wont to ſay, after he had ouercome Pompey, That he lent not his eares more willinglie, nor took ſo much content in any thing, as to be intreated; whereby he gaue a kind of hope vnto all, euen his enemies, that they ſhould obtaine whatſoeuer they ſhould requeſt. Graces are ſilken veſtments, tranſparent, free, and not conſtrained.
                     Thirdly, ſpeedily and readily. This ſeemes to depend vpon the former, for benefits are eſteemed according to the 6 3. Speedily.
                         will wherewith they are beſtowed; Now he that ſtayes long before he ſuccour and giue, ſeemes to haue beene a long time vnwilling to doe it, qui tarde fecit, diu noluit. As contrarily, a readineſſe heerein doubleth the benefit: bis dat, qui celeriter. That indifferencie and careleſſe regard, whether it be done, or not done, that is vſed heerein, is not approued by any, but impudent perſons. Diligence muſt bee vſed in all points. Heerein then there is a fiue-fold maner of proceeding, whereof three are reproued; to refuſe to do a good turne, and that ſlowly too, is a double iniurie: to refuſe ſpeedily, and to giue ſlowly, are almoſt one; And ſome there are that are leſſe offended with a quick deniall; Minus decipitur cui negatur celeriter. The beſt way then is, to giue ſpeedily; but that which is moſt excellent, is, to anticipate the demaund, to preuent the neceſſitie and the deſire.
                     Fourthly, without hope of reſtitution, this is that wherein the force and vertue of a benefit doth principallie conſiſt. If it 7 4. Without hope of restitution.
                         be a vertue, it is not mercenarie: tunc eſt virtus dare beneficia non reditura. A benefit is leſſe richly beſtowed, where there is a retrogradation and reflexion; but when there is no place for requitall, yea it is not knowne from whence the good turne commeth, there it is in it true luſtre and glorie. If a man looke after the like, he will giue ſlowly and to few. Now it is farre better to renounce all ſuch hopes of like returnes, than to ceaſe to merit, and to do good; for whileſt a man ſeeketh after that ſtrange and accidentall payment, he depriueth himſelfe of the true and naturall, which is that inward ioy and comfort he receiueth in doing good. Againe, he muſt not be twice intreated for one thing. To do wrong, is in it ſelfe a baſe and abominable thing, and there needs no other thing to diſſwade

a man from it: ſo to deſerue well of another, is an excellent and honorable thing, and there needs no other thing to inflame a man to it. And in a word, it is not to do good to looke after a like returne, it is to make merchandize & profit thereof: Non eſt beneficium quod in quaestum mittitur. A man ſhould not confound and mingle together actions ſo diuers: demus beneficia, non foeneremus. It is pitie but ſuch men ſhould be deceiued that hope after ſuch requitals: dignus eſt decipi qui de recipiendo cogitaret, cùm daret. She is no honeſt woman who either for feare, or the better to inflame, or to draw a man on, refuſeth: quae quia non licuit non dedit, ipſa dedit. So hee deſerues nothing that doth good, to receiue good againe. Graces are pure virgins, without hope of returne, ſaith Heſiodus.
                     
                     Fiftly, to do good in a proportion anſwerable to the deſire 8 5. According to the deſire of the receiuer.
                         of a man, and as it may be acceptable to him that receiueth it, to the end he may know and find, that it is truly intended and done vnto him. Concerning which point, you are to know, that there are two ſorts of benefits, the one are honorable to the perſon that receiueth, and therefore they ſhould be done publickly: The other are commodious, ſuch as ſuccour the want, weakneſſe, ſhame, or other neceſſitie of the receiuer. Theſe are to be done ſecretlie, yea if neede be, that he only may take notice that receiueth them; and if it be fit, the receiuer ſhould not know from whence they come (becauſe it may be he is baſhfull, and the knowledge thereof may diſcourage him from taking, though his needs be great) it is good and expedient to conceale it from him, and to ſuffer the benefit to drop into his hand, as it were vnawares. It is enough the benefactor know it, and his owne conſcience ſerue him for a witneſſe, which is better than if he had a thouſand lookers on.
                     Sixtly, without the hurt and offence of another, and the 9 6. Without the offence of another.
                         preiudice of iuſtice: to do good not doing euill: To giue to one at the charge of another, is to ſacrifice the ſonne in the preſence of the father, ſaith a wiſe man.
                     Seuenthly, wiſely. A man may be ſometimes hindered from anſwering demaunds and petitions, from refuſing or 10 7 Wiſely.
                         yeelding vnto them. This difficultie proceedeth from the euill nature of man, eſpeciallie of the petitioner, who vexeth

himſelfe too much in the enduring of a repulſe, be it neuer ſo iuſt and reaſonable. And this is the reaſon why ſome promiſe and agree to all (a teſtimonie of weakneſſe) yea, when they haue neither power, nor will to performe, and referring the auoiding of this difficultie to the very point of the execution, they hope that many things may happen that may hinder and trouble the performance of their promiſe, and ſo thinke to quit themſelues of their obligation; or if it fall out there be queſtion made thereof, they find excuſes and auoidances, and ſo for that time content the petitioner. But none of all this is to be allowed, for a man ought not to promiſe or agree to any thing, but to that which he can, will, and ought to performe. And finding himſelfe betweene theſe two ſtraits and dangers, either of a bad promiſe, becauſe it is either vniuſt, or ill befitting, or an abſolute deniall, which may ſtirre vp ſome ſedition, or miſconceit, the counſell is, that he ſalue this matter either by delaying the anſwere, or in ſuch ſort compoſing the promiſe in ſuch generall and doubtfull termes, that they bind not a man preciſely to the performance thereof. But heere is craft and ſubtiltie, farre different from true freedome, but this iniquitie of the petitioner is the cauſe thereof, and he deſerueth it.
                     Eightly, it muſt proceed from a manlie heart, and hartie affection, homo ſum, humani a me nihil alienum puto, eſpeciallie 11 8. From a hartie affection.
                         towards thoſe that are afflicted and in want, and this is that which wee call mercie. They that haue not this affection, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        & immanes, are inhumane, and cary the marks of diſhoneſt men. But yet this muſt proceed from a ſtrong, conſtant, and generous, not a ſoft, effeminate, and troubled mind: for that is a vitious paſſion, and which may fall into a wicked mind, whereof in this place we haue alreadie ſpoken: for there is a good and an euill mercie. A man muſt ſuccour the afflicted, not afflicting himſelfe, and applying the euill vnto himſelfe, derract nothing from equitie, and honor; for God ſaith, that wee muſt not haue pitie of the poore in iudgement: and ſo God and his Saints are ſaid to be mercifull and pitifull.
                     Ninthly, it muſt be without boaſting, and ſhew, or publike proclamation thereof, for this is a kind of reproch: Theſe 12 9. Without boasting.
                        
                        
kind of vaunts do not only take away the grace, but the credit, and make a benefit odious, hoc eſt in odium beneficia perducere. And in this ſenſe it is ſaid, that a benefactor muſt forget his good deeds.
                     He muſt continue them, and by new benefits confirme, and renew the old, (this inuiteth the whole world to loue 13 10. Continue them without repentance.
                         him, and to ſeeke his loue) and neuer repent himſelfe of the old, howſoeuer it may ſeeme, that he hath caſt his ſeed vpon a barraine and vnthankfull ground, beneficij tui etiam infelicitas placeat, nuſquam haec vox, vellem non feciſſe. An vnthankfull man wrongs none but himſelfe, and a good turne is not loſt by his ingratitude; It is a holy conſecrated thing that cannot be violated, nor extinguiſhed by the vice of another. And it is no reaſon becauſe another is wicked, that therefore a man ſhould ceaſe to be good, or diſcontinue his office: and that which is more, the worke of a noble and generous heart is to continue to do well, to breake and to vanquiſh the malice and ingratitude of another man, and to mend his maners, optimi viri & ingentis animi eſt tamdiu ferre ingratum, donec feceris gratum: vincit malos pertinax bonitas.
                     
                     Laſtly, not to trouble, or importune the receiuer in the fruition thereof, as they do who hauing giuen an honor, or an 14 11. Not to reuoke or trouble a good turne.
                         office to a man, will afterwards execute it themſelues; or at leaſtwiſe procure them one good, that they may reape another themſelues. He that is the receiuer, ought not to indure this, and therefore is not vnthankfull; and the benefactor defaceth the benefit, and cancelleth the obligation. One of our Popes denying a Cardinall an vniuſt boone which hee demaunded, all eaging vnto him that hee was the cauſe why hee was made Pope, anſwered him, Why then giue me leaue to be Pope, and take not that from me that thou haſt giuen me.
                     After theſe rules and aduiſements concerning good deeds, we muſt know that there are ſome benefits, more acceptable 15 Distinctions of benefits.
                         and welcome than others, and which are more or leſſe binding. They are beſt welcome, that proceed from a friendlie hand, from thoſe whom a man is inclined to loue without this occaſion; and contrarily it is a griefe to be obliged vnto him, whom a man likes not, and to whom he would not willingly be indebted. Such benefits alſo are welcome, that come from

the hand of him, that is any way bound to the receiuer: for heere is a kind of iuſtice and they bind leſſe. Thoſe good deeds that are done in neceſſities, and great extremities, carie with them a greater force; they make a man forget all iniuries and offences paſt, if there were any, and binde more ſtrongly; as contrarilie, the deniall in ſuch a caſe, is very iniurious, and makes a man forget all benefits paſt. Such benefits likewiſe, as may be requited with the like, are more gladly receiued, than their contraries, which ingender a kind of hate, for he that findeth himſelfe wholly bound, without any power or poſſibility of repaiment, as often as he ſeeth his benefactour, hee thinkes hee ſees a teſtimony of his inabilitie or ingratitude, and it is irkſome to his heart. There are ſome benefits, the more honeſt and gratious they are, the more burthenſome are they to the receiuer, if he be a man of credit, as they that tie the conſcience and the will, for they lock faſter, keepe a man in his right memorie, and ſome feare of forgetfulneſſe, and failing his promiſe. A man is a ſafer priſoner vnder his word, than vnder locke and keie. It is better to be tied by ciuill and publicke bands, than by the law of honeſtie, and conſcience: two notaries are better than one. I truſt your word and your faith, and conſcience: heere is more honour done to the receiuer; but yet conſtraint faſtneth, ſolliciteth, and preſſeth much more; and heere is more ſafety to the lender, and a man carrieth himſelfe more careleſly, becauſe he doubteth not but that the law, and thoſe outward ties will awaken him, when the time ſhall ſerue. Where there is conſtraint, the will is more looſe, where there is leſſe conſtraint, the will hath leſſe libertie: quod me ius coget vix a voluntate impetrem.
                     
                     From a benefit proceeds an obligation, and from it a benefit; 16 Obligation the mother and daughter of a benefit or good turne. and ſo it is both the child and the father, the effect, and the cauſe, and there is a twofold obligation, actiue and paſſiue. Parents, princes and ſuperiours, by the dutie of their charge, are bound to do good vnto thoſe that are committed and commended vnto them, either by law or by nature; and generally all men that haue means are bound to releeue thoſe that are in want, or anie affliction whatſoeuer, by the command of nature. Behold heere the firſt obligation; afterwards

from benefits or good turnes, whether they be due, and ſprining from this firſt obligation, or free and pure merits, ariſeth the ſecond obligation, and diſcharge, whereby the receiuers are bound to an acknowledgement and thankfull requitall. All this is ſignified by Heſiodus, who hath made the Graces three in number, holding each other by the hands.
                     The firſt obligation is diſcharged by the good offices of euerie one that is in anie charge, which ſhall preſentlie be diſcourſed 17 The firſt obligation and mother. of in the ſecond part, which concerneth particular duties: but yet this obligation is ſtrengthened, and weakned, and leſned accidentallie by the conditions and actions of thoſe that are the receiuers. For their offences, ingratitudes, and vnworthineſſe doe in a maner diſcharge thoſe, that are bound to haue care of them; and a man may almoſt ſay as much of their naturall defects too. A man may iuſtly with leſſe affection loue that child, that kinſman, that ſubiect, that is not onelie wicked and vnworthie, but foule, miſſhapen, crooked, vnfortunate, ill borne; God himſelfe hath abated him much, from their naturall price and eſtimation: but yet a man muſt in this abatement of affection, keepe a iuſtice, and a moderation, for this concerneth not the helpes and ſuccors of neceſſitie, and thoſe offices that are due by publike reaſon, but onlie that attention, and affection which is in the inward obligation.
                     The ſecond obligation, which ariſeth from benefits, is that 18 The ſecond obligation which is thankfulnes.
                         which we are to handle, & concerning which, we muſt at this time ſet down ſome rules: 1. the law of dutifull acknowledgement & thankfulneſſe is naturall, witneſſe beaſts themſelues, not only priuat and domeſticall, but cruell and ſauage, among whom there are many excellent examples of this acknowledgement, as of the Lion towards the Roman ſlaue. Officia etiam ferae ſentiunt. Secondly it is a certaine act of vertue, and a teſtimony of a good mind, and therefore it is more to be eſteemed than bountie or benefit, which many times proceeds from abundance, from power, loue of a mans proper intereſt, and very ſeldome from pure vertue, whereas thankfulneſſe ſpringeth alwaies from a good heart; and therefore howſoeuer the benefit may be more to be deſired, yet kinde acknowledgement is farre more commendable. Thirdly it is an eaſie

thing, yea a pleaſant, and that is in the power of euery man. There is nothing more eaſie, than to doe according to nature, nothing more pleaſing, than to be free from bands, and to be at liberty.
                     By that which hath beene ſpoken, it is eaſie to ſee how baſe and vilanous a vice forgetfulneſſe and ingratitude is, 19 Of ingratitude.
                         how vnpleaſing and odious vnto all men, Dixeris maledicta cuncta, cum ingratum hominem dixeris; It is againſt nature, and therefore Plato ſpeaking of his diſciple Ariſtotle, calleth him an vngratefull mule. It is likewiſe without all excuſe, and cannot come but from a wicked nature, graue vitium, intolerabile quod diſſociat homines. Reuenge which followeth an iniury, Senec. as ingratitude a good turne, is much more ſtrong and preſſing (for an iniurie inforceth more than a benefit, altius iniuriae quàm merita deſcendunt) it is a very violent paſſion, but yet nothing ſo baſe, ſo deformed a vice as ingratitude. It is like thoſe euils that a man hath, that are not dangerous, but yet are more grieuous and painful than they that are mortall. In reuenge there is ſome ſhew of iuſtice, and a man hides not himſelfe, to worke his will therein; but in ingratitude there is nothing but baſe diſhoneſty and ſhame.
                     Thankefulneſſe or acknowledgement that it may be ſuch 20 Rules of thankfulnes.
                         as it ſhould bee, muſt haue theſe conditions. Firſt hee muſt gratiouſly receiue a benefit, with an amiable and cheerefull viſage, and ſpeech, qui gratè beneficium accepit, primam eius penſionem ſoluit. Secondly, he muſt neuer forget it, Ingratiſſimus 
                        Senec. 
                        omnium qui oblitus, nuſquam enim gratus fieri poteſt, cut totum beneficium elapſum eſt. The third office is to publiſh it; ingenui 
                        Idem. 
                        pudoris eſt fateri per quos profecerimus, & haec quaſi merces authoris. As a man hath found the heart, and the hand of another, Plin. open to do good, ſo muſt he haue his mouth open to preach and publiſh it, and to the end the memory thereof may be the more firme, and ſolemne, he muſt name the benefit, and that by the name of the benefactor. The fourth office is to make reſtitution, wherein hee muſt obſerue theſe foure conditions: That it be not too ſpeedie, nor too curiouſly; for this carries an ill ſent with it, and it bewraies too great an vnwillingneſſe to be in debt, and too much haſte to bee quit of that band. And it likewiſe giueth an occaſion to the friend or

benefactor, to thinke that his curteſie was not kindlie accepted of; for to be too carefull, and deſirous to repay, is to incur the ſuſpition of ingratitude. It muſt therefore follow ſome time after, and it muſt not be too long neither, leſt the benefit grow too ancient, (for the Graces are painted yong) and it muſt be vpon ſome apt and good occaſion, which either offereth it ſelfe, or is taken, and that without noiſe and rumour. That it be with ſome vſurie, and ſurpaſſe the benefit, like fruitfull ground, ingratus eſt, qui beneficium reddit ſine vſura, or  at leaſt equall it with all the ſhew and acknowledgement that may be, of great reaſon of a farther requitall, and that this is not to ſatisfie the obligation, but to giue ſome teſtimony that he forgetteth not how much he is indebted. That it bee willingly and with a good heart, Ingratus eſt, qui metu gratus eſt; 
                         for if it were ſo giuen, eodem animo beneficium debetur, quo datur: errat ſi quis beneficium libentius accipit, quàm reddit. Laſtly,  if his inabilitie bee ſuch, as that hee cannot make preſent reſtitution, yet let his will be forward enough, which is the firſt and principall part, and as it were the ſoule, both of the benefit and acknowledgement; though there bee no other witneſſe heereof than it ſelfe; and he muſt acknowledge not onely the good hee hath receiued, but that likewiſe that hath beene offered, and might haue beene receiued, that is to ſay, the goodwill of the benefactor, which is, as hath beene ſaid, the principall.
                  
                  
                     The ſecond part, which concerneth the ſpeciall duties of certaine men, by certaine and ſpeciall obligation. THE PREFACE.
                     BEing to ſpeake of ſpeciall and particular duties, differing according to the diuerſitie of perſons and their ſtates, whether they be vnequall, as ſuperiours and inferiours, or equall, we will begin with maried folks, who are mixt, and hold with both equallitie and inequallitie. And ſo much the rather, becauſe we are firſt to ſpeake of priuate and domeſticall iuſtice and duties, before publike, becauſe they are before

them; as families and houſes are before common-weales, and therefore that priuat iuſtice which is obſerued in a familie, is the image, and ſource, and modell of a common-weale. Now theſe priuat and domeſticall duties are three, that is to ſay, betweene the husband and the wife, parents and children, maſters and ſeruants, and theſe are the parts of a houſhold or familie, which taketh the foundation from the huſband and the wife, who are the maſters and authours thereof. And therefore firſt of maried folke.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XII. The dutie of maried folke.
                  
                  ACcording to thoſe two diuers conſiderations that are in mariage, as hath been ſaid, that is to ſay, equalitie and 1 Common duties.
                      inequalitie, there are likewiſe two ſorts of duties and offices of maried folke, the one common to both, equallie reciprocall of like obligation, though according to the cuſtome of the world, the paine, the reproch, the inconuenience, be not equall: that is to ſay, an entire loyaltie, fidelitie, communitie, and communication of all things, and a care and authoritie ouer their familie, and all the goods of their houſe. Heereof we haue ſpoken more at large in the firſt booke.
                  The other are particular and different, according to that inequalitie that is betwixt them, for thoſe of the husband 2 Particular duties of the husband.
                      are: 1. To inſtruct his wife with mildneſſe in all things that belong vnto hir dutie, hir honor and good, and whereof ſhe is capable. 2. To nouriſh hir, whether ſhe brought dowrie with hir or no. 3. To cloath hir. 4. To lie with hir. 5. To loue and defend hir: The two extremities are baſe and vitious, to hold hir vnder like a ſeruant, to make her miſtris by ſubiecting himſelfe vnto hir. And theſe are the principall duties. Theſe follow after, to comfort hir being ſicke, to deliuer hir being captiue, to burie hir being dead, to nouriſh hir liuing, and to prouide for his children he hath had by hir, by his will and teſtament.
                  The duties of the wife, 1. are to giue honor, reuerence, and reſpect to hir husband, as to hir maſter and lord; for ſo haue 3 Of the wife.
                      the wiſeſt women that euer were termed their husbands, and

the hebrew word Baal ſignifieth them both, husband and lord. She that diſchargeth hirſelfe of this dutie honoreth hir ſelfe more than hir husband: and doing otherwiſe, wrongs none but hir ſelfe. 2. To giue obedience in all things iuſt and lawfull; applying and accommodating hir ſelfe to the maners and humours of hir husband; like a true looking-glaſſe, which faithfullie repreſenteth the face, hauing no other particular deſignement, loue, thought, but as the dimenſions and accidents which haue no other proper action or motion, and neuer moue but with the bodie, ſhe applieth hir ſelfe in all things to hir husband. 3. Seruice, as to prouide either by hir ſelfe or ſome other his viands, to waſh his feet. 4. To keepe the houſe; and therefore ſhe is compared to the Tortuis, and is painted hauing hir feet naked, and eſpeciallie in the abſence of hir husband. For hir husband being farre from hir, ſhe muſt be as it were inuiſible, & contrarie to the Moone (which appeareth in hir greatnes when ſhe is fartheſt from the ſunne) not appeare, but when ſhe comes neere hir ſunne. 5. To be ſilent, and not to ſpeake but with hir husband, or by hir huſband: and foraſmuch as a ſilent woman is a rare thing and hardlie found, ſhe is ſaid to be a pretious gift of God. 6. To employ hir time in the practiſe and ſtudie of huſwifrie, which Eccleſ. 26. is the moſt commodious and honorable ſcience and occupation of a woman, this is hir ſpeciall miſtris qualitie, and which a man of meane fortune ſhould eſpeciallie ſeeke in his mariage. It is the only dowrie that ſerueth either to ruinate, or preſerue families, but it is very rare. There are diuers that are couetous, few that are good huſwiues. We are to ſpeake of them both, of houſhold husbandrie preſentlie by it ſelfe.
                  In the priuat acquaintance and vſe of mariage there muſt 4 An aduiſement vpon the acquaintance of maried folks.
                      be a moderation, that is, a religious and deuout band, for that pleaſure that is therein, muſt be mingled with ſome ſeueritie; it muſt be a wiſe and conſcionable delight. A man muſt touch his wife diſcretlie and for honeſtie, as it is ſaid, and for feare, as Aristotle ſaith, leſt prouoking hir deſires too wantonlie, the pleaſure thereof make hir to exceed the bounds of reaſon, and the care of health: for too hot and too frequent a pleaſure altereth the ſeed, and hindereth generation. On the other ſide, to the end ſhe be not ouer-languiſhing, barraine, and ſubiect

to other diſeaſes, he muſt offer himſelfe vnto hir though ſeldome. Solon ſaith thriſe in a month; but there can no certaine law or rule be giuen heereof. Plutar. in Solone.
                  
                  The doctrine of houſhould husbandrie doth willinglie follow, and is annexed vnto mariage.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIII. Houſhold Huſbandrie.
                  
                  1 HOuſhold husbandrie is an excellent, iuſt, and profitable occupation. It is a happie thing ſaith Plato, for a man to goe through his priuat affaires without iniuſtice. There is nothing more beautifull than a houſhold well and peaceably gouerned.
                  2 It is a profeſſion which is not difficult, for he that is capable of any thing elſe, is not vncapable of this; but yet it is carefull, and painefull, and troubleſome, by reaſon of the multitude of affaires, which though they be ſmall and of no great importance, yet foraſmuch as they are common & frequent, and neuer at an end, they do much annoy and wearie a man. Domeſticall thornes prick, becauſe they are ordinarie; but if they come from the principall perſons of the familie, they gaule and exulcerate, and grow remedileſſe.
                  3 It is a great happines and a fit meane to liue at eaſe, to haue one whom a man may truſt, and vpon whom he may repoſe himſelfe; which that he may the better do, he muſt chooſe one that is true and loyall, and afterwards bind him to do well by that truſt and confidence he putteth in him: habita fides ipſam obligat fidem; multi fallere docuerunt, dum timent falli; & alijs ius peccandi, ſuspicando dederunt:
                  
                  4 The principall precepts and counſels that belong to frugalitie, or good husbandrie are theſe: 1. To buy and ſell all things at the beſt times and ſeaſons, that is, when they are beſt and beſt cheape. 2. To take good heed leſt the goods in the houſe bee ſpoiled or miſcarrie, bee either loſt or caried away; This doth eſpeciallie belong to the woman, to whom Aristotle giues this authoritie and care. 3. To prouide firſt and principallie for theſe three, neceſſitie, cleanlineſſe, order: and againe, if there be meanes,

ſome aduiſe to prouide for theſe three too; (but the wiſer ſort wiſh no great paines to bee taken therein: non ampliter ſed munditer conuinium: plus ſalis quàm ſumptus): abundance, pompe, and preparation, exquiſite and rich faſhion. The contrary is many times practiſed in good houſen, where you ſhall haue beds garniſhed with ſilke, embrodered with gold, and but one ſimple couerlid in winter, which were a commoditie farre more neceſſarie. And ſo of the reſt.
                  4. To rule and moderate his charge, which is done by taking away ſuperfluities, yet prouiding for neceſſitie, and that which is fit and beſeeming. A ducket in a mans purſe will doe a man more honour and honeſtie, than tenne prodigallie ſpent, ſaith one. Againe (but this requires induſtrie and good ſufficiencie) to make a great ſhew with a little charge, and aboue all, not to ſuffer the expence to grow aboue the receit and the income.
                  5. To haue a care and an eie ouer all; the vigilancie and preſence of the maſter, ſaith the prouerbe, fatteth the horſe and the land. And in any caſe the maſter and miſtriſſe muſt take a care to conceale their ignorance and inſufficiencie in the affaires of the houſe, and much more their careleſneſſe, making a ſhew as if they attended and thought of nothing elſe. For if officers and ſeruants haue an opinion that their maſters looke not vnto them, they may chance to make his haire grow through his hood.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIIII. The duty of Parents and children.
                  
                  THe dutie of parents and children is reciprocall and reciprocallie  naturall: if that of children be more ſtrait, that of parents is more ancient, parents being the firſt authours and cauſe, and more important to a common-weale: for to people a ſtate and to furniſh it with honeſtmen and good citizens, the culture and good nouriſhment of youth is neceſſarie, which is the ſeed of a common-wealth. And there comes not ſo much euill to a weale-publike by the ingratitude of children towards their parents, as by the careleſneſſe of parents in the inſtruction of their children: and therefore with

great reaſon in Lacedemon and other good & politike ſtates, there was a puniſhment and a penaltie laid vpon the parents when the children were ill conditioned. And Plato was wont to ſay, that he knew not in what a man ſhould bee more carefull and diligent than to make a good ſonne. And Crates cried out in choler, To what end doe men take ſo much care in heaping vp goods, and ſo little care of thoſe to whom they ſhall leaue them? It is as much as if a man ſhould take care of his ſhoo and not of his foot. What ſhould hee do with riches that is not wiſe and knowes not how to vſe them? It is like a rich and beautifull ſaddle vpon a iades backe. Parents then are doubly obliged to this duty; both becauſe they are their children, and becauſe they are the tender plants, and hope of the Common-weale: This is to till his owne land together with that of the weale-publicke.
                  Now this office or dutie hath foure ſucceſſiue parts, according to thoſe foure goods or benefits that a child ought to receiue 2 The diuiſion of the office of parents.
                      ſucceſſiuely from his parents, life, nouriſhment, inſtruction, communication. The firſt regardeth the time, when the infant is in the wombe, vntill his comming into the world incluſiuelie: the ſecond the time of his infancie in his cradle, vntill hee know how to goe and to ſpeake: the third all his youth; this part muſt be handled more at large, and more ſeriouſly: the fourth concerneth their affection, communication and cariage towards their children now come to mans eſtate, touching their goods, thoughts, deſignments.
                  The firſt, which regardeth the generation, and fruit in the wombe is not accounted of and obſerued with ſuch diligence 3 The firſt part, the office of parents.
                      as it ought, although it haue as much part in the good or euill of a child (as well of their bodies as their ſoules) as their education and inſtruction after they are borne and come to ſome growth. This is that that giueth the ſubſiſtence, the temper and temperature, the nature; the other is artificiall and acquired: and if there be a fault committed in this firſt part, the ſecond and third can hardly repaire it, no more than a fault in the firſt concoction of the ſtomacke, cannot bee mended in the ſecond nor third. We men go vnaduiſedlie and headlong to this copulation, only prouoked thereunto by pleaſure, and a deſire to disburthen our ſelues of that which tickleth and

preſſeth vs thereunto: if a conception happen thereby, it is by chance, for no man goeth to it warily, and with ſuch deliberation and diſpoſition of body as hee ought, and nature doth require. Since then men are made at aduenture, and by chance, it is no maruell if they ſeldome fall out to bee beautifull, good, ſound, wiſe and well compoſed. Behold then briefly, according to Philoſophy the particular aduiſements touching this firſt point, that is to ſay, the begetting of male children, ſound, wiſe, and iudicious: for that which ſerueth for the one of theſe qualities, ſerues for the other. 1. A man muſt not couple himſelfe with a woman that is of a vile, baſe and diſſolute condition, or of a naughty and vitious compoſition of body. 2. He muſt abſtaine from this action and copulation ſeuen or eight daies. 3. During which time hee is to nouriſh himſelfe with wholſome victuals, more hot and drie than otherwiſe, and ſuch as may concoct well in the ſtomacke. 4. He muſt vſe a more than moderate exerciſe. All this tendeth to this end and purpoſe, that the ſeed may be wel concocted and ſeaſoned, hot and drie, fit and proper for a maſculine, ſound and wiſe temperature. Vagabounds, idle and lazie people, great drinkers, who haue commonly an ill concoction, euer beget effeminate, idle and diſſolute children (as Hippocrates recounteth of the Scythians.) Againe a man muſt applie himſelfe to this encounter after one maner, a long time after his repaſt, that is to ſay, his bellie being empty, and he faſting (for a full panch performes nothing good either for the mind or for the body) and therefore Diogenes reproched a licentious yong man, for that his father had begotten him being drunke. And the law of the Carthaginians is commended by Plato, which enioined a man to abſtaine from L. 2. de leg. wine that day that he lay with his wife. 6. And not neere the monthly tearmes of a woman, but ſix or ſeuen daies before, or as much after them. 7. And vpon the point of conception and retention of the ſeed, the woman turning and gathering hirſelfe together vpon the right ſide, let hir ſo reſt for a time. 8. This direction touching the viands and exerciſe muſt be continued during the time of hir burthen.
                  To come to the ſecond point of this office after the birth of  the infant, theſe foure points are to be obſerued. 1. The infant

muſt be waſhed in warme water, ſomewhat briniſh, to make 
                        The ſecond part of the office of parents. Ezech. 16. the members ſupple and firme, to cleanſe and drie the fleſh & the braine, to ſtrengthen the ſinewes, a very good cuſtome in the Eaſterne parts & among the Iewes. 2. The nurſe if ſhe be to be choſen, let hir be young, of a temperature or complexion the leaſt cold and moiſt that may be, brought vp in labour, hard lodging, ſlender diet, hardned againſt cold and heate. I ſay if ſhe be to be choſen, becauſe according to reaſon, and the opinion of the wiſeſt, it ſhould be the mother; and therefore they crie out againſt hir, when ſhe refuſeth this charge, being inuited and as it were bound thereunto by nature, who to that end hath giuen hir milke and dugs, by the example of beaſts; and that loue and iealouſie that ſhe ought to haue of hir little ones, who receiue a very great hurt by the change of their aliment, now accuſtomed in a ſtranger, and perhaps a bad one too, of a conſtitution quite contrarie to the former, whereby they are not to be accounted mothers but by halfes. Quod eſt hoc contra naturam imperfectum, ac dimidiatum matris genus peperiſſe, & ſtaim ab ſe abieciſſe, aluiſſe in vtero 
                     Aul. Gell. L. 12. c. 1. 
                     ſanguine ſuo neſcio quid quod non videret: non alere autem nunc ſuo lacte, quod videat iam viuentem, iam hominem, iam matris officia implorantem. 3. The nouriſhment beſides the dugge ſhould be goates milke, or rather creame, the moſt ſubtile and aerie part of the milke, ſod with honie and a little ſalt. Theſe are things very fit for the bodie and the mind, by the aduice of all the wiſe and great Phyſitians, Greeks, and Hebrews. Galen. multis locis. Homer. 10. Iliad. I ſay 7. 
                     Butyrum & mel comedet, vt ſciat reprobare malum, & eligere bonum. The qualitie of milke or creame is very temperate, and full of good nouriſhment; the drineſſe of the honie and ſalt conſumeth the too great humiditie of the braine, and diſpoſeth it vnto wiſdome. 4. The infant muſt by little and little be accuſtomed and hardned to the aire, to heate and cold: and we are not to be fearefull thereof; for in the Northerne parts of the world they waſh their children ſo ſoone as they come out of the womb of their mothers in cold water, and are neuer the worſe.
                  The two firſt parts of the office of parents we haue ſoone diſpatched; whereby it appeareth, that they are not true fathers  that haue not that care, affection and diligence in theſe

matters that is fit; for they are the cauſe and occaſion, either by careleſneſſe or otherwiſe, of the death and vntimely birth of their children; and when they are borne they care not for them, but expoſe them to their own fortunes, for which cauſe they are depriued by law of that fatherlie power ouer them that is due vnto them; and the children to the ſhame of their parents are made ſlaues by thoſe that haue nouriſhed them and brought them vp, who are farre from taking care to preſerue them from fire and water, and all other croſſes and afflictions that may light vpon them.
                  The third part which concerneth the inſtruction of children 6 The third part of the office of parents.
                      we are to handle more ſeriouſlie. So ſoone as this infant is able to goe and to ſpeake, and ſhall begin to employ his mind and his bodie, and that the faculties thereof ſhall be awakened and ſhew themſelues, the memorie, imagination, reaſon, which begin at the fourth or fift yeare, there muſt be An instruction very important. a great care and diligence vſed in the well forming thereof: for this firſt tincture and liquor wherewith the mind muſt be ſeaſoned, hath a very great power. It cannot be expreſſed how much this firſt impreſſion and formation of youth preuaileth, euen to the conquering of nature it ſelfe. Nourture, ſaith one, excelleth nature. Lycurgus made it plaine to all the world, by two little dogs of one litter, but diuerſlie brought vp, to whom preſenting before them in an open place a pot of pottage and a hare, that which was brought vp tenderlie in the houſe fell to the pottage; the other that had beene euer trained vp in hunting, forſooke the pottage andranne after the hare. The force of this inſtruction proceeds from this, that it entreth eaſily, and departeth with difficultie: for being the firſt that entreth, it taketh ſuch place and winneth ſuch Quint, Senec. credit as a man will, there being no other precedent matter to conteſt with it, or to make head againſt it. This mind then wholly new and neat, ſoft and tender, doth eaſily receiue that impreſſion that a man will giue vnto it, and afterwards doth not eaſily loſe it.
                  Now this is not a thing of ſmall importance, but a man may rather ſay it is the moſt difficult and important that may be.  For who ſeeth not that in a ſtate all depends vpon this? Neuertheleſſe (and it is the greateſt, moſt dangerous and lamentable

fault that is in our policies, noted by Aristotle and Plutarch) wee ſee that the conduct and diſcipline of youth is wholly left vnto the charge and mercie of their parents what kind of men ſoeuer they be, many times careleſſe, fooliſh, wicked, and the publike ſtate regardeth it not, cares not for it, whereby all goes to ruine. Almoſt the only ſtates that haue giuen to the lawes the diſcipline of children, were that of Lacedemon and Creet: But the moſt excellent diſcipline of the world for youth, was the Spartaine; and therefore Ageſilaus perſwaded Xenophon to ſend his children thither, for there, ſaith he, they may learne the moſt excellent ſcience of the world, and that is to commaund and to obey well, and there are formed good Lawyers, Emperours at armes, Magiſtrates, Citizens. This youth and their inſtruction they eſteemed aboue all things; and therefore Antipater demaunding of them fiftie children for hoſtages, they anſwered him, that they had rather giue him twiſe as many men at their ripeſt yeares.
                  Now before we enter into this matter, I will heere giue an  aduertiſement of ſome weight. There are ſome that take great paines to diſcouer the inclinations of children, and for what imployment they ſhall be moſt fit; but this is a thing ſo obſcure, and ſo vncertaine, that when a man hath beſtowed what coſt, and taken what paines he can, he is commonlie deceiued. And therefore not to tie our ſelues to theſe weake and light diuinations and prognoſtications drawne from the motions of their infancie, let vs indeuor to giue them an inſtruction vniuerſallie good & profitable, whereby they are made capable, readie, and diſpoſed to whatſoeuer. This is to goe vpon a ſure ground, and to do that which muſt alwaies be done. This ſhall be a good tincture, apt to receiue all others.
                  To make an entrance into this matter, we may referre it vnto three points, the forming of the ſpirit, the ordering of 9 The diuiſion of this matter.
                      the bodie, the ruling of the maners. But before we giue any particular counſell touching theſe three, there are generall aduiſements that belong to the maner of proceeding in this buſineſſe, that ſhew vs how to carie our ſelues worthily and happilie therein, which muſt be firſt knowne as a preamble to the reſt.
                  The firſt is carefullie to gard his ſoule, and to keepe it neate 
                     
and free from the contagion and corruption of the world, The firſt generall aduice touching inſtruction. To gard the eares. that it receiue not any blot nor wicked attainture. And the better to do this, he muſt diligentlie keepe the gates, which are the eares eſpeciallie, and then the eies, that is to ſay, giue order, that not any, no not his owne father, come neere vnto him to buz into his eares any thing that is euill. There needs no more but a word, the leaſt diſcourſe that may be, to make an euill almoſt paſt reparation. Gard thine eares aboue all, and then thy eies. And for this cauſe Plato was of opinion, that it was not fit that ſeruants and baſe perſons ſhould entertaine children with diſcourſe, becauſe their talke can be no better than fables, vaine ſpeeches and fooleries, if not worſe. This were to traine vp and to feede thoſe tender yeares with follies and fooleries.
                  The ſecond aduice concerneth not only the perſons that muſt haue charge of this child, but the diſcourſe and conference 11 The ſecond generall aduice touching the choice of inſtructors. Conference. Bookes.
                      wherewith he muſt be entertained, and the bookes he muſt reade. Touching the perſons, they muſt be honeſt men, well borne, of a ſweet and pleaſing conuerſation, hauing their head well framed, fuller of wiſdome than of ſcience; and that they agree in opinion together, leſt that by contrarie counſels, or a different way in proceeding, the one by rigour, the other by flatterie, they hinder not one another, and trouble their charge and deſignments. Their bookes and communication muſt not be of ſmall, baſe, ſottiſh, friuolous matters, but great and ſerious, noble and generous; ſuch as may rule and inrich the vnderſtanding, opinions, maners; as they that inſtruct a man in the knowledge of our humane condition, the motions and myſteries of our minds, to the end he may know himſelfe and others; ſuch, I ſay, as may teach him what to feare, to loue, to deſire; what paſſion is, what vertue, how he may iudge betwixt ambition and auarice, ſeruitude and ſubiection, libertie and licentiouſnes. He is deceiued that thinketh that there is a greater proportion of ſpirit required to the vnderſtanding of thoſe excellent examples of Valerius Maximus, and all the Greeke and Romane hiſtories (which is the moſt beautifull ſcience and knowledge of the world) than to vnderſtand Amadis of Gaule, and other like vaine and friuolous diſcourſes. That child that can know how many

hennes his mother hath, and who are his vncles and his coſens, will as eaſilie carrie away how many kings there haue beene, and how many Caeſars in Rome. A man muſt not diſtruſt the capacity and ſufficiency of his mind, but know how to conduct and manage it.
                  The third is to carrie himſelfe towards him, and to proceed 12 The third generall aduice. Inſtruction milde and free.
                      not after an auſtere, rude and ſeuere manner, but ſweetly, mildly, & cheerefullie. And therefore we do heere altogether condemne that cuſtome which is common in all places, to beat and to box, and with ſtrange words and outcries to hazen children, and to keepe them in feare & ſubiection, as the maner is in free-ſchooles & collēdges. For it is a cuſtome too vniuſt, and as foule a fault, as when a Iudge or Phyſitian ſhall be moued to choler againſt an offender and patient: preiudiciall and quite contrarie to that purpoſe that a man hath, which is to ſtir vp a deſire in them, and to bring them in loue with vertue, wiſdome, ſcience, honeſty. Now this imperious and rude cariage breeds in children a hatred, horrour and deteſtation of that they ſhould loue; it prouoketh them, makes them head-ſtrong, abateth and taketh away their courage, in ſuch ſort that their mindes become ſeruile, baſe and ſlauiſh, like their vſage; Parentes ne prouocetis ad iracundiam ſilios veſtros ne deſpondeant animum. For ſeeing themſelues Coloſſ. 3. thus handled, they neuer performe any thing of woorth, but curſe their maſter and their apprentiſhippe. If they doe that which is required at their hands, it is becauſe the eie of the maſter is alwaies vpon them, it is for feare, and not cheerefullie and noblie, and therefore not honeſtly. If they faile and performe not their taske, to ſaue themſelues from the rigour of the puniſhment, they haue recourſe to baſe vnlawfull remedies, lies, falſe excuſes, teares of deſpite, flights, triuentings, all worſe than the fault they haue committed.
                  
                     Dum id reſcitum iri credit, tantiſper cauet; Terent.
                     
                     Si ſperat fore clam, rurſum ad ingenium redit:
                     Ille, quem beneficio adiungas, ex animo facit;
                     Studet par referre, praeſens, abſenſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         idem erit:
                  
                  My will is that they be handled freely and liberally, vſing therein reaſon, and ſweet and milde perſwaſions, which ingender in their hearts the affections of honour and of ſhame.

The firſt will ſerue them as a ſpurre to what is good, the ſecond as a bridle to checke and withdraw them from euill. There is ſomething, I know not what, that is ſeruile and baſe in rigor and conſtraint, the enemy to honour and true liberty. We muſt clean contrary fat their hearts with ingenuity, liberty, loue, vertue and honour.
                  
                     Pudore & liberalitate liberos retinere Terent.
                     
                     Satius eſſe credo, quàm metu.
                     Hoc patrium eſt potius conſuefacere filium
                     Sua ſponte recte facere, quàm alieno metu.
                     Hoc pater ac dominus intereſt, hoc qui nequit
                     Fate atur ſe neſcire imperare liberis.
                  
                  Blowes are for beaſts that vnderſtand not reaſon: iniuries and brawles are for ſlaues. He that is once accuſtomed thereunto is mard for euer. But reaſon the beautie of action, the deſire of honeſty and honour, the approbation of all men, cheerefulneſſe and comfort of heart, and the deteſtation of their contraries, as brutiſhneſſe, baſeneſſe, diſhonour, reproch and the improbation of all men; theſe are the armes, the ſpurs and the bridles of children well borne, and ſuch as a man would make honeſtmen. This is that which a man ſhould alwaies ſound in their eares; and if theſe means cannot preuaile, all other of rigour and roughneſſe ſhall neuer do good. That which cannot be done with reaſon, wiſdome, endeuour, ſhall neuer be done by force; and if happily it be done, yet it is to ſmall purpoſe. But theſe other meanes cannot be vnprofitable, if they be imploied in time, before the goodneſſe of nature be ſpent and ſpilt. But yet for all this, let no man thinke that I approoue that looſe and flattering indulgence, and ſottiſh feare to giue children cauſe of diſcontent and ſorrow, which is another extremity as bad as the former. This were like the Iuie, to kill and make barren the tree which it embraceth, or the ape that killeth hir yoong with culling them: or like thoſe that feare to hold him vp by the haire of the head that is in danger of drowning, for feare of hurting him, and ſo ſuffer him to periſh. Againſt this vice the wiſe Hebrew ſpake much. Youth muſt be held in obedience and diſcipline, not Eccleſ. 30. bodily like beaſts and madmen, but ſpirituall, humane, liberall according to reaſon.
                  
                     
We come now to the particular and more expreſſe aduiſements of this inſtruction. The firſt head of them is, as wee 13 Particular aduiſements touching the minde.
                      haue ſaid, to exerciſe, ſharpen and forme the mind. Whereupon there are diuers precepts, but the firſt principall and fundamentall of all others, which reſpecteth the end of inſtruction, and which I moſt deſire to inculcate, becauſe it is leaſt embraced and followed, and euery man runneth after the contrary, which is a common and ordinarie errour, is, to haue much more, and the chiefe and principall care to exerciſe, to husband and manure, to vſe the proper good, and much leſſe to get and to endeuour the attainment of that which is ſtrange; to ſtriue and ſtudy more for wiſdome, than for ſcience and arte; rather well to forme the iudgement, and by conſequence the will, and the conſcience, than to fill the memorie, and to inflame the imagination. Theſe are the three miſtreſſe parts of a reaſonable ſoule: But the firſt is the iudgement, as before hath beene diſcourſed, to which place I reſend the Reader. Now the cuſtome of the world is quite contrarie, which runneth wholly after arte, ſcience, and what L. 1. ca. 7. is acquired. Parents to the end they may make their children wiſe, are at great charge, and their children take great paines, Vt omnium rerum ſic literarum intemperantiâ laboramus: and Tacit. many times all is loſt. But to make them wiſe, honeſt, apt and dexterious, which is a matter of ſmall charge or labour, they take no care at all. What greater folly can there be in the world, than more to admire ſcience, that which is acquired, memorie, than wiſdome, than nature? Now all commit not this fault with one and the ſame minde; ſome ſimplie caried by cuſtome, thinke that wiſdome and ſcience are not things different, or at leaſtwiſe, that they march alwaier together, and that it is neceſſarie a man haue the one to attaine the other; theſe kinde of men deſerue to be taught: others goe out of malice, and they thinke they know well enough what they doe, and at what price ſoeuer it be they will haue arte and ſcience: For this is a meane in theſe daies in the occidentall parts of Europe to get fame, reputation, riches. Theſe kinde of people make of ſcience an arte and merchandiſe, ſcience mercenarie, pedanticall, baſe and mechanicall. They buie ſcience to ſell it againe. Let vs leaue theſe merchants

as vncureable. Contrariwiſe, I cannot heere but blame the opinion and faſhion of ſome of our gentlemen of Fraunce, (for in other nations this fault is not ſo apparent) who haue knowledge or arte in ſuch diſdaine & contempt, that they do leſſe eſteeme of an honeſt man only for this, becauſe he hath ſtudied: they diſcarde it as a thing that ſeemeth in ſome ſort to impeach their nobilitie. Wherein they ſhew themſelues what they are, ill borne, woorſe aduiſed, and truely ignorant of vertue and honour; which they likewiſe bewray in their cariage, their idleneſſe, their impertinencies, their inſufficiencie, in their inſolencies, vanities, and barbarities.
                  To teach others, and to diſcouer the fault of all this, we muſt make good two things; The one, that ſcience and wiſdome 14 A compariſon of ſcience and wiſdome.
                      are things verie different; and that wiſdome is more woorth than all the ſcience or arte of the world; as heauen exceedes the price of the earth, gold of iron: the other, that they are not onely different, but that they ſeldome or neuer goe together, that they commonly hinder one another; he that hath much knowledge or arte is ſeldome wiſe, and he that is wiſe hath not much knowledge. Some exceptions there are heerein, but they are verie rare, and of great, rich, and happie ſpirits. Some there haue beene in times paſt, but in theſe daies there are no more to be found.
                  The better to performe this, we muſt firſt know what ſcience and wiſdome is. Science is a great heape, or accumulation 15 The definition of ſcience and wiſdome.
                      and prouiſion of the good of another; that is, a collection of all that a man hath ſeene, heard and read in bookes, that is to ſay, of the excellent ſayings and doings of great perſonages that haue beene of all nations. Now the garner or ſtorehouſe where this great prouiſion remaineth and is kept, the treaſurie of ſcience and all acquired good, is the memorie. He that hath a good memorie, the fault is his owne if he want knowledge, becauſe he hath the meane. Wiſdome is a ſweet and regular managing of the ſoule. He is wiſe that gouerneth himſelfe in his deſires, thoughts, opinions, ſpeeches, actions, with meaſure and proportion. To be briefe, and in a word, wiſdome is the rule of the ſoule: and that which manageth this rule is the iudgement, which ſeeth, iudgeth, eſteemeth all things: rangeth them as they ought, giuing to euery thing

that which belongs vnto it. Let vs now ſee their differences and how much wiſdome excels the other.
                  Science is a ſmall and barraine good in reſpect of wiſdome, for it is not only not neceſſarie (for of three parts of the world  two and more haue made little vſe thereof) but it brings with it ſmall profit, and ſerues to little purpoſe. 1. It is no way ſeruiceable to the life of a man: How many people rich and poore, great and ſmall, liue pleaſantlie and happilie, that haue neuer heard any ſpeech of ſcience? There are many other things more commodious and ſeruiceable to the life of man, and the maintenance of humane ſocietie, as honor, glorie, nobilitie, dignitie, which neuertheleſſe are not neceſſarie. 2. Neither is it ſeruiceable to things naturall, which an ignorant ſot may as well performe, as he that hath beſt knowledge: Nature is a ſufficient miſtriſſe for that. 3. Nor to honeſtie, and to make vs better, paucis eſt opus literis ad bonam mentem, nay, it rather hindreth it. He that will marke it well ſhall find not only more honeſt people, but alſo more excellent in all kind of vertue amongſt thoſe that know little, than thoſe that know moſt; witneſſe Rome, which was more honeſt being young and ignorant, than when it was old, craftie, and cunning, Simplex illa & aperta a virtus in obſcuram & ſolertem ſcientiam verſa eſt. Science ſerueth not for any thing, but to inuent crafts & ſubtleties, artificiall cunning, deuiſes, and whatſoeuer is an enemie to innocencie, which willinglie lodgeth with ſimplicitie and ignorance. Atheiſme errours, ſects, and all the troubles of the world haue riſen from the order of theſe men of arte & knowledge. The firſt temptation of the diuell, ſaith the ſcripture, and the beginning of all euill, and the ruine of mankind, was the opinion and the deſire of knowledge: Eritis ſicut dij ſcientes bonum & malum. The Sirenes to deceiue and intrap Vlyſſes within their ſnares, offered vnto him the gift of ſcience; and S. Paul aduiſeth you all to take heed, ne quis vos ſeducat per philoſophiam. One of the ſufficients men of knowledge that euer was, ſpake of Science, as of a thing not Salomon in his Eccleſiaſt. only vaine, but hurtfull, painfull, and tedious. To be briefe, Science may make vs more humane and courteous, but not more honeſt. 4. Againe, it ſerueth nothing to the ſweetning of our life, or the quitting vs of thoſe euils that oppreſſe vs in

the world; but contrarily it increaſeth and ſharpneth them, witneſſe children and fooles, ſimple and ignorant perſons, who meaſuring euery thing by the preſent taſte, run thorow them with the leſſe griefe, beare them with better content, than men of greateſt learning and knowledge. Science anticipateth thoſe euils that come vpon vs, in ſuch ſort that they are ſooner in the ſoule of man by knowledge, than in nature. The wiſeman ſaid, that he that increaſeth knowledge, increaſeth Eccleſiaſtes 1. 18. ſorrow: Ignorance is a more fit remedie againſt all euils, iners malorum remedium ignorantia eſt. From whence proceed thoſe counſels of our friends, Thinke not of it, put it out of your head and memorie. Is not this to caſt vs into the armes of ignorance, as into the beſt and ſafeſt ſanctuarie that may be? But this is but a mockerie, for to remember and to forget is not in our power. But they would do as Chirurgions vſe to do, who not knowing how to heale a wound, yet ſet a good ſhew vpon it by allaying the paine and bringing it aſleepe. They that counſell men to kill themſelues in their extreame and remedileſſe euils, do they not ſend a man to ignorance, ſtupiditie, inſenſibilitie? Wiſdome is a neceſſarie good, and vniuerſallie commodious for all things: it gouerneth and ruleth all: there is not any thing that can hide, or quit it ſelfe of the iuriſdiction or knowledge thereof: It beareth ſway euery where, in peace, in warre, in publick, in priuat: It ruleth and moderateth euen the inſolent behauiors of men, their ſports, their daunces, their banquets, and is as a bridle vnto them. To conclude, there is nothing that ought not to be done diſcretlie and wiſely; and contrarily, without wiſdome all things fall into trouble and confuſion.
                  Secondly, Science is ſeruile, baſe, and mechanicall in reſpect of wiſdome, and a thing borowed with paine. A learned  man is like a crow deckt with the feathers that he hath ſtollen from other birds. He maketh a great ſhew in the world, but at the charge of another, and he had need to vaile his bonnet often, as a teſtimonie of that honor he giues to thoſe from whom he hath borowed his arte. A wiſe man is like him that liues vpon his owne reuenewes; for wiſdome is properly a mans owne; it is a naturall good well tilled and laboured.
                  Thirdly, the conditions are diuers, the one more beautifull 
                     
and more noble than the other. Learning or Science is fierce, preſumptuous, arrogant, opinatiue, indiſcreet, querulous, ſcientia inflat. 2. Science is talkatiue, deſirous to ſhew it ſelfe, which neuertheleſſe knowes not how to do any thing, is not actiue, but only fit to ſpeake and to diſcourſe: wiſdom acteth and gouerneth all.
                  Learning then and wiſdome are things very different, and wiſdome of the two the more excellent, more to be eſteemed than ſcience. For it is neceſſarie, profitable to all, vniuerſall, actiue, noble, honeſt, gracious, cheerefull. Science is particular, vnneceſſarie, ſeldome profitable, not actiue, ſeruile, mechanicall, melancholicke, opinatiue, preſumptuous.
                  We come now to the other point, and that is, that they are not alwaies together, but contrarily almoſt alwaies ſeparated. 19 Learning and wiſdome meete not together.
                      The naturall reaſon, as hath been ſaid, is, that their temperatures are contrarie. For that of ſcience and memorie is moiſt, and that of wiſdome and iudgement drie. This alſo is ſignified vnto vs, in that which happened to our firſt parents, who as ſoone as they caſt their eies vpon knowledge, they preſentlie deſired it, and ſo were robbed of that wiſdome wherewithall they were indued from their beginning; whereof we euery day ſee the like in common experience. The moſt beautifull and floriſhing ſtates, Common-weales, Empires, ancient and moderne, haue beene and are gouerned very wiſely, both in peace and warre, without ſcience. Rome the firſt fiue hundred yeares, wherein it floriſhed in vertue and Wiſdome without ſcience. valour, was without knowledge; and ſo ſoone as it began to be learned, it began to corrupt, to trouble, and ruinate it ſelfe by ciuill warres. The moſt beautifull policie that euer was, the Lacedemonian built by Lycurgus, from whence haue ſprung the greateſt perſonages of the world, made no profeſſion of learning, and yet it was the ſchoole of vertue and wiſdome, and was euer victorious ouer Athens, the moſt learned citie of the world, the ſchoole of all ſcience, the habitation of the Muſes, the ſtore-houſe of Philoſophers. All thoſe great and floriſhing realmes of the eaſt and weſt Indies, haue ſtood for many ages together without learning, without the knowledge of bookes or writings. In theſe dayes they learne many things, by the good leaue and aſſiſtance of their new

maſters, at the expence of their owne libertie, yea their vices and their ſubtilties too, whereof in former times they neuer heard ſpeach. That great, and it may be the greateſt and moſt floriſhing ſtate and Empire which is at this day in the world, is that of that great Lord, who like the Lion of the whole earth, makes himſelfe to be feared of all the Princes and Monarks of the world; and euen in this ſtate, there is not any profeſſion of ſcience, nor ſchoole, nor permiſſion or allowance to reade, or teach publicklie, no not in matters of religion. What guideth & gouerneth, and maketh this ſtate to proſper thus? It is wiſdome, it is prudence. But come wee to thoſe ſtates wherein learning and ſciences are in credit. Who do gouerne them? Doubtleſſe not the learned. Let vs take for example this our realme, wherein learning and knowledge haue greater honor than in all the world beſides, and which ſeemeth to haue ſucceeded Greece it ſelfe: The principall officers of this crowne the Conſtable, Marſhall, Admirall, the Secretaries of the ſtate, who diſpatch all affaires, are commonlie men altogether illiterate. And doubtleſſe, many great Lawyers, founders, and Princes haue baniſhed ſcience as the poyſon and peſtilence of a Common-wealth; Licinius, Valentinian, Mahomet, Lycurgus. And thus wee ſee what wiſdome is without ſcience. Let vs now ſee what ſcience is without wiſdome, which is not hard to doe. Let vs looke a little into thoſe that Science without wiſdome. make profeſſion of learning, that come from Schooles and Vniuerſities, and haue their heads full of Aristotle, Cicero, Bartolus. Are there any people in the world more vntoward, more ſottiſh, more vnfit for all things? From hence commeth that prouerb, that when a man would deſcribe a foole, or an vntowardlie perſon, hee calleth him Clerke, Pedante: And to expreſſe a thing ill done, it is the maner to ſay, It is Clearklike done. It ſhould ſeeme that learning doth intoxicate, and as it were hammer a mans braines, and makes him to turne ſotte and foole, as king Agrippa ſaid to S. Paul, Multae 
                     Act. 26. 
                     te literae ad inſaniam adducunt. There are diuers men that had they neuer beene trained vp in ſchooles and colleges, they had beene farre more wiſe; and their brethren that haue neuer applied themſelues to learning, haue prooued the wiſer men: Vt melius fuiſſet non didiciſſe: nam poſt quam docti prodierunt,
                     
                     boni deſunt. Come to the practiſe, chuſe me one of theſe learned ſchollers, bring him to the common counſell of a citie, or any publike aſſemblie, wherein the affaires of the ſtate are conſulted of, or matter of policie, or houſhold huſbandrie, you neuer ſaw a man more aſtoniſhed, he waxeth pale, bluſheth, cougheth, and at laſt knowes not what to ſay. And if he chance to ſpeake, he entreth into a long diſcourſe, of definitions, and diuiſions of Ariſtotle; ergo potlead. Marke in the ſelfe-ſame counſell a merchant, a burgeſſe, that neuer heard ſpeake of Ariſtotle, he will yeeld a better reaſon, giue a ſounder iudgement and more to purpoſe than theſe ſcholaſticall doctors.
                  Now it is not enough to haue ſaid, that wiſdome and learning ſeldome concurre and meete together, vnleſſe we ſeeke 20 The reaſon of this ſeparation.
                      the reaſon and cauſe thereof, not doubting thereby but ſufficiently to content and to ſatisfie thoſe, that miſlike what I haue ſaid, or thinke me perhaps an enemie to erudition and learning. The queſtion thereof is, from whence it commeth that learning and wiſdome doe ſeldome encounter and meete together in one and the ſame man: And there is great reaſon why we ſhould mooue this queſtion: for it is a ſtrange thing and againſt reaſon, that a man the more learned he is, ſhould not be the more wiſe, learning and knowledge being a proper meanes, and inſtrument vnto wiſdome Behold therefore two men, the one a ſtudent, the other none; he that hath ſtudied, is in ſome ſort bound to be farre the wiſer of the two, becauſe he hath all that the other hath, that is, nature, reaſon, iudgement, ſpirit; and beſides theſe the counſels, diſcourſes, iudgements of all the greateſt men of the world, by reading their books. Is there not then great reaſon, he ſhould be much more wiſe, more dexterious, more honeſt than the other, ſince that with theſe proper and naturall meanes, he attaineth ſo manie extraordinarie on euerie ſide? For as one ſaith well, the naturall good cohering and concurring with the accidentall frameth an excellent compoſition: and yet neuertheleſſe, we ſee the contrarie, as hath beene ſaid.
                  Now the true reaſon and anſwer to all this, is the euill and ſiniſter maner of ſtudie and ill inſtruction. They learne our 21 An anſwer
                     
                     
of bookes and ſchooles excellent knowledge, but with ill to ill diſcipline. meanes, and as bad ſucceſſe. Whereby it comes to paſſe, that all their ſtudie profiteth them nothing at all, but they remaine indigent and poore, in the midſt of their plentie and riches, and like Tantalus, die for hunger in the midſt of their dainties: the reaſon is, becauſe whileſt they pore vpon their bookes, they reſpect nothing ſo much as to ſtuffe and furniſh their memories with that which they read and vnderſtand, and preſently they thinke themſelues wiſe: like him that put his bread into his pocket and not into his belly, when his pocket was full, died for hunger. And ſo with a memory fully ſtuffed, they continue fooles; Student non ſibi & vitae, ſed alijs & ſcholae. They prepare themſelues to be reporters; Cicero hath ſaid it, Ariſtotle, Plato hath left it in writing, &c. but they for their parts know nothing. Theſe men commit a double fault, the one in that they apply not that which they learne, to themſelues, that ſo they may forme themſelues vnto vertue, wiſdome, reſolution, by which meanes their knowledge is vnprofitable vnto them: the other is, that during all that time, which with great paines and charge they employ, to the heaping together and pocketing vp for another without any profit to themſelues, whatſoeuer they can robbe from other men, they ſuffer their owne proper good to fall to the ground, and neuer put it in practiſe. They on the other ſide that ſtudie not, hauing no recourſe vnto another, take a care to husband their naturall gifts, and ſo prooue many times the better, the more wiſe, and reſolute, though leſſe learned, leſſe gainers, leſſe glorious. One there is that hath ſaid as much, though otherwiſe and more briefly; That learning marreth weake wits and ſpirits, perfecteth the ſtrong and naturall.
                  Now hearken to that counſell that I giue heereupon; A man muſt not giue himſelfe to the gathering and keeping 22 Good diſcipline.
                      the opinions and knowledges of another, to the end he may afterwards make report of them, or vſe them for ſhew or oſtentation, or ſome baſe and mercenary profit; but he muſt vſe them ſo, as that he may make them his owne. He muſt not onely lodge them in his minde, but incorporate and tranſubſtantiate them into himſelfe. He muſt not onely water his

minde with the deaw of knowledge, but he muſt make it eſſentially better, wiſe, ſtrong, good, couragious; otherwiſe to what end ſerueth ſtudie? Non paranda nobis ſolùm, ſed fruenda ſapientia eſt. He muſt not doe as it is the maner of thoſe that make garlands, who picke heere and there whole flowers, and ſo carry them away to make noſe-gaies, and afterwards preſents, heape together out of that booke and out of this booke many good things, to make a faire and a goodly ſhew to others; but he muſt do as bees vſe to do, who carie not away the flowers, but ſettle themſelues vpon them, like a hen that couereth hir chicken, and draweth from them their ſpirit, force, vertue, quinteſſence, and nouriſhing themſelues, turne them into their owne ſubſtance, and afterwards make good and ſweet honie, which is all their owne; and it is no more either thyme or ſweet mariarom. So muſt a man gather from bookes the marrow and ſpirit (neuer enthrawling himſelfe ſo much as to retaine the words by heart, as many vſe to do, much leſſe the place, the booke, the chapter; that is a ſottiſh and vaine ſuperſtition and vanitie, and makes him loſe the principall) and hauing ſucked and drawne the good, feed his mind therewith, informe his iudgement, inſtruct and direct his conſcience and his opinions, rectifie his will; and in a word, frame vnto himſelfe a worke wholly his owne, that is to ſay, an honeſt man, wiſe, aduiſed, reſolute. Non ad pompam nec ad ſpeciem, nec vt nomine magnifico ſequi otium velis, ſed quo 
                     Tacit. 
                     firmior aduerſus fortuita rempublicam capeſſas.
                  
                  And heereunto the choice of ſciences is neceſſarie. Thoſe that I commend aboue all others, and that beſt ſerue to that 23 2 The ſecond aduice touching the choice of ſciences.
                      end, which I propoſe and whereof I am to ſpeake, are naturall and morall, which teach vs to liue, and to liue well, nature and vertue; that which we are, and that which we ſhould be: vnder the morall are comprehended, the Politicks, Economicks, Hiſtories. All the reſt are vaine and frothie, and we are not to dwell vpon them, but to take them as paſſing by.
                  This end of the inſtruction of youth and compariſon of learning and wiſdome, hath held me too long, by reaſon of 24 3 The means to learne.
                      the conteſtation. Let vs now proceede to the other parts and aduiſements of this inſtruction. The meanes of inſtructions are diuers, eſpeciallie of two ſorts; the one by word, that is to By word of mouth.
                     
ſay, by precepts, inſtructions, and lectures; or elſe by conference with honeſt and able men, filing and refining our wits againſt theirs, as iron is cleanſed and beautified by the file; This meanes and maner is very pleaſing and agreeable to nature.
                  The other by action, that is, example, which is gotten not 25 By example.
                      only from good men by imitation, and ſimilitude, but alſo wicked, by diſagreement in opinions; For ſome there are that learne better by the oppoſition and horror of that euill they ſee in another. It is a ſpeciall vſe of Iuſtice, to condemne one, that he may ſerue for an example vnto others. And old Cato was wont to ſay, That wiſe men may learne more of fooles, than fooles of wiſe men. The Lacedemonians the better to diſſwade their children from drunkenneſſe, made their ſeruants drunken before their faces, to the end that ſeeing how horrible a ſpectacle a drunken man was, they ſhould the rather deteſt it.
                  Now this ſecond meanes or maner by example, teacheth vs with more eaſe and more delight. To learne by precepts A compariſon of theſe two. is a long way, becauſe it is a painefull thing to vnderſtand well, and vnderſtanding to retaine well, and retaining to vſe and practiſe well. And hardlie can we promiſe our ſelues to reape that fruit which they promiſe vnto vs. But example and imitation teach vs aboue the worke or action it ſelfe, inuite vs with much more ardour, and promiſe vnto vs that glorie which we learne to imitate. The ſeed that is caſt into the earth draweth vnto it ſelfe in the end the qualitie of that earth whereunto it is tranſported, and becomes like vnto that which doth there naturallie grow: So the ſpirits and maners of men conforme themſelues to thoſe with whom they commonlie conuerſe.
                  Now theſe two maners of profiting by ſpeech and by example, 26 From the liuing.
                      are likewiſe twofold, for they are drawne from excellent perſonages, either liuing, by their ſenſible and outward frequentation and conference; or dead, by the reading of their bookes. The firſt, that is the commerce with the liuing, is more liuely and more naturall, it is a fruitfull exerciſe of life, which was much in vſe amongſt the ancients, yea the Greeks themſelues, but it is caſuall depending on another, and rare:

It is a difficult matter to meete with ſuch people, and more difficult to make vſe of them. And this is practiſed either by keeping home, or by trauelling & viſiting ſtrange countries, not to be fed with vanities as the moſt do, but to carie with them the knowledge and conſideration eſpeciallie of the humours and cuſtomes of thoſe nations. This is a profitable exerciſe, the bodie is neither idle, nor tyred with labour, for this moderate agitation keepes a man in breath, the mind is in continuall exerciſe, by marking things knowen and new. There is not a better ſchoole to forme the life of man, than to ſee the diuerſitie of ſo many other liues, and to taſte a perperuall varietie of the formes of our nature.
                  The other commerce with the dead by the benefit of their bookes, is more ſure, and more neere vnto vs, more conſtant, 27 From the dead by bookes.
                      and leſſe chargeable. He that knowes how to make vſe of them, receiueth thereby great pleaſure, great comfort. It diſchargeth vs of the burthen of a tedious idleneſſe, it withdraweth vs from fond imaginations, and other outward things, that vex and trouble vs: It counſelleth vs, and comforteth vs in our griefes and afflictions: but yet it is only good for the mind, whereby the bodie remaineth without action, altereth and languiſheth.
                  We muſt now ſpeake of that order of proceeding and formalitie which a teacher of youth muſt keepe, that he may 28 4 To make the ſcholler to ſpeake and to reaſon.
                      happilie ariue to his propoſed end. It hath many parts; we will touch ſome of them. Firſt, hee muſt often examin his ſcholler, aske his iudgement and opinion of whatſoeuer ſhall preſent it ſelfe vnto him. This is quite contrarie to the ordinarie ſtile, which is, that the maſter do alwaies ſpeake and teach his child with authoritie, and worke into his head as into a veſſell, whatſoeuer he will, in ſo much that children are only auditours and receiuers, which maner of teaching I can not commend, obeſt plerun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ijs, qui diſcere volunt, authoritas eorum qui docent. Their ſpirits muſt be awakened and inflamed by demaunds, make them firſt to giue their opinions, and then giue them the ſame libertie, to aske others, to enquire and to open the way at their owne will. If without queſtioning with them a man ſpeake wholly vnto them, it is a labour in a maner loſt, the child is not profited thereby, becauſe he

thinks it belongs not vnto him, ſo long as he yeelds not an account thereof; he lends only his eares and thoſe coldly too; he ſets not forward with ſo good a paſe, as when he is a partie in the buſineſſe. Neither is it enough to make them giue their iudgement, but that they maintaine it, and be able to giue a reaſon of their ſaying, to the end that they ſpeake not by rote, but that they be attentiue, and carefull of that they ſpeake: and to giue them the better incouragement thereunto, a man muſt not ſeeme to neglect that they ſay, but commend at the leaſt their good eſſay and indeuor. This forme of teaching by queſtions and demaunds is excellentlie obſerued both by Socrates (the principall in this buſineſſe) as wee ſee euery where in Plato, where by a long connexion and enfolding of demaunds wittilie and dexteriouſlie made, he ſweetlie leadeth a man to the cloſet of veritie; and alſo by the Doctor of veritie Mat. 16. 22. Luk. 10. & 24. in his Goſpell. Now theſe queſtions muſt not be only of things touching ſcience and memorie, as hath been ſaid, but matter of iudgement. For to this exerciſe all things may ſerue, euen the leaſt that are, as the follies of a Laquey, the malice of a Page, a diſcourſe at table: for the worke of iudgement is not to handle and to vnderſtand great and high matters, but iuſtlie to weigh them, and conſider of them whatſoeuer they bee. Queſtions therefore muſt bee mooued touching the iudgement of men and their actions, and by reaſon determined, to the end that thereby men may frame their iudgement and their conſcience. The tutor or inſtructor of Cyrus in Xenophon for a lecture propoſed this queſtion; A great youth hauing a little coat or caſſocke, gaue it to one of his companions of a leſſe ſtature, and tooke from him his caſſocke, which was the greater: vpon which fact he demanded his iudgement. Cyrus anſwered, that it was wel, becauſe both of them were thereby the better fitted. But his maſter reprehended him ſharpely for it, becauſe hee conſidered onely the fitneſſe and conueniencie thereof, and not the iuſtice, which ſhould firſt and eſpecially haue beene thought of, which was, that no man may be enforced in that which was his owne. And this no doubt is an excellent maner of inſtruction. And though a man may recite authorities out of books, the ſayings of Cicero or Ariſtotle, yet it is not onely

to recite them, but to iudge of them, and ſo to frame and faſhion them to all vſes, and to apply them to diuers ſubiects. It is not enough to report as a hiſtorie, that Cato kilde himſelfe at Vtique, that he might not fall into the hands of Caeſar; and that Brutus and Caſſius were the authors of the death of Caeſar; for this is the leaſt: but I will that he proceed and iudge, whether they did well heerein or no; whether they deſerued well of the common-weale; whether they carried themſelues therein according to wiſdome, iuſtice, valour; and wherein they did ill, wherein well. Finally and generally, in all theſe diſcourſes, demands, anſwers, the conueniencie, order, veritie, muſt be inquired into, a worke of iudgement & conſcience. Theſe things a man by any means muſt not diſſemble, but euer preſſe them, and hold him ſubiect vnto them.
                  Secondly, he muſt accuſtome and frame him to an honeſt curioſity to know all things; whereby he muſt firſt haue his 29 5 An aduiſement touching honeſt curioſitie.
                      eies vpon euery thing, the better to conſider all that may be ſaide, done or attempted concerning himſelfe, and nothing muſt paſſe his hands, before it paſſe and repaſſe his iudgement; and then he muſt make an enquirie into other matters, as well of right as of action. He that enquireth after nothing, knowes nothing, ſaith one; He that buſieth not his minde, ſuffereth it to ruſt, and becomes a foole; and therefore he muſt make profit of all, apply euery thing to himſelfe, take aduice and counſell, as well of what is paſt, the better to ſee the errour he hath committed, as of that which is to come, the better to rule and to direct himſelfe. Children muſt not be ſuffered to be idle, to bring themſelues aſleepe, to entertaine themſelues with their owne prattle; for wanting ſufficiencie to furniſh themſelues with good and worthy matter, they will feed vpon vanities; they muſt therefore be alwaies buſied in ſome imploiment, and kept in breath, and this curioſitie muſt be ingendred in them, the better to awaken them, and to ſpurre them forward, which being ſuch as is ſaid, ſhall be neither vaine in it ſelfe, nor tedious to another.
                  He muſt likewiſe faſhion and mould his ſpirit to the generall paterne and modell of the world and of nature, make it 30 6 Aduice.
                     
                     
vniuerſall, that is to ſay, repreſent vnto him in all things, the vniuerſall face of nature: that the whole world may be his booke: that of what ſubiect ſoeuer a man talke, he caſt his eie and his thought vpon the large immenſitie of the world, vpon ſo many different faſhions and opinions, which haue beene, and are in the world touching that ſubiect. The moſt excellent and noble mindes, are the more vniuerſall and more free; and by this meanes the minde is contented, learneth not to be aſtoniſhed at any thing, is formed to a reſolution and ſtedfaſt conſtancie. To be breefe, ſuch a man doth no more admire any thing, which is the higheſt and laſt point of wiſdome. For whatſoeuer doth happen, or a man may report vnto him, he eaſily findeth that there is nothing in the world either new or ſtrange; that the condition of man is capable of all things; that they haue come from others, and that elſewhere diuers things paſſe more ſtrange, more great. And in this ſenſe it was that wiſe Socrates called himſelfe a citizen of the world. And contrarily, there is not any thing that doth more depraue and enthraule the minde of man, than to make him taſte and vnderſtand but one certaine opinion, beleefe, and maner of life. What greater follie or weakeneſſe can there be, than to thinke that all the world walketh, beleeueth, ſpeaketh, doth, liueth and dieth according to the maner of his countrey? like thoſe barde block-heads, who when they heare one recite the maners and opinions of forraine countries, very different and contrarie to theirs, they tremble for feare, and beleeue them not; or elſe doe abſurdly condemne them as barbarous, ſo much are they enthralled and tied to their cradell, a kinde of people brought vp (as they ſay) in a bottle, that neuer ſaw any thing but through a hole. Now this vniuerſall ſpirit muſt be attained by the diligence of the maſter or teacher, afterwards by trauell, and communication with ſtrangers, and the reading of bookes and the hiſtories of all nations.
                  Finally, he muſt teach him to take nothing vpon credit and by authoritie: this is to make himſelfe a beaſt, and to  ſuffer himſelfe to be ledde by the noſe like an oxe; but to examine all things with reaſon, to propoſe all things, and then to giue him leaue to chuſe. And if he know not how to chuſe,

but doubt, which perhaps is the better, ſounder, and ſurer courſe, to teach him likewiſe to reſolue of nothing of himſelfe, but rather to diſtruſt his owne iudgement.
                  After the minde comes the body, whereof there muſt likewiſe be a care taken, at one and the ſame inſtant with the ſpirit, 32 An aduiſement touching the body.
                      not making two works thereof. Both of them make an entire man. Now a maſter muſt endeuour to keepe his childe free from delicacie and pride in apparrell, in ſleeping, eating, drinking; he muſt bring him vp hardly to labour and pains; accuſtome him to heat and cold, winde and weather, yea and vnto hazards too; harden his muſcles and his ſinewes, as well as his minde, to labour, and then to paine and griefe too; For the firſt diſpoſeth to the ſecond, Labor callum obducit dolori. To be briefe, he muſt endeuour to make him luſtie and vigorous, indifferent to all kinde of viands. All this ſerueth not onely for his health, but for publike affaires and ſeruices.
                  We come now to the third head which concerneth maners, wherein both body and ſoule haue a part. This is twofold; 33 3 An aduiſement touching maners.
                      To hinder the euill, to ingraft and to nouriſh the good. The firſt is the more neceſſarie, and therefore the greater care, and heed muſt be taken. It muſt therefore be done in time, for there is no time too ſpeedy, to hinder the birth and growth of ill maners and conditions, eſpecially theſe following, which are to be feared in youth.
                  To lie, a baſe vice of ſeruants and ſlaues, of a licentious and fearefull minde, the cauſe whereof ariſeth many times 1 Euill maners.
                      from bad and rude inſtruction.
                  A ſottiſh ſhame and weakneſſe, whereby they ſeeke to hide themſelues, hold downe their heads, bluſh at euerie  queſtion that is propoſed, cannot indure a correction, or a ſharpe word, without a ſtrange alteration of countenance. Nature doth many times beare a great ſway heerein, but it muſt be corrected by ſtudie.
                  All affectation and ſingularitie in habit, cariage, gate, ſpeech, geſture, and all other things; this is a teſtimonie of  vanitie and vaine-glory, and marreth all the reſt, euen that which is good. Licet ſapere ſine pompa, ſine inuidia.
                  
                  But aboue all, choler, ſullenneſſe, obſtinacie; and therefore 
                     
it is very neceſſarie that a childe neuer haue his will by ſuch froward meanes, and that he learne and finde that theſe qualities are altogether vnprofitable and bootleſſe, yea baſe and villanous; and for this cauſe he muſt neuer be flattered, for that marreth and corrupteth him, teacheth him to be ſullen and froward, if he haue not his will, and in the end maketh him inſolent, that a man ſhall neuer worke any good vpon him. Nihil magis reddit iracundos, quàm educatio mollis & blanda.
                  
                  By the ſelfeſame meanes a man muſt ingraft into him 34 Good maners.
                      good and honeſt maners; And firſt inſtruct him to feare and reuerence God, to tremble vnder that infinite and inuiſible maieſtie, to ſpeake ſeldome and ſoberly of God, of his power, eternitie, wiſdome, will, and of his works; not indifferently and vpon all occaſions, but fearefully, with ſhame and reuerence. Not to be ouer ſcrupulous in the myſteries and points of religion, but to conforme himſelfe to the gouernment and diſcipline of the church.
                  Secondly, to repleniſh and cheriſh his heart with ingenuitie,  freedome, candor, integritie, and to teach him to be an honeſt man; out of an honorable and honeſt minde, not ſeruilely and mechanically for feare, or hope of any honour or profit, or other conſideration, than vertue it ſelfe. Theſe two are eſpecially for himſelfe.
                  For another and the company with whom he conuerſeth,  he muſt worke in him a ſweet kinde of affabilitie to accommodate himſelfe to all kinde of people, to all faſhions. Omnis Ariſtippum decuit color, & ſtatus & res. Heerein Alcibiades was excellent. That he learne how to be able, and to know how to doe all things, yea exceſſe and licentious behauiours if need be; but that he loue to doe onely that which is good: That he refraine to doe euill, not for want of courage, nor ſtrength, nor knowledge, but will? Multum interest virùm peccare quis nolit, aut neſciat.
                  
                  Modeſtly, whereby he conteſteth not, nor tieth himſelfe,  either to all, as to the greateſt and moſt reſpectiue perſons, or ſuch as are his inferiors either in condition or ſufficiencie, nor 
                        See Lib. 2. cap. 9. defendeth any thing obſtinately, with affirmatiue, reſolute, commanding words, but ſweet, ſubmiſſe and moderate ſpecches.

Hereof hath beene ſpoken elſe-where. And thus the three heads of the duties of parents towards their children are diſpatched.
                  The fourth concerneth their affection and communication with them, when they are great and capable of that wherunto 36 The fourth part touching the dutie of parents.
                      they were inſtructed. We know that affection is reciprocall and naturall betwixt parents and their children, but that of parents towards their children is farre more ſtrong and more naturall, becauſe it is giuen by nature to loue thoſe things that are comming on to the maintenance and continuance The loue of parēts greater than the loue of children. of the world, eſpeciallie thoſe in whom a man doth liue when he is dead. That of children towards their parents is retrograde, and therefore it goeth not ſo ſtronglie, nor ſo naturallie; and it ſeemeth rather to be the paiment of a debt, and a thankfull acknowledgement of a benefit receiued, than a pure, free, ſimple, and naturall loue. Moreouer, he that giueth and doth good, loueth more than he that receiueth and is indebted: And therefore a father and euery agent that doth good to another, loueth more than he is beloued. The reaſons of this propoſition are many. All loue to be (which being is exerciſed and demonſtrated in motion and action.) Now he that giueth, and doth good to another, is after a ſort in him that receiueth. He that giueth and doth good to another, doth that which is honeſt and honorable; he that receiueth doth none of this: honeſtie is for the firſt, profit for the ſecond. Now honeſtie is farre more worthie, firme, ſtable, amiable, than profit, which in a moment vaniſheth. Againe, thoſe things are moſt beloued that coſt vs moſt; that is deareſt vnto vs, which we come more dearely by. Now to beget, to nouriſh, to bring vp, is a matter of greater charge than to receiue all theſe.
                  This loue of parents is two-fold, though alwaies naturall, yet after a diuers maner: the one is ſimplie and vniuerſallie 37 The loue of parents twofold.
                      naturall, and as a ſimple inſtinct which is common with beaſts, according to which parents loue and cheriſh their children, though deformed, ſtammering, halting, milke-ſops, and vſe them like moppets, or little apes. This loue is not truly humane. Man indued with reaſon, muſt not ſeruilelie ſubiect himſelfe vnto nature as beaſts do, but follow it more

noblie with diſcourſe of reaſon. The other then is more humane and reaſonable, whereby a man loueth his children more or leſſe, according to that meaſure wherein he ſeeth the ſeeds and ſparks of vertue, goodnes, and towardlineſſe to ariſe and ſpring vp in them. Some there are who being beſotted and caried with the former kind of affection, haue but little of this, and neuer complaining of the charge ſo long as their children are but ſmall, complaine thereof when they come to their growth, & begin to profit. It ſeemeth that they are in a ſort offended and vexed to ſee them to grow and ſet forward in honeſt courſes that they may become honeſt men: Theſe parents are brutiſh and inhumane.
                  Now according to this ſecond, true, and fatherlie loue in 38 Of the true fatherly loue in communicating with his children being come to yeares of diſcretion.
                      the well gouerning thereof, parents ſhould receiue their children, if they be capable, into their ſocietie and partnerſhip in their goods, admit them to their counſell, intelligence, the knowledge and courſe of their domeſticall affaires, as alſo to the communication of their deſignements, opinions and thoughts; yea conſent and contribute to their honeſt recreations and paſtimes, as the caſe ſhall require, alwaies reſeruing their ranke and authoritie. For wee condemne the auſtere, lordlike, and imperious countenance and cariage of thoſe that neuer looke vpon their children, nor ſpeake vnto them but with authoritie, will not be called fathers but lords, though God himſelfe refuſe not this name of father, neuer caring for the hartie loue of their children, ſo they may be feared, reuerenced, and adored. And for this cauſe they giue vnto them ſparinglie, keepe them in want, that they may the better keepe them in awe and obedience, euer threatning them ſome ſmall pittance by their laſt will, when they depart out of this life. Now this is a ſottiſh, vaine, and ridiculous foolerie; It is to diſtruſt their owne proper, true, and naturall authoritie, to get an artificiall; And it is the way to deceiue themſelues, and to grow into contempt, which is cleane contrarie to that they pretend. It cauſeth their children to carie themſelues cunninglie with them, and to conſpire and find meanes how to deceiue them. For parents ſhould in good time frame their minds to dutie, by reaſon, and not haue recourſe to theſe meanes more tyrannous than fatherlie.
                  
                     
                        
Errat longè mea quidem ſententia,
                     Qui imperium credit eſſe grauius aut ſtabilius
                     Vi quod ſit, quàm illud quod amicitia adiungitur.
                  
                  In the laſt diſpoſition of our goods, the beſt and ſureſt way is to follow the lawes & cuſtomes of the countrie. The lawes 39 The vſage of them in their laſt willes according to the lawes.
                      haue better prouided for it than we, and it is a ſafer courſe to ſuffer them to faile in ſome thing, than to aduenture vpon our owne defects, in our owne proper choice. It is to abuſe that libertie we haue therein, to ſerue our fooliſh fantaſies and priuat paſſions, like thoſe that ſuffer themſelues to be caried by the vnwonted officious actions and flatteries of thoſe that are preſent, who make vſe of their laſt willes and teſtaments, either by gratifying or chaſtiſing the actions of thoſe that pretend intereſt therein. A man muſt conforme himſelfe to reaſon and common cuſtome heerin, which is wiſer than we are, and the ſurer way.
                  We come now to the dutie of children towards their parents, 40 Of the dutie of children towards their parēts.
                      ſo naturall and ſo religious, and which ought to be done vnto them not as vnto pure and ſimple men, but demi-gods, earthlie, mortall, viſible gods. And this is the reaſon why Philo the Iew ſaid, that the commandement touching the dutie of children was written the one halfe in the firſt table, which conteined the commandements that concerne our dutie towards God; and the other halfe in the ſecond table, wherein are the commandements that concerne our neighbour, as being halfe diuine, and halfe humane. This dutie likewiſe is ſo certaine, ſo due and requiſite, that it may not be diſpenſed withall by any other dutie or loue whatſoeuer, be it neuer ſo great. For, if it ſhall happen that a man ſee his father and his ſonne ſo indangered at one and the ſame inſtant, as that he cannot reſcue and ſuccour them both, he muſt forſake his ſonne, and goe to his father, though his loue towards his ſonne be greater, as before hath beene ſaid. And the reaſon is, becauſe the dutie of a ſonne towards his father is more ancient, and hath the greater priuiledge, and cannot be abrogated by any later dutie. 41 This dutie conſiſteth in fiue points.
                     
                  
                  Now this dutie conſiſteth in fiue points, comprehended in this word, Honour thy father and thy mother. The firſt is reuerence, not only in outward geſture and countenance, but alſo 
                     
inward, which is that high and holy opinion and eſteeme, that a childe ought to haue of his parents, as the authors and originall cauſes of his being, and of his good, a qualitie that makes them reſemble God himſelfe.
                  The ſecond is obedience, euen to the rougheſt and hardeſt 2 Ier. 35. commands of a father, according to the example of the Rechabites, who to obey the command of their father, neuer dranke wine in all their liues: Nay more than that, Iſaac refuſed not to yeeld his necke to the ſword of his father.
                  The third is to ſuccour their parents in all their needs and  neceſſities, to nouriſh them in their old age, their impotency, and want, to giue them their aſſiſtance in all their affaires. We haue an example and paterne heereof euen in beaſts. In the Storke, whoſe little ones (as S. Baſil affirmeth) feed and nouriſh In examer. their old dames, couer them with their feathers, when they fall from them, and couple themſelues together to carrie them vpon their backs. Loue furniſheth them with this arte. This example is ſo liuely and ſo ſignificant, that the dutie of children towards their parents hath beene ſignified by the qualitie of this creature, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , reciconiare. And the Hebrewes call this bird for this cauſe, chaſida, that is to ſaie, Leuit. 11. the debonaire, the charitable bird. We haue likewiſe notable examples heere amongſt men. Cymon the ſonne of great Miltiades, whoſe father dying in priſon, as ſome ſay for debt, and not hauing wherewithall to burie his bodie, much leſſe to redeeme it being areſted for the debt, whileſt it was caried to the buriall, according to the lawes of that country, Cymon ſold himſelfe and his libertie for money to prouide for his funerall. He with his plentie and goods relieued not his father, but with his libertie; which is deerer than all goods, yea and life too. He helped not his father liuing and in neceſſitie, but dead, and being no more a father nor a man. What had he done to ſuccour his father liuing, wanting, and requiring his helpe? This is an excellent preſident. We haue two the like examples, euen in the weake and feeble ſex of women, of two daughters which haue nouriſhed and giuen ſucke the one to the father, the other to hir mother, being priſoners and condemned to die by famine, the ordinarie puniſhment of the ancients. It ſeemeth in ſome ſort a thing againſt

nature, that the mother ſhould be nouriſhed with the daughters milke; but this is truely according to nature, yea thoſe firſt lawes, that the daughter ſhould nouriſh her mother.
                  The fourth is, not to doe, to attempt, or enterpriſe any  thing of weight or importance, without the aduice, conſent, and approbation of parents, and eſpecially in mariage.
                  The fift is, mildly and gently to endure the vices, imperfections, and teſtie and impatient humors of parents, their  ſeueritie and rigour. Manlius hath made good proofe heereof: for the Tribune Pomponius hauing accuſed the father of this Manlius in the preſence of the people of many crimes, and amongſt others, that he ouer cruelly handled his ſonne, enforcing him to till the earth: the ſonne goeth to the Tribune and finding him in his bedde, putting the point of his dagger to his throat, inforced him to ſweare, that he ſhould deſiſt from that purſuit he made againſt his father, deſiring rather to indure his fathers rigour, than to ſee him troubled for it.
                  A childe ſhall finde no difficultie in theſe fiue duties, if he conſider how chargeable he hath been to his parents, and with what care and affection he hath beene brought vp. But he ſhall neuer know it well, vntill he haue children of his owne, as hee that was found to ride vpon a hobbie-horſe playing with his children, entreated him that ſo tooke him to hold his peace vntill he were himſelfe a father, reputing him till then no indifferent iudge in this action.
               
               
                  CHAP. XV. The dutie of Masters and ſeruants:
                  
                  HEere commeth the third and laſt part of priuate and domeſticall iuſtice, which is the duties of maſters and ſeruants. Touching which it is neceſſarie to know the diſtinction of ſeruants: for they are principally three ſorts. That is to ſay, of ſlaues, whereof all the world hath beene full in former time, and is at this preſent, except a part of Europe, and no place more free than heere about France; they haue no power neither in their bodies nor goods, but

are wholly their maſters, who may giue, lend, ſell, reſell, exchange, and vſe them as beaſts of ſeruice. Of theſe hath beene ſpoken of at large. There are inferiour ſeruants, and ſeruants, free people, maſters of their perſons and goods, yea they cannot bargaine, or otherwiſe doe any thing to the preiudice of their owne libertie. But they owe honour, obedience, and ſerue vntill ſuch times, and vpon ſuch conditions, as they haue promiſed, and their maſters haue power to command, correct, and chaſtiſe them with moderation and diſcretion. There are alſo mercenaries, which are leſſe ſubiect, they owe no ſeruice nor obedience, but onely worke and labour for money; and they haue no authoritie in commanding or correcting them.
                  The duties of maſters towards their ſeruants, as well of  ſlaues as inferior ſeruants, are, not to handle them cruellie, remembring they are men, and of the ſame nature with vs, but onely fortune hath put a difference, which is euer variable and ſporteth it ſelfe in making great men little, and little great. And therefore the difference is not ſo great, ſo much to contemne them. Sunt homines, contubernales, humiles 
                     Senec. 
                     amici, conſerui, aequè fortunae ſubiecti. To handle ſeruants gently, ſeeking rather to be beloued than feared, is the teſtimonie of a good nature: to vſe them roughly and too ſeuerely, proceedeth from a crabbed and cruell minde, and that he beareth the ſame diſpoſition towards all other men, but want of power hindereth the execution thereof. They ought to inſtruct them with godly and religious counſell, and thoſe things that are requiſite for their health and ſafety.
                  The duties of ſeruants are, to honour and feare their maſters whatſoeuer they be, and to yeeld them obedience and fidelitie, ſeruing them not for gaine, or onely outwardly and for countenance, but heartily, ſeriouſly, for conſcience ſake, and without diſſimulation. We read of moſt worthie, noble, and generous ſeruices performed in former times by ſome towards their maſters, euen to the engaging and hazard of their liues, for their maſters ſafegard and honour.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XVI. The dutie of Soueraignes and Subiects.
                  
                  OF Princes and Soueraignes, their deſcriptions, notes, humours, markes, and diſcommodities hath beene diſcourſed in the firſt booke, chap. 49. Their dutie to gouerne the common-wealth hath beene ſpoken at large in this preſent booke, chap. 2. and 3. which is of politike prudence: yet we will touch a little heere the heads and generall points of their dutie.
                  The Soueraigne as the meane betweene God and the people, 1 The dutie of Soueraignes.
                      and debtour to theſe two, ought alwaies remember that he is the liuely image, the officer, and lieutenant generall of the great God his ſoueraigne; and to the people a perfect mirrour, a bright beame, a cleere looking glaſſe, an eleuated theater for euerie one to behold, a fountaine where all refreſh themſelues, a ſpurre to vertue, and who doth not any good; that is not famous, and put in the regiſter of perpetuall memorie. He ought then firſt of all to feare and honour God, to To be religious. be deuout, religious, to obſerue pietie not onely for himſelfe and for conſcience ſake, as euery other man, but for his ſtate, and as he is a ſoueraigne. The pietie which we heere require in a prince, is the care he ought to haue, and to ſhew for the conſeruation of religion and the ancient lawes and ceremonies of the countrey, prouiding by lawes penalties and puniſhments that the religion be neither changed, troubled, nor innouated. This is a thing that highly redoundeth to his honour and ſecuritie (for all doe reuerence, and more willingly obey, and more ſlowly attempt or enterpriſe any thing againſt him whom they ſee feareth God; and beleeue to be in his protection and ſafegard; vna cuſtodia pietas: pium virum 
                     Mercur. Triſm. 
                     nec malus genius nec fatum deuincit. Deus enim eripit eum ab omni malo.) And alſo to the good of the ſtate, for as all the wiſeſt haue ſaid, Religion is the band and cement of humane ſocietie.
                  The Prince ought alſo to be ſubiect, and inuiolablie to obſerue 2 To obſerue the lawes of ſuperiors.
                      and cauſe to be obſerued the lawes of God, and nature,

which are not to be diſpenſed with: and he that infringeth them is not only accounted a tyrant, but a monſter.
                  Concerning the people, he ought firſt to keepe his couenants 3 To keepe his promiſe.
                      and promiſes, be it with ſubiects or others with whom he is intereſſed or hath to do. This equitie is both naturall and vniuerſall. God himſelfe keepeth his promiſe. Moreouer, the prince is the pledge and formall warrant of the law and thoſe mutuall bargaines of his ſubiects. He ought then aboue all to keepe his faith, there being nothing more odious in a prince than breach of promiſe and periurie; and therefore it was well ſaid, that a man ought to put it among thoſe caſuall caſes if the prince do abiure or reuoke his promiſe, and that the contrarie is not to be preſumed. Yea he ought to obſerue thoſe promiſes and bargaines of his predeceſſors, eſpeciallie if he be their heire, or if they be for the benefit and welfare of the common-wealth. Alſo he may relieue himſelfe of his vnreaſonable contracts and promiſes vnaduiſedlie made, euen as for the ſelfe-ſame cauſes priuat men are releeued by the benefit of the prince.
                  He ought alſo to remember, that although he be aboue the law (I meane the ciuill and humane) as the Creator is aboue 4 To obſerue the lawes.
                      the creature (for the law is the worke of the prince, and which he may change and abrogate at his pleaſure, it is the proper right of the ſoueraigntie) neuertheleſſe though it be in force and authoritie, he ought to keepe it: to liue, to conuerſe and iudge according vnto it: and it would be a diſhonor and a very euill example to contradict it, and as it were falſifie it. Great Augustus hauing done ſomething againſt the law, by his owne proper acte would needs die for griefe: Lycurgus, Ageſilaus, Seleucus, haue left three notable examples in this point, and to their coſt.
                  Thirdly, the prince oweth iuſtice to all his ſubiects; and he ought to meaſure his puiſſance and power by the rule of 5 To do iuſtice.
                      iuſtice. This is the proper vertue of a prince trulie royall and princelike, whereof it was rightlie ſaid, by an old man to king Philip that delayed him iuſtice, ſaying he had no leiſure, That he ſhould then deſiſt & leaue off to be king. But Demetriu ſped not ſo well, who was diſpoſſeſt of his realme by his ſubiects, for caſting from a bridge into the riuer many of

their petitions, without anſwere, or doing them iuſtice.
                  Finally, the prince ought to loue, cheriſh, to be vigilant and carefull of his ſtate, as the husband of the wife, the father of 6 To take care and affect the common good.
                      his children, the ſhepheard of his flock, hauing alwaies before his eies the profit and quiet of his ſubiects. The proſperitie and welfare of the ſtate is the end and contentment of a good prince, vt respub, opibus firma, copijs locuples, gloria ampla, virtute 
                     Senec. 
                     honesta ſit. The prince that tieth himſelfe to himſelfe abuſeth himſelfe: for he is not his owne man, neither is the ſtate his, but he is the ſtates. He is a Lord, not to domineere, but to defend. Cui non ciuium ſeruitus tradita, ſed tutela: to attend, to watch, to the end his vigilance may ſecure his ſleeping ſubiects, his trauell may giue them reſt, his prouidence may maintaine their proſperitie, his induſtrie may continue their delights, his buſineſſe their leiſure their vacation, and that all his ſubiects may vnderſtand and know that he is as much for them, as he is aboue them.
                  To be ſuch and to diſcharge his dutie well, he ought to demeane and carie himſelfe as hath bin ſaid at large in the ſecond  and third chapter of this booke, that is to ſay, to furniſh himſelfe of good counſell, of treaſure, and ſufficient ſtrength within his ſtate, to fortifie himſelfe with alliance, and forraine friends to be readie, and to command both in peace and war; by this meanes he may be both loued and feared.
                  And to conteine all in a few words, he muſt loue God aboue all things, be aduiſed in his enterpriſes, valiant in attempts,  faithfull and firme in his word, wiſe in counſell, carefull of his ſubiects, helpfull to his friends, terrible to his enemies, pitifull to the afflicted, gentle and curteous to good people, ſeuere to the wicked, and iuſt and vpright towards all.
                  The dutie of ſubiects conſiſteth in three points, to yeeld due honor to their princes, as to thoſe that carie the image of 9 The dutie of ſubiects.
                      God, ordeined and eſtabliſhed by him; therfore they are moſt wicked, who detract or ſlaunder; ſuch were the ſeed of Cham and Chanaan. 2. To be obedient, vnder which is conteined Exod. 12. many duties, as to goe to the warres, to pay tributes and impoſts impoſed vpon them by their authoritie. 3. To wiſh them all proſperitie and happineſſe, and to pray for them.
                  
                     
But the queſtion is, Whether a man ought to yeeld theſe 10 Whether it be lawfull to lay violēt hands vpon the perſon of a tyrant. A double tyrant. The entrāce.
                      three duties generallie to all princes, if they be wicked or tyrants. This controuerſie cannot be decided in a word, and therefore wee muſt diſtinguiſh. The prince is a tyrant and wicked either in the entrance, or execution of his gouernmēt. If in the entrance, that is to ſay, that he treacherouſlie inuadeth, and by his owne force and powerfull authoritie gaines the ſoueraigntie without any right, be he otherwiſe good or euill (for this cauſe he ought to be accounted a tyrant) without all doubt we ought to reſiſt him either by way of iuſtice, if there be opportunitie & place, or by ſurpriſe: and the Grecians, ſaith Cicero, ordeined in former times rewards and honors for thoſe that deliuered the common-wealth from ſeruitude and oppreſſion. Neither can it be ſaid to be a reſiſting of the prince, either by iuſtice or ſurpriſe, ſince he is neither receiued, nor acknowledged to be a prince.
                  If in the execution, that is to ſay, that his entrance be rightfull 2 In the execution three waies.
                      and iuſt, but that he carieth himſelfe imperiouſlie, cruellie, & wickedlie, and, according to the common ſaying, tyrannicallie, it is then alſo to be diſtinguiſhed; for it may be ſo three waies, and euery one requireth particular conſideration. The Heerof ſee aboue Chap. 4. in Chap. of tyrannie and rebellion.
                      one is in violating the lawes of God and nature, that is to ſay, againſt the religion of the countrie, the commaundement of God, inforcing and conſtraining their conſciences. In this caſe he ought not to yeeld any dutie or obedience, following thoſe diuine axiomes, That we ought rather obey God than men, and feare him more that commaundeth the intire man, than thoſe that haue power but ouer the leaſt part. Yet he ought not to oppoſe himſelfe againſt him by violence or ſiniſter meanes, which is another extremitie, but to obſerue the middle way, which is either to flie or ſuffer, fugere, aut pati; theſe two remedies named by the doctrine of veritie in the like extremities. 2. The other leſſe euill, which concerneth not the conſciences, but only the bodies and the goods, is an abuſe to ſubiects, denying them iuſtice, impriſoning their perſons, and depriuing them of their goods. In the which caſe he ought with patience and acknowledgement of the wrath of God yeeld theſe three duties following, honor, obedience, vowes and prayers; and to be mindfull of three things, that

all power and authoritie is from God, and whoſoeuer reſiſteth the power, reſiſteth the ordinance of God: principi ſummum rorum indicium dij dederunt. Subditis obſequij gloria relicta eſt: bonos principes voto expetere, quale ſcunque tolerare. And Tacit. he ought not to obey a ſuperior, becauſe he is worthie and worthilie commaundeth, but becauſe he is a ſuperior; not for that he is good, but becauſe he is true and lawfull. There is great difference betweene true and good, euery one ought to obey the law, not becauſe it is good and iuſt, but ſimplie, becauſe it is the law. 2. That God cauſeth an hypocrite to raigne for the ſinnes of the people, though he reſerue him for a day of his furie; that the wicked prince is the inſtrument of his iuſtice, the which we ought to indure as other euils, which the heauens do ſend vs; quomodo ſterilitatem aut nimios imbres & caetera naturae mala, ſic luxū & auaritiam dominantium tolerare. 
                     Tacit. 3. The examples of Saul, Nabuchodonoſer, of many Emperours before Constantine, and others ſince him as cruell tyrants as might be: towards whom neuertheleſſe theſe three duties haue been obſerued by good men, and enioined them by the Prophets and learned men of thoſe daies, according to the oracle of the great Doctour of truth, which inferreth an obedience to them which ſit in the ſeate of gouernment, notwithſtanding they oppreſſe vs with inſupportable burthens, and their gouernment be euill.
                  The third concerneth the whole ſtate, when he would change or ruinate it, ſeeking to make it electiue, hereditarie, or of an Ariſtocracie, or Democracie, a Monarchie, or otherwiſe: And in this caſe he ought to withſtand and hinder their proceedings, either by way of iuſtice or otherwiſe: for he is not maſter of the ſtate; but only a gardian and a ſuertie. But theſe affaires belong not to all, but to the tutours and mainteiners of the ſtate, or thoſe that are intereſſed therein, as Electours of electiue ſtates; or Princes apparent in hereditarie ſtates; or ſtates generall, that haue fundamentall lawes. And this is the only caſe wherein it is lawfull to reſiſt a tyrant. And all this is ſaid of ſubiects, who are neuer permitted to attempt any thing againſt a ſoueraigne Prince for what cauſe L. Cogitationis ff de poen. L. Si quis non dicam c. de ſacroſ. Eccleſ. ſoeuer, and the lawes ſay that he deſerueth death, who attempteth, or giueth counſell, and which intendeth, or only

thinketh it. But it is honorable for a ſtranger, yea, it is moſt noble and heroicall in a prince by warlike means to defend a people vniuſtlie oppreſſed; and to free them from tyrannie, as Hercules did, and afterward Dion, Timoleon, and Tamberlaine prince of the Tartars, who ouercame Baiazeth the Turkiſh Emperour, and beſieged Conſtantinople.
                  
                  Theſe are the duties of ſubiects towards their liuing ſoueraignes: 12 Examinations of Soueraignes after their death.
                      But it is a point of iuſtice to examine their life after they are dead. This is a cuſtome iuſt and very profitable, which benefiteth much thoſe nations where it is obſerued: and which all good Princes doe deſire, who haue cauſe to complaine, that a man handleth the memorie of the wicked as well as theirs. Soueraignes are companions if not maſters of the lawes; for ſeeing iuſtice cannot touch their liues, there is reaſon, it taketh hold of their reputation, and the goods of their ſucceſſours. We owe reuerence and dutie equallie to all kings, in reſpect of their dignitie and office, but inward eſtimation and affection to their vertue. We patientlie indure them, though vnworthie as they are: We conceale their vices; for their authoritie and publike order where we liue hath neede of our common help: but after they are gone, there is no reaſon to reiect iuſtice, and the libertie of expreſſing our true thoughts; yea it is a very excellent and profitable example, that we manifeſt to the poſteritie faithfullie to obey a Maſter or Lord, whoſe imperfections are well knowne. They who for ſome priuat dutie commit a wicked prince to memorie, do priuat iuſtice to the publike hurt. O excellent leſſon for a ſucceſſour if it were well obſerued!
               
               
                  CHAP. XVII. The dutie of Magistrates.
                  
                  GOod people in a common-wealth would loue better to 1 For what cauſe Magiſtrates are allowed of.
                      inioy eaſe of contentment; which good and excellent ſpirits know how to giue themſelues in conſideration of the goods of nature, and the effects of God, than to vndertake publike charges, were it not that they feare to be ill gouerned, and by the wicked, and therefore they conſent to be magiſtrates: but to hunt and follow publike charges, eſpeciallie

the iudgement ſeat is baſe and vile, and condemned by all good lawes, yea euen of the heathen, witneſſe the law Iulia de ambitu: vnworthie a perſon of honour, and a man cannot better expreſſe his inſufficiencie, than by ſeeking for it. But it is moſt baſe and vile by briberie or money to purchaſe them, and there is no merchandize more hatefull and contemptible than it: for it neceſſarily followeth, that he which buieth in groſſe, ſelleth by retaile: Whereupon the Emperour Seuerus ſpeaking againſt the like inconuenience, ſaith, Lamprid. That a man can not iuſtly condemne him which ſelleth that he bought.
                  Euen as a man apparrelleth himſelfe, and putteth on his 2 How a magiſtrate ought to prepare himſelf before he take the charge.
                      beſt habit before he departeth his houſe to appeare in publike: ſo before a man vndertake publike charge, he ought priuately to examine himſelfe, to learne to rule his paſſions, and well to ſettle and eſtabliſh his minde. A man bringeth not to the turney a raw vnmanaged horſe, neither doth a man enter into affaires of importance, if he hath not beene inſtructed and prepared for it before: ſo, before a man vndertakes theſe affaires, and enters vpon the ſtage and theater of this world, he ought to correct that imperfect and ſauage part in vs, to bridle and reſtraine the libertie of affections, to learne the lawes, the parts, and meaſures thereof, wherewith it ought to be handled in all occaſions. But contrarily it is a vevery lamentable and abſurd thing, as Socrates ſaith, that although no man vndertaketh the profeſſion of any myſterie or mechanicall arte, which formerly he hath not learned: yet in publike charges, in the skill to command and obey well, to gouerne the world, the deepeſt and difficulteſt myſterie of all, they are accepted, and vndertake it, that know nothing at all.
                  Magiſtrates are intermixed perſons, placed betweene the ſoueraigne and priuate men, and therefore it behooueth 3 A generall deſcription of magiſtrates.
                      them to know how to command, and to obey, how to obey their ſoueraigne, yeeld to the power of ſuperior magiſtrates, honour their equals, command their inferiors, defend the weake, make head againſt the great, and be iuſt to all: and therefore it was well ſaid, That magiſtracie deſcrieth a man, being to play in publike ſo many parts.
                  
                     
In regard of his ſoueraigne, the magiſtrate according to the diuerſitie of the commands, ought diuerſly to gouerne, 4 The dutie of magiſtrates as touching the ſoueraigne.
                      or readily, or not at all to obey, or ſurceaſe his obedience. Firſt, in thoſe commands which yeeld vnto him acknowledgement and allowance, as are all the warrants of Iuſtice, and all other where this clauſe, or any equiualent vnto it (if it appeare vnto you) or which are without attribution of allowance, iuſt and indifferent of themſelues, he ought to obey, and hee may eaſily diſcharge himſelfe without any ſcruple and danger.
                  2 In thoſe commands which attribute vnto him no acknowledgement, but onely the execution, as are warrants of command, if they be againſt right and ciuill Iuſtice, and that haue in them clauſes derogatorie, he ought ſimplie to obey: for the ſoueraigne may derogate from the ordinarie law, and this is properly that wherein ſoueraigntie conſiſteth.
                  3 To thoſe which are contrarie to right, and conteine no derogatorie clauſe, but are wholly preiudiciall to the good and vtilitie of the common-wealth, what clauſe ſoeuer it hath, and though the magiſtrate knoweth it to be falſe, and inforced againſt right and by violence, he ought not to yeeld readily in theſe three cauſes, but to hold them in ſuſpence, and to make reſiſtance once or twice; and at the ſecond or third command to yeeld.
                  4 Touching thoſe which are repugnant to the law of God, and nature; he ought to diſmiſſe and acquit himſelfe of his office, yea to indure any thing, rather than obey or conſent: and he need not ſay that the former commands may haue ſome doubt in them: becauſe naturall Iuſtice is more cleere than the light of the Sunne.
                  5 All this is good to be done in reſpect of the things themſelues; But after they are once done by the ſoueraigne, how euill ſoeuer they be, it is better to diſſemble them, and burie the memorie of them, than to ſtirre and loſe all (as Papinian did) frustra niti & mihi aliud, niſi odium quaerere, extremae dementiae est.
                  
                  In reſpect of priuate ſubiects, magiſtrates ought to remember, that the authority which they haue ouer them, they 5 As touching priuate men.
                      haue but at a ſecond hand, and hold it of the ſoueraigne, who

alwaies remaineth abſolute lord, and their authoritie is limited to a prefixed time.
                  The magiſtrate ought to be of eaſie acceſſe, ready to heare and vnderſtand all complaints and ſutes, hauing his gate  open to all, and himſelfe alway at hand, conſidering he is not for himſelfe, but for all, and ſeruant of the common-wealth, Magna ſeruitus, magna fortuna. And for this cauſe the law of Moyſes prouided, that the Iudges and iudgement ſeats were Deut. 16. held at the gates of the cities, to the end euery man might haue eaſie acceſſe thereto.
                  He ought alſo indifferently to receiue and heare all, great  and little, rich and poore, being open to all; Therefore a wiſe man compareth him to an altar whereto a man repaireth being oppreſſed and afflicted, to receiue ſuccour and comfort.
                  But he ought not to conuerſe and be familiar with many, but with very few, and thoſe very wiſe and aduiſed, and that  ſecretly: for it debaſeth authoritie, it diminiſheth and diſſolueth the grace and reputation thereof. Cleon called to the gouernment of the common-wealth, aſſembled all his friends, and there renounced and diſclaimed all intimation or inward amitie with them, as a thing incompatible with his charge, for Cicero ſaith, he depriueth himſelfe of the perſon of a friend, that vndertaketh that of a Iudge.
                  His office is eſpecially in two things, to vphold and defend the honor, the dignitie, and the right of his ſoueraigne, and 5 Cic. lib. 1. Officior. of the weale publike which he repreſenteth: gerere perſonam ciuitatis, eius dignitatem & decus ſuſtinere, with authority and a milde ſeueritie.
                  Then as a good and loyall interpreter and officer of the  Prince, he ought exactly to ſee that his will be performed; that is to ſay the law, of which he is the miniſter, and it is his charge to ſee it diligently executed towards all, therefore he is called the liuing law, the ſpeaking law.
                  Although the magiſtrate ought wiſely to temper mildeneſſe with rigour, yet it is better for a magiſtrate to be ſeuere  and cruell, than gentle, facill, and pitifull: and God forbiddeth to be pitifull in iudgement. A ſeuere Iudge holdeth ſubiects in obedience of the lawes: a milde and pitifull makes them to contemne the lawes, the magiſtrates, and the

Prince, who made both. To be briefe, to diſcharge well his office, there is required two things, honeſty and courage. The firſt hath need of the ſecond. The firſt preſerueth the magiſtrate free from auarice, reſpect of perſons, of bribes, which is the plague, and ſmotherer of truth. (Acceptatio munerum praeuaricatio eſt veritatis) from the corruption of iuſtice which Plato calleth an hallowed virgin: Alſo from paſſions, of hatred, of loue, and others, all enemies to right and equity. But to carrie himſelfe well againſt the threatnings of great men, the importunate intreaties of his friends, the lamentations and teares of the poore diſtreſſed, which are all violent and forceable things, and yet haue ſome colour of reaſon and iuſtice, and which maketh ſometimes the moſt reſolute to relent, he had need of courage. Firme and inflexible conſtancie is a principall qualitie and vertue in a magiſtrate, to the end he may not feare the great and mightie, and be not mooued and mollified with the miſerie of another, though it cary with it ſome ſhew of goodneſſe: But yet it is forbid to haue pitie of the poore in iudgement.
               
               
                  CHAP. XVIII. The dutie of the great and ſmall.
                  
                  THe dutie of the great conſiſteth in two things, in indeuouring by all meanes, to ſpend their bloud and abilitie for the defence and conſeruation of pietie, iuſtice, of the Prince, of the ſtate, and generally for the welfare and good of the common-wealth; of which they ought to be the pillers & ſupporters; and after in defending and protecting the poore afflicted and oppreſſed, reſiſting the violence of the wicked: and like good bloud, to runne to the wounded part, according to the prouerbe; That good bloud, that is to ſay, noble and generous, can not lie, that is to ſay, deceiue where is need. By this meanes Moyſes became the head of the Iewiſh nation, vndertaking the defence of men iniured and vniuſtly Exod. 2. troad vnder foot. Hercules was deified for deliuering the oppreſſed from the hands of tyrants. Thoſe that haue done the like, haue beene called Heroes and demi-gods, and to the like, all honours haue beene anciently ordeined, that is, to

ſuch as deſerued well of the common-wealth, and were the deliuerers of the oppreſſed. It is no greatneſſe for a man to make himſelfe to be feared, (except it be of his enemies) and to terrifie the world, as ſome haue done, which alſo haue procured them hate. Oderint dum metuant. It is better to be beloued than adored. This commeth of a naturall pride, and inhumanitie, to contemne and diſdaine other men as the ordure and excrements of the world, and as if they were not men; and from thence they grow cruell, and abuſe both the bodies and goods of the weake, a thing wholly contrarie to true greatneſſe and honour, who ought to vndertake the defence thereof.
                  The dutie of inferiors towards their ſuperiors, conſiſteth in two points, in honoring and reuerencing them, not onely ceremoniouſly and in outward ſhew, which he muſt doe as well to the good as the euill, but with loue and affection, if they deſerue it, and are louers of the common-wealth. Theſe are two things, to honour, and to eſteeme, which are due to the good and truely great: to others to bend the knee, to bowe the body, not the heart, which is to eſteeme and loue. Moreouer to pleaſe them by humble and ſeruiceable duties, and to inſinuate into their fauour.
                  Principibus placuiſſe viris non vltima laus eſt.
                  And to make himſelfe capable of their protection, which if he cannot procure them to be his friends, yet at the leaſt not to make them his enemies, which muſt be done with meaſure and diſcretion. For ouer-greedilie to auoid their indignation, or to ſeeke their grace and fauour, beſides that it is a teſtimonie of weakneſſe, it is ſilentlie to condemne them of iniuſtice and crueltie; Non ex profeſſo cauere aut fugere: nam quem quis fugit, damnat; Or to ſtirre vp in them a deſire to execute their furie, ſeeing ſo baſe and fearefull a ſubmiſſion.
               
            
            
               
                  Of Fortitude the third vertue. PREFACE.
               THe two former precedent vertues rule and gouerne man in companie, or with another: theſe two following rule him in himſelfe and for himſelfe: reſpecting the two viſages

of fortune, the two heads and kinds of all accidents, Proſperitie, and Aduerſitie: for fortitude armeth a man againſt aduerſitie, Temperance guideth him in proſperitie: moderating the two brutiſh parts of our ſoule, fortitude ruleth the iraſcible, temperance the concupiſcible: Theſe two vertues may wholly be compriſed and vnderſtood by this word Conſtancie, which is a right and equall ſtay edneſſe of the mind, in all accidents and outward things, whereby he is not puffed vp in proſperitie, nor deiected in aduerſitie. Nec aduerſis frangitur, nec prosperis aestuat.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIX.
                  
                     Of Fortitude or Valour in generall.
                     VAlour, (for this vertue is more properlie ſo called than fortitude) is a right and ſtrong reſolution, an equall, and 1 The deſcription of valour.
                         vniforme ſtay ednes of the mind againſt all dangerous, difficult, and dolorous accidents: in ſuch ſort, that difficultie and danger is the obiect and matter wherein it is exerciſed: to be breefe, it is all that which humane weaknes feareth, Timendorum contemptrix, quae terribilia, & ſub iugum libertatem noſtram 
                        Senec. 
                        mittentia, despicit, prouocat, frangit.
                     
                     Of all the vertues in greateſt eſtimation and honor, this is moſt renowned, who for the prerogatiue thereof is ſimplie 2 The praiſe thereof.
                         called a vertue. That is the more difficult, the more glorious, which produceth the greateſt, famous, and moſt excellent effects; it conteineth magnanimitie, patience, conſtancie, an inuincible reſolution, heroicall vertues, whereupon many haue ſought the inconueniences that belong thereunto, with greedineſſe to attaine ſo honorable imployment. This vertue is an impregnable bulwarke, a compleat armour to incounter all accidents, Munimentum imbecillitatis humanae inexpugnabile: quod qui circundedit ſibi, ſecurus in hac vitae obſidione 
                        Senec. 
                        per durat.
                     
                     But becauſe many do miſtake, and in place of the only true vertue conceiue the falſe and baſtardlie valours, I will in declaring 3 Of imperfect or falſe valours.
                         more at large the nature and definition thereof, expell thoſe popular errours that are heere intruded. We will note then in this vertue foure conditions; the firſt is generallie and

indifferentlie againſt all ſorts of difficulties & dangers: wherefore they are deceiued that thinke there is no other valour than the militarie, which only they eſteeme, becauſe it may be it is moſt renowned and glorious, and carieth greateſt reputation Military valour. and honor, which is the tongue and trumpet of immortalitie; for to ſay truth, there is more fame and glorie therein than paine and danger. Now this is but a ſmall part and a little raye or light of the true, entire, perfect, and vniuerſall, whereby a man is one and the ſame, in companie, in bed with his griefes, as in the field, as little fearing death in his houſe, as in the armie. This militarie valour is pure and naturall in beaſts, with whom it is as well in females as in males; in men it is often artificiall, gotten by feare and the apprehenſion of captiuitie, of death, of griefe, of pouertie; of which things beaſts haue no feare. Humane valour is a wiſe cowardlineſſe, a feare accompanied with foregſiht to auoid one euill by another; choler is the temper, and file thereof; beaſts haue it ſimplie. In men alſo it is attained by vſe, inſtitution, example, cuſtome, and it is found in baſe and ſlauiſh minds: of a ſeruant or ſlaue, or a factour, or fellow trained vp in merchandiſe, is made a good and valiant ſouldier, and often without any tincture or inſtinct of vertue and true philoſophicall valour.
                     The ſecond condition, it preſuppoſeth knowledge as well of the difficultie, paine, and danger, which there is in the action 4 Temeritie or ſtupiditie.
                         that is preſented, as of the beautie, honeſtie, iuſtice, and dutie required in the enterpriſe or ſupport thereof. Wherefore they are deceiued that make valour an inconſiderate temeritie, or a ſenſeleſſe brutiſh ſtupiditie: Non eſt inconſulta temeritas, nec periculorum amor, nec formidabilium appetitio, diligentiſſima 
                        Seneca. 
                        in tutela ſui fortitudo eſt: & eadem patientiſſima eorum quibus falſa ſpecies malorum eſt. Vertue cannot be without knowledge and apprehenſion, a man cannot trulie contemne the danger which he knoweth not; if a man will alſo acknowledge this vertue in beaſts. And indeed they that ordinarilie attempt without any foreſight or knowledge, when they come to the point of execution the ſent is their beſt intelligence.
                     The third condition; this is a reſolution and ſtayednes of 
                        
the mind grounded vpon the dutie, and the honeſtie, and Bodily ſtrength. iuſtice of the enterpriſe; which reſolution neuer ſlacketh, whatſoeuer hapneth, vntill he haue valiantlie ended the enterpriſe, or his life. Many offend againſt this condition, firſt and more groſſely they that ſeeke this vertue in the body, and in the power and ſtrength of the limmes. Now valour is not a qualitie of the bodie, but of the mind; a ſetled ſtrength, not of the armes and legs, but of the courage. The eſtimation and valure of a man conſiſteth in his heart and will: heere lieth his true honor: and the only aduantage and the true victorie ouer his enemie, is to terrifie him, and to arme himſelfe againſt his conſtancie and vertue: all other helps are ſtrange and borowed: ſtrength of armes and legs is the qualitie of a porter: to make an enemie to ſtoope, to dazell his eies at the light of the ſunne, is an accident of fortune. He whoſe courage faileth not for any feare of death, quelleth not in his conſtancie and reſolution: and though he fall, is not vanquiſhed of his aduerſarie, who perhaps may in effect be but a baſe fellow, but of fortune: and therefore he is to accuſe his owne vnhappineſſe, and not his negligence. The moſt valiant are oftentimes the moſt vnfortunate. Moreouer they are deceiued, which diſquiet themſelues, and make account of thoſe vaine Thraſonicall brags of ſuch ſwaggering Braggadochios, who by their loftielooks, and braue words, would win credit of thoſe that are valiant and hardie, if a man would do them ſo much fauour to beleeue them.
                     Moreouer, they that attribute valour to ſubtiltie and craft, 6 Arte and industrie.
                         or to arte or induſtrie, do much more prophane it, and make it play a baſe and abiect part. This is to diſguiſe things, and to place a falſe ſtone for a true. The Lacedemonians permitted no Fencers nor maſter-Wreſtlers in their cities: to the end their youth might attaine thereto by nature, and not by arte. We account it a bold and hardie thing to fight with a Lion, a Beare, a wilde Bore, which encounter a man onely according to nature: but not with Waſpes, for they vſe ſubtiltie. Alexander would not contend in the Olympique games, ſaying, there was no equalitie: becauſe a priuate man might ouercome, and a king be vanquiſhed. Moreouer it is not fitting for a man of honour, to trie and aduenture his valour

in a thing, wherein a baſe fellow inſtructed by rule may gaine the priſe. For ſuch victory commeth not of vertue, nor of courage, but of certaine artificiall tricks and inuentions: wherein the baſeſt will doe that, which a valiant man knoweth not, neither ſhould he regard to doe it. Fencing is a tricke of arte, which may be attained by baſe perſons, and men of no account. And although infamous and ruffinlike fellowes are apt to fight or doe any thing in cities or townes, with the dexteritie of the ſword; if they ſee an enemie, would they not runne away? Euen ſo is it in that, which is attained By long habit and cuſtome, as builders, tumblers, mariners, who vndertake dangerous things, and more difficult than the moſt valiant, being trained and inſtructed therein from their youth.
                     Finally, they which conſider not ſufficiently the motiue 7 Paſſion.
                         and circumſtance of actions, wrongly attribute to valour and vertue, that which appertaineth and belongeth to ſome paſſion or particular intent. Eor as it is not properly vertue, nor iuſtice to be loyall and officious towards ſome, which a man particularly loueth; nor temperance, to abſtaine from the carnall pleaſure of his ſiſter, or of his daughter; nor liberalitie towards his wife and children: ſo is it not true valour to aduenture himſelfe to any danger, for his owne benefit and particular ſatisfaction. Wherefore if it be good for gaine, as ſpies, pioners, traitors, merchants on the ſea, mercenarie ſouldiers; if for ambition or reputation to be eſteemed and accounted valiant; as the moſt part of our men of warre, who ſay, being naturally caried thereunto, that if they thought they ſhould loſe their life, would not goe; if wearie of his life through paine and griefe, as the ſouldier of Antigonus, who liuing in extreame torment by the meanes of a fiſtula he had, was hardie to attempt all dangers, being healed auoided them; if to preuent ſhame, captiuitie, or any other euill; if through furie and the heat of choler: to be brief, if by paſſion or particular conſideration, as Aiax, Catiline, it is neither valour nor vertue, Sicut non martyrem poena, ſic nec fortem pagna ſed cauſa fecit.
                     
                     The fourth condition. It ought to bee in the execution 8 Indiſcretion.
                         therof wiſe and diſcreet, whereby many falſe opinions are

reiected in this matter, which are not to hide themſelues from thoſe euils and in conueniences that threaten them: neither to feare leſt they ſurpriſe vs, nor to flie, yea not to feele the firſt blowes, as the noiſe of thunder or ſhot, or the fall of ſome great building. Now this is to vnderſtand amiſſe: for ſo that the minde remaine firme and entire in it owne place and diſcourſe, without alteration, hee may outwardly diſquiet and make a ſtirre. He may lawfully, yea it is honorable, to ouerthrow, to vndoe; and to reuenge himſelfe of euils, by all meanes and honeſt indeauors: and where there is no remedie, to carrie himſelfe with a ſetled reſolution. Mens immota manet: lachrymae voluuntur inanes. Socrates mocked thoſe that condemned flight: What, ſaith he, is it cowardlineſſe to beate and vanquiſh them by giuing them place? Homer commendeth in his Vlyſſes the skill to flie: the Lacedemonians profeſſors of valour in the iourney of the Plateans, retired, the better to breake and diſſolue the Perſian troope; which otherwiſe they could not doe, and ouercame them. This hath beene practiſed by the moſt warlike people. In other places the Stoickes themſelues allowed to waxe pale; to tremble at the firſt ſudden encounter, ſo that it proceed no farther into the minde and courage. And this is valour in groſſe. There are things which are iuſtly to be feared and flied, as ſhipwracks, lightnings, and thoſe where there is no remedie, neither place of vertue, prudence, valour.
                  
                  
                     Of fortitude or valour in particular.
                     TO diuide the matter and diſcourſe of that which is heere The propoſition and diuiſion of this matter. to be ſaid, this vertue is exerciſed and employed againſt all that which the world accounteth euill. Now this euill is two-fold, externall, and internall, the one proceedeth from without, it is called by diuers names, aduerſitie, affliction, iniurie, vnhappineſſe, euill and ſiniſter accidents: The other is inward in the mind, but cauſed by that which is outward: Theſe are hatefull and hurtfull paſſions, of feare, ſadneſſe, choler, and diuers others. We muſt ſpeake of them both; preſcribe meanes and remedies to ouercome, ſuppreſſe, and rule them. Theſe are the arguments and counſels of our vertue,

fortitude, and valour. It conſiſteth then heere of two parts, the one of euils or ill accidents, the other of paſſions, which proceed thereof. The generall aduice againſt all good and euill fortune hath beene declared before: we will ſpeake heere more ſpecially and particularly thereof.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XX. The firſt part of outward euils.
                  VVE will conſider theſe outward euils three waies, in 1 The diſtinction and compariſon of euils by their cauſes.
                      their cauſes, which ſhall be declared in this chapter; afterward in their effects; laſtly in themſelues diſtinctly, and particularly euery kinde of them: And we will giue aduice and meanes in them all, by vertue to be armed againſt them.
                  The cauſe of euill and hatefull accidents, which happen to vs all, are either common and generall, when at the ſame inſtant they concerne many, as peſtilence, famine, warre, tyranny. And theſe euils are for the moſt part ſcourges ſent of God, and from heauen, or at leaſt the proper and neereſt cauſe thereof we cannot eaſily know: Or particulars, and thoſe that are knowne, that is to ſay, by the meanes of another. And ſo there are two ſorts of euils; publike and priuate. Now the common euils, that is to ſay, proceeding of a publike cauſe, though they concerne euery one in particular, are in diuers kinds, more or leſſe grieuous, weightie, and dangerous, than the priuate, whoſe cauſes are knowne. More grieuous, for they come by flockes and troopes, they aſſaile more violently, with greater ſtirre of vehemencie and furie: they haue a greater concurſe and traine: they are more tempeſtuous, they bring foorth greater diſorder and confuſion. Leſſe grieuous: becauſe generalitie and communitie ſeemeth to mitigate, and leſſen euery mans euill. It is a kinde of comfort not to be alone in miſerie: it is thought to be rather a common vnhappineſſe, where the courſe of the world, and the cauſe is naturall, than perſonall affliction. And indeed thoſe wrongs which a man doth vs, torment vs more, wound vs to the quicke, and much more alter vs. Both theſe two haue their remedies and comforts.
                  
                     
Againſt publicke euils, a man ought to conſider from whom, and by whom they are ſent, and to marke their cauſe. 2 The aduice againſt publicke euils. Prouidence. Destinie.
                      It is God, his prouidence, from whence commeth and dependeth an abſolute neceſſitie, which gouerneth and ruleth all, whereunto all things are ſubiect. His prouidence, and deſtinie, or neceſſitie, are not, to ſay the truth, two diſtinct laws in eſſence, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , neither are they one. The diuerſitie is only in the conſideration and different reaſon. Now to murmure, and to be grieued at the contrarie, is firſt of all ſuch impietie, as the like is not elſewhere found: for all things doe quietlie obey, man only torments himſelfe. And againe it is a folly, becauſe it is vaine and to no purpoſe. If a man will not follow this ſoueraigne and abſolute miſtris willinglie, it ſhall cary all by force: ad hoc ſacramentum adacti ſumus ferre mortalia, nec perturbari ijs, quae vitare nostrae potestatis non eſt: in regno nati ſumus, deo parere libertas eſt.
                  
                  Deſine fata deûm flecti ſperare querendo.
                  There is no better remedie, than to applie our willes to the will thereof; and according to the aduice of wiſdome to make a vertue of neceſſitie. Non eſt aliud effugium neceſſitatis, quàm velle quod ipſa cogat. In ſeeking to contend or diſpute againſt it, we doe but ſharpen and ſtirre the euill. Laeto animo ferre quicquid acciderit quaſi tibi volueris accidere: debuiſſes enim velle, ſi ſciſſes ex decreto Dei fieri. Beſides we ſhall better profit our ſelues, we ſhall do that which we ought to do, which is to follow our generall and ſoueraigne, who hath ſo ordeined it. Optimum pati, quod emendare non poſſis; & deum, quo authore cuncta proueniunt, ſine murmuratione comitari. Malus miles eſt qui imperatorem gemens ſequitur. And without conteſtation to allow for good whatſoeuer he will. It is magnanimitie of courage to yeeld vnto him. Magnus animus qui ſe Deo tradidit. It is effeminacie and daſtardlines to murmure or complaine, puſillus & degener, qui obluctatur, de ordine mundi male existimat, & emendare mauult Deum quàm ſe.
                  
                  Againſt thoſe priuat euils, which do proceed from the act of another, and which pierce vs more, we ought firſt well to 3 The distinction. Of priuat euils.
                      diſtinguiſh them, leſt we miſtake them. There is diſpleaſure, there is offence. We often conceiue ill of another, who notwithſtanding hath not offended vs neither in deed nor will,

as when he hath either demaunded, or refuſed any thing with reaſon, but yet was then hurtfull vnto vs: for ſuch cauſes it is too great ſimplicitie to be offended, ſince that they are not offences. Now there are two ſorts of offences, the one croſſeth our affaires againſt equitie; this is to wrong vs: the others are applied to the perſon, who is contemned by it, and handled otherwiſe than it ought, be it in deed or in word. Theſe are more grieuous and harder to be indured, than any other kind of affliction.
                  The firſt and generall aduice againſt all theſe ſorts of euils, is to be firme and reſolute, not to ſuffer himſelfe to be lead by 4 The aduice againſt them in generall.
                      common opinion, but without paſſion to conſider of what weight and importance things are, according to veritie and reaſon. The world ſuffereth it ſelfe to be perſwaded and lead by impreſſion. How many are there that make leſſe account to receiue a great wound, than a little blow? more account of a word, than of death? To be briefe, all is meaſured by opinion: and opinion offendeth more than the euill; and our impatience hurts vs more, than thoſe of whom wee complaine.
                  The other more particular counſels and remedies are drawne firſt from our ſelues, (and this is that we muſt firſt 5 Particular aduiſements drawne from our ſelues.
                      looke into.) Theſe pretended offences may ariſe of our owne defects and weakneſſe. This might be a follic grounded vpon ſome defect, in our owne perſon, which any one in deriſion would counterfait. It is follie to greeue and vex himſelfe for that which proceedeth not from his owne fault. The way to preuent others in their ſcoffes, is firſt to ſpeake, and to let them know, that you know as much as they can tell you; if it be that the iniurie hath taken his beginning by our default, and that we haue giuen the occaſion of this abuſe, why ſhould we be offended therewith? for it is not an offence, but a correction, which he ought to receiue, and make vſe of as a puniſhment. 3. But for the moſt part it proceedeth of our owne proper weakneſſe, which makes vs melancholie. Now he ought to quit himſelfe of all thoſe tender delicacies, which makes him liue vnquietlie, but with a manly courage, ſtrong and ſtoutlie to contemne, and tread vnder foote the indiſcretions and follies of another. It is no ſigne that a man is ſound,

if he complaine when one toucheth him. Neuer ſhalt thou be at reſt if thou frame thy ſelfe to all that is preſented.
                  They are alſo drawne from the perſon that offendeth. We 6 Of thoſe who offend.
                      repreſent in generall the maners and humours of thoſe perſons with whom we are to liue in the world. The moſt part of men take no delight but to do euill, and meaſure their power by the diſdaine, and the iniurie of another. So few there are which take pleaſure to do well. He ought then to make account, that whether ſoeuer we turne vs, we ſhall finde thoſe that will harme, and offend vs. Whereſoeuer we ſhall finde men, we ſhall finde iniuries. This is ſo certaine and neceſſarie, that the lawyers themſelues, who rule the trafficke and affaires of this world, haue wincked at, and permitted in diſtributiue and commutatiue iuſtice many eſcapes in lawe. They haue permitted deceit and hinderances euen to the one halfe of the iuſt price. This neceſſitie to hurt and offend, commeth firſt of the contrarietie, and incompatibilitie of humours and willes, whereof it commeth that a man is offended without will to offend. Then from the concurrence and oppoſition of affaires, which inferreth that the pleaſure, profit, and good of one, is the diſpleaſure, dammage, and ill of others; and it cannot be otherwiſe, following this common & generall picture of the world, if he who offendeth thee is inſolent, a foole, and raſh (as he is, for an honeſt man neuer wrongeth any) wherefore complaineſt thou, ſince he is no more his owne man, than as a mad man? You can well indure a furious man without complaint, yea, you will pitie him; an innocent, an infant, a woman, yee will laugh at them: a foole, a drunken man, a cholericke, an indiſcreet man in like ſort. Wherefore when theſe people aſſaile vs with words, we ought not to anſwere them: we muſt hold our peace, and quit our ſelues of them. It is an excellent & worthie reuenge, and greeuous to a foole, not to make any account of him, for it is to take away that pleaſure which he thinketh to haue in vexing vs, ſince our ſilence condemnes his ſimplicitie, and his owne temeritie, is ſmothered in his owne mouth: if a man anſwere him, he makes him his equall, and by eſteeming him too much, he wrongs himſelfe. Malè loquuntur, quia bene loqui neſciunt, faciunt quod ſolent & ſciunt, malè quia mali, & ſecundum ſe.
                  
                  
                     
Behold then for concluſion the aduice and counſel of wiſdome: we muſt haue reſpect vnto ourſelues, and vnto him 7 The concluſion of theſe counſels & with the rule of wiſdome. that offendeth vs. As touching our ſelues, wee muſt take heed we do nothing vn woorthy and vnbefitting our ſelues, that may giue another aduantage againſt vs. An vnwiſe man that diſtruſteth himſelfe, growes into paſſion without cauſe, and thereby giues incouragement to another to contradict him. This is a weakeneſſe of the minde, not to know to contemne offence: an honeſt man is not ſubiect to iniurie: he is inuiolable: an inuiolable thing is not onely this, that a man can not beate, but being beaten, neither receiueth wound nor hurt: This reſolution is a more ſtrong bulwarke againſt all accidents; that we can receiue no euill, but of our ſelues. If our iudgement be as it ought, we are inuulnerable. And therfore we alwaies ſay with wiſe Socrates, Anitus and Melitus may well put me to death, but they ſhall neuer inforce me to doe that I ought not. Moreouen, an honeſt man, as he neuer giueth occaſion of iniurie to any man, ſo he cannot endure to receiue an iniurie. Laedere enim laedique coniunctum eſt. This is a wall of braſſe, which a man is not able to pierce; ſcoffes, and iniuries trouble him not. Touching him that hath offended vs, if you hold him vaine and vnwiſe, handle him accordingly, and ſo leaue him: if he be otherwiſe, excuſe him; Imagine that he hath had occaſion, and that it is not for malice, but by miſconceit and negligence; he is vexation enough to himſelfe, and he wiſheth he had neuer done it. Moreouer, I ſay, that like good husbands we muſt make profit and commoditie of the iniuries that are offered vs. Which wee may doe at the leaſt two waies, which reſpect the offendor & the offended. The one, that they giue vs occaſion to know thoſe that wrong vs, to the end we may the better flie them at another time. Such a man hath ſlandered thee, conclude preſently that he is malicious: and truſt him no more: The other, that they diſcouer vnto vs our infirmity, and the means whereby we are eaſilie beaten, to the end we ſhould amend and repaire our defects; leſt another take occaſion to ſaie as much or more. What better reuenge can a man take of his enemies, than to make profit of their iniuries, and thereby better and more ſecurely to manage our affaires?
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXI.
                  
                     Of outward euils conſidered in their effects and fruits.
                     AFter the cauſes of euils we come to the effects and fruits 1 Generall effects very profitable.
                         thereof, where are alſo found true preſeruatiues and remedies. The effects are many, are great, are generall and particular. The generall reſpect the good, maintenance and culture of the vniuerſe. Firſt of all, the world would be extinguiſhed, would periſh, and be loſt, if it were not changed, troubled, and renued by theſe great accidents of peſtilence, famine, warre, mortalitie, which ſeaſon, perfect and purifie it, to the end to ſweeten the reſt, and giue more libertie and eaſe to the whole. Without theſe a man could neither turne himſelfe nor be ſetled. Moreouer beſides the varietie and interchangeable courſe, which they bring both to the beautie and ornament of this vniuerſe, alſo allparts of the world are benefited thereby. The rude and barbarous are heereby poliſhed and refined, artes and ſciences are diſperſed and imparted vnto all. This is as a great nurſerie, wherein certaine trees are tranſplanted from other ſtockes, others pruned and pulled vp by the rootes, all for the good and beautie of the orchard. Theſe good and generall conſiderations ought to remaine and reſolue euery honeſt and reaſonable minde, and to hinder the curious inquirie of men into thoſe great and turbulent accidents ſo ſtrange and wonderfull, ſince they are the works of God and nature, and that they doe ſo notable a ſeruice in the generall courſe of the world. For wee muſt thinke, that that which is a loſſe in one reſpect, is a gaine in another. And to ſpeake more plainly, nothing is loſt, but ſuch is the courſe of the world, ſo it changeth and ſo it is accommodated. Vir ſapiens nihil indignetur ſibi accidere, ſciat que illa ipſa quibus laedi videtur, ad conſeruationem vniuerſi pertinere, & ex his eſſe, quae curſum mundi officium
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            conſummant. 
                        2 Particular effects diuers.
                        
                     
                     The particular effects are diuers, according to the diuers ſpirits & ſtates of thoſe that receiue them: For they exerciſe the good, relieue and amend the fallen, puniſh the wicked. Of euery one a word, for heereof wee haue ſpoken elſewhere. 1. Lib. of the three verities, cap 11. Theſe outward euils are in thoſe that are good, a very profitable

exerciſe, and an excellent ſchoole wherein (as Wreſtlers and Fencers, Mariners in a tempeſt, Souldiers in dangers, Philoſophers in their Academies, and all other ſorts of people in the ſerious exerciſe of their profeſſion) they are inſtructed, made and formed vnto vertue, conſtancie, valour, the victorie of the world and of fortune. They learne to knowe themſelues, to make triall of themſelues, and they ſee the meaſure of their valour, the vttermoſt of their ſtrength; how farre they may promiſe or hope of themſelues; and then they encourage and ſtrengthen themſelues to what is beſt, accuſtome and harden themſelues to all, become reſolute and inuincible; whereas contrarily, the long calme of proſperitie mollifieth them, and maketh them wanton and effeminate. And therefore Demetrius was wont to ſay, That there were no people more miſerable, than they that had neuer felt any croſſes or afflictions, that had neuer beene miſerable, calling their life a dead ſea.
                     Theſe outward euils to ſuch as are offenders, are a bridle to ſtay them, that they ſtumble not, or a gentle correction 3 Medicine and chaſtiſment.
                         and fatherly rod after the fall to put them in remembrance of themſelues, to the end they make not a ſecond reuolt. They are a kinde of letting bloud, and medicine or preſeruatiue to diuert faults and offences; or a purgation to voide and purifie them.
                     To the wicked and forlorne they are a puniſhment, a ſickle 4 Puniſhment.
                         to cut them off, and to take them away, or to afflict them with a long and miſerable languiſhment. And theſe are their wholſome and neceſſarie effects, for which theſe outward euils are not onely to be eſteemed of, and quietly taken with patience and in good part, as the exploits of diuine iuſtice, but are to be embraced as tokens and inſtruments of the care, of the loue and prouidence of God, and men are to make a profitable vſe of them, following the purpoſe and intention of him, who ſendeth and diſpoſeth them as pleaſeth him.
                  
                  
                     
                        Of outward euils in themſelues and particularly. AN ADVERTISEMENT.
                     ALl theſe euils, which are many and diuers, are priuations of their contrarie good, as likewiſe the name and nature

of euill doth ſignifie. And therefore as many heads as there are of good, ſo many are there of euils, which may all be reduced and comprehended in the number of ſeauen, ſickneſſe, griefe, (I include theſe two in one) captiuitie, baniſhment, want, infamie, loſſe of friends, death; which are the priuations of health, libertie, home-dwelling, meanes or maintenance, honors, friends, life, whereof hath beene ſpoken before In the first booke. at large. We will heere inquire into the proper and particular remedies and medicines againſt theſe ſeuen heads of euils, and that briefly without diſcourſe.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXII. Of Sickeneſſe and griefe.
                  
                  WE haue ſaid before that griefe is the greateſt, and, to ſay the truth, the onely eſſentiall euill, which is moſt felt, and hath leaſt remedies. Neuertheleſſe, behold ſome few that regard the reaſon, iuſtice, vtilitie, imitation and reſemblance with the greateſt and moſt excellent.
                  It is a common neceſſitie to indure; there is no reaſon that  for our ſakes a miracle ſhould be wrought; or that a man ſhould be offended if that happen vnto him, that may happen vnto euery man.
                  It is alſo a naturall thing; we are borne thereunto, and to deſire to be exempted from it is iniuſtice, we muſt quietly  endure the lawes of our owne condition. We are made to be old, to be weake, to grieue, to be ſicke, and therefore we muſt learne to ſuffer that which we cannot auoid.
                  If it be long, it is light and moderate, and therefore a  ſhame to complaine of it; if it be violent it is ſhort, and ſpeedily ends either it ſelfe or the patient, which comes all to one end. Confide, ſummus non habet tempus dolor. Si grauis, breuis; Si longus, leuis.
                  
                  And againe, it is the body that endureth: it is not our ſelues that are offended, for the offence diminiſheth the excellencie  and perfection of the thing, and ſickneſſe or griefe is ſo far from diminiſhing, that contrarily it ſerueth for a ſubiect and an occaſion of a commendable patience, much more than health doth: And where there is more occaſion of commendation,

there is not leſſe occaſion of good. If the body be the inſtrument of the ſpirit, who will complaine when the inſtrument is imploied in the ſeruice of that whereunto it is deſtinated? The body is made to ſerue the ſoule: if the ſoule ſhould afflict it ſelfe for any thing that hapneth to the bodie, the ſoule ſhould ſerue the body. Were not that man ouer delicate & curious, that would cry out and afflict himſelf, becauſe ſome one or other had ſpoiled his apparell, ſome thorne had taken hold of it, or ſome man paſſing by had torne it? Some baſe broker perhaps would be aggrieued therewith, that would willingly make a commoditie thereof: But a man of abilitie and reputation would rather laugh at it, and account it as nothing in reſpect of that ſtate and abundance that God hath beſtowed on him. Now this body is but a borrowed garment, to make our ſpirits for a time to appeare vpon this lowe and troubleſome ſtage, of which onely we ſhould make account, and procure the honour and peace thereof. For from whence commeth it that a man ſuffereth griefe with ſuch impatiencie? It is becauſe he accuſtometh not himſelfe to ſeeke his content in his ſoule; non aſſuerunt animo eſſe contenti, nimium illis cum corpore fuit. Men haue too great a commerce with their bodies; And it ſeemeth that griefe groweth proud, ſeeing vs to tremble vnder the power thereof.
                  It teacheth vs to diſtaſte that which we muſt needs leaue,  and to vnwinde our ſelues from the vanity and deceit of this world, an excellent peece of ſeruice.
                  The ioy and pleaſure we receiue by the recouerie of our health, after that our griefe or ſickneſſe hath taken his courſe,  is a ſtrange enlightning vnto vs, in ſuch ſort that it ſhould ſeeme that nature hath giuen ſickneſſe for the greater honor and ſeruice of our pleaſure and delight.
                  Now then if the griefe be indifferent, the patience ſhall be eaſie: if it be great, the glory ſhall be as great: if it ſeeme ouerhard,  let vs accuſe our delicacie and niceneſſe; and if there be but few that can indure it, let vs be of the number of thoſe few. Let vs not accuſe nature for hauing made vs too weake, for that is nothing, but we are rather too delicate. If we flie it, it will follow vs; if we cowardly yeeld vnto it, and ſuffer our ſelues to be vanquiſhed, it will handle vs the more roughlie,

and the reproch will light vpon our ſelues. It would make vs afeard, and therefore it ſtandeth vs vpon to take heart, and that when it commeth it find vs more reſolute than was imagined. Our yeelding makes that more eager and more fierce, ſtare fidenter, non quia difficilia non audemus: ſed quia non audemus, difficilia ſunt.
                  
                  But leſt theſe remedies ſhould ſeeme but faire words and  meere imaginations, and the practiſe of them altogether impoſſible, we haue examples both frequent and rich not only of men, but of women and children, who haue not only a long Examples. time indured long and grieuous ſickneſſes with ſuch conſtancie, that their griefe hath rather giuen them life than courage; but haue attended and borne euen with ioy, yea, haue ſought after the greateſt and moſt exquiſit torments. In Lacedemon little children whipped one another, yea ſometimes to the death, without any ſhew in their countenance of any griefe or ſmart that they felt, only to accuſtome themſelues to ſuffer for their countrie. Alexanders page ſuffered himſelfe to be burnt with a cole without crie or countenance of diſcontent, becauſe he would not interrupt the ſacrifice: and a lad of Lacedemon ſuffered a foxe to gnaw his guts out of his belly before he would diſcouer his theft. Pompay being ſurpriſed by king Gentius, who would haue conſtrained him to reueale the publike affaires of Rome, to make knowne that no torment ſhould make him to do it, did voluntarilie put his finger into the fire, and ſuffered it to burne, vntill Gentius himſelfe tooke it out. The like before that had Mutius done before another king, Porſenna; and that good old Regulus of Carthage endured more than all theſe: and yet more than Regulus, Anaxarchus, who being halfe pounded in a morter by the tyrant Nicocreon, would neuer confeſſe that his mind was touched with any torment; Beat and pound the ſacke of Anaxarchus till you be glutted, as for himſelfe you ſhall neuer touch him.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIII. Of Captiuitie and impriſonment.
                  
                  THis affliction is no more than nothing, and in reſpect of ſickneſſe and griefe it is an eaſie matter to vanquiſh it.

For ſick folke are not without captiuitie in their beds, in their houſes, for the time they lye in, yea, they ingroſſe as it were affliction aboue captiuitie; neuertheleſſe, a word or two thereof. There is nothing but the bodie, the couer, the priſon of the ſoule that is captiue, the ſoule it ſelfe remaineth alwaies free, and at libetie in deſpite of all; and therefore how ſhould that man know or perceiue that he is in priſon, who as freely, yea and more freely too, may walke and wander whither he will, than he that is abroad? The walls and dungeons of the priſon are not ſtrong enough to ſhut him vp, the body that toucheth him and is ioyned vnto him, cannot hold nor ſtay him. He that knoweth how to maintaine himſelfe in his libertie, and to vſe and hold his owne right, which is not to be ſhut vp, no not in this world, will but laugh at theſe fleight and childiſh embarments. Christianus etiam extra carcerem ſaeculo renuntiauit: in carcere etiam carceri: nihil intereſt vbi ſit is in ſaeculo 
                     Tertul. 
                     qui extra ſaeculum estis; auferamus carceris nomen, ſeceſſum vocemus, & ſi corpus includitur, caro detinetur, omnia ſpiritui patent, totum hominem animus circumfert, & quò vult transfert.
                  
                  The priſon hath gentlie receiued into the lap thereof many great and holy perſonages; it hath beene the ſanctuarie, the hauen of health, and a fortreſſe to diuers that had beene vtterlie vndone if they had had their libertie, yea, that haue had recourſe thereunto to be in libertie, haue made choyce thereof, and eſpouſed themſelues vnto it, to the end they might liue at reſt, and free themſelues from the cares of the world, è carcere in custodiarium tranſlati. That which is ſhut vp vnder lock and key is in ſafeſt cuſtodie: and it is better to be vnder the ſafegard of a key, than to be bound and enthralled with thoſe fetters and ſtocks, whereof the world is full, that publicke places and courts of great princes, and the tumultuous affaires of this world bring with them, as iealouſies, enuies, violent humours, and the like. Si recogitemus ipſum 
                     Tertul. 
                     magis mundum carcerem eſſe, exiſſe nos è carcere quàm in carcerem introiſſe intelligemus, maiores tenebr as habet mundus quae hominum praecordia excaecant, grauiores catenas induit, quae ipſas animas constringunt, peiores immunditias expirat, libidines hominum, plures postremò reos continet vniuerſum genus hominum. Many haue eſcaped the hands of their enemies, and other

great dangers and miſeries by the benefit of impriſonment. Some haue there written bookes, and haue there bettered their knowledge. Plus in carcere ſpiritus acquirit quàm caro amittit. Diuers there are whom the priſon hauing kept and preſerued for a time, hath reſent vnto their former ſoueraigne dignities, and mounted them to the higheſt places in the world; others it hath yeelded vp vnto heauen, and hath not at any time receiued any that it reſtoreth not.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIIII. Of Baniſhment & exile.
                  
                  FXile is a change of place that brings no ill with it, but in opinion; it is a complaint and affliction wholly imaginarie:  for according to reaſon there is not any ill in it: In all places all is after one faſhion, which is comprehended in two words, Nature, & Vertue. Duo quae pulcherrima ſunt, quocun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nos mouerimus, ſequentur, natura communis & propria virtus.
                  
                  In all places we finde the ſelfeſame common nature, the ſame heauens, the ſame elements. In all places the heauens 2 Nature.
                      and the ſtarres appeare vnto vs in the ſame greatnes, extent, and that is it which principallie we are to conſider, and not that which is vnder vs, and which we trample vnder feete. Againe, at a kenning we cannot ſee of the earth aboue ten or twelue leagues: Angustus animus quem terrena delectant. But the face of the great azured firmament, decked and counterpointed with ſo many beautifull and ſhining diamonds, doth alwaies ſhew it ſelfe vnto vs; and to the end we may wholly behold it, it continuallie whirleth about vs. It ſheweth it ſelfe all vnto all, and in all reſpects in a day and a night. The earth which with the ſea and all that it conteineth, is not the hundreth and ſixtie part of the greatnes of the ſunne, ſheweth not it ſelfe vnto vs but in that ſmall proportion that is about the place where we dwell: yea and that change of that earthlie floore that is vnder vs is nothing. What matter is it to be borne in one place and to liue in another? Our mother might haue lay en in elſewhere, and it is a chance that we are borne heere or there. Againe, all Countries bring foorth and nouriſh men, and furniſh them with whatſoeuer is neceſſarie. All

countries haue kindred; nature hath knit vs all together in bloud and in charitie. All haue friends; there is no more to to but to make friends, and to win them by vertue and wiſdome. Euery land is a wiſe mans countrie, or rather no land is his particular countrie. For it were to wrong himſelfe, and it were weakneſſe and baſeneſſe of heart, to thinke to cary himſelfe as a ſtranger in any place. He muſt alwaies vſe his owne right and libertie, and liue in all places as with himſelfe, and vpon his owne, omnes terras tanquam ſuas videre, & ſuas tanquam omnium.
                  
                  Moreouer what change or diſcommoditie doth the diuerſitie of the place bring with it? Do we not alwaies cary about 3 Vertue.
                      vs one and the ſame ſpirit and vertue? Who can forbid, ſaith Brutus, a baniſhed man to cary with him his vertues? The ſpirit and vertue of a man is not ſhut vp in any place, but it is euery where equallie and indifferentlie. An honeſt man is a citizen of the world, free, cheerfull, and content in all places, alwaies within himſelfe, in his owne quarter, and euer one and the ſame, though his caſe or ſcabberd be remoued and caried hither and thither: animus ſacer & aternus vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         eſt, dijs cognatus, omni mundo & auo par. A man in euery place is in his own countrie where he is well. Now for a man to be well, it dependeth not vpon the place, but himſelfe.
                  How many are there, that for diuers conſiderations haue willinglie baniſhed themſelues? How many others baniſhed 4 Examples.
                      by the violence of another, being afterwards called home, haue refuſed to returne, and haue found their exile not only tollerable, but pleaſant and delightfull, yea, neuer thought they liued vntill the time of their baniſhment, as thoſe noble Romans Rutilius, Marcellus? How many others haue beene led by the hand of good fortune out of their countrie, that they may grow great and puiſſant in a ſtrange land?
               
               
                  CHAP. XXV. Of Pouertie, want, loſſe of goods.
                  
                  THis complaint is of the vulgar and miſerable ſottiſh ſort 1 Pouertie two-fold.
                      of people, who place their ſoueraigne good in the goods of fortune, and thinke that pouertie is a very great euill. But

to ſhew what it is, you muſt know that there is a two-fold pouertie, the one extreame, which is the want of things neceſſarie, 1. Want of things neceſſarie.
                      and requiſit vnto nature; This doth ſeldome or neuer happen to any man, nature being ſo iuſt, and hauing formed vs in ſuch a faſhion, that few things are neceſſarie, and thoſe few are not wanting, but are found euery where, parabile eſt quod natura defiderat, & expoſitum, yea in ſuch a ſufficiencie as being moderatly vſed, may ſuffice the condition of euery one. Ad manum eſt, quod ſat eſt. If we will liue according to nature and reaſon, the deſire and rule thereof, we ſhall alwaies find that which is ſufficient. If we will liue according to opinion, whileſt we liue we ſhall neuer find it. Si ad naturam viues nunquam eris pauper, ſi ad opinionem nunquam diues: exiguum natura deſiderat, opinio immenſum. And therefore a man that hath an arte or ſcience to ſtick vnto, yea, that hath but his armes at will, is it poſſible he ſhould either feare or complaine of pouertie?
                  The other is the want of things, that are more than ſufficient, 2 2. Want of things ſuperfluous.
                      required for pomp, pleaſure and delicacie. This is a kind of mediocritie and frugallitie: and to ſay the truth, it is that which we feare, to loſe our riches, our moueables, not to haue our bed ſoft enough, our diet well dreſt, to be depriued of theſe commodities, and in a word, it is delicateneſſe that holdeth vs, this is our true maladie. Now this complaint is vniuſt; for ſuch pouertie is rather to be deſired than feared: and therefore the wiſe man asked it of God, mendicitatem nec diuitias, 
                     Prouer. 30. 
                     ſed neceſſaria. It is farre more iuſt, more rich, more peaceable and certaine, than abundance which a man ſo much deſireth. More iuſt; for man came naked, nemo naſcitur diues; 
                     The praiſe of ſufficiencie. and he returneth naked out of this world. Can a man tearme that truly his, that he neither bringeth nor carieth with him? The goods of this world, they are as the moueables of an Inne. We are not to be diſcontented ſo long as we are heere, that we haue need of them. More rich; It is a large ſegnorie, a kingdome, magnae diuitiae lege naturae compoſita paupertas: magnus 
                     1. Timot. 6. 
                     quaestus pietas cum ſufficientia. More peaceable and aſſured; it feareth nothing, and can defend it ſelfe againſt the enemies thereof, etiam in obſeſſa via paupertas pax eſt. A ſmall body that may couer and gather it ſelfe vnder a buckler, is in better

ſafetie than a great, which lieth open vnto euery blow. It is neuer ſubiect to great loſſes, nor charges of great labour and burthen. And therefore they that are in ſuch an eſtate, are alwaies more cheerfull and comfortable, for they neither haue ſo much care, nor feare ſuch tempeſts. Such kind of pouertie is free, cheerfull, aſſured, it maketh vs truly maſters of our owne liues; whereof the affaires, complaints, contentions that do neceſſarilie accompanie riches, cary away the better part. Alas what goods are thoſe, from whence proceed all our euils? That are the cauſe of all thoſe iniuries that we indure, that makes vs ſlaues, trouble the quiet of our ſoules, bring with them ſo many iealouſies, ſuſpicions, feares, frights, deſires? He that vexeth himſelfe for the loſſe of theſe goods is a miſerable man, for together with his goods he loſeth his ſpirit too. The life of poore men is like vnto thoſe that ſaile neere the ſhore; that of the rich like to thoſe that caſt themſelues into the maine Ocean. Theſe cannot attaine to land, though they deſire nothing more, but they muſt attend the wind and the tide; the other come aboord, paſſe and repaſſe as often as they will.
                  Finally, wee muſt endeuour to imitate thoſe great and generous perſonages, that haue made themſelues merrie with  ſuch kinde of loſſes, yea haue made aduantage of them, and thanked God for them, as Zenon, after his ſhipwracke, Fabricius, Seranus, Curius. It ſhould ſeeme that pouertie is ſome excellent and diuine thing, ſince it agreeth with the gods who are imagined to be naked, ſince the wiſeſt haue embraced it, or at leaſt haue endured it with great contentment. And to conclude in a word, with ſuch as are not ouer paſſionate it is commendable, with others inſupportable.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXVI. Of Infamie.
                  
                  THis affliction is of diuers kinds. If it be loſſe of honors and dignities, it is rather a gaine than a loſſe: Dignities are but honorable ſeruitudes, whereby a man by giuing himſelfe to the weale-publike, is depriued of himſelfe. Honors are but the torches of enuie, iealouſie, and in the end exile &

pouertie. If a man ſhall call to minde the hiſtorie of all antiquitie, he ſhall finde that all they that haue liued, and haue caried themſelues woorthily and vertuouſly, haue ended their courſe, either by exile, or poiſon, or ſome other violent death: witneſſe among the Greekes, Ariſtides, Themiſtocles, Phocion, Socrates; amongſt the Romans, Camillus, Scipio, Cicero, Papinian; among the Hebrues the Prophets: In ſuch ſort that it ſhould ſeeme to be the liuerie of the more honeſt men, for it is the ordinarie recompence of a publike ſtate to ſuch kinde of people. And therefore a man of a gallant and generous ſpirit ſhould contemne it, and make ſmall account thereof, for he diſhonoureth himſelfe, and ſhewes how little he hath profited in the ſtudie of wiſdome that regardeth in any reſpect the cenſures, reports, and ſpeeches of the people, be they good or euill.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                     Of the loſſe of Friends.
                     I Heere comprehend parents, children, and whatſoeuer is neere and deere vnto a man. Firſt wee muſt know vpon  what this pretended complaint or affliction is grounded, whether vpon the intereſt or good of our friends or our owne. Vpon that of our friends? I doubt we ſhall ſay yea to that; but yet we muſt not be too credulous to beleeue it. It is an ambitious faining of pietie, whereby we make a ſhew of ſorrow and griefe for the hurt of another, or the hindrance of the weale-publike: but if wee ſhall withdraw the vaile of diſſimulation, and ſound it to the quicke, we ſhall finde that it is our owne particular good that is hid therein, that toucheth vs neereſt. Wee complaine that our owne candle burneth, and is conſumed, or at leaſt is in ſome danger. This is rather a kinde of enuie, than true pietie: for that which we ſo much complaine of touching the loſſe of our friends, their abſence, their diſtance from vs, is their true and great good: moerere hoc euentum inuidi magis quàm amici eſt. The true vſe of death is to make an end of our miſeries. If God had made our life more miſerable, he had made it longer.
                     And therefore to ſay the truth, it is vpon our owne good 
                        
that this complaint and affliction is grounded: now that becommeth vs not; it is a kind of iniurie to be grieued with the reſt and quiet of thoſe that loue vs, becauſe we our ſelues are hurt thereby. Suis incommodis angi non amicum, ſed ſeipſum amantis eſt.
                     
                     Againe, there is a good remedie for this, which fortune can not take from vs, and that is, that ſuruiuing our friends, we  haue meanes to make new friends. Friendſhip as it is one of the greateſt bleſſings of our life, ſo it is moſt eaſily gotten. God makes men, and men make friends: Hee that wanteth not vertue, ſhall neuer want friends: It is the inſtrument wherewith they are made, and wherewith when he hath loſt his old, he makes new. If fortune haue taken away our friends, let vs endeuour to make newe; by this meanes wee ſhall not loſe them, but multiply them.
                  
                  
                     Of death.
                     VVE haue ſpoken heereof ſo much at large and in all reſpects in the eleuenth and laſt chapter of the ſecond booke, that there remaineth not any thing elſe to be ſpoken, and therefore to that place I referre the Reader.
                  
                  
                     
                        The ſecond part of inward euils, tedious and troubleſome paſſions. THE PREFACE.
                     FRom all theſe aboue named euils, there ſpring and ariſe in vs diuers paſſions and cruell affections: for theſe being taken and conſidered ſimply as they are, they breed feare, which apprehendeth euils as yet to come, ſorrow for preſent euils, and if they be in another, pitie and compaſſion. Being conſidered as comming and procured by the act of another, they ſtirre vp in vs the paſſions of choler, hatred, enuie, iealouſie, deſpite, reuenge, and all thoſe that procure diſpleaſure, or make vs to looke vpon another with an enuious eie. Now this vertue of fortitude and valour conſiſteth in the gouernment and receit of theſe euils according to reaſon, in the reſolute and couragious cariage of a man, and the

keeping of himſelfe free and cleere from all paſſions that ſpring thereof. But becauſe they ſubſiſt not, but by theſe euils, if by the meanes and help of ſo many aduiſements and remedies before deliuered, a man can vanquiſh and contemne them all, there can be no more place left vnto theſe paſſions. And this is the true meane to free himſelfe, and to come to the end, as the beſt way to put out a fire is to withdraw the fuell that giues it nouriſhment. Neuertheleſſe wee will yet adde ſome particular counſels againſt theſe paſſions, though they haue bin in ſuch ſort before deciphered, that it is a matter of no difficultie to bring them into hatred and deteſtation.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXVIII. Againſt Feare.
                  
                  LEt no man attend euils before they come, becauſe it may be they will neuer come: our feares are as likely to deceiue vs as our hopes; and it may be that thoſe times that we thinke will bring moſt affliction with them, may bring greateſt comfort. How many vnexpected aduentures may happen that may defend a man from that blow we feare? Lightning is put by with the winde of a mans hatte, and the fortunes of the greateſt ſtates with accidents of ſmall moment. The turne of a wheele mounteth him that was of loweſt degree, to the higheſt ſtep of honour; and many times it falleth out that wee are preſerued by that, which we thought would haue beene our ouerthrow. There is nothing ſo eaſily deceiued as humane foreſight. That which it hopeth, it wanteth; that which it feareth, vaniſheth; that which it expecteth hapneth not. God hath his counſell by himſelfe; That which man determineth after one maner, he reſolueth after another. Let vs not therefore make our ſelues vnfortunate before our time, nay when perhaps we are neuer likely to be ſo. Time to come which deceiueth ſo many, will likewiſe deceiue vs as ſoone in our feares, as in our hopes. It is a maxime commonly receiued in Phyſicke, that in ſharp maladies the predictions are neuer certaine: and euen ſo is it in the moſt furious threatnings of fortune; ſo long as there is life, there is hope, for

hope continues as long in the body as the ſoule, quamdiu ſpiro, ſpero.
                  
                  But foraſmuch as this feare proceedeth not alwaies from  the diſpoſition of nature, but many times from an ouer delicate education (for by the want of exerciſe and continuall trauell and labour, euen from our youth we many times apprehend things without reaſon) we muſt by a long practiſe accuſtome our ſelues vnto that, which may moſt terrifie vs, preſent vnto our ſelues the moſt fearefull dangers that may light vpon vs, and with cheerefulneſſe of heart attempt ſometimes caſuall aduentures, the better to trie our courage, to preuent euill occurrents, and to ſeaſe vpon the armes of fortune. It is a matter of leſſe difficultie to reſiſt fortune by aſſailing it, than by defending our ſelues againſt it. For then we haue leaſure to arme our ſelues, we take our aduantages, we prouide for a retrait; whereas when it aſſaulteth vs, it ſurpriſeth vs vnawares, and handleth vs at her owne pleaſure. We muſt then whileſt we aſſaile fortune learne to defend our ſelues, giue vnto our ſelues falſe alarums, by propoſing vnto vs the dangers that other great perſonages haue paſt, call to mind that ſome haue auoided the greateſt, becauſe they were not aſtoniſhed at them, others haue beene ouerthrowne by the leaſt, for want of reſolution.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIX. Againſt Sorrow.
                  
                  THe remedies againſt ſorrow (ſet downe before as the moſt tedious, hurtfull, and vniuſt paſſion) are twofold: ſome are direct or ſtreight, others oblique. I call thoſe direct which Philoſophie teacheth, which concerne the confronting and diſdaining of euils, accounting them not euils, or at leaſt wiſe very ſmall and light (though they be great and grieuous) and that they are not woorthie the leaſt motion or alteration of our mindes; and that to be ſorrie for them, or to complaine of them, is a thing very vniuſt and ill befitting a man, ſo teach the Stoicks, Peripateticks, and Plantoniſts. This maner of preſeruing a man from ſorrow and melancholike

paſſion, is as rare, as it is excellent, and belongs to ſpirits of the firſt ranke. There is likewiſe another kinde of Philoſophicall remedy, although it be not of ſo good a ſtampe, which is eaſie and much more in vſe, and it is oblique, this is by diuerting a mans minde and thought to things pleaſant & delightfull, or at leaſt indifferent from that that procureth our ſorrow: which is to deale cunningly, to decline and auoid an euill, to change the obiect. It is a remedie very common, and which is vſed almoſt in all euils, if a man marke it, as well of the body as of the minde. Phyſitians when they cannot purge a rheume, they turne it into ſome other part leſſe dangerous. Such as paſſe by ſteepe and precipitate deepes and downfals, that haue need of launcings, ſearingirons, or fire, ſhut their eies, and turne their faces another way. Valiant men in warre doe neuer taſte nor conſider of death, their mindes being caried away by the deſire of victorie: In ſo much that diuers haue ſuffered death gladly, yea haue procured it, and beene their owne executioners, either for the future glorie of their name, as many Greekes and Romans; or for the hope of another life, as Martyrs, the diſciples of Hegeſias, and others after the reading of Plato his booke to Antiochus, de morte contemnenda; or to auoid the miſeries of this life, and for other reaſons. All theſe are they not diuerſions? Few there are that conſider euils in themſelues, that reliſh them as Socrates did his death; and Flauius condemned by Nero to die by the hands of Niger. And therefore in ſiniſter accidents & miſaduentures, and in all outward euils, we muſt diuert our thoughts, and turne them another way. The vulgar ſort can giue this aduice; Thinke not of it. Such as haue the charge of thoſe that are any way afflicted, ſhould for their comfort furniſh affrighted ſpirits with other obiects. Abducendus eſt animus ad alia ſtudia, ſolicitudines, curas, negotia; loci deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         mutatione ſaepe curandus eſt.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXX. Againſt mercy and compaſſion.
                  
                  THere is a two-fold mercie, the one good and vertuous, which is in God and in his ſaints, which is in will and in

effect to ſuccour the afflicted, not afflicting themſelues, or diminiſhing any thing that concerneth honor or equitie; the other is a kind of feminine paſſionate pitie, which proceedeth from too great a tenderneſſe and weakneſſe of the minde, whereof hath beene ſpoken before in the aboue-named paſſion. Againe, this wiſdome teacheth vs to ſuccour the afflicted, but not to yeeld and to ſuffer with him. So is God ſaid to be mercifull; as the Phyſitian to his patient; the aduocate to his client affoordeth all diligence and induſtrie, but yet taketh not their euils and affaires to the heart; ſo doth a wiſe man, not entertaining any griefe, or darkning his ſpirit with the ſmoke thereof. God commandeth vs to aid, and to haue a care of the poore, to defend their cauſe; and in another place he forbids vs to pitie the poore in iudgement.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXI. Againſt Choler.
                  
                  THe remedies are many and diuers wherewith the minde muſt before hand be armed and defended, like thoſe that feare to be beſieged; for afterwards it is too late. They may be reduced to three heads; The firſt is to cut off the way, and to ſtop all the paſſages vnto choler. It is an eaſier matter to 1 The first head.
                      withſtand it, and to ſtay the paſſage thereof in the beginning, than when it hath ſeaſed vpon a man to cary himſelfe well and orderly. He muſt therfore quit himſelfe from all the cauſes and occaſions of choler, which heertofore haue been produced in the deſcription thereof, that is to ſay, 1. weakneſſe and tenderneſſe; 2. maladie of the minde in hardning it ſelfe againſt whatſoeuer may happen; 3. too great delicateneſſe; the loue of certaine things do accuſtome a man to facilitie and ſimplicitie, the mother of peace and quietnes. Adomnia compoſiti ſimus: quae bona & paratiora ſint nobis meliora & grauiora; it is the generall doctrine of the wiſe. King Cotys hauing receiued for a preſent many beautifull and rich veſſels, yet fraile and eaſie to be broken, brake them all, to the end he might not be ſtirred to choler and furie when they ſhould happen to be broken. This was a diſtruſt in himſelfe, and a baſe kinde of feare that prouoked him thereunto. 4. Curioſitie

according to the example of Caeſar, who being a conquerour, and hauing recouered the letters, writings, and memorials of his enemies, burnt thē all before he ſaw them; 5. Lightnes of beliefe; 6. and aboue all, an opinion of being contemned, and wronged by another, which he muſt chaſe from him as vnworthie a man of ſpirit: for though it ſeeme to be a glorious thing, and to proceed from too high an eſteeme of himſelfe (which neuertheleſſe is a great vice) yet it commeth of baſeneſſe and imbecillitie. For he that thinketh himſelfe to be contemned by another, is in ſome ſenſe his inferior, iudgeth himſelfe, or feares that in truth he is ſo, or is ſo reputed, and diſtruſteth himſelfe. Nemo non eo à quo ſe contemptum iudicat minor eſt. A man muſt therefore thinke that it proceedeth rather from any thing than contempt, that is, ſottiſhneſſe, indiſcretion, want of good maners. If this ſuppoſed contempt proceed from his friends, it is too great familiaritie. If from his ſubiects or ſeruants, knowing that their maſter hath power to chaſten them, it is not to be belieued that they had any ſuch thought. If from baſe and inferior people, our honor or dignitie, or indignitie, is not in the power of ſuch people: indignus Caeſaris ira. Agathocles & Antigonus laughed at thoſe that wronged them, and hurt them not hauing them in their power. Caeſar excelled all in this point; and Moyſes, Dauid, and all the greateſt perſonages of the world haue done the like; magnam fortunam magnus animus decet: The moſt glorious conqueſt is for a man to conquer himſelfe, not to be moued by another. To be ſtirred to choler is to confeſſe the accuſation; Conuitia ſi iraſcare agnita videntur, ſpreta exoleſcunt. He can neuer be great, that yeeldeth himſelfe to the offence of another: If we vanquiſh not our choler, that will vanquiſh vs. Iniurias & offenſiones ſupernè despicere.
                  
                  The ſecond head is of thoſe remedies that a man muſt imploy 2 2. Head.
                      when the occaſions of choler are offered, and that there is a likelihood that we may be moued thereunto, which are, firſt, to keepe and conteine our bodies in peace and quietnes, without motion or agitation; which inflameth the bloud and the humours, and to keepe himſelfe ſilent and ſolitarie. Secondlie, delay in beleeuing and reſoluing, and giuing leaſure to the iudgement to conſider. If we can once diſcouer it, we

ſhall eaſily ſtay the courſe of this feuer. A wiſe man counſelled Augustus being in choler, not to be moued before he had pronounced the letters of the Alphabet. Whatſoeuer we ſay or doe in the heate of our bloud, ought to be ſuſpected. Nil tibiliceat dum iraſceris. Quàre? Quia vis omnia licere. Wee muſt feare and be doubtfull of our ſelues, for ſo long as we are moued, we can do nothing to purpoſe. Reaſon when it is hindered by paſſions, ſerueth vs no more than the wings of a bird being faſtned to his feet. We muſt therefore haue recourſe vnto our friends, and ſuffer our choler to die in the middeſt of our diſcourſe. And laſtly, diuerſion to all pleaſant occaſions, as muſicke &c.
                  The third head conſiſteth in thoſe beautifull conſiderations wherewith the mind muſt long before be ſeaſoned. Firſt, 3 3. Head.
                      in the conſideration of the actions and motions of thoſe that are in choler, which ſhould breed in vs a hatred thereof, ſo ill do they become a man. This was the maner of the wiſe, the better to diſſwade a man from this vice, to counſell him to behold himſelfe in a glaſſe. Secondly and contrarily, of the beautie which is in moderation; Let vs conſider how much grace there is in a ſweet kind of mildnes and clemencie, how pleaſing and acceptable they are vnto others, and commodious to our ſelues: It is the adamant that draweth vnto vs the hearts & willes of men. This is principallie required in thoſe whom fortune hath placed in high degree of honor, who ought to haue their motions more remiſſe and temperate, for as their actions are of greateſt importance, ſo their faults are more hardly repaired. Finally, in the conſideration of that eſteeme and loue which we ſhould beare to that wiſdome which we heere ſtudie, which eſpeciallie ſheweth it ſelfe in retaining and commanding it ſelfe, in remaining conſtant and inuincible; a man muſt mount his mind from the earth, and frame it to a diſpoſition, like to the higheſt region of the aire, which is neuer ouer-ſhadowed with cloudes, nor troubled with thunders, but in a perpetuall ſerenitie; ſo our mind muſt not be darkned with ſorrow, nor moued with choler, but flie all precipitation, imitate the higheſt planets that of all others are caried moſt ſlowlie. Now all this is to be vnderſtood of inward choler and couered, which indureth being ioyned

with an ill affection, hatred, deſire of reuenge, quae in ſinu ſtulti requieſcit, vt qui reponunt odia; quod
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſaeuae cogitationis indicium eſt, ſecreto ſuo ſatiantur. For the outward and open choler is ſhort, a fire made of ſtraw, without ill affection, which is only to make another to ſee his fault, whether in inferiours by reprehenſions, or in others by ſhewing the wrong and indiſcretion they commit, it is a thing profitable, neceſſarie, and very commendable. It is good and profitable both for himſelfe and for another ſometimes to be moued to anger, but it 4 To be angry when it is good and commodious.
                      muſt be with moderation and rule.
                  There are ſome that ſmother their choler within, to the end it breake not foorth, and that they may ſeeme wiſe and moderate; but they fret themſelues inwardlie, and offer For himſelfe. themſelues a greater violence than the matter is worth. It is better to chide a little, and to vent the fire, to the end it be not ouer ardent and painfull within. A man incorporateth choler by hiding it. It is better that the point thereof ſhould prick a little without, than that it ſhould be turned againſt it ſelfe: Omnia vitia in aperto leuiora ſunt, & tunc pernicioſiſſima cum ſimulata ſanitate ſubſidunt.
                  
                  Moreouer, againſt thoſe that vnderſtand not, or ſeldome ſuffer themſelues to be led by reaſon, as againſt thoſe kind of ſeruants that doe nothing but for feare, it is neceſſarie that 5 For another with conditions. choler either true or diſſembled put life into them, without which there can be no rule or gouernment in a familie. But yet it muſt be with theſe conditions. Firſt, that it be not often, vpon all, or light occaſions. For being too common, it growes into contempt, and works no good effect. Secondly, not in the aire, murmuring and railing behind their backs, or vpon vncertainties, but be ſure that he feele the ſmart that hath committed the offence. Thirdly, that it be ſpeedily, to purpoſe and ſeriouſly, without any mixture of laughter, to the end it may be a profitable chaſtiſement for what is paſt, and a warning for that which is to come. To conclude, it muſt be vſed as a medicine.
                  All theſe remedies may ſerue againſt the following paſſions.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXXII. Against Hatred.
                  
                  THat a man may the better defend himſelfe againſt hatred, he muſt hold a rule that is true, that all things haue two handles whereby he may take them: by the one they ſeeme to be grieuous and burthenſome vnto vs, by the other eaſie and light. Let vs then receiue things by the good handle, and we ſhall finde that there is ſomething good and to be loued, in whatſoeuer we accuſe and hate. For there is nothing in the world that is not for the good of man. And in that which offendeth vs, we haue more cauſe to complaine thereof, than to hate it: for it is the firſt offence, and receiueth the greateſt dammage, becauſe it loſeth therein the vſe of reaſon, the greateſt loſſe that may be. In ſuch an accident then, let vs turne our hate into pitie, and let vs endeuour to make thoſe worthie to be beloued, which we would hate, as Lycurgus did vnto him, that had put out his eie, whom he made, as a chaſtiſement of that wrong, an honeſt, vertuous, and modeſt citizen, by his good inſtruction.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXIII. Againſt Enuie.
                  
                  AGainſt this paſſion, we muſt conſider that which wee eſteeme and enuie in another. We willingly enuie in others riches, honors, fauours, and the reaſon is, becauſe we know not how dearly they haue coſt them. He that ſhall ſay, thou ſhalt haue as much at the ſame price, we would rather refuſe his offer, than thanke him for it. For before a man can attaine vnto them, he muſt flatter, endure afflictions, iniuries; to be briefe, loſe his libertie, ſatisfie and accommodate himſelfe to the pleaſures and paſſions of another. Man hath nothing for nothing in this world. To think to attaine to goods, honors, ſtates, offices otherwiſe, and to peruert the law or rather cuſtome of the world, is to haue the money and wares too. Thou therefore that makeſt profeſſion of honour and of vertue, why doſt thou afflict thy ſelfe if thou haue not theſe

goods, which are not gotten but by a ſhamefull patience? Doe thou therefore rather pitie others, than enuie them. If it be a true good that is hapned to another, we ſhould reioice thereat; for we ſhould deſire the good of one another: To be pleaſed with another mans proſperitie, is to increaſe our owne.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXIIII. Against Reuenge.
                  
                  AGainſt this cruell paſſion, we muſt firſt remember, that  there is nothing ſo honorable, as to know how to pardon. Euery man may proſecute the law to right that wrong that he hath receiued; but to giue grace, to remit and forgiue, belongeth to a ſoueraigne Prince. If then thou wilt be a king of kings themſelues, and doe an act that may become a king, pardon freely, be gracious towards him that hath offended thee.
                  Secondly, there is nothing ſo great and ſo victorious, as  hardineſſe and a couragious inſenſibilitie in the ſuffering of iniuries, whereby they returne and rebound wholly vpon the wrongers, as heauie blowes vpon a hard and ſteeled anuill, which doe no other but wound and benum the hand and arme of the ſtriker: To meditate reuenge is to confeſſe himſelfe wounded: to complaine is to acknowledge himſelfe guiltie and inferiour. Vltio doloris confeſſio est: non est magnus animus quem incuruat iniurta: ingens animus & verus aeſtimator ſui non vindicat iniuriam, quia non ſentit.
                  
                  But ſome will obiect, that it is irkſome and diſhonorable to endure an offence; I agree thereunto, and I am of opinion  not to ſuffer, but to vanquiſh and maſter it: but yet after a faire and honorable faſhion, by ſcorning it and him that offred it; nay more than that, by doing good vnto him. In both theſe Caeſar was excellent. It is a glorious victorie to conquer, and to make the enemie to ſtoope, by benefits, and of an enemie to make him a friend, be the iniurie neuer ſo great. Yea to thinke that by how much the greater the wrong is, by ſo much the more woorthie it is to be pardoned; and by how much more iuſt the reuenge is, by ſo much the more commendable is clemencie.
                  
                     
Againe, it is no reaſon that a man ſhould be iudge and a  partie too, as he that reuengeth is. Hee muſt commit the matter to a third perſon, or at leaſt take counſell of his friends, and of the wiſer ſort, not giuing credit vnto himſelfe. Iupiter might alone dart out his fauourable lightnings; but when there grew a queſtion of ſending foorth his reuenging thunderbolts, he could not doe it without the counſell and aſſiſtance of the twelue gods. This was a ſtrange caſe that the greateſt of the gods, who of himſelfe had power to doe good to the whole world, could not hurt a particular perſon, but after a ſolemne deliberation. The wiſdome of Iupiter himſelfe feareth to erre, when there is a queſtion of reuenge, and therfore he hath need of a counſell to deteine him.
                  We muſt therefore forme vnto our ſelues a moderation of the minde, this is the vertue of clemencie, which is a ſweete 5 Clemencie.
                      mildneſſe and graciouſneſſe, which tempereth, retaineth, and repreſſeth all our motions. It armeth vs with patience, it perſwadeth vs that we cannot be offended but with our ſelues; that of the wrongs of another nothing remaineth in vs, but that which we will retaine. It winneth vnto vs the loue of the whole world, and furniſheth vs with a modeſt carriage agreeable vnto all.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXV. Againſt Iealouſie.
                  
                  THe only meane to auoid it, is for a man to make himſelfe worthie of that he deſireth, for iealouſie is nothing elſe  but a diſtruſt of our ſelues, and a teſtimonie of our little deſert. The Emperour Aurelius, of whom Faustine his wife demaunded what he would do, if his enemie Caſſius ſhould obtaine the victorie againſt him in battell, anſwered, I ſerue not the gods ſo ſlenderlie, as that they will ſend me ſo hard a fortune. So they that haue any part in the affection of another, if there happen any cauſe of feare to loſe it, ſhould ſay, I honor not ſo little his loue, that he will depriue me of it. The confidence we haue in our owne merit, is a great gage of the will of another.
                  He that proſecuteth any thing with vertue, is eaſed by hauing 
                     
a companion in the purſuit; for he ſerueth for a comfort, and a trumpet to his merit. Imbecillitie only feareth the incounter, becauſe it thinketh that being compared to another, the imperfection thereof will preſentlie appeare. Take away emulation, you take away the glorie and ſpurre of vertue.
                  My counſell to men againſt this maladie, when it proceedeth from their wiues, is, that they remember that the greateſt  part, and moſt gallant men of the world haue fallen into this misfortune, and haue beene content to beare it without ſtirring and moleſtation: Lucullus, Caeſar, Pompey, Cato, Auguſtus, Antonius, and diuers others. But thou wilt ſay, the world knoweth it and ſpeakes of it: and of whom ſpeake they not in this ſenſe, from the greateſt to the leaſt? how many honeſt men do euery day fall into the ſame reproch? and if a man ſtirre therein, the women themſelues make a ieſt of it: the frequencie of this accident ſhould moderate the bitterneſſe thereof. Finally be thou ſuch that men may complaine of thy wrong, that thy vertue extinguiſh thy hard fortune, that honeſt men may account neuertheleſſe of thee, but rather curſe the occaſion.
                  As touching women, there is no counſell againſt this euill, for their nature is wholly compoſed of ſuſpition, vanitie, curioſitie.  It is true that they cure themſelues at the charge of their husbands, turning their euill vpon them, and healing it with a greater. But if they were capable of counſell, a man would aduiſe them not to care for it, not to ſeeme to perceiue it: which is a ſweet mediocritie betweene this fooliſh iealouſie, and that other oppoſite cuſtome practiſed in the Indies and other nations, where women labour to get friends, and women for their husbands ſeeke aboue all things their honor and pleaſure (for it is a teſtimonie of the vertue, valor, and reputation of a man in thoſe countries to haue many wiues.) So did Liuia to Augustus, Stratonice to king Deiotaurus; and for multiplication of ſtock Sara, Lea, Rachel to Abraham and Iacob.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of Temperancie, the fourth vertue.
               
                  CHAP. XXXVI. Of Temperancie in generall.
                  
                  TEmperancie is taken two waies, generallie for a moderation and ſweet temper in all things. And ſo it is not a ſpeciall 1 Temperancie two-fold. Generall.
                      vertue, but generall and common, the ſeaſoning ſauce of all the reſt: and it is perpetuallie required, eſpeciallie in thoſe affaires where there is controuerſie and conteſtation, troubles and diuiſions. For the preſeruation thereof, there is no better way, than to be free from particular phantaſies and opinions, and ſimple to hold himſelfe to his owne deuoire. All lawfull intentions or opinions are temperate; choler, hatred are inferior to dutie and to iuſtice, and ſerue only thoſe that tie not themſelues to their dutie by ſimple reaſon.
                  Speciallie, for a bridle and rule in things pleaſant, delightfull, 2 Speciall.
                      which tickle our ſenſes and naturall appetites. Habena voluptatis, inter libidinem & ſtuporem naturae poſita, cuius duae partes; verecundia in fuga turpium, honestas in obſeruatione decori: We will heere take it more at large, for a rule and dutie in all proſperitie, as fortitude is the rule in all aduerſitie, and it ſhall be the bridle, as fortitude the ſpurre. With theſe two we ſhall tame this brutiſh, ſauage, vntoward part of our paſſions which is in vs, and we ſhall carry our ſelues well and wiſely in all fortunes & accidents, which is a high point of wiſdome.
                  Temperancie then hath for the ſubiect and generall obiect thereof all proſperitie, pleaſant and plauſible things, but eſpeciallie 3 The deſcription of temperancie.
                      and properlie pleaſure, whereof it is the razor and the rule; the razor to cut off ſtrange and vitious ſuperfluities; the rule of that which is naturall and neceſſarie: Voluptatibus imperat, alias odit & abigit, alias diſpenſat, & ad ſanum modum redigit: nec vnquam ad illas propter illas venit, ſcit optimum eſſe modum cupitorum, non quantum velis, ſed quantum debeas. This is the authoritie and power of reaſon ouer concupiſcence and violent affections, which carrie our willes to delights and pleaſures. It is the bridle of our ſoule, and the proper inſtrument to cleare thoſe boyling tempeſts which ariſe in vs by the heate and intemperancie of our bloud, that the ſoule may

be alwaies kept one, and appliant vnto reaſon, that it applie not it ſelfe to ſenſible obiects, but that it rather accommodate them vnto it ſelfe, and make them ſerue it. By this we weane our ſoule from the ſweet milke of the pleaſures of this world, and we make it capable of a more ſolid and ſoueraigne nouriſhment. It is a rule that ſweetlie accommodateth all things vnto nature, to neceſſitie, ſimplicitie, facilitie, health, conſtancie. Theſe are things that goe willinglie together, and they are the meaſures and bounds of wiſdome; as contrarily arte, luſt, and ſuperfluitie, varietie, and multiplicitie, difficultie, maladie, and delicateneſſe keepe companie together, following intemperancie and follie: Simplici cura constant neceſſaria, in delitijs laboratur. Ad parata nati ſumus: nos omnia nobis difficilia facilium fastidio fecimus.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXVII. Of Prosperitie, and counſell thereupon.
                  
                  THat proſperitie which ſweetly falles vpon vs, by the common courſe and ordinarie cuſtome of the world, or  by our own wiſdome and diſcreet cariage, is farre more firme and aſſured, and leſſe enuied, than that which commeth from heauen, with fame and renowne beyond and againſt the opinion of all, and the hope euen of him that receiueth theſe bounties.
                  Proſperitie is very dangerous: whatſoeuer there is that is  vaine and light in the ſoule of man, is raiſed and caried with the firſt fauorable winde. There is nothing that makes a man ſo much to loſe and forget himſelfe, as great proſperitie, as corne lodgeth by too great abundance, and boughs ouercharged with fruit breake aſunder, and therefore it is neceſſarie that a man looke to himſelfe, and take heed, as if he went in a ſlipperie place, and eſpeciallie of inſolencie, pride, and preſumption. There be ſome that ſwimme in a ſhallow water, and with the leaſt fauour of fortune are puffed vp, forget themſelues, become inſupportable, which is the true picture of follie.
                  From thence it commeth that there is not any thing more  fraile, and that is of leſſe continuance than an ill aduiſed proſperitie, which commonly changeth great and ioyfull occurrents

into heauy and lamentable, and fortune of a louing mother, is turned into a cruell ſtep-dame.
                  Now the beſt counſell that I can giue to a man, to carrie  himſelfe heerein, is, not to eſteeme too much of all ſorts of proſperitie and good fortunes, and in any ſort not to deſire them: If they ſhall happen to come, out of their good grace and fauour, to receiue them willingly and cheerefully; but as things ſtrange and no way neceſſarie, but ſuch as without which a man may paſſe his life, and therefore there is no reaſon he ſhould make account of them, or thinke himſelfe the woorſe or better man for them. Non est tuum, fortuna quod fecit tuum. Qui tutam vitam agere volet, ista viſcata beneficia deuitet, nil dignum putare quod ſperes. Quid dignum habet fortuna quod concupiſcas?
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Pleaſure, and aduice thereupon.
                  
                  PLeaſure is an apprehenſion and ſenſe of that which is agreeable to nature, it is a pleaſant motion and tickling: The deſcription and diſtinction of pleaſure. as contrarilie, griefe or ſorrow is vnwelcome and vnpleaſing to the ſenſes; neuertheleſſe, they that place it in the higheſt degree, and make it the ſoueraigne good, as the Epicures, take it not ſo, but for a priuation of euill and diſpleaſure, in a word Indolence. According to their opinion, the not hauing of any euill, is the happieſt eſtate that man can hope for in this life. Nimium boni eſt cui nihil eſt mali: This is as a mid-way or neutralitie betwixt pleaſure taken in the firſt and common ſenſe, and griefe; it is as ſometime the boſome of Abraham was ſaid to be, betwixt paradiſe and the hell of the damned. This is a ſweete and peaceable ſtate and ſetling, a true, conſtant and ſtaied pleaſure, which reſembleth in ſome ſort the tranquillitie of the ſoule, accounted by Philoſophers the chiefe and ſoueraigne good: the other firſt kinde of pleaſure is actiue and in motion. And ſo there ſhould be three eſtates, the two extreame oppoſites, Griefe and Pleaſure, which are not ſtable nor durable, and both of them ſickly: and that in the middle, ſtable, firme, ſound, wherunto the Epicures gaue the name of pleaſure (as indeed it is in regard of griefe and

ſorrow) making it the chiefe and ſoueraigne good. This is that which hath ſo much defamed their ſchoole, as Seneca hath ingenuouſly acknowledged and ſaid, that their euill was in the title and words, not in the ſubſtance, hauing neuer had either doctrine or life more ſober, temperate, and enemie to wickedneſſe and vice than theirs. And it is not altogether without reaſon that they called this Indolence and peaceable ſtate, Pleaſure: for that tickling delight which ſeemeth to mount vs aboue indolence, aimeth at nothing elſe but indolence, or want of griefe, as it proper butte; as for example; that appetite that rauiſheth vs with deſire of women, ſeeketh nothing elſe but to flie that paine that an ardent and furious deſire to ſatisfie our luſt bringeth with it, to quit our ſelues of this feuer, and to purchaſe our reſt.
                  Pleaſure hath diuerſly beene ſpoken of, and more briefly and ſparingly than was fit; ſome haue deified it, others deteſted 2 Againſt it.
                      it as a monſter, and tremble at the very word, taking it alwaies in the worſer part. They that doe wholly condemne it ſay; Firſt, it is ſhort, a fire of ſtraw, eſpecially if it be liuely and actiue. Secondly, fraile and tender, eaſily and with nothing corrupted and ended, an ounce of ſorrow marres a whole ſea of pleaſure: It is called a choaked peece of artillery. Thirdly, baſe, ſhamefull, exerciſing it ſelfe by vilde inſtruments, in hidden corners, at leaſt for the moſt part, for there likewiſe are magnificent and pompous pleaſures. Fourthly, quickly ſubiect to ſatietie. A man knowes not how to continue long in his pleaſures, he is impatient as wel in his delights as his griefes, and it is not long ere repentance follow, which many times yeelds pernicious effects, the ouerthrow of men, families, common-weales. Fiftly, and aboue all they alleadge againſt it, that when it is in his greateſt ſtrength, it maſtreth in ſuch a maner, that reaſon can haue no enterteinment.
                  On the other ſide, it is ſaid, to be naturall, created and eſtabliſhed of God in the world, for the preſeruation and continuance 3 For it, See Lib. 2. ca. 6. thereof, as well by retaile of the indiuiduall parts, as in groſſe of the ſpeciall kindes. Nature the mother of pleaſure, in thoſe actions that are for our need and neceſſitie, hath likewiſe mingled pleaſure. Now to liue well is to conſent vnto nature. God, ſaith Moyſes, hath created pleaſure, Plantauerat
                     
                     dominus paradiſum voluptatis, hath placed and eſtabliſhed man in a pleaſant eſtate, place and condition of life: and in the end, what is the laſt and higheſt felicitie, but certaine and perpetuall pleaſure? Inebriabuntur ab vbertate domus tuae, & torrente voluptatis tuae potabis eos. Suis contenta finibus res est diuina voluptas. And to ſay the truth, the moſt regular Philoſophers, and the greateſt profeſſors of vertue, Zeno, Cato, Scipio, Epaminondas, Plato, Socrates himſelfe haue been in effect amorous, and drinkers, dancers, ſporters, and haue handled, ſpoken, written of loue and other pleaſures.
                  And therefore this matter is not decided in a word, but we muſt diſtinguiſh, for pleaſures are diuers. There are naturall, 4 The diſtinction of pleaſures.
                      and not naturall: This diſtinction as more important we will preſently better conſider of. There are ſome that are glorious, arrogant, difficult; others that are obſcure, milde, eaſie & ready. Though to ſay the truth, Pleaſure is a qualitie not greatly ambitious; it is accounted rich enough of it ſelfe, without the addition of any thing to the reputation thereof, and it is loued beſt in obſcuritie. They likewiſe that are ſo eaſie and ready are cold and frozen, if there be no difficultie in them: which is as an inducement, a baite, a ſpurre vnto them. The ceremonie, ſhame and difficultie that there is in the attainment of the laſt exploits of loue, are the ſpurres, and matches that giue fire vnto it, and increaſe the price thereof. There are ſpirituall pleaſures & corporall, not (to ſay the truth) becauſe they are ſeparated: for they al belong to the entire man, and the whole compoſed ſubiect: and the one part of our ſelues hath not any ſo proper, but that the other hath a feeling thereof, ſo long as the mariage and amorous band of the ſoul & bodie continueth in this world. But yet there are ſome wherin the ſoule hath a better part than the body, & therfore they better agree with men, than with beaſts, and are more durable, as thoſe that enter into vs by the ſenſe of ſeeing and hearing, which are the two gates of the ſoule, for hauing only their paſſage by them, the ſoule receiueth them, concocteth and digeſteth them, feedeth and delighteth it ſelfe a long time; the body feeleth little. Others there are wherein the body hath the greater part, as thoſe which belong to the taſte and touch, more groſſe and material, wherein the beaſts beare

vs companie, ſuch pleaſures are handled, tried, vſed and ended in the bodie it ſelfe, the ſoule hath onely the aſſiſtance and companie, and they are but ſhort, like a fire of ſtraw, ſoone in, ſoone out.
                  The chiefe thing to be conſidered heerein, is to know how wee ſhould carrie and gouerne our ſelues in our pleaſures, 5 Aduiſements heereupon.
                      which wiſdome will teach vs, and it is the office of the vertue of temperance. We muſt firſt make a great and notable difference betweene the naturall, and not naturall. By the not naturall we doe not onely vnderſtand thoſe that are againſt nature, and the true vſe approoued by the lawes; but alſo the naturall themſelues, if they degenerate into too great an exceſſe and ſuperfluitie, which is no part of nature, which contenteth it ſelfe with the ſupplie of neceſſitie; whereunto a man may likewiſe adde decencie and common honeſtie. It is naturall pleaſure to be couered with a houſe and garments Which are naturall. againſt the rigour of the elements, and the iniuries of wicked men; but that they ſhould be of gold or ſiluer, of Iaſper or Porpherie, it is not naturall: Or if they come vnto a man by other meanes than naturall, as if they be ſought and procured by arte, by medicines, or other vnnaturall meanes: Or if they be firſt forged in the minde, ſtirred by paſſion, and afterwards from thence come vnto the body, which is a prepoſterous order: for the order of nature is, that pleaſures enter into the bodie, and be deſired by it, and ſo from thence aſcend vnto the minde. And euen as that laughter that is procured by tickling the arme-holes, is neither naturall nor pleaſing, but rather a kinde of conuulſion; ſo that pleaſure that is either ſought or kindled by the ſoule, is not naturall.
                  Now the firſt rule of wiſdome concerning pleaſures is this, 6 The firſt and generall rule.
                      to chaſe away, and altogether to condemne the vnnaturall, as vitious, baſtardly (for as they that come to a banquet vnbidden, are to be refuſed; ſo thoſe pleaſures that without the inuitation of nature preſent themſelues, are to be reiected) to admit and receiue the naturall; but yet with rule and moderation: and this is the office of temperancie in generall, to driue away the vnnaturall, to rule the naturall.
                  
                     
The rule of naturall pleaſures conſiſteth in three points:
                  Firſt, that it be without the offence, ſcandall, dammage, and preiudice of another. Rules for the naturall.
                  
                  Secondly, that it be without the preiudice of himſelfe, his honor, his health, his leaſure, his dutie, his functions.
                  Thirdly, that it be with moderation, that he take them no more to the heart, than againſt the heart, neither couet them, nor flie from them, but take and receiue them, as men doe honie with the tip of the finger, not with a full hand; not to engage himſelfe in them too farre, nor to make them his principall buſineſſe, and onely worke; much leſſe to enthrall himſelfe vnto them, and of recreations make them neceſſities, for that is the greateſt miſerie of all others. Pleaſure ſhould be but as an acceſſarie, a recreation for the time, that he may the better returne to his labour, as ſleepe which ſtrengthneth the bodie, and giueth vs breath to returne the more cheerfullie to our worke. To be ſhort, a man muſt vſe them, not inioy them. But aboue all, he muſt take heed of their treaſon: for ſome there are, that whileſt we giue our ſelues vnto them, and loue them ouer dearely, returne euill for good, and more diſpleaſure than delight: but this is treacherouſlie: for they goe before to beſot and deceiue vs, and hiding from vs their taile, they tickle vs and embrace vs to ſtrangle vs. The pleaſure of drinking goes before the paine of the head: ſuch are the delights and pleaſures of indiſcreet and firie youth, wherewith they are made drunken. We plunge our ſelues into them, but in our old age they forſake vs, as it were drowned and ouerwhelmed, as the ſea in his reflux ouer-runneth the ſandie banks: That ſweetneſſe which we haue ſwallowed ſo greedilie, endeth with bitterneſſe and repentance, and filleth our ſoules with a venemous humor that infecteth and corrupteth it.
                  Now as moderation and rule in pleaſures is an excellent and profitable thing according vnto God, nature, reaſon: ſo 8 Want of gouernment in pleaſure preiudicious.
                      exceſſe and immoderate vnrulineſſe is of all others the moſt pernicious, both to the publicke and priuat good. Pleaſure ill valued, ſoftneth and weakneth the vigor both of ſoule and bodie; Debilitatem induxere delitiae, blandiſſimae dominae: it beſotteth

and effeminateth the beſt courages that are, witnes Hannibal: and therfore the Lacedemonians that made profeſſion of contemning all pleaſures were called men, and the Athenians ſoft and delicate women. Xerxes to puniſh the reuolt of the Babylonians, and to aſſure himſelf of them in time to come, tooke from them their armes, forbidding all painfull and difficult exerciſe, and permitting all pleaſures and delicacies whatſoeuer. Secondly, it baniſheth and driueth away the principall vertues, which cannot continue vnder ſo idle and effeminate an empire: Maximas virtutes iacere oportet voluptate dominante. Thirdly, it degenerateth very ſuddenly into the contrarie thereof, which is griefe, ſorrow, repentance: for as the riuers of ſweet water run their courſe to die in the ſalt ſea, ſo the honie of pleaſure endeth in the gall of griefe; In praecipiti eſt, ad dolorem vergit, in contrarium abit, niſi modum teneat. Extrema gaudij luctus occupat. Finally, it is the ſeminarie of all euils, of all ruine. Malorum eſca voluptas. From it come thoſe cloſe and ſecret intelligences, then treaſons, and in the end euerſions and ruines of Common-weales. Now wee will ſpeake of pleaſures in particular.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXIX. Of eating and drinking, Abstinence, and Sobrietie.
                  
                  VIctuals are for nouriſhment, to ſuſtaine and repaire the infirmitie of the bodie; the moderate, naturall, and pleaſant 1 The vſe of victuall.
                      vſe thereof entertaineth it, maketh it a fit and apt inſtrument for the ſoule; as contrarily an vnnaturall exceſſe weakneth it, bringeth great and loathſome diſeaſes, which are the naturall puniſhments of intemperancie; Simplex ex ſimplici cauſa valetudo; multos morbos ſupplicia luxuriae, multa fercula fecerunt. A man complaineth of his braine for ſending downe ſo many rheumes, the foundation of all dangerous maladies; but the braine may well anſwere him, Define fundere, & ego deſinam fluere; Be thou ſober in powring downe, and I will be ſparing in dropping downe. But what, the exceſſe and prouiſion, the multitude, diuerſitie, and exquiſit preparation of

viands is come in requeſt; and it is our cuſtome euen in the greateſt and moſt ſumptuous ſuperfluities, to craue pardon for not prouiding enough.
                  How preiudicate both to the mind and to the body a full  diet, with diuerſitie, curioſitie, exquiſit and artificiall preparation is, euery man may finde in himſelfe. Gluttonie and drunkennes are idle and vndecent vices; they bewray themſelues ſufficientlie by the geſtures and countenances of thoſe that are there with tainted; whereof the beſt and more honeſt is, to be dull and drouſie, vnprofitable and vnfit for any good: for there was neuer man that loued his belly too well, that did euer performe any great worke. Moreouer, it is the vice of brutiſh men, and of no worth, eſpeciallie drunkennes, which leadeth a man to all vnworthie actions; witneſſe Alexander, otherwiſe a great Prince, being ouercome with this vice, killed his deareſt friend Clitus, and being come to himſelfe, would haue kild himſelfe for killing Clitus. To conclude, it wholly robbeth a man of his ſenſe, and peruerteth his vnderſtanding: Vinum clauo caret, dementat ſapientes, facit repueraſcere ſenes.
                  
                  Sobrietie though it be none of the greateſt and more difficult vertues, and which is not painfull to any but fooles and 3 Sobrietie commended.
                      mad-men, yet it is a way and a kinde of progreſſe to other vertues: It extinguiſheth vice in the cradell, and ſtifleth it in ſeed: It is the mother of health, and an aſſured medicine againſt all maladies, and that that lengthneth a mans life. Socrates by ſobrietie had alwaies a ſtrong bodie and liued euer in health; Maſiniſſa the ſobereſt king of all the reſt got children at 86. yeeres of age, and at 92. vanquiſhed the Carthaginians; whereas Alexander by his drunkenneſſe died in the flowre of his age, though he were better borne and of a ſounder conſtitution than them all. Many ſubiect to goutes and Hierom. other diſeaſes by Phyſicke incurable, haue recouered their health by diet. Neither is it ſeruiceable to the bodie onely, but to the minde too, which thereby is kept pure, capable of wiſdome and good counſell; Salubrium conſiliorum parens ſobrietas. All the greateſt perſonages of the world haue beene ſober, not onely the profeſſours of ſingular vertue and auſteritie

of life, but all thoſe that haue excelled in any thing, Cyrus, Caeſar, Iulian the emperour, Mahumet: Epicurus the great doctor of pleaſure heerein excelled all men. The frugalitie of the Romane Curij and Fabritij is more extolled than their great victories: The Lacedemonians as valiant as they were, made expreſſe profeſſion of frugalitie and ſobrietie.
                  But a man muſt in time and from his youth embrace this part of temperancie, and not ſtay till the infirmities of old  age come vpon him, leſt that he be vtterly caſt downe with varietie of diſeaſes; as the Athenians, who were reproched for that they neuer demanded peace, but in their mourning garments, after they had loſt their kindred and friends in warre, and were able to defend themſelues no longer. This is to aske counſell when it is too late; Sera in fundo parſimonia; it is to play the good husband when there is nothing left but bare walles, to make his market when the faire is ended.
                  It is a good thing for a man not to accuſtome himſelfe to a delicate diet, leſt when he ſhall happen to be depriued therof, his bodie grow out of order, and his ſpirit languiſh and faint; and contrarily to vſe himſelfe to a groſſer kinde of ſuſtenance, both becauſe they make a man more ſtrong and healthfull, and becauſe they are more eaſily gotten.
               
               
                  CHAP. XL. Ofriot and exceſſe in apparell and ornaments, and of frugalitie.
                  
                  IT hath beene ſaid before that garments are not naturall, nor neceſſarie to a man; but artificiall, inuented and vſed onely  by him in the world. Now inaſmuch as they are artificiall, (for it is the maner of things artificiall to varie and multiplie, without end and meaſure, ſimplicitie being a friend vnto nature) they are extended and multiplied into ſo many inuentions (for to what other end are there ſo many occupations and traffiques in the world, but for the couering and decking of our bodies?) diſſolutions and corruptions, inſomuch that it is no more an excuſe and couering of our defects and neceſſities,

but a neſt of all maner of vices, vexillum ſuperbiae, nidus luxuriae, the ſubiect of riot and quarrels: for from hence did firſt begin the proprietie of things, mine and thine; and in the greateſt communities or fellowſhips that are, apparell is alwaies proper, which is ſignified by this word, diſrobe.
                  It is a vice very familiar and proper vnto women (I meane  exceſſe in apparell) a true teſtimonie of their weakneſſe, being glad to winne credit and commendations by theſe ſmall and ſlender accidents, becauſe they know themſelues to be too weake and vnable to purchaſe credit and reputation by better meanes: for ſuch as are vertuous, care leaſt for ſuch vanities. By the lawes of the Lacedemonians it was not permitted to any to weare garments of rich and coſtly colours, but to common women: That was their part, as vertue and honour belonged vnto others.
                  Now the true and lawfull vſe of apparrell is to couer our ſelues againſt winde and weather, and the rigour of the aire, and ſhould neuer be vſed to other end; and therefore as they ſhould not be exceſſiue nor ſumptuous, ſo ſhould they not be too baſe and beggerly. Nec affectatae ſordes, nec exquiſitae munditiae. Caligula was as a laughing ſtocke to all that beheld him, by reaſon of the diſſolute faſhion of his apparell. Auguſtus was commended for his modeſtie.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLI. Carnall pleaſure, Chaſtitie, Continencie.
                  
                  COntinencie is a thing verie difficult, and muſt haue a carefull and a painfull guard: It is no eaſie matter wholly 1 See the chap. 24. to reſiſt nature, which in this is moſt ſtrong and moſt ardent.
                  And this is the greateſt commendation that it hath, that  there is difficultie in it; as for the reſt, it is without action and without fruite, it is a priuation, a not doing, paine without profit; and therefore ſterilitie is ſignified by virginitie.

I ſpeake heere of ſimple continencie, and onely in it ſelfe, which is a thing altogether barren & vnprofitable, and hardly commendable, no more than not to play the glutton, not to be drunken; and not of Chriſtian continencie, which to make it a vertue hath two things in it, a deliberate purpoſe alwaies to keepe it, and that it be for Gods cauſe. Non hoc in virginibus 
                     Auguſt. 
                     praedicamus, quòd ſint virgines, ſed quòd deo dicatae; witneſſe the Veſtalles, and the fiue fooliſh virgins ſhut out of doores; and therefore it is a common errour, and a vanitie, to call continent women honeſt women and honorable, as if it were a vertue, and there were an honor due vnto him that doth no euill, doth nothing againſt his dutie. Why ſhould not continent men in like ſort haue the title of honeſtie and honour? There is more reaſon for it, becauſe there is more difficultie, they are more hot, more hardie, they haue more occaſions, better meanes. So vnlikely is it that honour ſhould be due vnto him that doth no euill, that it is not due vnto him that doth good, but onely, as hath beene ſaid, to him that is profitable to the 
                        Lib. 1. ca. 60. weale-publike, and where there is labour, difficultie, danger. And how many continent perſons are there ſtuft with other vices, or at leaſt that are not touched with vaine-glory and preſumption, whereby tickling themſelues with a good opinion of themſelues, they are readie to iudge and condemne others? And by experience wee ſee in many women how dearly they ſell it vnto their husbands, for diſlodging the diuell from that place where they rowe, and eſtabliſhing the point of honor as in it proper throne, they make it to mount more high, and to appeare in the head, to make him belieue that it is not any lower elſewhere. If neuertheleſſe this flattering word, honor, ſerue to make them more carefull of their dutie, I care not much if I allow of it. Vanitie it ſelfe ſerues for ſome vſe, and ſimple incontinencie and ſole in it ſelfe is none of the greateſt faults, no more than others that are purely corporall, and which nature committeth in hir actions either by exceſſe or defect without malice. That which diſcrediteth it and makes it more dangerous, is, that it is almoſt neuer alone, but is commonlie accompanied and followed with other

greater faults, infected with the wicked and baſe circumſtances of prohibited perſons, times, places; practiſed by wicked meanes, lies, impoſtures, ſubornations, treaſons; beſides the loſſe of time, diſtractions of thoſe functions from whence it proceedeth by great and grieuous ſcandals.
                  And becauſe this is a violent paſſion and likewiſe deceitfull, 3 An aduiſement.
                      we muſt arme our ſelues againſt it, and be wary in deſcrying the baits thereof, and the more it flattereth vs, the more diſtruſt it: for it would willinglie embrace vs to ſtrangle vs; it pampereth vs with honie, to glut vs with gall; and therefore let vs conſider as much, that the beautie of another is a thing that is without vs, and that as ſoone it turneth to our euill as our good; that it is but a flower that paſſeth, a ſmall thing and almoſt nothing but the colour of a body; and acknowledging in beautie the delicate hand of nature, we muſt priſe it as the ſunne and moone for the excellencie that is in it: and comming to the fruition thereof by all honeſt meanes, alwaies remember that the immoderate vſe of this pleaſure conſumeth the body, effeminateth the ſoule, weakneth the ſpirit; and that many by giuing themſelues ouermuch thereunto, haue loſt, ſome their life, ſome their fortune, ſome their ſpirit: and contrarily, that there is greater pleaſure and glory in vanquiſhing pleaſure, than in poſſeſſing it: that the continencie of Alexander and of Scipio hath beene more highlie commended, than the beautifull countenances of thoſe yong damſels that they tooke captiues.
                  There are many kinds and degrees of continencie and incontinencie. The coniugall is that which importeth more  than all the reſt, which is moſt requiſit and neceſſarie, both for the publike and particular good, and therefore ſhould be by all in greateſt account. It muſt be kept and retained within the chaſte breaſt of that partie whom the deſtinies haue giuen for our companion. He that doth otherwiſe, doth not only violate his owne bodie, making it a veſſell of ordure by all lawes; the lawe of God, which commaundeth chaſtitie; of Nature, which forbiddeth that to be common which is proper to one, and impoſeth vpon a man faith and conſtancie;

of Countries, which haue brought in mariages; of families, transferring vniuſtlie the labour of another to a ſtranger; and laſtly, Iuſtice it ſelfe, bringing in vncertainties, iealouſies, and brawles amongſt kindred, depriuing children of the loue of their parents, and parents of the pietie and dutie of their children.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLII. Of Glory and Ambition.
                  
                  AMbition, the deſire of glory and honor (wherof we haue alreadie ſpoken) is not altogether and in all reſpects to be condemned. Firſt, it is very profitable to the weale-publike as the world goeth, for it is it from whence the greateſt of our honorable actions doth ariſe, that hartneth men to dangerous attempts, as we may ſee by the greateſt part of our ancient heroicall men, who haue not all been lead by a philoſophicall ſpirit, as Socrates, Phocion, Aristides, Epaminondas, Cato, and Scipio, by the only true and liuely image of vertue; for many, yea the greateſt number haue beene ſtirred thereunto by the ſpirit, of Themistocles, Alexander, Caeſar: and although theſe honorable atchieuments and glorious exploits haue not beene with their authors and actors, true works of vertue but ambition; neuertheleſſe their effects haue beene very beneficiall to the publike ſtate. Beſides this conſideration, according to the opinion of the wiſeſt, it is excuſable and allowable in two caſes: the one in good and profitable things, but which are inferior vnto vertue, and common both to the good and to the euill, as artes and ſciences: Honos alit artes: inconduntur omnes ad ſtudia gloria; inuentions, induſtrie, military valour. The other in continuing the good will and opinion of another. The wiſe doe teach, not to rule our actions by the opinion of another, except it be for the auoiding of ſuch inconueniences as may happen by their contempt of the approbation and iudgement of another.
                  But that a man ſhould be vertuous, and doe good for glorie, as if that were the ſalarie and recompence thereof, is a falſe 
                     
and vaine opinion. Much were the ſtate of vertue to be pitied, if ſhe ſhould fetch hir commendations and priſe from the opinion of another, this coine were but counterfelt, and this pay too baſe for vertue; She is too noble to begge ſuch recompence. A man muſt ſettle his ſoule, and in ſuch ſort compoſe his actions, that the brightneſſe of honor dazell not his reaſon, and ſtrengthen his minde with braue reſolutions, which ſerue him as barriers againſt the aſſaults of ambition.
                  Hee muſt therefore perſwade himſelfe, that vertue ſeeketh not a more ample and more rich theater to ſhew it  ſelfe than hir owne conſcience: The higher the Sunne is, the leſſer ſhadowe doth it make: The greater the vertue is, the leſſe glorie doth it ſeeke. Glory is truely compared to a ſhadowe, which followeth thoſe that flie it, and flieth thoſe that follow it. Againe, hee muſt neuer forget, that man commeth into this world as to a Comedy, where hee chooſeth not the part that he is to play, but onely bethinks himſelfe how to play that part well that is giuen vnto him: or as a banquet, wherein a man feeds vpon that that is before him, not reaching to the farre ſide of the table, or ſnatching the diſhes from the maſter of the feaſt. If a man commit a charge vnto vs, which we are capable of, let vs accept of it modeſtlie, and exerciſe it ſincerelie; making account that God hath placed vs there to ſtand ſentinell, to the end that others may reſt in ſafetie vnder our care. Let vs ſeeke no other recompence of our trauell, than our owne conſcience to witneſſe our well doing, and deſire that the witneſſe be rather of credit in the court of our fellow-citizens, than in the front of our publike actions. To be ſhort, let vs hold it for a maxime, that the fruit of our honorable actions, is to haue acted them. Vertue cannot finde without it ſelfe a recompence worthie it ſelfe. To refuſe and contemne greatnes, is not ſo great a miracle, it is an attempt of no difficultie. He that loues himſelfe, and iudgeth ſoundlie, is content with an indifferent fortune. Magiſtracies very actiue and paſſiue are painfull,

and are not deſired but by feeble and ſicke ſpirits. Otanes one of the ſeauen that had title to the ſoueraigntie of Perſia, gaue ouer vnto his companions his right, vpon condition, that he and his might liue in that Empire free from all ſubiection and magiſtracie, except that which the ancient lawes did impoſe, being impatient to commaund, and to be commaunded. Diocletian renounced the Empire, Celestinus the Popedome.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLIII. Of Temperancie in ſpeech, and of Eloquence.
                  
                  THis is a great point of wiſdome: Hee that ruleth his tongue well, in a word, is wiſe, qui in verbo non offendit hic perfect us eſt: The reaſon heereof is, becauſe the tongue is all the world, in it is both good and euill, life and death, as hath beene ſaid before. Let vs now ſee what aduice is to be giuen to rule it well.
                  The firſt rule is, that ſpeech be ſober and ſeldome: To know how to be ſilent is a great aduantage to ſpeake well; 1 Rules of ſpeeach.
                      and he that knowes not well how to do the one, knowes not the other.
                  To ſpeake well and much, is not the worke of one man; and the beſt men are they that ſpeake leaſt, ſaith a wiſe man.
                  They that abound in words, are barraine in good ſpeech and good actions; like thoſe trees that are full of leaues and yeeld little fruit, much chaffe, and little corne.
                  The Lacedemonians, great profeſſors of vertue and valour, did likewiſe profeſſe ſilence, and were enemies to much ſpeech: And therefore hath it euer beene commendable to be ſparing in ſpeech, to keepe a bridle at the mouth: Pone domine custodiam ori meo. And in the law of Moyſes that veſſell that had not his couering faſtned to it, was vncleane. By ſpeech a man is knowne and diſcerned: The wiſe man

hath his tongue in his heart, the foole his heart in his tongue.
                  The ſecond, that it be true: The vſe of ſpeech is to aſſiſt the truth, and to carrie the torch before it, to make it appeare;  and contrarilie to diſcouer and reiect lying. Inſomuch that ſpeech is the inſtrument whereby wee communicate our willes and our thoughts: It had need be true and faithfull, ſince that our vnderſtanding is directed by the onely meanes of ſpeech. He that falſifieth it, betrayeth publike ſocietie; and if this meane faile vs and deceiue vs, there is an end of all, there is no liuing in the world. But of lying we haue alreadie ſpoken. 
                        Cap. 10.
                  
                  The third, that it be naturall, modeſt, and chaſte: not accompanied  with vehemencie and contention, whereby it may ſeeme to proceede from paſſion; not artificiall nor affected; not wicked, immodeſt, licentious.
                  The fourth, that it be ſerious and profitable, not vaine  and vnprofitable. A man muſt not be too attentiue in relating what hath hapned in the market place or theater, or repeating of ſonets and meriments, it bewrayes too great and vnprofitable leaſure, otio abundantis, & abutentis. Neither is it good to enter into any large diſcourſe of his owne actions and fortunes; for others take not ſo much pleaſure to heare them, as he to relate them.
                  But aboue all, it muſt neuer be offenſiue, for ſpeech is the inſtrument and fore-runner of charitie, and therefore to vſe  it againſt it, is to abuſe it, contrarie to the purpoſe of nature. All kind of foule ſpeech, detraction, mockerie, is vnworthie a man of wiſedome and honour.
                  The ſixt, to be gentle and pleaſing, not crabbed, harſh, and enuious; and therefore in common ſpeech acute and  ſubtile queſtions muſt be auoided, which reſemble crafiſhes, where there is more picking worke than meate to eate, and their end is nothing elſe but brawles and contentions.
                  Laſtly, that it be conſtant, ſtrong, and generous, not looſe, effeminate, languiſhing, whereby wee auoid the maner of  ſpeech of Pedanties, pleaders, women.
                  
                     
To this point of Temperancie belongeth ſecrecie (whereof 8 Chap. 8. wee haue ſpoken in the Chapter of faith or fidelitie) not onely that which is committed vnto vs, and giuen vs to keepe, but that which wiſdome and diſcretion telleth vs ought to be ſuppreſſed.
                  Now as ſpeech makes a man more excellent then a beaſt, 9 Of eloquence and the commendation thereof.
                      ſo eloquence makes the profeſſours thereof more excellent then other men. For this is the profeſſion or arte of ſpeech, it is a more exquiſite communication of diſcourſe and of reaſon, the ſtearne or roother of our ſoules, which diſpoſeth the hearts and affections like certaine notes to make a melodious harmonie.
                  Eloquence is not onely a puritie and elegancie of ſpeech, 10 The deſcription.
                      a diſcret choice of words properly applied, ending in a true and a iuſt fall, but it muſt likewiſe be full of ornaments, graces, motions; the words muſt bee liuely, firſt, by a cleare and diſtinct voyce, rayſing it ſelfe, and falling by little and little; Afterwards by a graue and naturall action, wherein a man may ſee the viſage, hands, and members of the Orator to ſpeake with his mouth, follow with their motion that of the minde, and repreſent the affections: for an Orator muſt firſt put on thoſe paſſions which hee would ſtirre vp in others. As Bruſidus drew from his owne wound the dart wherewith he ſlew his enemie: So paſſion being conceiued in our heart, is incontinentlie formed into our ſpeech, and by it proceeding from vs, entreth into another, and there giueth the like impreſſion which wee our ſelues haue, by a ſubtle and liuely contagion. Heereby wee ſee that a ſweet and a mild nature is not ſo fit for eloquence, becauſe it cannot conceiue ſtrong and couragious paſſions, ſuch as it ought, to giue life vnto the Oration; in ſuch ſort, that when he ſhould diſplay the maſter-ſailes of eloquence in a great and vehement action, hee commeth farre ſhort thereof; as Cicero knew well how to reproch Callidius, who accuſed Gallus with a cold and ouermild voyce and action, in niſi fingeres, ſic ageres? But being likewiſe vigorous, and furniſhed as hath beene ſaid, it hath not leſſe force and violence

then the commaunds of tyrants, enuironed with their gards and halberds; It doth not only leade the hearer, but intangleth him, it reigneth ouer the people, and eſtabliſheth a violent empire ouer our ſoules.
                  A man may ſay againſt Eloquence that truth is ſufficiently 11 Obiections anſwored.
                      maintained and defended by it ſelfe, and that there is nothing more eloquent then it ſelfe: which I confeſſe is true, where the minds of men are pure, and free from paſſions: but the greateſt part of the world, either by nature, or arte, and ill inſtruction is preoccupated, and ill diſpoſed vnto vertue and veritie, whereby it is neceſſary that men be handled like iron, which a man muſt ſoften with fire before he temper it with water: So by the firie motions of eloquence, they muſt be made ſupple and manageable, apt to take the temper of veritie. This is that whereunto Eloquence eſpeciallie tendeth; and the true fruit thereof is to arme vertue againſt vice, truth againſt lying & calumnies. The Orator, ſaith Theophraſtus, is the true Phyſitian of the ſoule, to whom it belongeth to cure the biting of ſerpents by the muſicke of the pipe, that is, the calumnies of wicked men by the harmonie of reaſon. Now ſince no man can hinder, but that ſome there are that ſeaſe vpon eloquence, to the end they may execute their pernicious deſignments, how can a man do leſſe than defend himſelfe with the ſame armes; for if we preſent our ſelues naked to the combat, do we not betray vertue and veritie? But many haue abuſed eloquence to wicked purpoſes, and the ruine of their countrie: It is true, but that is no reaſon why eloquence ſhould be deſpiſed, for that is common to it with all the excellent things of the world, to be vſed or abuſed, well or ill applied, according to the good and bad diſpoſition of thoſe that poſſeſſe them. Moſt men abuſe their vnderſtanding, but yet we muſt not therefore conclude that vnderſtanding is not neceſſarie.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ERRATA.
            PAge 89. lin. 23. which we moſt flie.
            Page 118. lin. 19. vncleane ſeed.
            Page 215. lin. 4. with thoſe that know them.
            Page 244. lin. 7. ouerruleth the minde.
            Page 292. lin. 23. liue ſeuerely.
            Page 336. lin. 23. in the way to death.
            Page 357. lin. 1. it is religion.
            Page 395. lin. 24. And this in a briefe ſumme, is the military diſcipline.
            Page 433. lin. 24. conſtant.
            Page 502. lin. 24. wherefore if it be for gaine.
            Page 540. lin. 24. and ſtifleth it in the ſeed.
         
      
   