
      
         
            
            
            
               A Detection
of damnable driftes, practized
by three VVitches arraigned at
               
Chelmisforde in Essex, at the
laste Assises there holden, whiche
were executed in Aprill.
1579.
            Set forthe to discouer the Ambushementes of
Sathan, whereby he would surprise vs
lulled in securitie, and hardened
with contempte of Gods
vengeance threatened
for our offences.
            
               
               Imprinted at London for Edward White,
at the little North-dore of Paules.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               ACcept this pamphlet (Christian
Reader) view, and
peruse it with discretion,
and hedefulnesse. No trifles are therin
conteined worthy to be contēned,
nor pernicious fantazies deseruyng
to bee condemned. But contrariwise
in this pretie plot may holsome hearbes
of admonitions for the vnwarie,
and carelesse, and soote flowers to recreate
the wearied senses, be gathered.
For on thone side the cleare sight
maie espie the ambushmentes, whiche
Sathan the secrete woorkemaister of

wicked driftes, hath placed in moste
partes of this realme, either by craftie
conueighaunces, to creepe into the
conceiptes of the simple, or by apparaunt
treacherie to vndermine and
spoile the states of suche as God permitteth
him to haue power ouer. And
on the other side the eye that is wimpled,
may hereby be aduertised of the
darkenesse, wherewith his vnderstandyng
is ouercast, and puttyng of
the veile of vanitie, maie reclaime
his concept, and esteeme of the impietie
of the offendours and vilanie of
their actes, accordyng to the woorde
of God, and waightinesse of the case.
And if in tyme past he hath escaped
their Sorceries, let hym not the lesse

feare the harmes that maie hereafter
ensue. For the Deuill by the sufferaunce
of almightie God, is as well
able to plague the persone, that moste
presumeth of safetie, as any haue bin
who in this treatise are mentioned.
Some with muche adoe cā be awaked
out of their drousie dreames, though
thei bee tolde that their neighbours
house is on fire. But when their owne
walles are inuaded with like flames,
thei shall finde that it had bin better
to haue come an hower too soone, to
quenche those forrein fires, then to
haue risen one minute too late to extinguishe
the same, creepyng into
their owne chambers. If therefore
thou be assured that thy neighbour,

either in bodie, familie, or gooddes is
impaired by damnable witchcrafte,
or perceiuest by information, or other
wise ought of suche deuises, intēded
to be practized, or likely presumption
of suche Deuilishe deedes contriued,
for Charitie to thy Christian brother,
and tender regard of thine own
state, preuente or stop the mischief by
all possible meanes. And for thyne
owne parte with praier, and assured
faithe in the merites of Christ Iesus
shield thy self, so shal neither the
Deuill nor his Angelles
haue power, ouer
thee, or thine.
            Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The Confession of Elizabeth Fraunces,
late of Hatfeelde in Essex.
            
               IMprimis, the saied Elizabeth
Fraunces cōfessed that about
Lent last (as she now remembreth)
she came to one Pooles
wife her neighbour, and required
some olde yest of her, but beyng denied the
same, she departed towardes one good wife
Osbornes house a neighbour dwelling thereby
of whome she had yest, and in her waie going
towardes the saied good wife Osbornes house,
shee cursed Pooles wife, and badde a mischief
to light vppon her, for that she would giue her
no yest, Whereuppon sodenly in the waie she
hard a greate noise, and presently there appered
vnto her a Spirite of a white colour in seemyng
like to a little rugged Dogge, standyng

               
neere her vppon the grounde, who asked her
whether she went? shee aunswered for suche
thinges as she wanted, and she tolde him therewith
that she could gette no yeest of Pooles
wife and therefore wisled the same Spirite to
goe to her and plague her, whiche the Spirite
promised to doe, but first he bad her giue him
somewhat, then she hauing in her hand a crust
of white bread, did bite a peece thereof and
threwe it vppon the grounde, whiche she thinketh
he tooke vp and so went his waie, but before
he departed from her she willed hym too
plague Pooles wife in the head, and since then
she neuer sawe him, but she hath harde by her
neighbours that the same Pooles wife was
greuously pained in her head not longe after,
and remayneth very sore payned still, for on saterdaie
last past this Examinate talked with
her.
            2 Item this Elizabeth Fraunces saieth further,
that she knoweth one Elizabeth Lorde awidowe,
dwellyng in the same parishe of Hatfielde
and so hath doen of longe tyme, of whom
she hard, that about seuen or eight yeres paste
she brought drinke in a crewse, and gaue it to
one Ihon Fraunces seruaunte to goodman

Some of the same parishe, shortly after the taking
of whiche drinke he sickened, and died.
            3 Item she further confesseth that she likewise
knoweth that the same Widowe Lorde,
was saied to haue bewitched one Ione Robertes,
seruaunte to old Higham, in a peece of an
Apple cake whiche she gaue her, vpon the eatyng
whereof she presently sickened, and not
long after died.
            4 Item she also confesseth, that she knowes
one Mother Osborne, a Widowe in the same
toune to be a witche, and that she hath a marke
in the ende of one of her fingers like a pitt, and
an other marke vppon the outside of her right
legge, whiche she thinketh to bee pluckt out by
her Spirit: and that one Mother Waterhouse
her owne sister (long since executed for Witch
crafte) had the self same markes, whithe she
termeth (nippes) and she saieth that this Mother
Osborne liyng lame, and complainyng of
her sore legge, she the saied Elizabeth Fraunces
came vnto her, and required to see her leg,
whiche beeyng shewed vnto her, she the saied
Elizabeth badde to pnt it into the bedde again,
saiyng: that she her self knewe that the same

came, by wante of well seruyng of God. And
thus muche for Elizabeth Fraunces.
         
         
            ¶The Euidence giuen against Elleine
Smithe of Maldon.
            
               THere was one Ihon Chaundeler
dwellyng in Maldon, whose
wife named Alice Chaundeler,
was mother vnto this Elleine
Smithe, and for Witchcrafte
was executed long before, after whose execution
he went vnto his daughter in lawe Ellein
Smithe, and demaunded certaine money of
her, whiche she had receiued of her mother his
wife, by meanes of whiche money thei fell out,
and in fallyng out the saied Elleine in greate
rage saied vnto hym, that it had been better for
hym, he had neuer fallen out with her, aud so it
came to passe, for the same Ihon Chaundeler
confessed before his death, that after the same
hower that she had saied so vnto hym, he nener
eate any meate that digested in hym, but euer
it came vp againe as soone as it was done, by
whiche meanes he consumed, and wasted awaie
to his death.
            2 The sonne of the foresaid Ellen Smithe,

of the age of thirteene yeres, or there aboutes,
came to the house of one Ihon Estwood of
Malden, for to begge an almose, who chid the
boye awaie from his doore, wherevppon he
wente home and tolde his mother, and within
a while after the said Estwood was taken with
very greate paine in his bodie, and the same
night followyng, as he satte by the fire with
one of his neighbours, to their thinkyng thei
did see a Ratte runne vp the Chimney, and
presently it did fall doune again in the likenesse
of a Tode, and takyng it vp with the tongges,
thei thruste it into the fire, and so helde it in
Forcesibly, it made the fire burne as blewe as
Azure, and the fire was almoste out, and at the
burnyng thereof the saied Ellen Smithe was
in greate paine and out of quiete, wherevppon
dissemblyngly she came to the house of the fore
saied Ihon Estwood, and asked how all that
were there did, and he saied well I thanke
God, and she said, I thought you had not been
well, and therefore I came to see how you did,
and so went her waie.
            3 Also it was auouched, and by this prisoner
confessed, that where as her daughter, and the
daughter of one Widowe Webbe of Maldon
afore saied, did fall out and fight, the same Ellein

Smithe offended thereat, meetyng good
wife Webbes daughter the nexte daie, gaue
her a blowe on the face, wherevpon so soone as
the childe came home she sickened, and languishyng
twoo daies, cried continually, awaie
with the Witche, awaie with the Witch, and
so died. And in the mornyng immediatly after
the death of the same childe, the saied good
wife Webbe espied (as she thought) a thyng
like to a blacke Dogge goe out at her doore,
and presently at the sight thereof, she fell distraught
of her wittes.
            4 Besides the sonne of this Mother Smith,
confessed that his mother did keepe three Spirites,
whereof the one called by her greate
Dicke, was enclosed in a wicker Bottle: The
seconde named Little Dicke, was putte into
a Leather Bottle: And the third termed Willet,
she kepte in a Wolle Packe. And thereuppon
the house was commaunded to bee searched.
The Bottles and packe were found, but
the Spirites were vanished awaie.
         
         
            ¶The effecte of the Euidence againste
Mother Staunton, late of Wimbishe
in Essex, who was arraigned, but not
executed, for that no manslaughter,
or murder was obiected against her.
            
               
               IMprimis, this Mother Staunton,
late of the parishe of Wimbishe
in Essex, came to the house
of one Thomas Prat of Broke
Walden, Thou Farrour of Libleburie
beeyng presente, and one Thomas
Swallowe, and the saied Mother Staunton,
beyng demaunded by one of them how she did,
she aunswered, that a knaue had beaten her:
saiyng she was a Witche, then saied he again,
in good faithe Mother Staunton, I thinke
you bee no Witche, no Maister ꝙ she, I am
none in deede, although I can tell what belongeth
to that practise, of whiche woordes, the
goodman of the house tooke witnesse of the aforenamed
parties, and deliuered a bill subscribed
mith their handes thereof, to Maister
George Nicolles.
            2 Item, the saied Mother Staunton came
to his house an other tyme, and after certaine
woordes of anger betweene hym and her, he
raced her face with a Nedle, what quoth she,
haue you a Flea there: and the nexte night after,
the saied Pratte was so greeuously taken
with tormente of his Limmes, that he neuer
thought to haue liued one hower longer, which
also was subscribed and sent.
            
               
3 Item, she came the third tyme by his bore
with Graines, and he demaundyng a fewe of
her, she asked what he would doe with them,
I will giue them, saied he, to my Chickens,
and snatchyng a handfull from her, did so. But
after thei had tasted of them, three or fower
dousen of them died, and onely one Chicken
escaped of them all.
            4 Item, she came on a tyme to the house of
one Richard Saunder of Brokewalden, and
beeyng denied Yeest, whiche she required of
his wife, she went her waie murmuryng, as
offended with her aunswere, and after her departure,
her yonge child in the Cradle was taken
vehemently sicke, in a merue
                  •
               lous strange
maner, wherevppon the mother of the childe
tooke it vp in her armes to comforte it, whiche
beyng doen, the Cradle rocked of it self, sixe or
seuen tymes, in presence of one of the Earle of
Surreis gentilmen, who seyng it stabbed his
dagger three or fower tymes into the Cradle
ere it staied: Merily iestyng and saiyng, that he
would kill the Deuill, if he would bee rocked
there.
            5 Item, the saied Mother Staunton, came
on a tyme to the house of one Robart Petie of

Brookewalden, and beyng denied by his wife
diuerse thynges, whiche she demaunded at
once, and also charged with the stealyng of a
Knife from thence, she wente her waie in
greate anger, and presently after her departure,
the little childe of the saied Petie fell so
straungely sicke as for the space of a Weeke,
as no bodie thought it would liue.
            6 Item, the saied Stauntons wife, came also
to one Willyam Corners house of Brokewalden
vpon a Fridaie, as she had doen often
in tymes paste, and beeyng denied of certaine
thynges whiche she craued, as a peece of Leather
&c. she asked the good wife how many
children she had, who aunswered one, whiche
childe beeyng then in perfite healthe, was presently
taken with suche a sweate and coldnesse
of bodie, and fell into suche shrickyng and staryng,
wringyng and writhyng of the bodie to
and fro, that all that sawe it, were doubtfull of
the life of it.
            7 Item, she came on a tyme to the house of
Robart Cornell of Suersem, and craued a
Bottle of Milke of his wife, but beyng denied
it, she departed for a little while, leauyng her
owne Bottle behinde her, and tooke an other
with her, that belonged to the afore saied Cornell,

after three daies she came againe, and requested
her owne Bottle, and restored the other,
crauyng Milke as before, the wife of the
house alwaies suspectyng her to bee a Witche
denied her requeste, and barred the doores against
her, wherevpon she satte doune vppon
her heeles before the doore, and made a Circle
vppon the grounde with a knife. After that she
digged it full of holes with in the compasse, in
the sight of the saied wife, her man, and her
maide, who demaundyng why she did so? She
made aunswere, that she made a shityng house
for her self after that sorte, and so departed, the
nexte daie the wife commyng out at the same
doore, was taken sicke, and began to swell frō
tyme to tyme, as if she had been with child, by
whiche swellyng she came so greate in bodie,
as she feared she should burste: and to this daie
is not restored to healthe.
            8 Item, she came often to the house of one
Ihon Hopwood of Walden, and had continaally
her requestes, at the laste beyng denied of
a Leathern thong, she went her waie offended
and the same night his Geldyng in the stable,
beyng the daie before in very good case, died
sodainly, and afterward beyng burdeined with
all, she neuer denied it.
            
               
Item, she commyng to the house of Ihon
Cornell the yonger of Wimbishe, and beeyng
denied her demaunde, she tooke offence, and
immediatly after his cattell in steede of sweete
Milke, yelded gore stinkyng blood, and one of
his Kine fell into suche miserable plight, that
for a certaine space, he could by no meanes recouer
her.
            Item, she came on a tyme to the Uicars
house at Wimbishe, and beyng denied her errande
by his wife (he beeyng as then from
home) his little sonne in the Nurses lapp was
taken with suche vehemēt sicknes, that the beholders
supposed no lesse, but it would straight
haue died, the saied Mother Staunton sittyng
by, and hauyng touched the child before it grew
sicke: but within one hower after the Uicar
came home the childe recouered perfectly, and
plaied as before.
            Item, also she came on a tyme to the house
of oue Rohart Lathburie, of the same Toune,
who dislikyng her dealyng, sent her home emptie,
but presently after her departure, his
Hogges fell sicke and died, to the number of
twentie, and in the ende he burned one, whereby
as he thinketh, he saued the reste: He also
had a Cowe straungely caste into a narrowe

gripe, and beyng holpen out in the presence of
maister Henry Mordaunt, notwithstandyng
the diligent care that was takn of her, she was
in fewe daies three tymes like to be loste in the
mite. And thus muche for Mother Staunton.
         
         
            ¶The effecte of the Euidence geuen in
against Mother Nokes late of Lamberd
Parishe in Essex.
            
               
                  A
                Certaine Seruant to Thomas
Spycer of Lamberd Ende in
Essex yoman, sporting, and passing
away the time in play with
a great number of youth, chaunced
to snatche a paire of Gloues out of the pockette
of this Mother Nokes Daughter being
a yong woman of the age of xxviij yeres, which
he protesteth to haue done in iest. Her Mother
perceiuyng it, demaunded the Gloues of him,
but he geuing no greate eare to her wordes departed
towardes the feeldes to fetch home certeine
Cattell. Immediately vpon his departure
quoth the same Mother Nokes to her
Daughter, lette him alone, I will bounce him
well enough, at what time he being soudainely
taken, and reft of his limmes sell doune. There

was a boye then in his companie by whome he
sent the Gloues to Mother Nokes. Notwithstanding
his Maister was faine to cause him to
be set home in a Wheele Barrowe, and to bee
laide into a bedde, where with his legges a
crosse he lay beddred eight daies, and as yet
hath not attayned to the right vse of his lymmes.
            Further it was auouched that mother Nokes
had saied that her housbande laie with one
Tailers wife of Lamberd Ende, and with reprochfull
words reuiled her saiyng at last; thou
hast a Nurse childe but thou shalte not keepe it
long, and presently thereupon the Childe died.
            Another affirmed, that when he had reproued
the said Tailers wife, and Mother Nokes
as thei were at Churche, and willed them to agree
better, the same Mother Nokes in a fume
aunswereth that she cared for none of them all,
as longe as Tom helde on her side, meanyng
her Feende.
            The same man hauing a seruaunt of his at
Plough, this Mother Nokes going by, asked
the felowe a question but getting no aunswere

of him she went her way. Forthwith one of his
horses fell doune. At his coming home to dy
                  •
               
               
               
                  •
               er,
he tolde his Maister howe the same horse
was swolne about the head. His Maister at
first supposyng that it came by a strype, was
greately offended at the ploughman, but afterwardes
vnderstandyng of Mother Nokes goyng
by, and the circumstance afore mentioned,
went to the said Mother Nokes and chid
and threatened to haue her to her
aunswere, howbeeit the
Horse died.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   