
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  ¶The workes of Geffray Chaucer newlye printed, wyth dyuers workes whych were neuer in print before: As in the table more playnly doth appere.
                  Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum Solum.
                  ¶Printed by Wyllyam Bonham, dwellynge at the ſygne of the Kynges armes in Pauls Churchyarde. 1542.
               
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the Kynges hyghneſſe, my mooſt gratious ſoueraigne lorde Henry the eyght, by the grace of God Kynge of Englande Fraunce, and Irelande, defendour of the Fayth, and in erth ſupreme heed of the church of Englande and Irelande.
            
               AMonges all other excellencies, moſte gratious ſoueraigne lorde, wher with almyghty God hathe endowed mankynde, aboue the reſydue of erthly creatures, as an outward declaration of reaſon or reaſonableneſſe, wherin conſyſteth the ſymilitude of man vnto Angels, and the dyfference betwene the ſame and brute beeſtes, I veryly ſuppoſe, that ſpeche or langage is not to be reputed amonges the ſmalleſt or inferiours. For therby is expreſſed the conceyte of one to another in open and playne ſentence, whych in the reſydue of lyuely creatures, lacketh and is not ſhewed amonges them, but by certayn couert and derke ſygnes, and that in ſewe thynges hauynge courſe and operacion onely of nature. Thys ſpeche or langage, after the confuſyon of tonges, ſente by goddes punyſhment for pryde and arrogance of people, hath bene be a certayne inſtyncte and dyſpoſytion naturall dyuyſed and inuented in ſondry partes of the worlde, as felowſhyppes or cōpanyenges of folkes one wyth another chaunced, moche to the outward expreſſynge of the thynge in worde or ſounde, accordynge to that wherof it had meanynge or ſygnificacyon. But in proceſſe of tyme, by dilygence or policy of people, after dyuers fourmes, fygures, and impreſſyons in metal barkes of trees, & other mater vſed for memorie and knowlege of thinges then preſent or paſſed, ſondry letters or carectes were firſt amonges the Phenices dyuyſed and founde, wyth ſuche knyttynges and ioynynges of one to another by a marueylous ſubtilte and crafte, as counterueyled was and is equiuaualent to the ſame langages. So as the conceyte of mannes mynde, whyche at the begynnynge was vſed to be declared by mouthe onely, came to ſuche poynt, that it was as ſenſybly and vyuely expreſſed in wrytynge. Hervpon enſewed a great occaſyon and corage vnto them that ſhulde wryte, to compone and adorne the rudeneſſe and barbariete of ſpeche, and to forme it to an eloquent and ordynate perfection, where vnto many and many greate poetes and oratours haue hyghly employed theyr ſtudyes and corages, leauynge therby notable renoume of them ſelues, and exſample perpetuel to theyr poſterite. Amonges other the Grekes in all kyndes of ſciences, ſemed ſo to preuayle and ſo to ornate theyr tonge, as yet by other of ryght noble langages can not be perfytelye ymitated or folowed. The Latyns by exſample of the Grekes, haue gotten or wonne to them no ſmall glorie, in the fourmynge, order, and vttrynge of that tonge. Out of the whyche two, yf it be well ſerched, that is to ſaye Greke and Latin (though by corruption of ſpeche it ſhulde ſeme moche otherwyſe) haue bene deryued ye reſydue of the langages that be wrytten wyth the letters or carectes of eyther of them bothe: But of all ſpeches, thoſe whyche mooſt approche to the latinite, be the Italian and Spaynyſhe tonges, of whome the one by corruption of the Gothes and Longobardes hadde her begynnynge, as latyn ſpoken by ſtraungers of a barbare vnderſtondyng. The other beinge alſo latyn was by Vandales, Gothes, Moores, Saracenes, and other ſo many tymes blemyſhed, as maruayle it is to ſe nowe vnto what perfection theſe two formed out of the latyn & barbare ſpeches be reduced. Next vnto them in ſimilitude to the latyn is the French tonge whyche by diligence of people of the ſame, is in fewe yeares paſſed ſo amended, as well in pronunciation as in wrytynge, that an Englyſhe man by a ſmale tyme exercyſed in that tonge hath not lacked grounde to make a grammer or rule ordynarye therof. Though of trouth (whyche ſome ſhall ſcarſelye beleue) the Germayns haue ſo fourmed the order of theyr langage, that in the ſame, is both as moch plentie as nere concordaūce to the phraſe of the latyn, as the Frenche

tonge hath. And verely, lyke as all theſe and the reſt haue ben thus vigilant and ſtudious to meliorate or amende theyr langages: ſo hath there not lacked amonges vs Englyſhe men, whych haue ryghte well and notablye endeuoured and emploied them ſelues, to the beautifyenge and betterynge of thenglyſhe tonge.
            Amonges whome mooſt excellent prince, my moſt redoubted and gracious ſoueraigne lorde, I your mooſt humble vaſſall, ſubiecte and ſeruaunt Willyam Thynne, chefe clerke of your kechyn, moued by a certayne inclinacion and zele, whych I haue to heare of anye thynge ſoundynge to the laude and honoure of thys your noble realme, haue taken great delectation, as the tymes and layſers myght ſuſtre, to rede & heare the bokes of that noble & famous clerke Geffray Chaucer, in whoſe workes is ſo manyfeſt comprobacion of hys excellent lernynge in all kyndes of doctrines and ſciences, ſuche frutefulneſſe in wordes, well accordynge to the mater and purpoſe, ſo ſwete and pleaſaunt ſentences, ſuch perfection in metre, the compoſition ſo adapted, ſuch freſhneſſe of inuention, compendiouſneſſe in narration, ſuche ſenſyble 
                  •
               nd open ſtyle, lackynge neyther maieſty ne mediocrite couenable in dyſpoſition, & ſuche ſharpneſſe or quyckneſſe in concluſyon, that it is moch to be maruayled, howe in hys tyme, when doutleſſe al good letters were layde a ſlepe throughoute the worlde, as the thynge whyche eyther by the dyſpoſition and influence of the bodyes aboue, or by other ordinaunce of God, ſemed lyke and was in daunger to haue vtterly peryſhed, ſuche an excellent poete in our tonge ſhuld as it were (nature repugnyng) ſprynge and aryſe. For thoughe it had ben in Demoſthenes or Homerus tymes, whē al learnyng and excellency of ſciences floryſhed amonges the Grekes, or in ye ſeaſon that Cicero prince of eloquence amonges latyns lyued, yet had it ben a thynge ryght rare and ſtraunge and worthye perpetuall laude, that any clerke by lernynge or wytte coulde then haue framed a tonge before ſo rude and imperfyte, to ſuch a ſwete ornature and compoſition, lykely yf he had lyued in theſe dayes, beynge good letters ſo reſtored and reuyued as they be, yf he were not empeched by the enuye of ſuche as maye tollerate nothynge, whyche to vnderſtande theyr capacite doth not extēde, to haue brought it vnto a full and fynall perfection. Wherfore gracious ſoueraygne lord, taking ſuche delyte and pleaſure in the workes of thys noble clerke (as is afore mencioned) I haue of a longe ſeaſon moche vſed to rede & vyſite the ſame: & as bokes of dyuers impryntes came vnto my handes, I eaſely and with out great ſtudye, myght and haue deprehended in them many errours, falſyties, and deprauations, whych euidently appered by the contrarietees and alteracions founde by collacion of the one wyth the other, wherby I was moued and ſtyred to make diligēt ſerch, where I myght fynde or recouer any trewe copies or exēplaries of the ſayd bokes, whervnto in proceſſe of tyme, not wythout coſte & payne I attayned, and not onely vnto ſuche as ſeme to be very trewe copyes of thoſe workes of Geffray Chaucer, whyche before had bene put in print, but alſo to dyuers other neuer tyll nowe imprinted, but remaynynge almoſte vnknowen and in obliuion, whervpon lamentynge wyth my ſelfe, the negligence of people, that haue bene in thys realme, who doutleſſe were verye remyſſe in the ſettynge forthe or auauncemēt eyther of the hyſtories therof, to the great hynderaūce of ye renoume of ſuche noble prynces and valyaunt conquerours and capitayns as haue ben in the ſame or alſo of the workes or memorye of the famous and excellente clerkes in all kyndes of ſciences that haue floryſhed therin. Of whyche bothe ſortes it hath pleaſed God as hyghly to nobilitate thys yle as any other region of chriſtendome: I thought it in maner appertenaūt vnto my dewtye, and that of very honeſty and loue to my countrey I ought no leſſe to do, then to put my helpyng hande to the reſtauracion and bryngynge agayne to lyght of the ſayd workes, after the trewe copyes and exemplaryes aforefayde. And deuyſynge wyth my ſelfe, who of all other were mooſt worthye, to whome a thynge ſo excellent & notable ſhulde be dedicate, whych to my conceyte ſemeth for the admiration, noueltye, and ſtrangeneſſe that it myghte be reputed to be of in the tyme of the authour, in compariſon, as a pure and fyne tryed precyous or polyced iewell out of a rude or indigeſt

maſſe or mater, none coulde to my thinkynge occurre, that ſyns, or in the tyme of Chaucer, was or is ſuffycient, but only your maieſte royall, whyche by diſcrecyon and iugement, as mooſt abſolute in wyſedome and all kyndes of doctryne, coulde and of hys innate clemence and goodneſſe, wolde adde or gyue any authorite her vnto.
            For this cauſe moſt excellent and in all vertues moſt preſtant prince, I as humbly proſtrate before your kynglye eſtate, lowly ſupply and beſeche the ſame, that it woll vouchſafe to take in good parte my poore ſtudy and deſyrous mynde, in reducyng vnto light this ſo precious and neceſſary an ornament of the tonge of thys youre realme, ouer pytous to haue ben in anye poynt loſt, falſifyed, or neglected: So that vnder the ſhylde of youre moſt royall protectyon and defence it may go forthe in publyke, & preuayle ouer thoſe that wolde blemyſhe, deface, and in manye thynges clerely abolyſhe the lande, renoume, and glorie hertofore compared, and meritoriouſly adquired by dyuers prynces, and other of thys ſayd moſt noble yle, whervnto nat onelye ſtraungers vnder pretexte of hyghe lernyng and knowlege of theyr malycyous and peruers mindes, but alſo ſome of your owne ſubiectes, blynded in folye and ignorance, do wyth great ſtudy contende. Moſt gracious, victorious, and of god moſte electe and worthy prynce my moſt dradde ſoueraygne lord, in whom of very merite, dewtie, and ſucceſſyon, is renewed the gloryous tytell of Defenſor of the chriſten faythe, whyche by your noble, progenytour, the great Conſtantyne, ſomtyme kyng of this realme, and emperour of Rome was nexte god and hys apoſtels, chefely maynteyned, corroborate, and defended, almyghty Ieſu ſende to your hyghneſſe the contynuall and euerlaſtyng habundaūce of hys infynite grace. Amen.
            ¶Thus endeth the preface.
         
         
            A Table of all the names of the workes contayned in thys volume.
            
               
                  ¶The Preface.
                  
                     THe Caunterbury tales I.
                  The Romant of the Roſe ij.
                  Troylus and Creſeyde iij.
                  The teſtamēt of creſeyde iiij.
                  The legende of good womē, wyth a balade v.
                  Boetius the Conſolatione philoſophie vi.
                  The dreame of Chaucer, wyth a balade vij.
                  The aſſemble of Foules viij.
                  The flour of Curteſy, with a balade ix.
                  How pyte is deed & beryed in a gentyl hert x.
                  Labelle dame ſauns mercy xi.
                  Annelyda and falſe Artyte xij.
                  The aſſemble of Ladyes xiij.
                  The concluſyon of the Aſtrolabye xiiij.
                  The complaynt of the blacke knyght xv.
                  A preyſe of women xvi.
                  The houſe of Fame xvij.
                  The teſtament of Loue xviij.
                  The lamentaciō of Mary Magdaleyn xix.
                  The remedy of Loue xx.
                  The complaynt of Mars and Venus xxi.
                  The complaynt of Mars alone xxij.
                  The complaynt of Venus alone xxiij.
                  The letter of Cupyde xxiiij.
                  A balade of our Lady xxv.
                  A balade to kynge Henry the fourth xxvi.
                  Of the Cuckowe & the Nightyngale xxvij.
                  Scogan vnto the yonge lordes and gentylmen of the kynges houſe xxviij.
                  A balade of good conſaile by Chaucer xxix.
                  Dyuers other goodly balades &c .xxx.
               
               ¶Thus endeth the fyrſt table, and here foloweth the ſeconde.
            
            
               
               In this table ye may fynde any thing that ye woll haue in this volume by the Folio, as foloweth.
               
                  
                     
                        ¶The Prologes of the Caunterbury tales.
                        
                           THe knyghtes tale. Fol. I.
                        The Myllers tale Fol. xij.
                        The Reues tale Fol. xvi.
                        The Cokes tale Fol. xix.
                        The mā of lawes tale F. xx.
                        The Squyers tale F. xxviij
                        The Marchauntes tale Fol. xxxi.
                        The wyfe of Bathes prologue Fol. xxxvj.
                        The wyfe of Bathes tale Fol. xl.
                        The Freres tale Fol. xliij.
                        The Sompners tale Fol. xlv.
                        The Clerke of Oxenfordes tale Fol. xlviij.
                        The Frankeleyns tale Fol. lv.
                        The ſeconde Nunnes tale Fol. lx.
                        The prologe of ye Chanōs yoman Fol. lxij.
                        The tale of the Chanons yoman Fol. lxiij.
                        The Doctor of Phiſykes tale Fol. lxviij.
                        The Pardoners Prologue Fol. lxx.
                        The Pardoners tale Fol. lxxj.
                        The Shypmans tale Fol. lxxiij.
                        The Priores Prologue Fol. lxxvi.
                        The priores tale Fol. eodem
                        The ryme of ſyr Topas Fol. lxxviij.
                        The tale of Chaucer Fol. lxxxv.
                        The Monkes Prologue Fol. lxxxix.
                        The Monkes tale Fol. xc.
                        The tale of the Nunnes preeſt Fol. xciiij.
                        The Manciples tale Fol. xcviij.
                        The Perſons Prologue Fol. C.
                        The Perſons tale Fol. eodem.
                        The Plowmans tale Fol. C.xix.
                        ¶Explicit Caunterbury tales.
                     
                  
                  The Romaunt of the Roſe Fol. C.xxviij.
                  
                     
                        ¶Troylus and Creſeyde is deuyded in to fyue bookes.
                        ¶The fyrſt boke begynneth Fol. c.lxvij
                        The ſeconde boke begynneth Fol. c.lxxiij
                        The thyrde boke begynneth Fol. c.lxxxiij
                        The fourth boke begynneth Fol. c.xciij
                        The fyfth boke begynneth Fol. cc.ij
                        ¶Explicit Troylus and Creſeyde.
                     
                  
                  ¶The Teſtament of Creſeyde Fol. cc.xij
                  The complaynte of Creſeyde Fol. cc.xv
                  
                     
                        ¶The legende of good women hath all theſe folowyng. Firſte.
                        ¶The Prologue. Fol. cc.xx.
                        ¶The legende of Cleopatras Fol. cc.
                              •
                           ix.
                        The leg. of Thyſbe of Babyloyne Fol. cc.xx
                        The legende of quene Dydo Fol. cc.xxj
                        The leg. of Hipſtphile & Medea Fol. cc.xxiij
                        The leg. of Lucrece of Rome Fol. cc.xxiiij
                        The legende of Aryadne Fol. cc.xxv
                        The legende of Philomene Fol. cc.xxvii
                        The legende of Phillys Fol. cc.xxviij
                        The legende of Hypermeſtra Fol. cc.xxix.
                        ¶Explicit the legende of Good women.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶Boetius de Conſolatione is deuyded into fyue bokes.
                        ¶The fyrſt boke begynneth Fol. cc.xxxij
                        The ſeconde boke begynneth Fol. cc.xxxvij
                        The thyrde boke begynneth Fol. cc.xliij
                        The fourth boke begynneth Fol. cc.lvij
                        The fyfth boke begynneth Fol. cc.lxi.
                        ¶Explicit Boetius de conſolatione.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶All theſe workes folowynge be workes by them ſelfe.
                        
                           THe dreme of Chaucher F. cc.lxvij
                        The aſſemble of foules F. cc.lxxiij
                        The flour of Curteſy F. cc.lxxviij
                        Howe Pyte is deed and beryed in a gentyll herte. Fol. cc.lxxix
                        La belle dame ſans mercy Fol. cc.lxxx
                        Annelyda and falſe Arcyte Fol. cc.lxxxvi
                        The aſſemble of Ladyes Fol. eodem.
                        The cōcluſion of thaſtrolaby Fol. cc.xci
                        The cōplaynt of the blacke knight Fol. ccc
                        A preyſe of women Fol. ccc.iiij
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶The houſe of Fame is deuyded in to thre bookes.
                        ¶The fyrſt boke begynneth Fol. ccc.v.
                        The ſeconde boke begynneth Fol. ccc.viii
                        The thyrde boke begynneth Fol. ccc.xi
                        ¶Explicit the houſe of Fame.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ¶The Teſtament of Loue is deuyded in to thre bokes.
                        ¶The fyrſt boke begynneth Fol. ccc.xv.
                        The ſeconde boke begynneth Fol. ccc.xxv.
                        The thyrde boke begynneth Fol. ccc.xlj.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ¶All theſe workes folowynge be workes by them ſelfe.
                        
                           THe lamentacyon of Marye Magdalayne Fol. ccc.l.
                        The remedy of Loue Fol. ccc.lv.
                        The cōplaynt of Mars & venus fol. ccc.lviij
                        The complaynt of Mars alone Fol. ccc.lix.
                        The complaynt of Venus alone Fol. ccc.lx.
                        The letter of Cupyde Fol. ccc.lx.
                        A balade of our lady Fol. ccc.lxiij.
                        A balade of kyng H. the fourth Fol. ccc.lxiiij.
                        Of ye cuckowe & ye nyghtingale Fol. ccc.lxvij.
                        Scogan vnto the yonge lordes and gentylmen of the kynges houſe Fol. ccc.lxix.
                        Dyuers other balades of Chaucer. &c. 
                     
                  
               
               ¶Thus endeth the table of all the workes.
            
         
         
            ¶Eyght goodly queſtions, with theyr aunſweres.
            
               
                  SOmtyme in Grece that noble region
               There were eightclerkes of grete ſcience
               Philoſophers of notable diſcretion
               Of whom was aſked, to proue theyr prudence
               Eyght queſtions, of derke intellygence
               To whiche they anſwered after theyr entent
               As here dothe appere playne and euydent
            
            
               ¶The fyrſt queſtyon, what erthly thyng
               Is beſt, and to god mooſt commendable
               The firſt clerke anſwered without tarying
               A mannes ſoule, euer ferme and ſtable
               In ryght, from trouthe nat varyable
               But nowe alas full ſore may we wepe
               For couetyſe hath brought trouthe a ſlepe
            
            
               ¶The ſeconde, what thing is mooſt odious
               A double man ſayd the philoſophre
               wyth a virgyn face and a tayle venomous
               wyth a fayre vieu, and a falſe profre
               A corrupte caryen in a golden tree
               It is a monſter in natures lynage
               One man to haue a double vyſage
            
            
               ¶The thyrde, what is the beſt dower
               That maye be to a wyfe appropriate
               A clene lyfe, was the cleckes aunſwer
               wythout ſynne, chaſt, and inuyolate
               From all diſceytes, and ſpeches inoruate
               Or countenaunce, whyche ſhall be to diſpyſe
               No fyre make, and no ſmoke woll aryſe
            
            
               ¶The fourth queſtyon, what maydē may
               Be called clene in chaſtyte
               The fourth clerke anſwerd, whiche alway
               Euery creature is a ſhamed on to lye
               Of whom euery man reporteth gret honeſte
               Good maydens kepe your chaſtyte forthe
               And remēbre that good name is gold worth
            
            
               ¶Who is a poore man euer full of wo
               A couetouſe man, whyche is a nygon
               He that in his herte can neuer ſaye ho
               The more good, the leſſe diſtributyon
               The richer, the worſe of condityon
               Men in this coſt, clepen him a nygarde
               Sir Guy the bribour is hys ſtewarde
            
            
               ¶Whiche is a ryche man withouten fraude
               He that can to hys good ſuffyſe
               what ſoeuer he hath, he yeueth god the lande
               And kepeth hym clene from all couetyſe
               He deſyreth nothyng in vngoodly wyſe
               His body is here, hys mynde is aboue
               He is a ryche man, for god dothe hym loue
            
            
               ¶Who is a foole, is the ſeuenth demaunde
               He that wolde hurte, and hath no powere
               Myght he mykell, moche wolde he cōmaūde
               His malyce great, his myght nought were
               He thretteth full faſte, full lytell may he dere
               Thynketh nat howe men haue ſayd beforne
               God ſendeth a ſhrewde cowe a ſhorte horne
            
            
               ¶Who is a wyſe man, is the eyght queſtion
               He that myght noye, and dothe no noyaūce
               Myght punyſhe, and leaueth punyſſyon
               A man mercyfull without vengeaunce
               A wyſe man putteth in remembraunce
               Sayeng, had I venged all myne harme
               
                  My cloke had nat be furred halfe ſo warme.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            ¶To the kynges moſt noble grace, and to the lordes and knyghtes of the garter.
            
               
                  TO you wele of honour and of worthyneſſe
               Our Chriſten kyng, the heire and ſucceſſour
               Vnto Iuſtinians deuout tenderneſſe
               In faythe of Ieſu our redemptour
               And to you lordes of the garter floure
               Of cheualry, as men you clepe and cal
               The lorde of vertue, and of grace authour
               Graunt the frute of your roſe neuer appal
            
            
               O liege lorde that haue eke the lykeneſſe
               Of Conſtantyne, thenſample and myrrour
               To princes all, in humble buxumneſſe
               To holy churche o veray ſuſtaynour
               And pyller of our fayth, and werryour
               Agayne the hereſyes bytter galle
               Do forthe do forthe, contynue your ſocour
               Holde vp Chriſtes baner lette it nat falle
            
            
               This yle or this had ben but hethneſſe
               Nad be of your fayth the force and vigour
               And yet this day the fendes crabbydneſſe
               weueth fully to catche a tyme and hour
               To haue on vs your lieges a ſharpe ſhoure
               And to hys ſeruytude vs knytte and thralle
               But aye we truſt in you our protectour
               On your conſtaunce we awayten alle
            
            
               Cōmaundeth that no wight haue hardineſſe
               O worthy kyng, our Chriſten Emperour
               Of the fayth to diſpute more or leſſe
               Openly amonge people: Her errour
               Spryngeth all day, and engendreth rumour
               Maketh ſuch lawe, and for ought may befal
               Obſerue it wele, there to be ye dettour
               Doth ſo, and god in glorye ſhall you ſtall
            
            
               Ye lordes eke, ſhynyng in noble fame
               To whiche appropred is the mayntenaunce
               Of Chriſtes cauſe, in honour of hys name
               Shoue on, and put his foes to vttraunce
               God wolde ſo, ſo wolde eke your legiaunce
               To tho two prycketh you your duite
               who ſo nat kepeth this double obſeruaunce
               Of meryte and honour naked is he
            
            
               Your ſtyle ſayth, ye be foes to ſhame
               Nowe kyth of your fayth the perſeueraunce
               In whiche an hepe of vs be halte and lame
               Our chriſten kyng of Englande & of Fraūce
               And ye my lordes wyth your alyaunce
               And other faythfull people that there be
               Truſt I to god, ſhal quench al this noyſaūce
               And this lande ſette in hyghe proſperite
            
            
               Conqueſt of hyghe proweſſe is for to tame
               The wylde woodneſſe of theſe myſcreaunce
               Ryght to the rote repe ye that ſame
               Slepe nat this, but for goddes pleſaunce
               And hys mother, and in ſygnifyaunce
               That ye ben of ſaynt Georges lyuere
               Doth hym ſeruyce and knyghtly obeyſaunce
               For Chriſtes cauſe is hys, well knowen ye
            
            
               Stiffe ſtand in that, & ye ſhal greue & grame
               The foe to peace, the norice of diſtaunce
               That nowe is erneſt, tourne it in to game
               Nowe kythe of your beleue the conſtaunce
               Lorde liege, & lordes haue remembraunce
               Lorde of all is the blyſfull Trinyte
               Of whoſe vertue the mighty habundaunce
               You herte and ſtrength in faythfull vnyte.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            
               
                  WHan faythe fayleth in preeſtes ſawes
               And lordes heſtes are holden for lawes
               And robbery is holden purchace
               And lechery is holden ſolace
               Than ſhall the londe of Albyon
               Be brought to great confuſyon
            
            
               It falleth for euery gentylman
               To ſaye the beſt that he can
               In mannes abſence
               And the ſothe in hys preſence
               It cometh by kynde of gentyll blood
               To caſte away all heuyneſſe
               And gader togyder wordes good
               The werke of wyſedome beareth wytneſſe
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  
                     ¶The Caunterbury tales.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  The Prologues.
                  
                     WHen that Apryll wyth hys ſhoures ſote
                  The drought of Marche had perced the rote
                  And bathed euery vayne in ſuche lycoure
                  Of whych vertue, engendred is the floure
                  When zephirus eke wyth hys ſote breth
                  Enſpyred hath euery holte and heth
                  The tendre croppes, and the yong ſonne
                  Hath in the Ram halfe hys courſe yronne
                  And ſmale foules maken melodye
                  That ſlepen al nyght with open eye
                  So prycketh hem nature in her courage
                  Than longen folke to go on pylgrymage
                  And palmers to ſeken ſtraunge ſtrondes
                  To ſerue halowes couth in ſondry londes
                  And ſpecially fro euery ſhyres ende
                  Of Englonde to Caunterbury they wende
                  The holy blyſfull martyr for to ſeke
                  That hem hath holpen, when they were ſeke.
               
               
                  IT befell that ſeaſon on a day
                  In Southwarke at the taberde as I lay
                  Redy to go in my pylgrymage
                  To Caunterbury with deuoute courage
                  That nyght was come into that hoſtelry
                  Well nyne and twenty in a company
                  Of ſondry folke by auenture yfall
                  In felyſhyp, and pylgrymes were they all
                  That towarde Caunterbury wolde ryde
                  The chambres and ſtables weren wyde
                  And well weren they eaſed at the beſt
                  And ſhortly whan the ſonne was at reſt
                  So had I ſpoken with hem euerychone
                  That I was of her felyſhyp anone
                  And made forwarde early for to ryſe
                  To take our way there as I you deuyſe
                  But netheles, whyle I haue tyme and ſpace
                  Or that I ferther in this tale pace
                  Me thynke it accordaunt to reaſon
                  To tell you all the condycyon
                  Of eche of hem ſo as it ſemed me
                  And whyche they were, and of what degre
                  And eke in what araye that they were in
                  And at a knyght then wyll I fyrſt begyn.
               
               
                  ¶The knyght. i.
                  
                     A knyght there was, & that a worthy man
                  That fro the tyme that he fyrſt began
                  To ryden out, he loued cheualrye
                  Trouth, honoure, fredom, and curteſye
                  Full worthy was he in hys lordes warre
                  And therto had he rydden no man farre
                  As well in chriſtendome as in Hethyneſſe
                  And euer had honoure for hys worthyneſſe
                  At Alyſaundre he was, when it was won
                  Full ofte tyme he had the dourde begon
                  Abouen all nations in Pruce
                  In Lettowe had he rydden and in Luce
                  No chriſten man ſo ofte of hys degre
                  In Garnade at the ſyege had he be
                  At Algezer, and rydden in Belmarye
                  At Leyes was he, and alſo at Satalye
                  When they were wonne, and in the great ſee
                  At many a noble armye had he be
                  At mortall battaylles had he bene fyftene
                  And foughten for our fayth at Tramyſſene
                  In lyſtes thries, and aye ſlayne hys fo
                  Thys ylke worthy knyght had ben alſo
                  Somtyme wyth the lorde of Palathye
                  Ayenſt another hethen in Turkye
                  And euermore he had a ſouerayne pryſe
                  And though he was worthy he was wyſe
                  And of hys porte as meke as is a mayde
                  He neuer yet no vylanye ne ſayde
                  In all hys lyfe, vnto no maner wyght
                  He was a very perfyte gentyll knyght
                  For to tell you of hys aray
                  Hys horſe were good, but he was nothynge gay
                  Of fuſtyan he wered a gyppon
                  All beſmottred wyth hys haubergion
                  For he was late come fro hys vyage
                  And wente for to done hys pylgrimage.
               
               
                  ¶The Squyer. ij.
                  Wyth him there was his ſonne a yōgeſquyre
                  A louer and a luſty bachelere
                  With his lockes crul as they were layd in preſſe
                  Of twenty yere of age he was I geſſe
                  Of hys ſtature he was of euen length
                  And wonderly delyuer, and of great ſtrength
                  And he had be ſomtyme in chyuauchye
                  In Flaundres, in Artoys, and in Pycardye
                  And borne hym well, as of ſo lytell ſpace
                  In hope to ſtande in hys ladyes grace
                  
                     Enbrouded was he, as it weren a mede
                  All full of freſhe floures, whyte and rede
                  Syngynge he was, or floytynge all the daye
                  He was freſhe as is the moneth of Maye
                  Short was hys gowne, wt ſleues longe & wyde
                  Well coude he ſytte on a horſe, and fayne ryde
                  He coude ſonges make, and well endyte
                  Iuſte and eke daunce, portray and well wryte
                  So hote he loued, that by nyghter tale
                  He ſlept nomore then doth the nyghtyngale
                  Curteys he was, lowly and ſeruyſable
                  And kerft before hys father at the table.
               
               
                  ¶The Squyers yoman. iij.
                  A Yoman had he and ſeruauntes no mo
                  At that tyme, for hym lyſt to ryde ſo
                  And he was clad in cote and hode of grene
                  A ſhefe of pecocke arowes bryght and ſheue
                  Vnder hys belt he barelfull thryftely
                  Well coude he dreſſe hys tackle yomanly
                  Hys arowes drouped not wyth fethers lowe
                  And in hys hande he bare a myghtye bowe
                  A not heed had he, wyth a browne vyſage
                  Of wodde crafte well couth he all the vſage
                  Vpon hys arme he bare a gaye bracer
                  And by hys ſyde a ſwearde and a bokeler
                  And on that other ſyde a gay dagger
                  Harueyſed well, and ſharpe as poynte of ſpere
                  A Chriſtofer on hys breſt of ſyluer ſhene
                  An horne he bare, the baudrycke was of grene
                  A foſter was he ſothly as I geſſe.
               
               
                  ¶The Prioreſſe. iiij.
                  There was alſo a Nonne a Prioreſſe
                  That of her ſmylynge was ſymple and coye
                  Her greateſt othe was by ſaynt Loye
                  And ſhe was called dame Eglentyne
                  Full well ſhe ſonge the ſeruyce deuyne
                  Entewned in her voycefull ſemely
                  And Frenche ſhe ſpake full fetouſly
                  After the ſchole of Stratforde at bowe
                  For frenche of Parys was to her vnknowe
                  At meate was ſhe well ytaught wythall
                  She let no morſell fro her lyppes fall
                  Ne wete her fyngers in her ſauce depe
                  Well couth ſhe cary a morſell and well kepe
                  That no drop ne fell vpon her breſt
                  In curteſye was ſet full moche her leſt
                  Her ouerlyp wyped ſhe ſo clene
                  That in her cup was no ferthynge ſene
                  Of grece, when ſhe dronken had her draught
                  Full ſemely after her meate ſhe taught
                  And ſykerly ſhe was of great dyſporte
                  And full pleaſaunt, and amyable of porte
                  And payned her to counterfete chere
                  Of courte, and to be ſtatelythe of manere
                  And to bene holden dygne of reuerence.
                  But for to ſpeake of her conſcience
                  She was ſo charitable and ſo pytous
                  She wolde wepe yf that ſhe ſawe a mous
                  Caught in a trappe, yf it were deed or bledde
                  Of ſmale houndes had ſhe that ſhe fedde
                  Wyth roſte fleſhe, mylke, or waſtell breed
                  But ſore wepte ſhe yf any of hem were deed
                  Or yf men ſmote hem wyth a yarde ſmerte
                  And all was conſcience and tender herte
                  Full ſemely her wymple pynched was
                  Her noſe tretes, her eyen gray as glas
                  Her mouth ſmale, and therto ſofte and reed
                  But ſekerly ſhe had a fayre forheed
                  It was almoſt a ſpanbroede I trowe
                  For hardely ſhe was not vnder growe
                  Full fetyſe was her cloke as I was ware
                  Of ſmale corall about her arme ſhe bare
                  A payre of hedes, gauded all wyth grene
                  And theron honge a broche of golde full ſhene
                  On whych ther was fyrſt wrytten a crowned. A
                  And after that (Amor vineit omnia)
                  Another Nonne wyth her hath ſhe
                  That was her chapeleyn, and preeſtes thre.
               
               
                  ¶The Monke. v.
                  A Monke there was fayre for the mayſtry
                  An out ryder, that loued venery
                  A manly man to bene an abbot able
                  Full many a deynte horſe had he in ſtable
                  And when he rode men myght hys brydle here
                  Gyngelynge in a whyſtlynge wynde as clere
                  And eke as loude, as doth the chapell bell
                  There as thys lorde way keper of the cell
                  The rule of ſaynt Maure and of ſaynt Benet
                  Becauſe it was olde and ſomdele ſtreyt
                  Thys ylke monke let olde thynges pace
                  And helde after the newe worlde the ſpace
                  He yaue not of the texte a pulled henne
                  
                     That ſayeth, that hunters be not holy men
                  Ne that a monke when he is recheleſſe
                  Is lykened to a fyſhe that is waterleſſe
                  Thys is to ſaye, a monke out of hys cloyſtre
                  Thys ylke texte helde he not worth an oyſtre
                  And I ſaye hys opinion was good
                  Wherto ſhulde he ſtudy, & make him ſelfe wood
                  Vpon a boke alwaye in cloyſtre to powre
                  Or ſwynke wyth hys handes, or labowre
                  As Auſtyn byd, how ſhulde the worlde be ſerued
                  Let Auſtyne haue hys ſwynke to hym reſerued
                  Therfore he was a pryckſoure a ryght
                  Greyhoūdes he had as ſwyft as foule of flyght
                  Of pryckynge and of huntynge for the hare
                  was all hys luſt, for no coſt wolde he ſpare
                  I ſawe hys ſleues purſled at the hande
                  wyth Grice, and that the fyneſt in a lande
                  And for to faſt hys hoode vnder the chynne
                  He had of golde wrought a curious pynne
                  A loue knot in the greater ende there was
                  Hys heed was balde, and ſhone as any glas
                  And eke hys face, as he had bene anoynte
                  He was a lorde full fatte and in good poynte
                  Hys eyen ſlepe, and rollynge in hys heed
                  That ſtemed as a furneys of a leed
                  Hys bootes ſowple, hys horſe in great eſtate
                  Nowe certaynly he was a fayre prelate
                  He was not pale as a forpyned ghoſt
                  A fatte ſwane loued he beſt of any roſt
                  Hys palfray was as browne as is a very
               
               
                  ¶The Frere. vi.
                  A Frere there was a wanton and a mery
                  A lymytour, a full ſolempne man
                  In all the ordres foure is none that can
                  So moche of daliaunce and fayre langage
                  He had made full many a mariage
                  Of yonge women at hys owne coſt
                  Vntyll hys order he was a noble poſt
                  Full welbyloued and famylyer was he
                  wyth frankeleyns ouer all in hys countre
                  And wyth worthy women of the toun
                  For he had power of confeſſyoun
                  As he ſayd hymſelfe, more then a curate
                  For of hys ordre he was lycenciate
                  Full ſwetely herde he confeſſyon
                  And pleaſaunt was hys abſolucyon
                  He was an eaſye man to pyue penaunce
                  There as he wyſt to haue a good pytaunce
                  For vnto a poore ordre for to gyue
                  Is ſygne that a man is well yſhryue
                  For yf he gaue, he durſt make auaunt
                  He wyſt that a man was repentaunt
                  For many a man is ſo harde of herte
                  That he maye not wepe though hym ſmerte
                  Therfore in ſtede of wepynge and prayres
                  Men mote gyue ſyluer to the poore freres
                  Hys typpet was aye faſſed full of knyues
                  And pynnes, for to gyue fayre wyues
                  And certaynly he had a mery note
                  well coude he ſynge and playen on a rote
                  Of yeddynge he bare vtterly the pryce
                  Hys necke was whyte as the floure delyce
                  Therto ſtronge he was as a champioun
                  And knewe the tauernes well in euery toun
                  And euery hoſteler and tapſter
                  Bet then a lazer or a begger
                  For vnto ſuche a worthye man as he
                  Accordeth nought, as by hys faculte
                  To haue wyth lazers ſuche acquayntaunce
                  It is not honeſt, it maye not auaunce
                  For to deale wyth ſuche porayle
                  But all wyth ryche, and ſellers of vytayle
                  And ouer all there as profyte ſhulde aryſe
                  Curteys he was, and lowly of ſeruyſe
                  There has no man no where ſo vertuous
                  He was the beſt begger in hys hous
                  And gaue a certayne ferme for the graunte
                  None of hys brethren came in hys haunte
                  For though a wydowe had but a ſhoo
                  (So pleaſaunt was hys In principio)
                  Yet wolde he haue a ferthynge er he wente
                  Hys purchace was better then hys rente
                  And rage he couth as it were a whelpe
                  In loue dayes there coude he mykell helpe
                  For there he was not lyke o cloyſtrere
                  wyth a threde bare cope, as a poore frere
                  But he was lyke a mayſter or a pope
                  Of double worſtede was hys ſemy cope
                  So rounded was as a bell out of preſſe
                  Somwhat he lyſped for hys wantonneſſe
                  To make hys Englyſhe ſwete vpon hys tonge
                  And in harpynge, when he had ſonge
                  Hys eyen twynkeled in hys heed aryght
                  As done the ſtarres in a froſty nyght
                  Thys worthye frere was called Huberd
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  ¶The Marchaunt. vij.
                  
                     A marchaunt was there wyth a longe berde
                  In motley, on hygh on hys horſe he ſat
                  Vpon hys heade a Flaundres beuer hat
                  Hys botes claſped fayre and ferouſly
                  Hys reaſons he ſpake full ſolempnely
                  Shewynge alway the encreaſe of his wynnyng
                  He wolde the See were kepte for any thynge
                  Betwyxe Myddelborough and Orewell
                  Well coude he in eſchaunge ſell
                  Thys worthy man full well hys wyt byſet
                  There wyſt no wyght that he was in det
                  So ſtately was he of hys gouernaunce
                  Wyth hys bargayns, and wyth hys cheuyſaūce
                  Forſoth he was a worthy man wythall
                  But ſothly to ſayne, I not what men hym call.
               
               
                  ¶The clerke of Oxenforde. viij.
                  A clerke there was of Oxenforde alſo
                  That vnto logyke had longe ygo
                  As leane was hys horſe as a rake
                  And he was nothynge fatte I vndertake
                  But loked holowe, and therto ſoberly
                  Full thredebar
                        •
                      was hys ouercourtpy
                  For he had yet getten hym no benefyce
                  Ne was nought worthy to haue none offyce
                  For hym was leuer to haue at hys beddes heed
                  Twenty bookes, cladde wyth blacke or reed
                  Of Ariſtotle, and of hys philoſophie
                  Then robes ryche, or fyddell or gaye ſa
                        ••
                     ry
                  But all be that he was a phyloſophre
                  Yet had he but a lytle golde in cofre
                  But all that he myght of hys frendes hente
                  On bookes and on learnynge he it ſpente
                  And beſely gan for the ſoules praye
                  Of hem that helpen hym to ſcholaye
                  Of ſtudye toke he moſte cure and hede
                  Not a worde ſpake he more then nede
                  And that was ſayd in fourme and reuerence
                  And ſhorte and quycke, and of hye ſentence
                  Sownyng in morall vertue was hys ſpeche
                  And gladly wolde lerne, and gladly teche
               
               
                  ¶The ſergiaunte at lawe. ix.
                  A ſergiaunt of lawe, ware and wyſe
                  That often had bene at the peruyſt
                  That was alſo full ryche of excellence
                  Dyſcrete he was, and of great reuerence
                  He ſemed ſuche, hys wordes were ſo wyſe
                  Iuſtyce he was full often in aſſyſe
                  By patent, and by playne commyſſyoun
                  For hys ſcience, and hys hye renoun
                  Of fees and robes had he many one
                  So great a purchaſour was no where none
                  All was fee ſymple to hym in effecte
                  Hys purchaſynge myght not be to hym ſuſpecte
                  Nowhere ſo beſy a man as he there nas
                  And yet he ſemed beſyer then he was
                  In termes had he caſe and domes all
                  That fro the tyme of kynge Wylliam was fall
                  Therto he could endyte, and maken a thynge
                  There coude no wyght pynche at hys wrytynge
                  And euery ſtatute coude he playne by rote
                  He rode but homely in a medley cote
                  Gyrte wyth a ſeynt of ſyl
                        ••
                     , with barres ſmale
                  Of hys arraye, tell I no lenger tale.
               
               
                  ¶The Frankeleyn. x.
                  A Frankeleyn there was in hys companye
                  Whyte was hys berde as is the deyſye
                  And of hys complexion he was ſanguyne
                  Well loued he by the morowe a ſoppe in wyne
                  To lyuen in delyte was euer hys wonne
                  For he was Epycures owne ſonne
                  That helde opinion, that playne delyte
                  Was very felicitye perfyte
                  An houſholder, and that a great was he
                  Saynt Iulian he was in hys countre
                  Hys breed, hys ale, was alwaye after one
                  A better byended man was no where none
                  Wythout bake meate was neuer hys houſe
                  Of fyſhe and fleſhe, and that ſo plenteous
                  It ſhewed in hys houſe of meate and drynke
                  Of all deyntes that men coude thynke
                  After the ſondrye ſeaſons of the yere
                  So chaunged he hys meate, and hys ſuppere
                  Full many afa
                        ••
                     e par
                        •
                     ryche had he in mewe
                  And many a dreme, and many a l
                        ••
                     e in ſtewe
                  Wo was hys coke, but hys 
                        ••
                     uce were
                  Poynante and ſharpe, and redy all hys gere
                  Hys table dor
                        •
                     naunt in hys hall alwaye
                  Stode redy couered all the longe daye
                  At ceſſions there was he lorde and ſyre
                  Full ofte tyme he was knyght of the ſhyre
                  An anelace and a gepſere all of ſylke
                  Hynge at hys gyrdell, whyte as morowe mylke
                  A ſhyryfe had he bene, and a countour
                  Was nowhere ſuche a worthy vaueſour.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The Haberdaſſher. xi.
                  An Haberdaſſher there was and a carpenter
                  A webbe, a dyer, and a tapyſer
                  All they were yclothed in o lyuere
                  Of a ſolempne and a great fraternyte
                  Full freſſhe and newe her geare ipyked was
                  Her knyues ychaped nere not wyth bras
                  But all with ſyluer wrought ful clene and wele
                  Her gyrdels and her pouches euerydele
                  Wel ſemed eueryche of hem a fayre burgeys
                  To ſytten at a yelde hal, on the hye deys
                  Eueryche for the wyſdome that he can
                  Was ſhape lyche for to ben an alderman
                  For catayle had they ryght ynough and rent
                  And eke her wyues wolde it well aſſent
                  And els certayne they were to blame
                  It is full fayre to ben yeleped madame
                  And gon to vigylles al before
                  And haue a mantel royall yche ybore.
               
               
                  ¶The Coke. xii.
                  A Coke they had wyth hem for the nones
                  To boyle the chykens and the mary bones
                  And pouder merchaunt, tarte, and galyngale
                  Well coude he knowe a draught of London ale
                  He couthe roſthe, ſethe, boy
                        •
                     e, and frye
                  Make mor
                        •
                     reys, and wel bake a pye
                  But great harme was it, as it thought me
                  That on hys ſhynne a mormal had he
                  And blynke manger made he wyth the beſte.
               
               
                  ¶The Shypman. xiij.
                  A Shipman was ther, wonnyng fer by weſt
                  For aught I wete, he was of Detchemouthe
                  He rode vpon a rowney, as he couthe
                  In a gowne of faldyng to the kne
                  A dagger hangyng by a lace had he
                  Aboute hys necke, vnder hys arme downe
                  The hote ſommer had made his hew a browne
                  And certayne he was a good felawe
                  Full many a draught of wyne had he drawe
                  From Burdeux ward, whiles ye chapmen ſlepe
                  Of nyce conſcience toke he no kepe
                  If that he faught, and had the hygher honde
                  By water he ſent hem home to euery londe
                  But of hys crafte, to recken wel hys tydes
                  Hys ſtreames and his daungers hym beſydes
                  Hys herbrough, hys moone, & hys lodemanage
                  There was none ſuche from Hul to Cartage
                  Hardy he was, and wyſe to vndertake
                  Wyth many a tempeſt had hys berde be ſhake
                  He knewe all the hauens as there were
                  Fro Scotlande to the Cape de feneſtere
                  And euery creke in Britayne and in Spayne
                  Hys barge was called the Maudelayne.
               
               
                  ¶De doctour of Phiſyke. xiiij.
                  Wyth vs there was a doctour of phiſyke
                  In thys worlde ne was there none hym lyke
                  To ſpeke of phiſyke, and of ſurgerye
                  For he was grounded in Aſtronomye
                  He kepte hys pacyent a full great del
                  In houres, by hys magyke naturel
                  Wel couthe he fortune the aſſendent
                  Of hys ymage for hys pacyent
                  He knewe the cauſe of euery maladye
                  Were it of colde, hete, moyſte, or drie
                  And wherof engendred what humour
                  He was a very perfyte practyſour
                  The cauſe yknowe, and of hys harme the rote
                  A none he gaue to the ſycke man his bote
                  Full redy had he hys apotecaries
                  To ſende hym dregges and hys lectuaries
                  For eche of hem made other for to wynne
                  Her frendſhyp was not newe to begynne
                  Wel knewe he the olde Eſculapius
                  And Dioſcorides, and eke Ruffus
                  Olde Hippocrates, Haly, and eke Gallen
                  Serapion, Raſis, and alſo Auicen
                  Auerroys, Damaſceue, and Conſtantyn
                  Bernarde, Gatiſden, and Gylbertyn
                  Of hys dyete meſerable was he
                  For it was of no ſuperfluyte
                  But of great nouryſſhynge, and digeſtyble
                  Hys ſtudy was but lytel on the Byble
                  In ſangwyne and in perce he clad was al
                  Lyned wyth Taffata, and wyth ſendal
                  And yet he was but eaſy of diſpence
                  He kepte that he wanne in tyme of peſtylence
                  For golde in Phyſyke is a cordyal
                  Therfore he loued golde in ſpecyal.
               
               
                  ¶The wyfe of Bathe  .xv.
                  A good wyfe there was beſyde Bathe
                  But ſhe was ſomdel deſe, and that was ſcathe
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     Of clothe makynge ſhe had ſuche an haunte
                  She paſſed hem of Ipre, or of Gaunte
                  In all the paryſſhe wyfe ne was there none
                  That to the offrynge before her ſhulde gone
                  And yf there dyd, certayn ryght wrothe was ſhe
                  That ſhe was al out of charite
                  Her kerchers ful fyne were of grounde
                  I durſt ſwere they wayden ten pounde
                  That on a Sonday were vpon her heed
                  Her hoſen were of fyne ſcarlet reed
                  Full ſtrayte yſtrayned, and ſhoesful newe
                  Bolde was her face, and reed was her hewe
                  She was a worthy woman al her lyue
                  Huſbandes at the churche dore had ſhe fyue
                  Withouten other company in youthe
                  But therof nedeth not to ſpeke as nouthe
                  And thryſe had ſhe ben at Hieruſalem
                  She had paſſed many a ſtronge ſtreme
                  At Rome had ſhe ben, and at Boloyne
                  In Galys at ſaynt Iames, and at Coloyne
                  She couth moche of wandrynge by the waye
                  Gat tothed was ſhe ſothely for to ſaye
                  Vpon an ambler eaſely ſhe ſat
                  Ywympled well, and on her heed an hat
                  As brode as is a bokeler or a targe
                  A foot mantel aboute her hyppes large
                  And on her fete a payre of ſpurres ſharpe
                  In felyſhyp well couth ſhe laughe and carpe
                  Of remedyes of loue ſhe coude perchaunce
                  For the couth of that arte the olde daunce.
               
               
                  ¶The Perſon. xvi
                  
                     A Good man there was of relygyoun
                  And was a poore perſon of a toun
                  But riche he was of holye thought and werke
                  He was alſo a lerned man, & a clerke
                  That Chriſtes goſpels truely wolde preche
                  Hys pariſſheus deuoutly wolde he teche
                  Benygne he was and wonder dilygent
                  And in aduerſyte full pacyent
                  And ſuche he was proued ofte ſythes
                  Ful lothe were hym to curſt for his tythes
                  But rather wolde he yeuen out of doute
                  Vnto hys poore paryſſheus aboute
                  Of hys offrynge, and of hys ſubſtaunce
                  He couth in lytel thynge haue ſuffyſaunce
                  Wide was hys pariſſhe, & houſes ferre a ſondre
                  But he ne lefte neyther for rayn ne thondre
                  In ſyckeneſſe ne in myſchefe for to vyſyte
                  The ferreſt in hys paryſſhe, moche or lyte
                  Vpon hys fete, and in hys hande a ſtaf
                  Thys noble enſample to hys ſhepe he yaf
                  That fyrſt he wrought, and afterwarde taught
                  Out of the goſpel he the wordes caught
                  And thys fygure he radde eke therto
                  That yf golde ruſte, what ſhulde yron do
                  For yf a preeſt be foule, on whom we truſt
                  No wonder is a leude man to ruſt
                  And ſhame it is, yf a preeſt take kepe
                  To ſe a ſhytten ſhepherde, and a clene ſhepe
                  Wel ought a preeſt enſample for to yeue
                  By hys clenneſſe, howe hys ſhepe ſhulde lyue
                  He ſette not hys benefyce to hyre
                  And lette hys ſhepe acombre in the myre
                  And renne to London to ſaynt Poules
                  To ſeken hym a chauntry for ſoules
                  Or with a brotherhede to be with holde
                  But dwelte at home, and kept wel hys folde
                  So that the wolfe ne made hem not miſcarye
                  He was a ſhepeherde, and not a mercenarye
                  And though he holy were and vertuous
                  He was not to ſynfull men diſpytous
                  Ne of hys ſpeche daungerous ne digne
                  But in hys techyng diſcrete and benigne
                  To drawen folke to heuen wyth fayrneſſe
                  By good enſample, thys was hys beſyneſſe
                  But yf it were any perſon obſtynate
                  Whether he were of hye or lowe eſtate
                  Hym wolde he ſhybbe ſharply for the nonis
                  A better preeſt I trowe no where none is
                  He wawed after no pompe ne reuerence
                  Ne maked hym no ſpyced conſcience
                  But Chriſtes lore, and hys Apoſtels twelue
                  He taught, but fyrſt he folowed it hym ſelue.
               
               
                  ¶The Plowman. xvii
                  With him there was a Plowmā his brother
                  That had yladde of donge many a ſother
                  A trewe ſwynker and a good was he
                  Lyuynge in peace, and parſyte charyte
                  God loued be beſt with al hys herte
                  At all tymes, thoughe hym gamed or ſmerte
                  And than hys neyghbours ryght as hym ſelfe
                  He wolde threſſhe, and therto dyke and delfe
                  For Chriſtes ſake, for euery poore wyght
                  withouten hyre, yf it lay in hys myght
                  Hys tythes payde he full fayre and well
                  Bothe of hys propre ſwynke, and of hys catel
                  
                     In a tabarde he rode, vpon a mare
                  There was alſo a Reue, and a Myllare
                  A Sompnour, and a Pardoner alſo
                  A Manſyple, and my ſelfe, there was no mo.
               
               
                  ¶The Myller. xviii.
                  The Myller was a ſtoute earle for ye nones
                  Full bygge he was of brawne, and eke of bones
                  That proued wel, for ouer al there he cam
                  At wraſtlyng, he wolde haue away the Ram
                  He was ſhorte ſholdred, a thicke gnarre
                  Ther nas no dore, but he wold heue of the bar
                  Or breke it, at a rennyng wyth hys heed
                  Hys berde as any ſowe or fore was reed
                  And therto brode, as it were a ſpade
                  Vpon the coppe ryght of hys noſe he hade
                  A werte, and theron ſtode a tufte of heeres
                  Reed as the briſtels of a ſowes eeres
                  Hys noſtrels blacke were and wyde
                  A ſwerde and a bokelet bare he by hys ſyde
                  Hys mouthe as great was as a furneys
                  He was a iangler and a golyerdeys
                  And that was moſte of ſynne & of harletryſe
                  Well couthe he ſteale corne, and tolde it thryſe
                  And yet he had a tombe of golde parde
                  A whyte cote and a blewe hoode weared he
                  A bagge pype wel couthe he blowe and ſowne
                  And therwith al brought he vs out of towne.
               
               
                  ¶The Manciple. xix.
                  A gentle Manciple there was of the temple
                  Of whiche al catours myght taken enſemple
                  For to ben wyſe, in byeng of vitayle.
                  For whether he payde, or toke by tayle
                  Algate he wayted ſo in hys aſſhate
                  That he was aye before, in good eſtate
                  Nowe is not that of god a full fayre grace
                  That ſuche a leude mans wyt ſhall pace
                  The wyſedome of an heape of lerned men
                  Of mayſters had he mo than thryſe ten
                  That were of lawe experte, and curyouſe
                  Of whyche there was a doſeyn in that houſe
                  Worthy to ben ſtewardes of rente and lande
                  Of any lorde that is in Englande
                  To maken hym lyue by hys propre good
                  In honour detleſſe, but yf he were woode
                  Or lyue as ſcarſſy as hym lyſte deſyre
                  And able to helpen al a ſhyre
                  In any eaſe that might fallen or happe
                  And yet the Manciple ſet all her cappe.
               
               
                  ¶The Reue. xx.
                  The Reue was a ſclender colerike man
                  Hys berde was ſhaue as nye as euer he can
                  Hys heere was by his eeres rounde yſhorne
                  Hys toppe was docked lyke a preeſt byforne
                  Full longe were his legges and full lene
                  I lyke a ſtaffe, there was no calfe yſene
                  Wel couth he kepe a garner and a bynne
                  There was non auditour coude on hym wyn
                  Wel wyſt he by the drought, and by the rayne
                  The yeldynge of his ſeed, and of his grayne
                  His lordes ſhepe, hys neet, and his deyrie
                  His ſwyne, his hors, his ſtore, and his pultrie
                  Were hooly in his Reuys gouernynge
                  And by his couenaunt yaue he rekenynge
                  Sithe hys lorde was twenty yere of age
                  There coude no man brynge hym in a rerage
                  There nas baylly, heerd, ne none other hyne
                  That he ne knewe hys ſleyght and his couyne
                  They were a drad of hym as of the dethe
                  Hys dwellynge was full fayre vpon an hethe
                  With grene trees ſhadowed was his place
                  He couthe better than hys lorde purchace
                  Full riche he was aſtored pryuely
                  His lorde he coude wel pleaſe ſubtylly
                  To yeue and leue hym of hys owne good
                  And haue a thanke, and yet a cote and hode
                  In youthe he had lerned a good myſtere
                  He was a well good wryght, a carpentere
                  This Reue ſat vpon a ryght good ſlot
                  That was al pomel grey, and hyght Scot
                  A longe ſurcote of perce vpon he hade
                  And by hys ſyde he bare a ruſty blade
                  Of Norfolke was this Reue, of which I tel
                  Beſyde a towne, men clepen it Baldeſwel
                  Tucked he was, as is a frere aboute
                  And euer he rode hyndereſt of the route.
               
               
                  ¶The Sompnour. xxi.
                  A Sompnour was there wyth vs in yt place
                  That had a fyre redde cherubyns face
                  For ſauſfleme he was, with eyen narowe
                  Al hote he was, and lecherous as a ſparowe
                  With ſkaled browes blacke, and pylled berde
                  Of hys vyſage chyldren were ſore aferde
                  
                     There nas quickſyluer, lytarge, ne brymſtone
                  Borace, ceruſe, ne oyle of tarter none
                  Ne oyntement that wolde clenſe or byte
                  That hym myght helpe of hys whelkes white
                  Ne of his knobbes ſyttynge on hys chekes
                  Wel loued he garlyke, onyons, and eke lekes
                  And for to drynke ſtronge wyne reed as blood
                  Then wold he ſpeke and crye as he were wood
                  And whan he had wel ydronke the wyne
                  Than wolde he ſpeke no worde but latyne
                  A fewe termes had he, two or thre
                  That he had lerned out of ſome degre
                  No wonder is, he herde it al the daye
                  And ye knowen wel eke howe that a iaye
                  Can clepe what, as wel as can the pope
                  But who ſo couthe in other thyng hym grope
                  Than had he ſpent al hys philoſophye
                  (A queſtio quid iuris) wolde he crye
                  He was a gentle harlot and a kynde
                  A better felawe ſhulde a man nat fynde
                  He wolde ſuffre for a quarte of wyne
                  A good felawe to haue hys concubyne
                  A twelue monthe, and excuſe hym at the ful
                  Ful priuely eke a ſynche couthe he pul
                  And yf he fonde o where a good felawe
                  He wolde teche hym to haue none awe
                  In ſuche caſe, of the archedekyns curſe
                  But yf mans ſoule were in hys purſe
                  For in hys purſe he ſhulde ypunyſhed be
                  Purſe is the archedekeus hel, ſayd he
                  But wel I wote he lyed ryght in dede
                  Of curſyng ought eche ſynful man drede
                  For curſyng wol ſlee, ryght as aſſoylyng ſaueth
                  And alſo ware hym of a Significauit
                  In daunger had he at hys owne gyfe
                  The yonge gyrles of the diocyſe
                  And knew her counſayle, and was of her reed
                  A garlonde had he ſet vpon hys heed
                  As great as it were for an aleſtake
                  A buckeler had he maked hym of a cake.
               
               
                  ¶The Pardoner. xxii.
                  
                     Wyth hym there rode a gentle Pardonere
                     Of Rounceual, hys frende and hys compere
                     That ſtreight was come fro the court of Rome
                     Ful loude ſonge he, come hyther loue tome
                     Thys Sompnour bare hym a ſtyffe bourdoun
                     was neuer trompe of halfe ſo great a ſoun
                     This Pardoner had heere as yelowe as were
                     But ſmothe it hynge, as doth a ſtryke of flexe
                     By ounces hynge hys lockes that he had
                     And therwith he his ſholders ouerſprad
                     But thynne it lay by culpons one and one
                     But hode for iolyte weared he none
                     For it was truſſed vp in hys walet
                     Hym thought he rode al the newe iet
                     Diſſheuylde ſaue his cappe he rode al bare
                     Suche glaryng eyen had he as an hare
                     A vernacle had he ſowed vpon hys cappe
                     Hys wallet beforne hym in hys lappe
                     Brette ful of pardone come from Rome al hote
                     A voyce he had as ſmale as hath a gote
                     No berde had he, ne neuer ſhulde haue
                     As ſmoth it was as it were newe ſhaue
                     I trowe he were a geldyng or a mare
                     But of hys crafte fro Berwyke vnto ware
                     Ne was there ſuche another pardonere
                     For in hys male had he a pyllowe here
                     Whyche as he ſayd, was our ladyes veyle
                     He ſayd he had a gobbet of the ſeyle
                     That ſaynt Peter had whan that he went
                     Vpon the ſee tyl Ieſu Chryſt hym hent
                     He had a croſſe of laten ful of ſtones
                     And in a glaſſe he had pygges bones
                     But with theſe relykes whan that he fonde
                     A poore perſon dwellyng vplonde
                     Vpon a day he gate hym more money
                     Than that perſon gate in monthes twey
                     And thus wyth fayned flateryng and 
                           •
                        apes
                     He made the perſon and the people hys apes
                     But trewly to tellen at the laſte
                     He was in churche a noble eccleſyaſt
                     Wel couthe he rede a leſſon or a ſtorie
                     But alderbeſt he ſange an oftytorie
                     For wel he wyſt, whan that ſonge was ſonge
                     He muſte preche, and wel afyle hys tonge
                     To wynne ſyluer as he wel coude
                     Therfore he ſonge ſo meryly and loude.
                  
                  
                     Nowe haue I tolde you ſothly in a clauſe
                     The ſtate, the aray, eche nōbre, and eke the cauſe
                     Why that aſſembled was this company
                     In Suthwerke at thys gentyl hoſtelry
                     That hyght the Tabarde faſt by the Belle
                     But nowe is tyme to you for to telle
                     Howe that we baren vs that ylke nyght
                     Whan we weren in that hoſtry a lyght
                     And after wol I tel of our vyage
                     And al the remenaunt of our pylgrymage
                     
                        But fyrſte I praye you of your curtely
                     That ye ne arette it nat my folly
                     Thouhg that I playnly ſpeke in this matere
                     To tellen you her wordes and eke her chere
                     Ne though I ſpeke her wordes properly
                     For thys ye knowen as wel as I
                     Who ſhal tellen a tale after a manne
                     He mote reherce as nye as euer he canne
                     Euerych worde, yf it be in hys charge
                     Al ſpeke he neuer ſo rudely ne large
                     Or els he mote tellen hys tale vntrewe
                     Or feyne thyng is, or fynde wordes newe
                     He may nat ſpare altho he were hys brother
                     He mote as wel ſaye o worde as another
                     Chryſt ſpake hym ſelfe full brode in holy writte
                     And wel I wotte no vyllayne is itte
                     Eke Plato ſayth, who ſo can hym rede
                     The wordes mote ben coſyn to the dede
                     Alſo I pray you for yeue it me
                     A! haue I nat ſette folke in her degree
                     Here in thys tale as they ſhulde ſtande
                     My wytte is ſhorte ye may wel vnderſtande.
                  
                  
                     
                        GReat chere made our hoſt vs euerychon
                     And to the ſupper ſette he vs anon
                     And ſerued vs wyth vitayle at the beſt
                     Strong was the wyne, and wel drynke vs leſt
                     A ſemely man our hoſt was wyth all
                     For to ben a marſhal in a lordes hall
                     A large man he was with eyen ſtepe
                     A fayrer burgeys is there none in chepe
                     Bolde of hys ſpeche, wyſe and wel ytaught
                     And of manhode hym lacked ryght naught
                     Eke therto he was a right mery man
                     And after ſupper playen he began
                     And ſpake of myrthe among other thynges
                     Whan that we had made our rekenynges
                     And ſayd thus, nowe lordynges trewly
                     Ye ben to me welcome ryght hertely
                     For by my trouthe yf I ſhuld nat lye
                     A ſawe nat thys yere ſo mery a company
                     Atones, in this herborowe as is nowe
                     Fayne wolde I don you myrth & I wyſt howe
                     And of a myrthe I am ryght nowe bethought
                     To done you eaſe, and it ſhall coſte nought
                     Ye gone to Canterbury god mote you ſpede
                     The blyſful martyr quyte you your mede
                     And wel I wote as ye gone by the way
                     Ye ſhapen you to talken and to play
                     For trewly comforte ne myrthe is there none
                     To ryden by the waye as dombe as a ſtone
                     And therfore wolde I maken you diſporte
                     As I ſayd erſt, and done you ſome comforte
                     And yf you lyke al by one aſſent
                     For to ſtonden at my iugement
                     And for to worchen as I ſhall you ſay
                     To morowe whan we ryden on the way
                     Nowe be my fathers ſoule that is deed
                     But ye be mery I wol gyue you myne heed
                     Holde vp your handes without more ſpeche
                     Our counſayle was nat longe for to ſeche
                     Vs thought it was nat worth to make it wyſe
                     And graunted hym without more auyſe
                     And badde hym ſay hys verdit as hym leſt
                     Lordinges (ꝙ he) nowe herkene for the beſt
                     But take it nat I praye you in diſdayne
                     Thys is the poynt to ſpeke it platte & playne
                     That eche of you to ſhorte with others way
                     In this vyage, ſhall tel tales tway
                     To Canterbery warde I meane it ſo
                     And homwardes he ſhal tel tales other two
                     Of auentures whilom that han befal
                     And whiche of you that beareth hym beſt of al
                     That is to ſayne, that tellen in thys caſe
                     Tales of beſt ſentence and moſt ſolace
                     Shall haue a ſupper at our alder coſt
                     Here in thys place ſyttyng by thys poſt
                     Whan that we commen ayen from Canterbery
                     And for to make you the more mery
                     I wol my ſeluen goodly with you ryde
                     Ryght at myne owne coſte and be your gyde
                     And who that wol my iugement withſay
                     Shall paye al that we ſpende by the way
                     And yf ye vouchſafe that it be ſo
                     Telle me anon wythout wordes mo
                     And I woll early ſhape me therfore
                     Thys thyng was graunted & our othes ſwore
                     Wyth full gladde herte, and prayden hym alſo
                     That he wolde vouchſafe for to do ſo
                     And that he wolde ben our gouernour
                     And of our tales iuge and reportour
                     And ſette a ſupper at a certayne priſe
                     And we wollen ben demed at hys deuyſe
                     In hye and lowe, and thus by one aſſent
                     We ben accorded to the iugement
                     And ther vpon the wyne was fette anone
                     We dronken, and to reſt wente ylke one
                     Withouten any lenger taryeng
                     A morowe whan they gan to ſpryng
                     Vp roſe our hoſt, and was our alder cocke
                     
                        And gadered vs al in a flocke
                     And forthe we ryden a lytel more than paas
                     Vnto the wateryng of ſaynt Thomas
                     And there our hoſt began hys horſe areſt
                     And ſayd: lordes herkene yf you leſt
                     Ye wote your forwarde, and I it recorde
                     If eueſonge and morowe ſonge acorde
                     Lette ſe nowe who ſhall tell the fyrſt tale
                     As euer I mote drynke wyne or ale
                     Who ſo is rebel to my iugement
                     Shall paye for all that by the way is ſpent
                     Nowe draweth cutte or that ye farther twyn
                     The whiche that hath the ſhorteſt ſhal begyn.
                  
                  
                     Sir knyght (ꝙ he) my maiſter and my lorde
                     Nowe draweth cutte, for that is myne acorde
                     Cometh nere (ꝙ he) my lady prioreſſe
                     And ye ſir clerke, lette be your ſhamefaſtneſſe
                     Ne ſtudyeth nat, lay hande therto euery man
                     Anone to drawe euery wyght began
                     And ſhortely for to tellen as it was
                     Were it by auenture, or by ſhorter caas
                     The ſothe is thys, the cutte fyll to the knyght
                     Of which ful blyth and glad was euery wyght
                     And tellen he muſt hys tale as it was reaſon
                     By forwarde, and by compoſytion
                     As ye han herde, what nedeth wordes mo
                     And whan thys good man ſawe yt it was ſo
                     As he that wyſe was and obedyent
                     To kepen hys forwarde by hys free aſſent
                     He ſayd, ſithen I ſhall begyn the game
                     What welcome cutte a goddeſhame
                     Nowe let vs ryde, and herkeneth what I ſay
                     And with that worde we ryden forth our way
                     And he began wyth ryght a mery chere
                     Hys tale anone, ryght as ye ſhal here.
                  
               
               ¶Thus ende the prologues of the Caunterbury tales, and here foloweth the knyghtes tale.
            
            
               
               
                   ¶Here begynneth the Knyghtes tale.
               
                  
                     WHylom, as olde ſtories tellen vs
                  There was a duke that hyght Theſeus
                  Of Athenes he was lorde & gouernour
                  And in hys tyme ſuche a conquerour
                  That greater was non vnder the ſon
                  Full many a riche countrey had he won
                  What with his wyſedom, and his cheualry
                  He conquered all the reigne of Feminy
                  That whylom was icleped Cythea
                  And wedded the quene Ipolyta
                  & brought her home wt him, in to his contre
                  Wyth mykell glory and ſolempnyte
                  And eke her yonge ſuſter Emely.
                  And thus with victory and melody
                  Let I thys worthy duke to Athenes ryde
                  And all hys hoſt, in armes hym be ſyde
                  And certes, yf it nere to longe to here
                  I wolde haue tolde fully the manere
                  Howe wonnen was the reygne of Feminy
                  By Theſeus, and by his cheualry
                  And of the great batayle for the nones
                  Betwene Athenes and Amaſones
                  And howe beſeged was Ipolyta
                  The yonge hardy quene of Cythea
                  And of the feeſt, yt was at her weddynge
                  And of the tempeſt at her home comyng
                  But al yt thyng, I mote as nowe forbere
                  I haue god wotte, a large felde to ere
                  And weked ben the oxen in the plowe
                  The remenaunt of my tale is long ynowe
                  I wyll nat letten eke, non of thys rout
                  Let euery felowe tell hys tale about
                  And let ſe nowe, who ſhall the ſupper wyn
                  And there I lefte, I wyll agayne begyn.
               
               
                  Thys duke, of whom I make mencyoune
                  Whan he was come, almoſt to the towne
                  In all hys wele and hys moſt pride
                  He was ware, as he caſt hys eye aſyde
                  where that there kneled in the hyghe wey
                  A company of ladys, twey and twey
                  Eche after other, cladde in clothes blake
                  But ſuch a crye and ſuch a wo they make
                  
                     That in thys worlde, nys creature lyuinge
                  That euer herde ſuche a waymentynge
                  And of thys crye, they nolde neuer ſtynten
                  Tyll they the reynes of hys bridell henten
                  What folke be ye, yt at myn home cōmyng
                  Perturben ſo my feeſt with cryeng
                  Quod Theſeus? Haue ye ſo great enuy
                  Of myne honour, that thus cōplayne & cry?
                  Or who hath you myſbode, or offended?
                  Nowe telleth me, yf it may be amended.
                  And why that ye be clothed thus in blake?
                  The oldeſt lady of them all ſpake
                  Whan ſhe had ſwowned with adeedly chere
                  That it was ruthe for to ſe and here
                  She ſayd lorde, to whom fortune hath yeue
                  Vyctory, and as a conquerour to lyue
                  Nought greueth vs your glory and honour
                  But we beſeke you of mercy and ſocour
                  And haue mercy on our wo and diſtreſſe
                  Some drope of pyte, through thy gētylneſſe
                  Vpon vs wretched wymen, let thou fall
                  For certes lorde, there nys none of vs all
                  That ſhe ne hath be a ducheſſe or a quene
                  Nowe be we caytyſes, as it is well iſene
                  Thanked be fortune, and her falſe whele
                  That non eſtate aſſureth for to be wele.
                  Now certes lorde, to abyde your preſence
                  Here in this temple of the goddeſſe Clemēce
                  We haue be waytyng all this fourtenyght
                  Helpe vs lorde, ſythe it lyeth in thy myght.
               
               
                  
                     I Wretche, that wepe and wayle thus
                  whylom wyfe to kyng Campaneus
                  That ſtarfe at thebes, curſed be ye day
                  And all we that ben in thys aray
                  And maken all thys lamentacyon
                  We loſten all our huſbondes at that town
                  whyle that the ſyege there aboute laye
                  And yet the olde Creon (wel awaye)
                  That lorde is nowe of Thebes cyte
                  Fulfilled of yre and of iniquite
                  He for diſpyte, and for hys tyranny
                  To done the deed bodyes vyllanye
                  Of all our lordes, whiche that ben ſlawe
                  Hath all the bodyes on an heape ydrawe
                  And wyll nat ſuffre hem, by none aſſent
                  Neyther to be buryed, ne to be brent
                  But maketh houndes to eate hem in dyſpyte
                  And wt that worde, wythout more reſpyte
                  They fallen groſly, and cryen pytouſly
                  Haue on vs wretched wymen ſome mercy
                  And let our ſorowe ſynke in thyn hert
                  This gentle duke down frō his hors ſtert
                  Wyth hert pytous, whā he herde hem ſpeke
                  Hym thought that hys herte wolde breke
                  Whan he ſawe hem ſo pytous and ſo mate
                  That whylom were of ſo great aſtate
                  And in hys armes, he hem all vp hent
                  And hem comforted in full good entent
                  And ſwore hys othe, as he was true Knyght
                  He wolde don ſo ferforthly hys myght
                  Vpon the tyrante Creon hem to wreake
                  That al the people of Grece ſhulde ſpeake
                  Howe Creon was of Theſeus yſerued
                  As he that had his dethe full well deſerued
                  And ryght anon wythouten more abode
                  His baner he diſplayed, and forthe rode
                  To Thebes warde, and all hys hooſt beſyde
                  No nere Athenes nolde he go ne ryde
                  Ne take hys eaſe fully halfe a day
                  But onward on hys way that nyght he lay
                  And ſent anone Ipolita the quene
                  And Emely her yonge ſyſter ſhene
                  Vnto the towne of Athenes to dwell
                  And forth he rydeth, ther nys no more to tell.
               
               
                  THe red ſtatu of Mars wt ſpere & targe
                  So ſhyneth in hys whyte baner large
                  That all the feldes glyttren vp & doun
                  And by hys baner, borne is hys penon
                  Of golde ful rych, in which there was ybete
                  The mynotaure, that he wan in C
                        •
                     rte
                  Thus rydeth this duke, this conquerour
                  And in his hoſte of chyualry the flour
                  Tyl that he came to Thebes, and alyght
                  Fayre in a felde, ther as he thought to fyght
                  But ſhortly for to ſpeken of thys thyng
                  With Creon, whiche was of Thebes Kyng
                  He faught, & ſlewe hym manly as a Knyght
                  In playne batayle, & put hys folke to flyght
                  And at a ſaute he wan the cyte after
                  And rente adowne wall, ſparre, and rafter
                  And to the ladyes, he reſtored agayn
                  The bodyes of her huſbandes yt were ſlayn
                  To done obſequies, as tho was the gyſe
                  But it were al to longe for to deuyſe
                  The great clamour, and the weymentyng
                  That the ladyes made at the brennyng
                  Of the bodyes, and the great honour
                  That Theſeus, the noble conquerour
                  Doth to ye ladies, whan they from him went
                  But ſhortly to tellen is myne entent
                  Whan yt this worthy duke, this Theſeus
                  Hath Creon ſlayne, and wan Thebes thus
                  
                     Styl in the felde he toke al nyght hys reſt
                  And dyd with al the countre as hym leſt
                  To ranſake in the taas of bodyes dede
                  (Hem for to ſtrype of harneys and of wede)
                  The pyllours dyd her buſyneſſe and cure
                  After the batayle and the diſcomfyture.
                  And ſo befell, that in the taas they founde
                  Through gyrt wt many a greuous wounde
                  Two yonge knyghtes lyeng by and by
                  Bothe in armes ſame, wrought full richely
                  Of whiche two, Arcyte hyght that one
                  And that other hyght Palamon
                  Not fully quycke, ne fully deed they were
                  But by her cote armours, and by her gere
                  The haraudes knewe hem beſt in ſpecyall
                  As the that weren of the bloode ryall
                  Of Thebes, and of ſyſtren two yborne
                  Out of the taas yt pyllours hath hem torne
                  And han hem caryed ſofte in to the tent
                  Of Theſeus, and he ful ſone hem ſent
                  To Athenes, to dwellen there in priſon
                  Perpetuall, he nolde hem not raunſon
                  And whan thys worthy duke had thus idon
                  He toke his hooſt, and home he gothe anon
                  With laurer crowned, as a conquerour
                  And there he lyueth in ioye and honour
                  Terme of his lyfe, what nedeth wordes mo?
                  And in a towne, in anguyſſe and in wo
                  Dwelleth Palamon, and hys felowe Arcyte
                  For euermore, ther may no gold hem quyte.
               
               
                  
                     THus paſſeth yere by yere, and day by day
                  Til it fel ones in a morowe of May
                  That Emely, yt fayrer was to ſene
                  Than is the lylly, vpon the ſtalke grene
                  And freſher than May, with floures newe
                  For with the roſe colour ſtrofe her hewe
                  I not whiche was the fayrer of hem two.
                  Er it was day, as was her won to do
                  She was aryſen, and all redy dyght
                  For May wol haue no ſlogardy a nyght
                  The ſeaſon pricketh euery gentell herte
                  And maketh it out of her ſlepe ſterte
                  And ſaythe atyſe, and do May obſeruaunce
                  Thys maketh Emely to haue remēbraūce
                  To don horrour to May, and for to ryſe
                  I clothed was ſhe freſſhe for to deuyſe
                  Her yelowe heare was broyded in a treſe
                  Behynde her backe, a yerde longe I gaſe
                  And in the gardyn at ſonne vpryſt
                  She walketh vp and downe as herryſt
                  She gadreth floures, party whyt and reed
                  To make a ſubtell garlande for her heed
                  And as an angell, heuenly ſhe ſonge
                  The great tour, that was ſo thicke & ſtronge
                  Whiche of the caſtell was ye chefe dungeon
                  Wherin the Knyghtes were in pry
                        •
                     on
                  Of whiche I tolde you, and tell ſhall
                  Was euyn ioynaunt to the garden wall
                  There as thys Emely had her playeng
                  Bright was the ſon, & clere the mornynge
                  And Palamon, thys wofull priſoner
                  As was hys won, by leaue of hys gayler
                  Was ryſen, & romed in a chambre on hyghe
                  In whiche he all the noble cyte ſyghe
                  And eke the gardyn, full of braunches grene
                  There as thys freſſhe Emely the ſhene
                  was in her walke, & romed vp and doun
                  This ſorowfull priſoner, this Palamon
                  Gothe in hys chambre romyng to and fro
                  And to hym ſelfe complaynyng of hys wo
                  That he was borne, full ofte ſayd alas
                  And ſo befell by auenture or caas
                  That thrugh a window thick of many a bar
                  Of yren gret, and ſquare as any ſpar
                  He caſte hys eyen vpon Emelia
                  And therwith he blent and cryed, ha.
                  As though he ſlongen were to the herte
                  And with that crye Arcite anon vp ſterte
                  And ſayd, Coſyn myne, what eyleth the
                  That arte ſo pale and deedly for to ſe?
                  why cryeſt thou: who hath do the offence?
                  For goddes loue, take all in pacience
                  Our priſon, for it may none other be
                  Fortune hath yenen vs thys aduerſyte,
                  Some wycked aſpect or diſpoſycion
                  Of Saturne, by ſome conſtellacion
                  Hath yeuen vs this, altho we had it ſworn
                  So ſtode the heuen, whan yt we were born
                  we mote endure, thys is ſhort and playn.
                  This Palamon anſwerde, & ſayd agayn:
                  Coſyn forſoth, of thys opinyon
                  Thou haſt a vayne ymagynacyon
                  Thys priſon cauſed me nat to crye
                  But I was hurt right now thrugh myne ey
                  Into myne herte, that woll my bane be
                  The fayrneſſe of a lady that I ſe
                  Yonde in the gardyn, comyng to and fro
                  Is cauſe of all my cryeng and wo
                  I not wher ſhe be woman or goddeſſe
                  But Venus it is, ſothly as I geſſe
                  And therwyth all on knees down he fyl
                  And ſayd: Venus, yf it be thy wyl
                  You in thys gardyn, thus to tranſfigure
                  
                     Beforne me, ſorowfull wretched creature
                  Out of thys priſon helpe that we may ſcape
                  And yf our deſteny be ſo iſhape
                  By eterne worde, to dyen in pryſon
                  Of our lynage haue ſome compaſſion
                  That is ſo lowe ybrought by tyranny.
                  And wyth that worde Arcyte gan eſpy
                  Where as the lady romed to and fro
                  And wyth that ſyght her bewte hurt hym ſo
                  That yf that Palamon were wounded ſore
                  Arcyte was hurt as moche as he, or more
                  And with a ſyghe he ſayd pitouſly
                  The freſſhe beutie ſleeth me ſodenly
                  Of her that rometh in the yonder place
                  And but I haue her mercy and her grace
                  That I may ſeen her at the leſte way
                  I nam but deed, there nis no more to ſay.
               
               
                  This Palamō, whā he theſe wordes herd
                  Diſpytouſly he loked, and anſwerd:
                  Whether ſayeſt thou this in erneſt or in play
                  Nay quod Arcite, in erneſt by my fay
                  God helpe me ſo, me lyſt full yuell to pley
                  This Palamō gan knyt his browes twey
                  It were (ꝙ he) to the no great honour
                  To be falſe ne for to be traytour
                  To me, that am thy coſen and thy brother
                  I ſworne full depe, and eche of vs to other
                  That neuer for to dyen in the payne
                  Tyll that the dethe departe vs twayne
                  Neyther of vs in loue to hyndre other
                  Ne in none other caſe my leue brother
                  But that thou ſhuldeſt truly further me
                  In euery caſe, as I ſhulde further the
                  This was thyn othe, and myn alſo certayn
                  I wote it well, thou darſt it not withſayn
                  Thus arte thou of my counſell out of doute
                  And nowe thou woldeſt falſly ben aboute
                  To loue my lady, whom I loue and ſerue
                  And euer ſhall, tyll that myn herte ſterue
                  Nowe certes falſe Arcite thou ſhalt not ſo
                  I loued her fyrſt, and tolde the my wo
                  As to my counſell, and to my brother ſworne
                  To further me, as I haue tolde beforne
                  For whiche thou art thounden, as a knyght
                  To helpen me, yf it lye in thy might
                  Or els arte thou falſe, I dare well ſayne
                  This Arcite full proudly ſpake agayne.
                  Thou ſhalt (ꝙ he) be rather fals than I
                  And thou arte falſe I tell the vtterly
                  For paramour I loued her fyrſt or thou
                  what wilt thou ſayn, thou wiſt it nat or now
                  Whether ſhe be woman or goddeſſe
                  Thyne is affection of holyneſſe
                  And myne is loue, as to a creature
                  For whiche I tolde the myne auenture
                  As to my coſyn, and my brother ſworne
                  Suppoſe that thou loueſt her byforne
                  Woſt thou not well the olde clerkes ſawe?
                  That, who ſhall gyue a louer any lawe?
                  Loue is a gretter lawe by my pan
                  Than maybe yeuen to any erthly man
                  And therfore poſityfe lawe, and ſuche decre
                  Is broken all day for loue in eche degre
                  A man more nedes loue maugre hys herd
                  He may nat fleen it though he ſhulde be deed
                  All be ſhe mayde, wydowe, or wyfe
                  And eke it is not lykely all thy lyfe
                  To ſtonden in her grace, nomore ſhall I
                  For well thou wodſt thy ſelfe verely
                  That thou and I be dampned to priſon
                  Perpetuall, vs gayneth no raunſon
                  We ſtryuen, as did the houndes for ye bone
                  That faughte al day, & yet her part was non
                  Ther cam a cur, while yt they wer ſo wroth
                  And bare away the bone from hein bothe
                  And therfore, at kynges court my brother
                  Eche man for hym ſelfe, there is non other
                  Loue if thou lyſt, for I loue and ay ſhall
                  And ſothly lefe brother thys is all
                  Here in thys priſon more we endure
                  And eueryche of vs taken hys auenture
                  Gret was the ſtrife betwix hem twey
                  If that I had leyſer for to fry
                  But to theffect, It happed on a day
                  To tell it you ſhortly as I may.
                  A worthy duke that hyght Perithous
                  That felowe was to duke Theſeus
                  Syth thylke day yt they were chyldren lyte
                  Was come to Athenes, hys felow to viſyte
                  And for to play, as he was wonte to do
                  For in this worlde he loued no man ſo
                  And he loued hym as tenderly agayne
                  So well they loued, as olde bokes ſayne
                  That whē that one was deed, ſothly to tell
                  His felow went & ſought hym downe in hell
                  But of that ſtory lyſt me not to write
                  Duke Perithous loued well Arcite
                  And had hym know at Thebes yere by yere
                  And fynally at requeſt and prayere
                  Of Peithous, withouten any raunſon
                  Duke Theſeus let hym out of pryſon
                  Frely to you, whither hym lyſt ouer all
                  In ſuche agyfe, as I you tellen ſhall.
                  
                     Thys was the forewarde, playnly to endyte
                  Betwyx duke Theſeus and hym Arcite
                  That yf ſo were, that Arcite were yfounde
                  Euer in hys lyfe, by daye, nyght or ſtounde
                  In any countre of thys duke Theſeus
                  And he were caught, it was accorded thus
                  That wyth a ſwerde he ſhulde leſe hys heed
                  There nas none other remedy ne reed
                  But taketh hys leaue, and homward hym ſped
                  Let hym beware, hys necke lyeth to wedde
                  Howe great ſorowe ſuffreth nowe Arcite
                  The death he feleth through hys herte ſmyte
                  He wepeth, wayleth, and cryeth pyteouſly
                  To ſleen hym ſelfe he wayteth priuely
                  And ſayd, alas the daye that I was borne
                  Nowe is my preſon worſe then beforne
                  Nowe is me ſhappen eternally to dwell
                  Not in purgatory, but in hell
                  Alas that euer I knewe Perithous
                  For els had I dwelt wyth Theſeus
                  I fetered in hys priſon euer mo
                  Then had I be in blyſſe, and not in wo
                  Onely the ſyght of her, whom that I ſerue
                  Though that I neuer her grace maye deſerue
                  wolde haue ſuffyſed ryght ynough for me
                  O dere coſyn Palamon (quod he)
                  Thyne is the victory of thys auenture
                  Full blyſfull in priſon mayſt thou endure
                  In priſon, Nay certes but in paradyſe
                  well hath fortune to the tourned the dyſe
                  That haſt the ſyght of her, and I thabſence
                  For poſſible is, ſythnes thou haſt her preſence
                  And arte a knyght, a worthy man and able
                  That by ſome caſe, ſyn fortune is chaungeable
                  Thou mayſt ſome tyme to thy deſyre attayne
                  But I that am exiled, and barayne
                  Of all grace, and in ſo great dyſpeyre
                  That ther nys water, erth, fyre, ne eyre
                  Ne creature, that of hem maked is
                  That maye me heale, or done comforte in thys
                  well ought I ſterue in wanhope and dyſtreſſe
                  Farwell my lyfe, my luſt and my gladneſſe
                  Alas, why playnen men ſo in comune
                  Of purueyaunce of God, or of fortune
                  That yeueth hem full ofte in many a gyſe
                  well bette then hem ſelfe can deuyſe
                  Some man deſyreth to haue rycheſſe
                  That cauſe is of her murdre or ſyckneſſe
                  And ſome man wolde out of hys priſon fayne
                  That in hys houſe, is of hys meyne ſlayne
                  Infinite harmes bene in thys matere
                  we wote not what thynge we prayen here
                  we faren as he, that dronke is as a mouſe
                  A dronken man wote well, he hath an houſe
                  But he wote nat, whych the ryght waye thyder
                  And to a dronken man the waye is ſlyder
                  And certes in thys worlde ſo faren we
                  we ſeken faſt after felicite
                  But we go wronge ful ofte truly
                  Thus may we ſaye al, and namely I
                  That wenden, and had a great opinion
                  That yf I myght ſcape fro priſon
                  Th
                        ••
                      had I bene in ioye and parfyte hele
                  There nowe I am exiled fro my wele
                  Syth that I maye not ſene you Emely
                  I nam but deed, there nys no remedy
                  ¶Vpon that other ſyde Palamon
                  when that he wyſt Arcite was gone
                  Such ſorowe he maketh, that the great tour
                  Reſowned of hys yellynge and clamour
                  The pure fetters on hys ſhynnes grete
                  were of hys bytter ſalte teares wete
                  Alas (ꝙ he) Arcite coſyn myne
                  Of all our ſtryfe, god wote the frute is thyne
                  Thou walkeſt nowe in Thebes at large
                  And of my wo, thou yeueſt lytle charge
                  Thou mayſt, ſyth thou haſt wiſedome & māhed
                  Aſſemble al the folke of our kynred
                  And make warre ſo ſharpe in thys countre
                  That by ſome auenture, or by ſome treate
                  Thou mayſt haue her to lady and to wyfe
                  For whom I muſt nedes leſe my lyfe
                  For as by waye of poſſibilite
                  Syth thou arte at thy large of priſon fre
                  And arte a lorde, great is thyne auauntage
                  More then is myne, that ſterue here in a cage
                  For I maye wepe and wayle, whyles yt I lyue
                  wyth all the wo that priſon maye me yeue
                  And eke wyth payne, that loue yeueth me alſo
                  That doubleth al my tourment and my wo
                  Therwyth the fyre of ielouſy vp ſtert
                  wythin hys breſt, and hent hym by the hert
                  So woodly, that he lykely was to beholde
                  The boxe tree, or the aſhen deed and colde
                  Then ſayd he. O cruell goddes, that gouerne
                  Thys worlde wyth your worde eterne
                  And wrytten in the table of Athamant
                  Your parliament and eterne graunt
                  what is mankynde more vnto you yholde
                  Then is the ſhepe, that rouketh in the folde?
                  For ſlayne is man, ryght as another beeſt
                  And dwelleth eke in priſon, and in arreſt
                  And hath ſyckneſſe, and great aduerſite
                  And ofte tyme gyltleſſe parde
                  
                     What gouernaunce is in thys preſcience
                  That gyltleſſe turmenteth innocence?
                  And encreaſeth thus all my penaunce
                  That man is bounden to hys obſeruaunce
                  For goddes ſake, to letten of hys wyll
                  There as a beeſt maye all hys luſtes fulfyll
                  And when a beeſt is deed, he hath no payne
                  But after hys death mā mote wepe and playne:
                  Though in thys worlde he haue care and wo
                  wythout doute it maye ſtanden ſo.
                  The anſwere of thys lete I to diuines
                  But well I wote, in thys worlde great pyne is
                  Alas I ſe a ſerpent or a thefe
                  That many a true man hath do myſchefe
                  Gone at hys large, & where hym lyſt may turne
                  But I mote bene in priſon through Saturne
                  And eke through Iuno, ielous and eke wood
                  That hath ſtroyed well nye all the blood
                  Of Thebes, wyth hys waſt walles wyde
                  And Venus ſleeth me on that other ſyde
                  For ielouſye, and feare of hym Arcite.
                  Nowe wyll I ſlynte of Palamon a lyte
                  And let hym in hys pryſon ſtyll dwell
                  And of Arcite forth woll I you tell
                  The ſommer paſſeth, and the nyghtes longe
                  Encreaſeth double wyſe the paynes ſtronge
                  Both of the louer, and of the priſoner
                  I not whych hath the wofuller myſter
                  For ſhortly to ſaye, thys Palamon
                  Perpetuall is dampned to priſon
                  In 
                        •
                     haynes and feters to the deed
                  And Arcite is exiled on hys heed
                  For euermore as out of that countre
                  Or neuer more ſhall hys lady ſe
                  You louers aſke I now thys queſtion
                  Who hath the wo
                        •
                     ſe, Arcite or Palamon?
                  That one maye ſe hys lady daye by daye
                  But in priſon mote he dwell alwaye
                  That other where hym lyſt maye ryde or go
                  But ſene hys lady ſhall he neuer mo
                  Nowe demeth as ye lyſt, ye that can
                  For I woll tell forth my tale as I began
                  ¶When that Arcite to Thebes comen was
                  Full ofte a daye he ſwelte and ſayd alas
                  For ſene hys lady ſhall he neuer mo
                  And ſhortly to conclude all hys wo
                  So mykell ſorowe made neuer creature
                  That is or ſhalbe, whyle the worlde maye dure
                  Hys ſlepe, hys meate, hys drynke is hym byraft
                  That leane he wareth, and drye as a ſhaft
                  Hys eyen holowe, and gryſly to beholde
                  Hys hewe pale, and falowe as aſſhen colde
                  And ſolitary he was, and euer alone
                  And waylynge all the nyght, makynge mone
                  And yf he herde ſonge or inſtrument
                  Then wolde he wepe, he myght not ſtent
                  So feble were hys ſpirites, and ſo lowe
                  And chaūged ſo, yt no man coude hym knowe
                  Hys ſpeche ne hys voyce, though men it herde
                  As in hys gyre, for all the worlde it ferde
                  Nought comly lyke to louers maladye
                  Of Hereos but rather lyke manye
                  Engendred of Humours melancolyke
                  Beforne hys fell fantaſtyke
                  And ſhortly was turned all vp ſo doun
                  Both habyte and dyſpoſicion
                  Of hym, thys wofull louer Arcyte
                  what ſhulde I all daye of hys wo endyte?
                  When he endured had a yere or two
                  Thys cruell torment, and thys payne and wo
                  At Thebes in hys countre, as I ſayd
                  Vpon a nyght in ſlepe as he hym layde
                  Hym thought howe that the wynged Mercury
                  Beforne hym ſtode, and bad hym to be mery
                  Hys ſlepy yerde in hande he bare vpryght
                  An harte he wered vpon hys heares bryght
                  Arayed was thys god, as he toke kepe
                  As he was, when Argus toke hys ſlepe
                  And ſaid him thus: to Athenes ſhalt thou wend
                  There is the ſhapen of thy wo an end
                  And wyth that worde Arcite awoke and ſtert
                  Nowe truly howe ſore that me ſmert
                  Quoth he, to Athenes ryght nowe wyll I fare
                  Ne for no drede of death ſhall I ſpare
                  To ſe my lady, that I loue and ſerue
                  In her preſence recke I not to ſterue
                  And with that word he caught a great myrrour
                  And ſawe that changed was al hys colour
                  And ſawe hys vyſage all in another kynde
                  And ryght anone it ran hym in hys mynde
                  That ſyth hys face was ſo dyſfygured
                  Of maladye, the whych he had endured
                  He myght well, yf that he bare hym lowe
                  Lyue in Athenes euermore vnknowe
                  And ſene hys ladye well nyghe daye by daye
                  And ryght anone he chaunged hys araye
                  And clad hym as a poore labourer
                  And all alone, ſaue only a ſquyer
                  That knewe hys priuitie and all hys caas
                  whych was dyſgyſed poorely as he was
                  To Athenes is he gone the nexte waye
                  And to the courte he wente vpon a daye
                  And at the gate he profered hys ſeruyce
                  To druge and drawe, what ſo men wold deuyſe
                  
                     And ſhortely of thys mater for to ſayne
                  He fell in offyce with a chamberlayne
                  The whiche was dwellyng with Emelye
                  For he was wyſe, and ſone couth eſpye
                  Of euery ſeruaunt, whiche that ſerued here
                  Well couthe he hewen wodde, & water bere
                  For he was yong and myghty for the nones
                  And therto he was ſtrong & bygge of bones
                  To done that any wyght can him deuyſe.
                  A yere or two he was in thys ſeruyſe
                  Page of the chambre, of Emely the bright
                  And Phyloſtrate he ſayd that he hyght
                  But halfe ſo well beloued man as he
                  Ne was there none in court, of hys degre
                  He was ſo gentyll of condicyon
                  That through all the court was hys renoun
                  They ſayd that it were a charyte
                  That Theſeus wolde enhauncen hys degre
                  And put hym in a worſhyp full ſeruyſe
                  There as he myght hys vertue exercyſe
                  And thus wtin a whyle hys name is ſpronge
                  Bothe of hys dedes, and of hys good tonge
                  That Theſeus had taken hym ſo nere
                  That of hys chambre he made hym ſquyere
                  And yafe hym golde to maynteyn hys degre
                  And eke men brought hym out of hys coutre
                  Fro yere to yere full priuely hys rent
                  But honeſtly and ſlyly he it ſpent
                  That no man wondred howe he it had
                  And thre yere in thys wyſe hys lyfe he ladde
                  And bare hym ſo in peace and eke in werre
                  Ther was no man that Theſeus hath der.
                  And in thys blyſſe lette I nowe Ar
                        •
                     yte
                  And ſpeke I woll of Palamon a lyte.
                  In derkneſſe horryble and ſtronge priſon
                  Thys ſeuen yere hath ſytten thys Palamon
                  Forpyned, what for wo and diſtreſſe
                  who feleth double ſore and heuyneſſe
                  But Palamon: that loue diſtrayneth ſo
                  That wode out of hys wit, he gothe for wo
                  And eke therto he is a priſonere
                  Perpetuall, and not onely for a yere.
                  Who coude ryme in Englyſſhe properly
                  Hys martyrdom▪ forſoth it am nat I
                  Therfore I paſſe as lyghtly as I may
                  It befell that in the ſeuenth yere in May
                  The thyrde nyght, as olde bokes ſayne
                  (That all thys ſtory tellen more playne)
                  were it by auenture or by deſtayne
                  As whan a thyng is ſhapen, it ſhall be
                  That ſoon after mydnight, Palamon
                  By helpyng of a frende brake hys priſon
                  And fleethe the cyte, as faſt as he may go
                  For he had yeue hys gayler drynke ſo
                  Of a clarrey, made of certen wyne
                  Wyth narcotiſe and opye, of Thebes fyne
                  That al yt night, thogh mē wolde hym ſhake
                  The gayler ſlept, he mught nat awake
                  And thus he fleeth as faſt as he may.
                  The nyght was ſhort, & faſt by the day
                  That nedes coſt he mote hym ſelfe hyde
                  And to a groue faſte there beſyde
                  with dredfull foote than ſtalketh Palamon
                  For ſhortly thys was hys opinyon
                  That in yt groue he wolde hym hyde al day
                  And in the nyght then wold he take his way
                  To Thebes warde, hys 
                        •
                     rendes for to prey
                  On Theſeus to helpe hym to warrey
                  And ſhortly, eyther he wolde leſe hys lyfe
                  Or wynne Emelye vnto hys wyfe
                  Thys is theffecte, and hys entent playne.
                  ¶Nowe woll I torne to Arcite agayne
                  That lytell wyſt howe nye was hys care
                  Tyl yt fortune had brought hym in her ſhare
                  The mery larke, meſſanger of day
                  Saleweth in her ſonge the morowe gray
                  And firy Phebus aryſeth vp ſo bright
                  That all the oriſo
                        ••
                      laugheth of the ſyght
                  And with hys ſtreames, drieth in the greues
                  The ſyluer dropes, hangyng in the leues
                  And Arcite, that in the courte ryall
                  with Theſeus hys ſquier principall
                  Is ryſen, and loketh on the mery day
                  And for to don hys obſeruaunces to May
                  Remembryng on the poynt of hys deſyre
                  He on hys courſer, ſtartlyng as the fyre
                  Is rydden in to the feldes hym to play
                  Out of the court, were it a myle or twey
                  And to the groue, of whyche I you tolde
                  By auenture, hys way he gan holde
                  To maken hym a garlonde of the greues
                  were it of wodbynde, or of hauthorn leues
                  And loude he ſonge ayenſt the ſonne ſhene.
                  May, wyth all thy floures and thy grene
                  welcom be thou, fayre freſſhe May
                  I hope that I ſome grene get may
                  And from hys courſer, wyth a luſty herte
                  In to the groue full haſtely he ſterte
                  And in a pathe he romed vp and doun
                  There, as by auenture thys Palamon
                  was in a buſſhe, that no man myght hym ſe
                  For ſore aferde of hys dethe was he
                  Nothyng ne knewe he, that it was Arcite
                  God wote he wolde haue trowed full lyte
                  
                     But ſothe is ſayd, go ſythen many yeres
                  That felde hath eyen, and wodde hath eres
                  It is full fayre a man to beare hym euyn
                  For al day men mete at vnſet ſteuyn
                  Full lytell wote Arcyte of hys felawe
                  That was ſo nyghe to herken of hys ſawe
                  For in the buſſhe ſytteth he nowe full ſtyll
                  Whan that Arcyte had romed all hys fyll
                  And ſongen all the roundell luſtely
                  In to a ſtudy he fell ſodenly
                  As don theſe louers in theyr quyent gyres
                  Now in the croppe, & now down in ye brires
                  Nowe vp nowe downe, as boket in a well
                  Ryght as the friday, ſothly for to tell
                  Nowe it rayneth, nowe it ſhyneth faſt
                  Ryght ſo gan gery Venus ouer caſt
                  The hertes of her folke, ryght as her day
                  Is geryfull, ryght ſo chaungeth ſhe aray
                  Selde is the friday all the weke tlyke
                  Whan ye Arcite had ſonge, he gan to ſyke
                  And ſet hym downe wythouten any more
                  Alas (ꝙ he) the day that I was bore
                  Howe longe Iuno through thy cruelte
                  Wylt thou warren Thebes the cyte▪
                  
                  Alas ybrought is to confuſyon
                  The blode ryall of Cadmus and Amphyon
                  Of Cadmus, whiche was the fyrſt man
                  That Thebes buylt, or fyrſt the town began
                  And of the cyte fyrſt was crowned kyng
                  Of hys lynage am I, and of hys ofſpring
                  By very lyne, as of the ſtocke ryall
                  And nowe I am ſo caytiſe and ſo thrall
                  That he that is my mortal enemy
                  I ſerue hym, as hys ſquire poorly
                  And yet dothe me Iuno well more ſhame
                  For I dare not be knowe myne owne name
                  But there as I was wont to hyght Arcyte
                  Now hyght I Philoſtrat nat worth a myte
                  Alas thou fell Mars, alas thou Iuno
                  Thus hath your yre our lynage all for do
                  Saue only me, and wretched Palamon
                  That Theſeus martreth in pryſon
                  And ouer all thys to ſleen me vtterly
                  Loue hath hys firy darte ſo bremyngly
                  I ſtycked through my true carefull herte
                  That ſhapen was my deth erſt my ſherte
                  Ye ſleen me wyth youre eyen Emelye
                  Ye ben the cauſe wherfore I dye
                  Of all the remenaunt of myne other care
                  Ne ſet I nat the mountaunce of a tare
                  So yt I coude do ought to your pleſaunce
                  And with yt worde he fell down in a traunce
                  A longe tyme, and afterwarde he vp ſtort
                  This Palamon thought ye thrugh his hert
                  He felte a colde ſworde ſodenly glyde
                  For yre he quoke, no lenger wolde he abyde
                  And whan that he had herde Arcites tale
                  As he were wood, with face deed and pale
                  He ſterte hym vp, out of the buſſhes thycke
                  And ſayd: Arcyte falſe traytour wycke
                  Nowe art thou hent, that loueſt my lady ſo
                  For whom that I haue th
                        ••
                      payne and wo
                  And art my bloode, & to my counſell ſworn
                  As I haue full ofte tolde the here beforn
                  And haſt be taped here duke Theſeus
                  And falſly haſt chaunged thy name thus
                  I wyll be deed, or els thou ſhalt dye
                  Thou ſhalt nat loue my lady Emelye
                  But I woll loue her onely and no mo
                  For I am Palamon thy mortall for
                  Though yt I haue no weapen in thys place
                  But out of pryſon am aſſert by grace
                  I drede not, that eyther thou ſhalt dye
                  Or thou ne ſhalt not louen Emelye
                  Theſe which thou wilt, or ye ſhalt not aſſert
                  This Arcite, with full diſpytous hert
                  Whan he hym knewe, & had hys tale herde
                  As ſters as a lyon, pulled out his ſwerde
                  And ſayd: By god that ſytteth aboue
                  Ne were it yt thou art ſyck, & wood for loue
                  And eke yt thou no wepen haſt in thys place
                  Thou ſhuldeſt neuer out of this groue pace
                  That thou ne ſhuldeſt dyen of myne honde
                  For I defye the ſ
                        ••
                     etie and the bonde
                  Whiche yt thou ſayſt yt I haue made to the
                  What very fole, thynke wel that loue is fre
                  And I wyl loue her maugre all thy myght
                  But for as moche as thou arte a knyght
                  And wylneſt to darrayne here by batayle
                  Haue here my trouth, to morow I wyll nat fayle
                  without wetyng a
                        •
                      any other wyght
                  That here I well be founden as a knyght
                  And bryngen harneys, ryght ynough for the
                  And cheſe the beſt, & leaue the worſt for me.
                  And meate & drynke, this night wyl I bring
                  Inough for the, and clothes for thy beddyng
                  And yf ſo be that thou my lady wyn
                  And ſlee me in thys wodde ther I am in
                  Thou mayſt wel haue thy lady as for me.
                  This Palamon anſwerde: I graunt it the
                  And thus they ben departed tyll a morowe
                  whā ech of hem had laid his faith to borowe
                  ¶O Cupyde out of all charyte
                  O regne, yt woldeſt haue no felowe with the
                  
                     Ful ſoth is ſayd, that loue ne lordſhyp
                  woll not hys thankes haue any felyſhyp
                  we fynde that of Arcite and of Palamon
                  Arcite is ryden anone into the toun
                  And on the morowe or it were daye lyght
                  Ful priuely two harneys hath he dyght
                  Both ſufficient and mete to darreygne
                  The batayle in ye felde betwyre hem tweine
                  And on hys horſe, alone as he was borne
                  He caryeth all hys harneys hym beforne
                  And in the groue, at tyme and place yſet
                  Thys Arcite & thys Palamon bene mette
                  To chaungen gan the colour in her face
                  Ryght as the hunter, in ye regne of Trace
                  That 
                        ••
                     andeth at a gappe wyth a ſpeare
                  when 
                        •
                     unted is the lyon or the beare
                  And hereth hym ruſhynge in the leaues
                  And breaketh the bowes in the greaues
                  And thiketh, here cometh my mortal enemy
                  wythout fayle, he muſt be deed or I
                  For eyther I more ſlee hym at the gappe
                  Or he more ſlee me, yf me myſhappe
                  So ferden they, in chaungynge of her hewe
                  As farre as euerych of other knewe
                  There nas no good daye, ne no ſaluyng
                  But ſtreyght, wythout worde or reherſyng
                  Eueryche of hem helpeth for to arme other
                  As frendly, as he were hys owne brother
                  And after that, wyth ſharpe ſpeares ſtronge
                  They foynen eche at other wonder longe
                  Thou myghteſt wene, that thys Palamon
                  In hys fyghtynge, were a wood Lyon
                  And as a cruel Tygre was Arcyte
                  As wylde bores gan they fyght and ſmyte
                  That frothen whyte as ſome for yre woode
                  
                     
                        ••
                     p to the ancle foughten they in her bloode
                  
                     
                        ••
                     d in thys wyſe, I let hem fyghtyng dwell
                  And forth I wol of Theſeus you tel.
                  The deſtenye and the miniſter general
                  That executeth in the worlde ouer al
                  The purueyaūce that god hath ſayd beforne
                  So ſtrōge it is, yt though ye world had ſworn
                  The contrary of thynge he yea or naye
                  Yet ſomtyme it ſhall fall on a daye
                  That fell neuer yet in a thouſande yere
                  For certaynly our appetytes here
                  Be it of warre, peace, hate, or loue
                  Al is ruled by the ſyght aboue
                  Thys meane I nowe by myghty Theſeus
                  That for to hunt is ſo deſyrous
                  And namely at the great harte in May
                  That in hys bed there daweth hym no day
                  That he nys clad, and redy for to ryde
                  Wyth hunt and horne, & hoūdes hym beſyde
                  For in hys huntyng hath he ſuch delyte
                  That it is all hys ioye and appetyte
                  To bene hym ſelfe the great hertes bane
                  For after Mars, he ſerueth nowe Dyane
                  Clere was the day, as I haue told or this
                  And Theſeus, wyth al ioye and blys
                  Wyth hys Ipolita, the fayre quene
                  And Emely, yclothen all in grene
                  An huntynge ben they rydden ryally
                  And to the groue, that ſtode there faſt by
                  In which ther was an herte, as mē him told
                  Duke Theſeus the ſtreyght waye hath hold
                  And to the lande, he rydeth hym ful ryght
                  For thider was ye hert wōt to haue his flight
                  And ouer a broke, and ſo forth on hys way
                  This duke wol houe a cours at him or twey
                  With hoūdes, ſuch as hym lyſt cōmaunde
                  And when ye duke was comen into ye launde
                  Vnder the ſonne he loked, and that anon
                  He was ware of Arcyte and Palamon
                  That foughtē breme, as it were bulles two
                  The bryght ſwordes wenten to and fro
                  So hydouſly, that wyth the leſte ſtroke
                  It ſemed, that it wolde haue fellen an oke
                  But what they weren, nothynge he ne wote
                  This duke wt his ſporres his courſer ſmote
                  And at a ſterte he was bytwyxt hem two
                  And pulled out hys ſworde, and cryed, ho
                  Nomore, on payne of leſyng of your heed
                  By myghty Mars, he ſhall anone be deed
                  That ſmyteth any ſtroke, that I maye ſene
                  But telleth me, what myſter men ye bene
                  That ben ſo hardy for to fyghten here
                  Wythout iudge, or other offycere
                  As though it were in lyſtes rially.
                  Thys Palamon anſwered haſtely
                  And ſayd: ſyr, what nedeth wordes mo▪
                  
                  We haue the death deſerued both two
                  Two wofull wretches ben we & caytyues
                  That ben encombred of our owne lyues
                  And as thou arte a ryghfull lorde and iuge
                  Ne yeue vs neyther mercy ne refuge
                  But ſlee me fyrſt, for ſaynt charite
                  But ſlee my felowe as wel as me
                  Or ſlee hī fyrſt, for though thou know it lite
                  This is thy mortal foe, thys is Arcite
                  That fro thy lande is banyſhed on hys heed
                  For whych he hath deſerued to be deed
                  For thys is he, that came vnto thy yate
                  And ſayd, that he hyght Philoſtrate
                  
                     Thus hath he iaped full many a yere
                  And thou haſt made hym thy chefe ſquire
                  And thys is he, that loueth Emely.
                  For ſythe the day is come that I ſhall dye
                  I make playnly my confeſſyon
                  I am thylke woful Palamon
                  That hath thy priſon broke wyckedly
                  I am thy mortall foe, and he am I
                  That loueth ſo hotte Emelye the bright
                  That I wol dye here preſent in her ſyght
                  wherfore I aſke dethe and my iewyſe
                  But ſlee my felowe in the ſame wyſe
                  For bothe we haue deſerued to be ſlayn
                  This worthy duke anſwerde anon agayn
                  And ſayd, this is a ſhorte concluſyon
                  Your owne mouthe, by your confeſſyon
                  Hath dampned you, and I woll it recorde
                  It nedeth not to pyne you wyth a corde
                  Ye ſhall be deed by myghty Mars the reed
                  The quene anone, for very woman heed
                  Gan for to wepe, and ſo dyd Emelye
                  And all the ladyes in the companye
                  Great pyte was it, as thought hem all
                  That euer ſuche a chaunce ſhulde befall
                  For gentylmen they were of great eſtate
                  And nothyng but for loue was thys debate
                  And ſawe her blody woundes wyde & ſore
                  And all cryden bothe leſſe and more
                  Haue mercy lorde vpon vs wymen all
                  And on her bare knees downe they fall
                  And wolde haue kyſt his fete there he ſtode
                  Tyl at the laſt, a ſlaked was hys mode
                  For pyte renueth ſone in gentle herte
                  And though he fyrſt for yre quoke & ſterte
                  He hath conſydred ſhorthly in a clauſe
                  The treſpas of hem bothe, & eke the cauſe
                  And al though hys yre her gylt accuſed
                  Yet in hys reaſon he hem bothe excuſed
                  As thus: he thought well that euery man
                  woll helpe hym ſelfe in loue al that he can
                  And eke delyuer hym ſelfe out of a pryſon
                  And eke hys herte, had compaſſyon
                  Of wymen, for they wepen euery in one
                  And in hys gentle heyte he thought anone
                  And ſofte vnto hym ſelfe he ſayd: fy
                  Vpon a lorde, that woll haue no mercy
                  But be a lyon, bothe in worde and dede
                  To hem that ben in repentaunce & in drede
                  As well as to a proude diſpytous man
                  That wyll mayntayne that he fyrſt began
                  That lorde hath lytell of diſcretyon
                  That in ſuche caſe can no diffynition
                  But wayeth pride and humbleſſe after one
                  And ſhortly, whan hys yre was thus agone
                  He gan to loken vp with eyen lyght
                  And ſpake theſe wordes al on hyght
                  The god of loue, ah, benedicite
                  Howe myghty, & howe great a lorde is he
                  Agayn hys myght ther gayneth no obſtacles
                  He may be cleaped a god for hys miracles
                  For he can maken at hys owne gyſe
                  Of euerych hert, as hym lyſt deuyſe
                  Lo here thys Arcyte, and thys Palamon
                  That quitely were out of my priſon gon
                  And myght haue lyued in Thebes ryally
                  And knowen I am her mortall enemy
                  And that her dethe is in my power alſo
                  And yet hath loue, maugre her eyen two
                  Brought hem hyther bothe for to dye
                  Nowe loketh, is not this a great folye▪
                  
                  Who may be a fole, but yf he loue▪
                  
                  Beholde for goddes ſake, that ſytteth aboue
                  Se howe they blede, be they nat wel arayde
                  Thus hath her lord, ye god of loue hem payd
                  Her wages and her fees for her ſeruyſe
                  And yet they wenen to be full wyſe
                  That ſerue loue, for aught that may be fall
                  But yet is this the beſt g
                        •
                     me of all
                  That ſhe, for whom they haue thys iolyte
                  Can hem therfore, as moche thanke as me
                  She wotte nomore of all this hote face
                  By God, than wotte a cokowe or an hare
                  But all mote ben aſſayed hote and colde
                  A man mote ben a foole other yong or olde
                  I wote it by my ſelfe full yore agone
                  For in my tyme, a ſeruaunte was I one
                  And therfore ſyth I knowe of loues payne
                  I wote howe ſore it can a man diſtrayne
                  As he that ofte hath be caught in her laas▪
                  
                  I you foryeue all hooly this treſpaas
                  At the requeſt of the quene, ye kneleth here
                  And eke of Emely, my ſyſter dere
                  And ye ſhall bothe anon anto me ſwere
                  That ye ſhal neuer more my countre dere
                  Ne make warre vpon me nyght ne day
                  But ben my frendes in all that ye may
                  I you for yene thys treſpas euery dele
                  And they hym ſwace his aſking fair & wele
                  And him of lordſhyp and of mercy prayde
                  And he hem graunted grace, & thus he ſayde.
                  To ſpeake of worthy lynage & rycheſſe
                  Though ye ſhe were a quene, or a princeſſe
                  Ilke of you bothe is worthy doutles
                  To wedde whan tyme is, but netheles
                  
                     I ſpeake, as for my ſyſter Emely
                  For whom ye haue thys ſtryfe and ielowſy
                  Ye wote your ſelfe, ſhe maye not wedde two
                  At ones, though ye fyghten euer mo
                  But one of you, all be hym loth or lefe
                  He mote go pype in an yue lefe
                  Thys is to ſaye, ſhe maye not haue both
                  Ne ben ye neuer ſo ielous, ne ſo wroth
                  And therfore, I you put in thys degre
                  That eche of you ſhall haue hys deſtyne
                  As hym is ſhape, and herken in what wyſe
                  Lo here your ende, of that I ſhall deuyſe
                  My wyll is thys, for plat concluſion
                  Wythout any replicacion
                  Yf that you lyketh, taketh it for the beſt
                  That euerych of you ſhall go where him lyſt
                  Frely, wythout raunſome or daungere
                  And thys daye fyftye wekes, ferre ne nere
                  Euerych of you ſhall brynge an .C. knyghtes
                  Armed for the lyſtes vp all ryghtes
                  Al redy to darreyne here by batayle
                  And thys behote I you wythouten fayle
                  Vpon my trouth, as I am true knyght
                  That whether of you both, hath that myght
                  That is to ſaye, that whether he or thou
                  May wyth his hūdred, as I ſpake of now
                  Slee hys contrary, or out of lyſtes dryue
                  Hym ſhall I yene Emely to wyue
                  To whom yt fortune yeueth ſo fayre a grace.
                  The lyſtes ſhall I maken in thys place
                  And god ſo wyſely on my ſoule rewe
                  As I ſhal euyn iudge be and trewe
                  Ye ſhall none other ende wyth me make
                  That one of you ſhalbe deed or take
                  And yf ye thynken, thys is wel yſayd
                  Sayeth your aduyſe, & holde you wel apayd
                  Thys is your ende, and your concluſion.
                  Who loketh lyghtly now but Palamon
                  Who ſpryngeth vp for ioye but Arcite
                  Who coude tel, or who coude endyte
                  The ioye that is made in thys place
                  When Theſeus had done ſo fayre a grace
                  But doun on knees wēt euery maner wight
                  And thanked him, wyth al her hert & myght
                  And namely theſe Thebans many ſythe
                  And thus wyth good hope & herte blythe
                  They takē her leue, & hōward gan they ryde
                  To Thebes warde, wyth olde walles wyde
                  I trowe men wolde deme it negligence
                  Yf I foryetten to tell the dyſpence
                  Of Theſeus, that goeth ſo buſely
                  To maken vp the lyſtes royally
                  That ſuche a noble Theatre, as it was
                  I dare well ſaye, in thys worlde ther nas
                  The circute a myle was about
                  Walled wyth ſtone, and dyched al about
                  Roūde was the ſhape, in maner of a compas
                  Full of degrees, the heygth of fyrty paas
                  That when a man was ſet on one degre
                  He letted not hys felowe for to ſ
                        •
                     
                  
                  Eſtward there ſtode a gate of marble whyte
                  weſtward ryght ſuche another in thoppoſite
                  And ſhortly to conclude, ſuche a place
                  was none in erth, as in ſo lytle ſpace
                  For in the lande, there nas no craftes man
                  That gemetry, or arſmetyke can
                  Ne portriture, ne caruer of ymages
                  That Theſeus ne gaue hym mete & wages
                  The theatre for to make and deuyſe
                  And for to do hys ryte and ſacrifyce
                  He eſtwarde hath vpon the yate aboue
                  In worſhyp of Venus, goddes of loue
                  Do make an auter, and an oratory
                  And on the weſtſyde, in memory
                  Of Mars, he hath maked ſuch another
                  That coſt of golde largely a fother
                  And northwarde, in a turret in the wal
                  Of alabaſtre whyte, and redde coral
                  An oratorye, ryche for to ſe
                  In worſhyp of Diane, goddes of chaſtite
                  Hath Theſeus do wrought in noble wyſe
                  But yet had I foryetten to deuyſe
                  The noble caruynges and the portratures
                  The ſhap, the countenaunce, & the fygures
                  That weren in the oratories thre
                  Fyrſt in the tēple of Venus thou mayſt ſe
                  wrought on the wal, ful pytouſly to beholde
                  The broken ſlepes, and the ſyghes colde
                  The ſault teares, and the waymentyng
                  The fyre ſtrokes, and the deſyryng
                  That loues ſeruauntes in thys lyfe enduren
                  The othes, that her couenauntes aſſuren
                  Pleſaunce and hope, deſyre, foole hardyneſſe
                  Beauty and youth, baudry and rycheſſe
                  Charmes and ſorcery, leaſynges and flatery
                  Dyſpence, buſyneſſe, and ielouſy
                  That weared of yelowe goldes a garlande
                  And a cokowe ſyttynge on her honde
                  Feeſtes, inſtrumentes, carolles, and daunces
                  Iuſtes and araye, and al the circumſtaunces
                  Of loue, whych I reken and reken ſhal
                  By ordre, were paynted on the wal
                  And mo then I can make of mencion
                  For ſothly all the mounte of Cytheron
                  
                     Where Venus hath her principal dwellyng
                  was ſhewed on the wall in portreyng
                  wyth all the ioye, and the luſtyneſſe
                  Nought was foryetē the portreſſe ydelneſſe
                  Ne Narciſſus the fayre of yore agon
                  Ne yet the folye of kynge Salomon
                  Ne yet the great ſtrength of Hercules
                  Thenchauntement of Medea and Circes
                  Ne of Turnus, wyth his hardy fyers corage
                  The ryche Creſus caytyfe in ſeruage
                  Thus may ye ſene, that wisdome ne richeſſe
                  Beaute ne ſleyght, ſtrength ne hardyneſſe
                  Ne may wyth Venus holde champartye
                  For as her lyſt the worlde maye ſhe gye
                  Lo, al theſe folke ſo caught were in her laas
                  Tyll they for wo full ofte ſayd alas
                  Suffyſeth here one enſample or two
                  And though I coude reken a thouſande mo
                  The ſtatue of Venus glorious to ſe
                  was maked fletynge in the large ſee
                  And fro the nauyll downe al couered was
                  wyth wawes grene, and bryght as any glas
                  A cytriole in her ryght hande had ſhe
                  And on her heed, ful ſemely for to ſe
                  A roſe garlande, freſhe and wel ſmellynge
                  Aboue her heed doues flytterynge
                  Beforne her ſtode her ſonne Cupido
                  Vpon hys ſhoulders wynges had he two
                  And blynde he was, as it is ofte ſene
                  A bowe he had, and arowes bright and kene
                  why ſhulde I not as wel tellen al
                  The purgatory that was therabout ouer al
                  within the temple of myghty Mars the rede
                  Al paynted was the wal in length & in brede
                  Lyke to the Eſtris of the gryſly place
                  That hyght ye gret tēple of Mars in Trace
                  In thylke colde froſty regyon
                  Ther Mars hath hys ſouerayne mancion
                  Fyrſt on the wall was paynted a foreſt
                  In whych ther wonneth nother mā ne beeſt
                  Wyth knotty and knarry trees olde
                  Of ſtubbes ſharpe, and hydous to beholde
                  In whych ther was a romble & a ſhowe
                  As though a ſtorme ſhuld breke euery bowe
                  And downward vnder an hyl vnder a bent
                  Ther ſtode the temple of Mars armipotent
                  wrought all of burnt ſtele, of whych thentre
                  was longe and ſtreyght, and gaſtly for to ſe
                  And ther out came ſuche a rage & ſuch a vyſe
                  That it made all the gates for to ryſe
                  The northren lyght in at the dores ſhone
                  For wyndowe on the wall was there none
                  Thrugh which mē might any lyght diſcerne
                  The dores were al of athamant eterne
                  Yclenſed ouerthwarte and endlonge
                  wyth yren toughe, for to maken it ſtronge
                  Euery pyller, the temple to ſuſtene
                  was tonne great, of yren bright and ſhene
                  ¶There ſawe I fyrſt the derke ymagynyng
                  Of felony, and eke the compaſſyng:
                  The cruel yre, redde as any glede
                  The pyckpurſe and eke the pale drede
                  The ſmyler, wyth the knyfe vnder the cloke
                  The ſhepen brennynge wyth ye blacke ſmoke
                  The treaſon of the murdrynge in the bede
                  The open warre, with woundes all be blede
                  Cōteke with blody knyues, & ſharpe manace
                  All full of chyrkyng was that ſory place
                  The fleer of hym ſelfe yet ſaw I there
                  His herte blood hath bathed all his here
                  The nayle ydriuen in the ſhode on hyght
                  with colde deth, wt mouth gapyng vpright
                  Amyddes of the temple ſate Myſchaunce
                  with Diſcomfort, and ſory Countenaunce
                  Yet ſaw I wodneſſe, laughyng in his rage
                  Armed complaynte on theft & fyers courage
                  The carrayne in the buſhe, wt throte ycorne
                  A thouſande ſlayne, & nat of qualme yſtorne
                  The tyraunt with the pray by force yraft
                  The town diſtroyed ther was nothing ylaft
                  Yet ſawe I brent the ſhyppes hoppeſteres
                  The hunter yſtrangled with ye wylde beares
                  The ſowe frettyng the chylde in the cradyll
                  The coke yſcaulded, for al his longe ladyll
                  Naught was foreten yt in fortune of Marte
                  The carter ouer rydden by his owne carte
                  Vnder the whele full lowe he laye a down
                  There were alſo of Martes diuyſyon
                  The barbour, the boucher, and the ſmyth
                  That forgeth ſharpe ſwordes on the ſtyth
                  And all aboue depaynted in a toure
                  Sawe I Cōqueſt, ſyttyng in great honoure
                  with the ſharpe ſworde ouer his heed
                  Hangyng by a ſubtyl twyned threde
                  Depaynted was ther, ye ſlaughter of Iulius
                  Of great Nero, and of Anthonius
                  Al be that thylke tyme they were vnborne
                  Yet was her death depaynted there beforne
                  By manacynge of Mars, ryght by fygure
                  So was it ſhewed in that portreture
                  As is depaynted in the certres aboue
                  Who ſhalbe deed or els ſlayne for loue
                  Suffyſeth one enſample in ſtoryes olde
                  I may not reken them al, though I wolde
                  
                     The ſtatue of Marce vpon a carte ſtode
                  Armed, and loked grym as he were wode
                  And ouer hys heed ther ſhynen two fygures
                  Of ſterres, that ben cleped in ſcryptures
                  That one (Puella) hyght, yt other (Rubeus)
                  Thys god armes was arayed thus
                  A wolfe there ſtode beforne hym at hys fete
                  Wyth eyen reed, and of a man he ete
                  wyth ſubtyl penſyl was paynted thys ſtorie
                  In redoutynge of Marce and of hys glorye.
                  Nowe to the temple of Dyane the chaſte
                  As ſhortly as I can I wol me haſte
                  To tel you al the dyſcriptyoun
                  Depaynted ben the walles vp and doun
                  Of huntyng and of ſhamfaſt chaſtyte
                  There ſawe I howe woful Caliſtope
                  when that Dyane greued was wyth her
                  was turned fro a woman to a bere
                  And afterwarde was ſhe made ye lode ſterre
                  Thus was it paynted, I can ſaye no ferre
                  Her ſ
                        ••
                     ne is eke a ſterre, as men may ſe
                  There ſawe I Dane turned vnto a tre
                  I meane not the goddeſſe Dyane
                  But Venus doughter, which ye hight Dane
                  There ſawe I Atheon an herte ymaked
                  For vengeaūce yt he ſawe Dyane al naked
                  I ſawe how yt his hoūdes haue hym caught
                  And freten him, for they knewe hym naught
                  Yet ypaynted was a lytel ferthermore
                  Howe Athalant hunted the wylde bore
                  And Meliager, and many other mo
                  For whych Dyane wrought hym care & wo
                  There ſawe I many another wonder ſtorye
                  whych me lyſt not to drawe in memorye
                  This goddeſſe ful wel vp an harte ſhe is ſete
                  wyth ſmale houndes al aboute her fete
                  And vnderneth her fete, ſhe had a moone
                  waryng it was, and ſhulde wane ſoone
                  In gaudy grene, her ſtatue clothed was
                  wyth bowe in hande, and arowes in a caas
                  Her eyen caſt ſhe ful lowe adoun
                  There Pluto hath hys darke regioun
                  A woman trauelynge was her before
                  But for her chylde, ſo longe was vnbore
                  Ful pytouſly Lucyna gan ſhe cal
                  And ſayd helpe, for thou mayſt beſt of al
                  wel coude he paynte lyuelye that it wrought
                  wyth many a floreyn he the hewes bought
               
               
                  Now then theſe lyſtes made, & Theſeus
                  That at hys great coſt hath arayed thus
                  The temples, and the theatre euerydel
                  When it was done, it lyked him wōder wel
                  But ſtynte I wol of Theſeus a lyte
                  And ſpeke of Palamon and of Arcyte
                  The daye approcheth of her returnynge
                  That euerych ſhulde an .C. knyghtes brynge
                  The batayle to darreyne, as I you tolde
                  And to Athenes, her couenautes to holde
                  Hath euerich of hem brought an .C. knightes
                  wel armed for the warre, at al ryghtes
                  And ſykerly, there trowed many a man
                  That neuer ſythnes the worlde began
                  As for to ſpeake of knyghthode, of her honde
                  As farre as god hath made ſee or londe
                  Nas of ſo fewe, ſo noble a company
                  For euery wyght, that loued chyualry
                  And wolde hys thākes haue a paſſing name
                  Hath prayed, that he myght be of that game
                  And wel was him, that therto choſen was
                  For yf there fel to morowe ſuch a caas
                  Ye knowe wel, that euery luſty knyght
                  That loueth paramours, & hath hys myght
                  were it in Englande, or els where
                  They wolde fayne wyllen to be there
                  To fyght for a lady, ah, benedicite
                  It were a luſty ſyght for to ſe
                  And ryght ſo fardē they wyth Palamon
                  wyth hym there went knyghtes many on
                  Some wolde ben armed in an habergeon
                  And in a breſt plate, wyth a lyght gyppion
                  And ſome wold haue a payre of plates large
                  And ſome wold haue a pruce ſheld or a targe
                  Some wolde be armed on hys legges wele
                  And haue an axe, & ſome a mace of ſtele
                  There nas none newe gyſe, that it nas olde
                  Armed were they, as I haue you tolde
                  Euerych after hys opinion
                  ¶Ther mayſt yu ſe comyng wyth Palamon
                  Lygurge hym ſelfe, the great kinge of Trace
                  Blacke was his berde, & māly was his face
                  The ſercles of hys eyen in hys heed
                  They glouden betwyxte yelowe and reed
                  And lyke a lyon loked he aboute
                  wyth kemped heeres on his browes ſtoute
                  His lymmes great, hys brawnes ſtronge
                  His ſhoulders brode, his armes roūde & lōge
                  And as the gyſe was in hys countre
                  Ful hye vpon a chare of golde ſtode he
                  wyth foure whyte bulles in the trays
                  In ſtede of a cote armure, ouer hys harnays
                  wyth nayles yelowe, & bryght as any golde
                  He hath a beares ſkyn, cole blacke for olde
                  His lōge heare was kempt behynd his backe
                  
                     As any rauens fether it ſhone for blacke
                  A wreth of gold arme great, of huge weight
                  Vpon his heed, ſet ful of ſtones bryght
                  Of fyne rubyes and of dyamandes
                  About hys chare ther wente whyt allaundes
                  Twenty and mo, as great as any ſtere
                  To hunten at the lyon, or at the wilde bere
                  And folowed hym, wyth moſel faſt ybounde
                  Colers of golde, and 
                        •
                     orrettes yfyled rounde
                  An hundred lordes had he in hys route
                  Armed ful wel, with hertes ſterne and ſtoute
               
               
                  Wyth Arcite, in ſtoryes as men fynde
                  The great Emetrius, the kynge of Ynde
                  Vpon a ſtede bay, trapped in ſtele
                  Couered wyth a cloth of golde diapred wele
                  Came rydyng lyke the god of armes Marce
                  Hys cote armure was of cloth of Trace
                  Couched wyth perle, whyte, rounde & gret
                  His ſadel was of brent golde newe ybet
                  A mantel vpon hys ſhoulders hangyng
                  Bret full of rubyes, reed as fyre ſparklyng
                  Hys cryſpe heere lyke rynges was yronne
                  And yt was yelowe, & gletering as ye Sonne
                  Hys noſe was hye, hys eyen bryght cytryn
                  Hys lyppes ruddy, hys colour was ſanguyn
                  A fewe frekles in hys face yſpreynte
                  Betwexte yelowe, & ſomdele blacke ymeynte
                  And as a lyon he hys eyen ceſte
                  Of fyue and twenty yere hys age I geſte
                  Hys berde was wel begonne for to ſprynge
                  Hys voyce was as a trompet ſownynge
                  Vpon hys heed he weared of laurer grene
                  A garlande freſhe and luſty for to ſene
                  Vpon hys hande he bare for hys delyte
                  And Egle tame, as any lylly whyte
                  An hundred lordes had he wyth hym there
                  Al armed ſaue her heedes in her gere
                  Ful rychely in al maner thynges
                  For truſteth wel, that erles, dukes, & kynges
                  were gathered in thys noble companye
                  For loue, and for encreace of chyualrye
                  About this kinge there ran on euery parte
                  Ful many a tame lyon and lyberte
                  And in thys wyſe, theſe lordes al & ſome
                  Ben on the ſonday to the cytie come
                  About prime, and in the towne alyght.
                  ¶This Theſeꝰ, this duke this worthy kniȝt
                  when he had brought hem into hys cyte
                  And inned hem, euerych after hys degre
                  He feeſteth hem, and doth ſo great laboure
                  To eaſen hem, and done hem al honoure
                  That yet men wenen that no mans wyt
                  Of none eſtate coude amende it
                  The mynſtralcye, the ſeruyce at the feeſt
                  The great gyftes, to the moſte and leeſt
                  The rich array, throughout Theſeus paleys
                  Ne who ſat fyrſt ne laſt vpon the deys
                  what ladyes fayreſt ben or beſt daūcyng
                  Or whych of hem can beſt daunce or ſyng
                  Ne who moſte felyngly ſpeketh of loue
                  Ne what haukes ſytten or perchen aboue
                  Ne what houndes lyggen on ye floure adoun
                  Of al thys now make I no mencion
                  But al the effecte, that thynketh my the beſt
                  Now cometh ye point, herkeneth yf you leſt
               
               
                  The ſonday at night, or day begā to ſpryng
                  when Palamon the larke herde ſyng
                  Although it were not day by houres two
                  Yet ſonge the larke, & Palamon ryght tho
                  with holy herte and with an hye corage
                  He roſe vp towenden on his pylgrimage
                  Vnto the blyſful Cytherea benygne
                  I meane Venus honorable and dygne
                  And in her hour, he walketh forthe a paas
                  Vnto the lyſtes, there the temple was
                  And downe he kneleth, & with humble chere
                  And herte ſore, he ſayd as ye ſhal here
                  ¶Fayreſt of fayre: O lady myne Venus
                  Doughter of Ioue, and ſpouſe to Vulcanus
                  Thou glader of the mount of Cytheron
                  For thylke loue thou haddeſt to Adon
                  Haue pyte of my bytter teares ſmerte
                  And take my humble prayer at thyne herte
                  Alas, I ne haue no langage to tel
                  The effecte, ne the turment of myne hel
                  Myne hert may not myne harmes bewraye
                  I am ſo confuſed, that I can not ſaye
                  But mercy lady bryght, that woſt wele
                  My thought, & ſeeſt what harmes yt I fele
                  Conſyder al thys, and rue vpon my ſore
                  As wyſly as I ſhal for euermore
                  Emforth my myght, thy true ſeruaunt be
                  And holde warre alwaye wyth chaſtite
                  That make I myne auowe, ſo ye me helpe
                  I kepe not of armes for to yelpe
                  Ne I ne aſke to morowe to haue victory
                  Ne renome in thys caſe, ne vayne glory
                  Of pryſe of armes, to blowen vp & doun
                  But wolde haue fulle poſſeſſyoun
                  Of Emely, and dye in her ſeruyce
                  Finde thou yt maner how, & in what wyſe
                  I retche not, but it may better be
                  
                     To haue victory of hem, or they of me
                  So that I haue my lady in myn armes
                  For though ſo be that Mars is god of armes
                  Your vertue is ſo great in Heuen aboue
                  That yf you lyſt, I ſhall wel haue my loue
                  Thy temple ſhal I worſhyp euer mo
                  And on thyn auter, where I ryde or go
                  I wol don ſacrifyce, and fyres bete
                  And yf ye wol not ſo, my lady ſwete
                  Than pray I you, to morowe with a ſpere
                  That Arcyte me through the herte bere
                  Than recke I not, whan I haue loſt my lyfe
                  Thoughe Arcyte wynne her to wyfe
                  Thys is the effecte and ende of my prayere
                  Yeue me my lady, thou blyſful lady dere
                  whan the oriſon was done of Palamon
                  His ſacrifyce he dyd, and that anon
                  Ful pytouſly, with al cyrcumſtaunces
                  Al tel I nat as nowe hys obſeruaunces.
                  But at the laſte, the ſtatue of Venus ſhoke
                  And made a ſygne, wherby that he toke
                  That hys prayere accepted was that day
                  For though the ſygne ſhewed a delay
                  Yet wiſt he wel, that graunted was his bone
                  And wt glad hert he went him hom ful ſone
               
               
                  The thyrde houre in equal that Palamon
                  Began to Venus temple for to gon
                  Tp roſe the ſonne, and vp roſe Emelye
                  And vnto the temple of Dyane gan hye
                  Her maydens, the whiche thyder were lad
                  Ful redely with hem the fyre they had
                  The enſence, the clothes, & the remenaunt al
                  That to the ſacrifyce longen ſhall
                  The hornes ful of meethe, as was the gyſe
                  There lacked nought to don her ſacrifyce
                  Smokyng the temple, ful of clothes fayre
                  This Emely, with herte debonayre
                  Her body wyſhe, with water of a wel
                  But how ſhe dyd ryght I dare nat tel
                  But it be any thyng in generall
                  And yet it were a game to here it all
                  To him that meaneth wel, it were no charge
                  But it is good a man be at his large
                  Her bright heare was vnkēpt & vntreſſed all
                  A crowne of a grene oke vnſeryall
                  Vpon her heed ſet ful fayre and mete
                  Two fyres on the aulter gan ſhe bete
                  And dyd her thynges, as men may beholde
                  In Stace of Thebes, and theſe bookes olde
                  whan kenled was the fyre, wt pitous chere
                  Vnto Dyane ſhe ſpake as ye may here
                  ¶O chaſte goddeſſe of the woddes grene
                  To whom both heuen & erthe and ſee is ſene
                  Quene of the reygne of pluto, derke & lowe
                  Goddeſſe of maydēs, yt myn hert hath know
                  Ful many a yere, and woſte what I deſyre
                  As kepe me fro the vengeaunce of thyn yre
                  That Acteon abought cruelly
                  Chaſte goddeſſe, wel woſte thou that I
                  Deſyre to ben a mayde al my lyfe
                  Ne neuer wol I be loue ne wyfe
                  I am thou (woſte wel) of thy company
                  A mayde, and loue huntyng and venery
                  And for to walken in the woddes wylde
                  And not for to ben a wyfe, & ben with chylde
                  Nought wyl I knowe companye of man
                  Nowe helpe me lady ſythe ye may and can
                  For tho thre formes that thou haſte in the
                  And Palamon, that hath ſuche a loue to me
                  And eke Arcyte, that loueth me ſo ſore
                  This grace I pray the, withouten more
                  And ſende loue and peace bytwyxt hem two
                  And fro me turne away her hertes ſo
                  That al her hotte loue, and her deſyre
                  And al her buſy turment, and al her fyre
                  Be queynt, or turned in an other place
                  And if ſo be thou wolte not do me that grace
                  Or yf ſo be my deſteny be ſhapen ſo
                  That I ſhal nedes haue one of hem two
                  As ſende me hym that moſte deſyreth me.
                  Beholde goddeſſe of clene chaſtyte
                  The bytter teares, that on my chekes fal
                  Syn thou arte a mayde, and keper of vs all
                  My maydenhede thou kepe, and wel cōſerue
                  And whyle I lyue, a mayden wol I yt ſerue.
                  ¶The fyres brenne vpon the auter clere
                  whyle Emely was thus in her prayere
                  But ſodenly ſhe ſawe a thyng queynte
                  For ryght anon, one of the fyres queynte
                  And quycked agayn, and after that anon
                  That other fyre was queynte, and al agon
                  And as it queynte it made a whyſtlyng
                  As don theſe wete brondes in her brennyng
                  And at the brondes ende, out ran anone
                  As it were bloddy droppes many one
                  For whiche ſo ſore agaſte was Emelye
                  That ſhe was wel nye madde, & gan to crye
                  For ſhe ne wyſte what it ſygnyfyed
                  But onely for the feare thus ſhe cryed
                  And wepte, that it was pyte for to here
                  And therwithal Dyane gan to apere
                  With bowe in honde, right as an huntereſſe
                  And ſayd doughter, ſtynte thyn heuyneſſe
                  
                     Amonge the goddes hye it is affyrmed
                  And by eterne worde, wrytten & confyrmed
                  Thou ſhalt be wedded to one of tho
                  That haue for the ſo much care and wo
                  But vnto whych of hem I may not tel
                  Farewel, for I may no lenger dwel
                  The fyres, whych on myne auter brenne
                  Shal declaren, er that thou gon henne
                  Thys auenture of loue, as in thys caſe
                  And with ye worde, the arowes in the caſe
                  Of the goddes, clatteren faſt and rynge
                  And forth ſhe went, and made vaneſhynge
                  For whych thys Emely aſtonyed was
                  And ſayd: what mounteth thys, alas
                  I put me vnder thy protection
                  Dyane, and vnder thy dyſpoſycion
                  And home ſhe goth the next waye
                  This is the effect, there is nomore to ſaye.
                  The nexte houre of Mars folowyng this
                  Arcite vnto the temple walked is
                  On fyers Mars, to done hys ſacrifyſe
                  wyth al the myght of hys paynem wyſe
                  wyth pytous herte, and hye deuocion
                  Ryght thus to Mars he ſayd hys oriſon
                  ¶O ſtronge god, that in the reygnes colde
                  Of trace honoured arte, and lorde yholde
                  And haſt in euery reygne and euery lande
                  Of armes, al the brydle in thyne hande
                  And hem fortuneſt, as thy lyſt deuyſe
                  Accepte of me my pytous ſacrifyce
                  Yf ſo be my thought may deſerue
                  And that my might be worthy for to ſerue
                  Thy godhede, that I maye ben one of thyne
                  Then praye I the, that thou rue on my pyne
                  For thylke payne, and thylke hotte fyre
                  In whech thou brenteſt whylom for deſyre
                  when thou vſedeſt the fayre beaute
                  Of fayre yonge freſhe Venus fre
                  And haddeſt her in thyne armes, at thy wyll
                  Al though thou ones on a tyme myſſyll
                  when Vulcanus had caught the in hys laas
                  And founde thy lyggynge by hys wyfe alas
                  For thylke ſorowe, that was in thyne herte
                  Haue ruth as wel on my paynes ſmerte
                  I am yonge and vnconning, as thou woſt
                  And as I trowe, wyth loue offended moſt
                  That euer was any lyues creature
                  For ſhe that doth me al thys wo endure
                  Ne retcheth neuer, where I ſynke or flete
                  And wel I wote, or ſhe me mercy hete
                  I mote wyth ſtrength wyn her in this place
                  And wel I wote, wythout helpe or grace
                  Of the, ne may my ſtrength not auayle
                  Thē helpe me lorde to morow in my batayle
                  For thylke fyre, that whylom brent the
                  As well as the fyre nowe brenneth me
                  And do, that I to morowe haue vyctorye
                  Myn be the trauayle, and thyn be the glorye
                  Thy ſouerayne tēple wol I moſte honouren
                  Of any place, and alwaye moſt labouren
                  In thy pleaſaunce, and in thy 
                        •
                     raftes ſtrōge
                  And in thy temple, I wol my baner honge
                  And al the armes of my companye
                  And euermore, vntyl the daye I dye
                  Eterne fyre I wol beforne the fynde
                  And eke to thys auowe I wyl me bynde
                  My berd, my heare, yt hongeth lowe adoun
                  That neuer yet felte offenſioun
                  Of raſour ne of ſhere, I wol the yeue
                  And bene thy true ſeruaunt whyle I lyue
                  Now lorde haue ruth vpon my ſorowes ſore
                  Yeue me the victory, I aſke the nomore
                  ¶The prayer ſtynte of Arcite the ſtronge
                  The rynges on the temple dore they ronge
                  And eke the dores clatren ful faſte
                  Of whych Arcite ſomwhat him agaſt.
               
               
                  The fyres brennen vpon the auter bryght
                  That it gan al the temple lyght
                  A ſwete ſmel anone the grounde vp yaſe
                  And Arcite anone hys honde vp haſe
                  And more enſence into the fyre he caſte
                  wyth other rytes mo, and at the laſte
                  The ſtatue of Mars begā his hauberk ryng
                  And with that ſoūde he herde a murmuryng
                  Ful lowe and dym, that ſayd thus: victory
                  For which he yaue to Mars honour & glory
                  And thus wyth ioye, and hope wel to fare
                  Arcite anone into hys ynne is fare
                  As fayne as foule is of the bryght ſonne
                  And ryght anone ſuch a ſtryfe is begonne
                  For thylke grauntynge, in the heuen aboue
                  Bytwyrt Venus, the goddes of loue
                  And Mars the ſterne god armypotent
                  That Iupiter was buſy it to ſtynte
                  Tyl that the pale Saturnus the colde
                  That knewe ſo many auentures olde
                  Founde in hys experience and arte
                  That he ful ſone hath pleaſed euery parte
                  And ſoth is ſayd, elde hath great auauntage
                  In elde is both wyſedome and vſage
                  Men maye the olde out ren, but not out rede
                  Saturne anone, to ſtyntē ſtryfe and drede
                  Al be it that it be agayne hys kynde
                  
                     Of al thys ſtryffe he can remedy fynde
                  My dere doughter Venus, ꝙ Saturne
                  My courſe that hath ſo wyde for to turne
                  Hath more power then wote any man
                  Myn is the drenchynge in the ſee ſo wan
                  Myne is the priſon in the derke cote
                  Myn is ye ſtrāglyng & ye hāgyng by ye throte
                  The murmure, and the churles rebellyng
                  The groynyng, and the priuy enpoyſonyng
                  I do vengeaūce and playne correction
                  whyle I dwell in the ſygne of the lyon
                  Myne is the ruyne of the hye halles
                  The fallyng of the toures and of the walles
                  Vpon the mynor, or vpon the carpenters
                  I ſlewe Sampſon ſhakyng the pyllers
                  And myne ben the maladyes colde
                  The derke treaſons, and the caſtels olde
                  My lokynge is the father of peſtilence
                  Nowe wepe nomore, I ſhal do my diligence
                  That Palamon, that is thyne owne knyght
                  Shal haue hys lady, as thou hym behyght
                  Thogh Mars ſhal helpe his kniȝt natheles
                  Betwixt you it mote ſomtyme be pees
                  Albe ye not of one complection
                  That cauſeth al daye ſuch deuiſion
                  I am thyne ayle, redy at thy wyl
                  wepe nomore, I wol thy luſt fulfyl
                  ¶Now wol I ſtyntē of theſe goddes aboue
                  Of Mars, and of Venus goddes of loue
                  And playnly I wol tellen you as I can
                  The great effecte, of whych that I began.
               
               
                  Great was ye feeſt in Athenes that day
                  And eke that luſty ſeaſon in May
                  Made euery wyght to ben in ſuch pleaſaūce
                  That al that day iuſten they and daunce
                  And ſpenten it in Venus hye ſeruyce
                  But bycauſe that they ſhulden aryſe
                  Erly, for to ſe the great ſyght
                  Vnto her reſt went they at nyght
                  And on the morowe when day gan ſprynge
                  Of horſe & harneys, noyſe and claterynge
                  There was in the hoſtelryes al aboute
                  And to the palays rode there many a route
                  Of lordes, vpon ſtedes and palfreys
                  There mayſt thou ſe deuyſyng of harneys
                  So vncouth, ſo rych, & wrought ſo wele
                  Of goldſmethry, of braudry, and of ſtele
                  The ſheldes bryght teſters and trappers
                  Gold hewē helmes, hauberkes & cot armers
                  Lordes in paramentes, on her courſers
                  Knyghtes of retenue, and eke ſquyers
                  Naylynge the ſpeares, and helmes bokeling
                  Gyggyng of ſheldes with layners lacynge
                  There as nede is, they were nothynge ydel
                  The fominge ſtedes on the golden brydel
                  Gnawyng, and faſt the armurers alſo
                  wyth fyle and hammer, rydyng to and fro
                  Yemen on fote, and comunes many one
                  wyth ſhorte ſtaues, thycke as they may gone
                  Pypes, trompes, nakoners, and clarions
                  That in the batayle blowen blody ſowns
                  The palays ful of people vp and doun
                  Here thre, there ten, holdynge her queſtion
                  Deuinyng of theſe Theban knyghtes two
                  Some ſayd thus, ſome ſayd it ſhulde be ſo
                  Some helde wyth hym with ye blacke berde
                  Some wt the balled, ſome wt the thick herde
                  Some ſayd he loked grym, and wold fyght
                  He hath a ſparth of twenty poūde of weight
                  Thus was the hal ful of deuinynge
                  Longe after the ſonne gan to ſprynge
                  The great Theſeus of hys ſlepe gan wake
                  wyth mynſtralſye & noyſe that they make
                  Helde yet the chambre of hys palays ryche
                  Tyl that the Theban knyghtes, both yliche
                  Honoured weren, and into the place yfette.
                  ¶Duke Theſeus is at the wyndowe ſette
                  Arayed ryght as he were a god in trone
                  The people preaſed thyderwarde ful ſone
                  Hym for to ſene, and done hym hye reuerēce
                  And eke for to here hys heſt and hys ſentence
                  An heraude on a ſcaffolde made an oo
                  Tyl al the noyſe of the people was ydo
                  And when he ſawe the people of noyſe ſtyl
                  Thus ſhewed he the myghty dukes wyl.
               
               
                  ¶The lorde hath of hys hye dyſcrecion
                  Conſydred, that it were dyſtruccion
                  To gentle bloode, to fyghten in thys gyſe
                  Of mortal batayle, now in thys empryſe
                  wherfore to ſhapen, that they ſhal not dye
                  He wol hys fyrſt purpoſe modefye
                  No man therfore, vp payne of loſſe of lyfe
                  No maner ſhorte, polaxe, ne ſhorte knyfe
                  In to the lyſtes ſende, or thytherbrynge
                  Ne ſhort ſword to ſtycke with point bytynge
                  No man ne drawe, ne beare it by hys ſyde
                  Ne no man ſhal to hys felow ryde
                  But one courſe, wyth a ſharp groūden ſpere
                  Foyne yf hym lyſt on fote, hym ſelfe to were
                  And he that is at myſchefe, ſhalbe take
                  And not ſlayne, but brought to the ſtake
                  That ſhall bene ordeyned on eyther ſyde
                  But thyther he ſhal by force, and there abyde
                  And yf ſo fal, that the chieftayne be take
                  
                     On eyther ſyde, or els ſleene hys make
                  No lenger ſhal the turnament laſte
                  God ſpede you, goeth and layeth on faſte
                  with ſwordes & lōge maſes fyghtē your fyl
                  Goth now your waye, this is the lordes wyl
                  ¶The voyce of the people touched heuen
                  So loude cryed they wyth mery ſteuen
                  God ſaue ſuche a lorde, that is ſo good
                  He wylleth no deſtruction of blood.
                  Vp goeth the trompes and the melodye
                  And to the lyſtes, rydeth ſo the companye
                  By ordynaunce, throughout the cytie large
                  Hōged wyth cloth of golde, & not wyth ſarge
                  Ful lyke o lorde thys noble duke gan ryde
                  Theſe two Thebans on euery ſyde
                  And after rode the quene and Emelye
                  And after that an other companye
                  Of one and other, after her degre
                  And thus they paſſen throughout the cytie
                  And to the lyſtes comen they be by tyme
                  It nas not of the daye yet fully pryme
                  when ſet was Theſeus full ryche and hye
                  Ipolita the quene, and Emelye
                  And other ladyes in degrees aboute
                  Vnto the ſeates preaſeth al the route
                  And weſtward, thrugh ye yates vnder marte
                  Arcite and eke an hundred of hys parte
                  wyth baner reed, is entred ryght anon
                  And in the ſelue momet entred Palamon
                  Is, vnder Venus, eſtwarde in that place
                  wyth baner whyte, & hardy chere & face
                  And in al the worlde, to ſeken vp and doun
                  So euen wythout variacion
                  There nas ſuch companyes twey
                  For there nas none ſo wyſe that coude ſey
                  That any had of other auauntage
                  Of worthyneſſe, ne of eſtate, ne age
                  So euen were they choſe to geſſe
                  And in to the renges fayre they hem dreſſe
                  when that her names red were euerychone
                  That in her nombre, gyle were there none
                  Tho were the gates ſhyt, & cryed was loude
                  Do now your deuer yonge knightes proude
                  ¶The heraudes left her prycking vp & doun
                  Now ryngen trompes loude and clarioun
                  There is nomore to ſaye, eſte and weſte
                  In goth the ſharpe ſperes ſadly in the arreſt
                  In goth the ſharpe ſpurres into the ſyde
                  There ſe men who can iuſt, & who can ryde
                  There ſhyueren ſhaftes, vpon ſheldes thycke
                  He feleth through the herte ſpoune the pryck
                  Vp ſpringeth ye ſper
                        •
                     s, twenty fote on hyght
                  Out goth the ſwordes, as the ſyluer bryght
                  The helmes they to heawe, and to ſhrede
                  Out burſt ye blood, wyth ſterne ſtremes rede
                  wyth myghty maces, the bones they to breke
                  He through ye thyckeſt of ye thrōge gan threke
                  Ther ſtomblen ſtedes ſtrōge, & down gon al
                  He rolled vnder the foote as dothe a bal
                  He foyneth on hys fete wyth a tronchoun
                  And he hurleth wyth hys horſe adoun
                  He through the body is hurte, and ſyth ytake
                  Maugre hys heed, & brought vnto the ſtake
                  As forward was, ryght there he muſt abyde
                  An other is ladde on that other ſyde
                  And ſomtyme doth hem Theſeus to reſte
                  Hem to refeſhe, and drynke yf hem leſte
                  Full ofte a day haue theſe Thebans two
                  Togyther met, and done eche other wo
                  Vnhorſed hath eche other of hem twey
                  Ther was no tygre, in the vale of Galaphey
                  when her whelpe is ſtole, when it is lyte
                  So cruel on the hunte, as is Arcite
                  For ielous herte, vpon thys Palamon
                  Ne in Belmary, there is no fel lyon
                  That hunted is, or for hys honger woode
                  Ne of hys prey, deſyreth ſo the bloode
                  As Palamon to ſlee hys foe Arcite
                  The ielouſe ſtrokes on her helmes byte
                  Out renneth ye bloode on both her ſydes rede
                  Somtyme an ende there is of euery dede
                  For er the Sunne vnto the reſt wente
                  The ſtronge kynge Emetrius gon hente
                  Thys Palamon, as he fought wt this Arcite
                  And made hys ſworde depe in hys fleſh byte
                  And by force of twenty is he take
                  Vn yolden, and drawen to the ſtake
                  And in the reſcous of thys Palamon
                  The ſtronge kynge Lygurge is borne adoun
                  And kynge Emetrius, for al hys ſtrength
                  Is borne out of hys ſadle a ſwordes length
                  So hurte hym Palamon or he were take
                  But al for nought, he was brought to ye ſtake
                  Hys hardy herte myght hym helpe naught
                  He muſt abyde, when that he was caught
                  By force, and eke by compoſycion
                  Who ſoroweth now but woful Palamon
                  That more no more gon agayne to fyght
                  ¶And when that Theſeus had ſene ye ſyght
                  He cryed hoe: no more, for it is don
                  Ne none ſhal lenger to hys felowe gon
                  I wol be true iuge, and not partye
                  Arcite of Thebes ſhal haue Emelye
                  That by hys fortune hath her fayre ywonne
                  
                     Anon there is a noyſe of people bygonne
                  For ioye of thys, ſo loude and hye withall
                  It ſemed that the lyſtes ſhulde fall
                  What can nowe fayre Venus done aboue?
                  What ſayth ſhe now? what doth ye quene of loue
                  But wepeth ſo, for wātyng of her wil
                  Tyl that her teares on the lyſtes fyll
                  She ſayd: I am a ſhamed doutles
                  Saturne ſayd: doughter holde thy pees
                  Mars hath al his wil his kniȝt hath his bone
                  And by myn heed, thou ſhalt be eaſed ſone
                  ¶The trompes with the loude mynſtralcye
                  The heraudes, that ſo loude yel and crye
                  Ben in her wele, for loue of dan Arcyte
                  But harkeneth me, & ſtynteth noyſe a lyte
                  whyche a myracle there byfell anon
                  The fyers Arcyte had hys helme of ydon
                  And on a courſer, for to ſhewe hys face
                  He pricketh endlonge the large place
                  Lokyng vpwarde vpon Emelye
                  And ſhe ayen hym caſte a frendly eye
                  (For women, as to ſpeke in comune
                  They folowen al the fauour of fortune)
                  And was all hys chere, as in hys herte
                  Out of the grounde a fyre infernal ſterte
                  From Pluto ſent, at the requeſt of Saturne
                  For whiche his horſe for feare gan to turne
                  And lepe a ſyde, and foundred as he lepe
                  And er that Arcyte may taken kepe
                  He pyght hym on the pomell of hys heed
                  That in the place he lay, as he were deed
                  Hys breſt to broſten wyth his ſadel bowe
                  As blacke he lay as any cole or crowe
                  So was the bloode yronne in his face
                  Anon he was brought out of the place
                  wyth herte ſore, to Theſeus paleys
                  Tho was he coruen out of hys harneys
                  And in a bedde ybrought ful fayre and blyue
                  For he was yet in memorye, and on lyue
                  And alway cryeng after Emelye.
                  ¶Duke Theſeus, with al hys companye
                  Is comen home to Athenes hys cyte
                  with al blyſſe and great ſolempnyte
                  Al be it that this auenture was fall
                  He wolde not diſcomforte hem all
                  Men ſayd eke, that Arcyte ſhulde not dye
                  He ſhulde ben yhealed of hys maladye
                  And of an other thyng they were as fayne
                  That of hem al there was none ſlayne
                  Al were they ſore hurte, and namely one
                  That wt aſpere was thronled hys breſt bone
                  Two other woundes, & two broken armes
                  Some had ſalues, and ſome had charmes
                  Fermaces of herbes and eke ſaue
                  They dronken▪ for they wold her lyeues haue
                  For whiche this noble duke, as he wel can
                  Comforteth and honoureth euery man
                  And made reuel al the longe nyght
                  Vnto the ſtraunge lordes, as it was ryght
                  Ne there nas holde no diſcomfortyng
                  But as iuſtes or a tourneyng
                  For ſothly there nas no diſcomfyture
                  For fallyng is holde but an auenture
                  Ne to be ladde by force vnto a ſtake
                  vnyolden and with twenty knyghtes take
                  One perſon a lone withouten any mo
                  And haryed forth by arme, foote, and too
                  And eke hys ſtede driuen forthe with ſtaues
                  With footemen, bothe yemen and knaues
                  It was ar
                        •
                     tted hym no vilanye
                  There may no man cleape it cowardye
                  For whiche anon, duke Theſeus dyd crye
                  To ſtynten al rancour and enuye
                  They grete as wel of one ſyde as of other
                  And eyther ſyde ylyke, as others brother
                  And yaue hym ryghtes after her degre
                  And fully helde a feeſt dayes thre
                  And coueyed the Knyghtes worthyly
                  Out of hys towne, a dayes iourney largely
                  And home went euery man the ryght way
                  Ther was no more, but farwel & haue good day.
                  Of this batayle, I wol no more endyte
                  But ſpeke of Palamon and Arcyte
                  Swelleth the breſt of Arcyte, and the ſore
                  Encreaſeth at his herte more and more
                  The clotered bloode, for any leche crafte
                  Corrumped, and is in hys body lafte
                  That neyther veynbloode, ne ventouſyng
                  Ne drynke of herbes, may be helpyng
                  By vertue expulſed, or anymall
                  For thylke vertue cleaped naturall
                  Ne may the venym voyde, ne expell
                  The pypes of hys longes began to ſwell
                  And euery lacerte, in hys breſt adown
                  Is ſhent wyth venym and corruption
                  Hym gayneth neyther, for to get hys lyfe
                  Vomyte vpwarde, ne downwarde laxatyfe
                  All is to bruſte thylke regyon
                  Nature hath no domynacyon
                  And certainly ther as nature w
                        •
                     l nat wirche
                  Farwel phiſyke, go beare the corſe to chirche
                  Thys is al & ſome, that Arcyte muſte dye
                  For whiche he ſendeth after Emelye
                  
                     And Palamon hys coſyn dere
                  Than ſayd he thus, as ye ſhall after here.
                  ¶Nought may my woful ſpyrit in my herte
                  Declare a poynte of al my ſorowes ſmerte
                  To you my lady, that I loue moſte
                  But I bequethe the ſeruyce of my goſte
                  To you abouen any creature
                  Syn that my lyfe may no lenger dure
                  Alas the wo, alas my paynes ſtronge
                  That I for you haue ſuffred and ſo longe
                  Alas the dethe, alas myn Emely
                  Alas the partyng of our company
                  Alas myn hertes quene, alas my lyues wyfe
                  Myn hertes lady, ender of my lyfe
                  What is the worlde, what aſken mē to haue
                  Nowe with his loue, now in his colde graue
                  Alone withouten any company
                  Farwel my ſwete foe, myn Emely
                  And ſofte take me in your armes twey
                  For the loue of god, herkeneth what I ſey.
                  ¶I haue here with my coſyn Palamon
                  Had ſtryfe and rancour, many a day agon
                  For loue of you, and for my ielouſye
                  And Iupiter ſo wyſſely my ſoule gye
                  To ſpeken of a ſeruaunt properly
                  with cyrcumſtaunces al trewly
                  That is to ſay, trouth, honour, & knyghthede
                  wyſedom, humbleſſe, eſtate, and hye kynrede
                  Fredom, and all that longeth to that arte
                  So Iupiter haue of my ſoule parte
                  As in this worlde ryght now knowe I non
                  So worthy to be loued as Palamon
                  That ſerueth you, and woll don all hys lyfe
                  And yf that ye ſhall euer ben a wyfe
                  For yet not Palamon, the gentyll man
                  And with that worde his ſpeche fayle begā
                  
                  For from hys fete vnto hys breſt was come
                  The colde of dethe, that had hym nome
                  And yet more ouer, for in hys armes two
                  The vytal ſtrength is loſte, and al ago
                  Saue onely the intellecte, without more
                  That dwelled in his herte ſycke and ſore
                  Gan faylen, whan the herte felte dethe
                  Duſked hys eyen two, and fayled brethe
                  But on hys lady, yet caſte he hys eye
                  Hys laſte worde was, mercy Emelye
                  Hys ſpyrit chaunged, and out went there
                  whytherwarde I can not tel, ne where
                  Therfore I ſtynte, I am no diuynyſtre
                  Of ſoules fynde I not in this regyſtre
                  Ne me lyſt not thylke opinyon to tell
                  Of hem, though they writen wher they dwel
                  Arcyte is colde, that Mars hys ſoule gye
                  Nowe woll I ſpeke forthe of Emelye.
                  ¶Shright Emely, and howlen Palamon
                  And Theſeus his ſuſter vp toke anon
                  Swounyng, & bare her fro hys corſe away
                  what helpeth it to tarry forthe the day
                  To tellen how ſhe wept bothe euē & morowe
                  For in ſuche caſe women haue ſuche ſorowe
                  whan that her huſbandes ben fro hem go
                  That for the more parte they ſorowen ſo
                  Or els fallen in ſuche maladye
                  That at the laſte, certaynly they dye
                  Infinyte ben the ſorowes and the teres
                  Of olde folke, and folke of tender yeres
                  In al the towne, for dethe of this Theban
                  For hym there wepeth bothe chylde and mā
                  
                  So great wepyng was there not certayne
                  whan Hector was brought, al freſhe iſlayn
                  To Troy alas, the pyte that was there
                  Cratchyng of chekes, rentyng eke of here
                  why woldeſt thou be deed, thus women crye
                  And haddeſt golde ynoughe, and Emelye?
                  No man myght glade Theſeus
                  Sauyng hys olde father Egeus
                  That knewe thys worldes tranſmutacion
                  As he had ſene it, bothe vp and doun
                  Ioye after wo, and wo after gladneſſe
                  And ſhewed hym enſamples and lykneſſe
                  Ryght as there dyed neuer man, ꝙ he
                  That he ne lyued in erthe in ſome degre
                  Ryght ſo there lyued neuer man, he ſayde
                  In al thys world, that ſomtyme he ne deyde
                  Thys world is but a thorowfare full of wo
                  And we ben pylgrymes, paſſyng to and fro
                  Deth is an ende of euery worldes ſore.
                  And ouer al thys yet ſayd he moch more
                  To thys effecte, ful wyſely to exhorte
                  The people, that they ſhulde hem recomfort
                  Duke Theſeus with al hys buſy cure
                  Caſteth nowe, where that the ſepulture
                  Of good Arcyte, ſhall beſt ymaked be
                  And eke moſte honorable of degre
                  And at the laſte he toke concluſyon
                  That there as Arcyte and Palamon
                  Had for loue, the batayle hem bytwene
                  That in the ſame ſelue groue, ſwete & grene
                  There as he had his amerous deſyres
                  Hys complaynte, & for loue hys hotte fyres
                  He wolde make a fyre, in whiche the offys
                  Funeral he myght hem al accomplys
                  He hath anon cōmaunded to hacke and hewe
                  The okes olde, and lay hem al on arewe
                  
                     In culpons, wel arayed for to brenne
                  His offycers with ſwyfte foote they renne
                  And ryght anon at hys commaundement
                  And after Theſeus hath yſente
                  After a beere, and it all ouer ſpradde
                  Wyth clothe of golde, the rycheſt that he had
                  And of the ſame ſute he clothed Arcyte
                  Vpon hys handes hys gloues whyte
                  Eke on hys heed a crowne of laurer grene
                  And in his hande a ſworde ful bright & kene
                  He loyde hym bare the viſage on the bere
                  Therwith he wepte, that pyte was to here
                  And for the people ſhulde ſene hym all
                  Whan it was day, he brought hym to ye hall
                  That roreth of the cry & of the ſorowes ſoun
                  Tho gan this woful theban Palamon
                  with glytering berde, & ruddy ſhynyng heres
                  In clothes blacke, dropped al wyth teres
                  And paſſyng other of wepyng Emely
                  The rufulleſt of all the company.
                  And in as moche as the ſeruyce ſhulde be
                  The more noble, and ryche in hys degre
                  Duke Theſeus let forthe the ſtedes bryng
                  That trapped were in ſtele all gleteryng
                  And couered with the armes of dan Arcyte
                  Vpon theſe ſtedes great and whyte
                  Ther ſaten folke, of which one bare his ſheld
                  Another hys ſpeare, in hys hande helde
                  The thyrde bare with him a bowe turkes
                  Of brent golde was the caſe & eke the harnes
                  And ryden forthe a pace with ſory chere
                  Towarde the groue, as ye ſhal after here.
                  ¶The nobleſt of the grekes, that there were
                  Vpon her ſhuldres caryed the bere
                  With ſlacke pace, and eyen reed and wete
                  Throughout the cyte, by the mayſter ſtrete
                  That ſprad was al wt blak, & that wōder hye
                  Ryght of the ſame is the ſtrete ywrye
                  Vpon the ryght hande wente Egeus
                  And on the other ſyde duke Theſeus
                  With veſſels in her hande, of golde full fyne
                  Al ful of hony, mylke, bloode, and wyne
                  Eke Palamon, with full great company
                  And after that, came wofull Emely
                  With fyre in hande, as was yt tyme the gyſe
                  To don the offyce of funeral ſeruyſe
                  Hye labour, and ful great apparaylyng
                  Was at ſeruyce, and at fyre makyng
                  That with his grene toppe the heuē raught
                  And twenty fadome of brede armes ſtraught
                  This is to ſayn, the bowes were ſo brode
                  Of ſtrawe firſt ther was layde many a lode.
                  But how the fyre was maked vp on height
                  And eke the names, howe the trees heyght
                  As oke, firre, beche, aſpe, elder, elme, popelere
                  Wyllo, holm, plane, boxe, cheſteyn, laulere
                  Maple, thorne, beche, ewe, haſel, whipultre
                  How they were felde, ſhal nat be tolde for me
                  Ne howe the goddes ronne vp and doun
                  Diſheryted of her abytacioun
                  In whiche they wonned in reſt and pees
                  Nymphes, Fauny, and amadriades
                  Ne howe the beeſte, ne the byrdes all
                  Fledden for feare, whan the trees fall
                  Ne how the grounde agaſt was of the lyght
                  That was nat wonte to ſe the ſonne bryght
                  Ne how the fyre was couched firſt with ſtre
                  And than with drye ſtyckes clouen a thre
                  And than with grene wodde, and ſpicery
                  And than with clothe of golde and perry
                  And garlondes hāgyng with many a floure
                  The myrre, the enſence, with ſwete odoure
                  Ne howe Arcyte lay amonge al this
                  Ne what rycheſſe aboute hys body is
                  Ne howe that Emely, as was the gyſe
                  Put in the fyre of funeral ſeruyſe
                  Ne how ſhe ſwouned whā maked was ye fyre
                  Ne what ſhe ſpake, ne what was her deſyre
                  Ne what iewelles men in the fyre caſte
                  Whan that the fyre was great & brent faſte
                  Ne how ſome caſt her ſheld, & ſome her ſpere
                  And of her veſtementes, whiche yt they were
                  And cuppes full of wyne, mylke, and bloode
                  In to the fyre, that brent as it were woode
                  Ne howe the grekes with a huge route
                  Thryſe rydden all the fyre aboute
                  Vpō the lefte hande, with a loude ſhowtyng
                  And thryſe with her ſpeares clateryng
                  And thryſe howe the ladyes gan crye
                  Ne how that ladde was homwarde Emelye
                  Ne howe that Arcite is brent to aſſhen colde
                  Ne howe the lyche wake was holde
                  All that nyght, ne howe the grekes play
                  The wake playes, kepe I nat to ſay
                  Who wreſtled beſt naked, wyth oyle anoynt
                  Ne who bare hym beſt in euery poynt
                  I woll not tellen howe they gone
                  whom to Athenes, whan the play is done
                  But ſhortly to the poynt than woll I wende
                  And make of my longe tale an ende.
               
               
                  By proceſſe and by length of yeres
                  All ſtynten is the mornyng and the teres
                  Of grekes, by one generall aſſent
                  
                     Than ſemed me there was a parlement
                  At Athenes, vpon a certayne poynt and caas
                  Amonge the whiche poyntes yſpoken was
                  To haue with certayne countres alyaunce
                  And haue of Thebans fully obeyſaunce
                  For whiche thys noble Theſeus anon
                  Let ſende after thys gentyl Palamon
                  Vnwyſte of him what was ye cauſe & why:
                  But in his blacke clothes ſorowfully
                  He came at hys commaundement on hye
                  Tho ſent Theſeus after Emelye.
                  Whan they were ſet, & huſhte was yt place
                  And Theſeus abydden hath a ſpace
                  Or any worde came from his wyſe breſt
                  Hys eyen ſette he there hym leſt
                  And with ſuche a ſadde vyſage, he ſyked ſtyll
                  And after that, right thus he ſayd hys wyll.
                  ¶The fyrſt mouer of the cauſe aboue
                  Whan he firſt made the fayre chayne of loue
                  Great was theffecte, & hye was hys entente
                  Wel wyſte he why, & what therof he mente
                  For with that fayre chayne of loue he bonde
                  The fyre, the eyre, the water, and the londe
                  In certayne bondes, that they may nat fle
                  That ſame prince and that mouer, ꝙ he
                  Hath ſtabliſſhed ī this wretched world adoſ
                        •
                     
                  
                  Certen dayes and duracion
                  To al that are engendred in thys place
                  Ouer the whiche day they may not pace
                  Al mowe they yet the dayes abredge
                  There nedeth none auctorite to ledge
                  For it is proued by experyence
                  But that me lyſt declaren my ſentence
                  Than may men by thys ordre diſcerne
                  That thylke mouer ſtable is and eterne
                  wel may men knowe, but he be a fole
                  That euery party is deryued from hys hole
                  For nature hath not taken hys begynnyng
                  Of one parte or cantell of a thyng
                  But of a thyng that perfyte is and ſtable
                  Diſcendyng ſo, tyl it be corrumpable
                  And therfore of hys wyſe purueyaunce
                  He hath ſo wel byſet hys ordynaunce
                  That ſpaces of thynges and progreſſyons
                  Shullen endure by ſucceſſyons
                  And not eterne, wythout any lye
                  Thus mayſt thou vnderſtande and ſe at eye.
                  Lo the oke, that hath ſo longe a noriſhyng
                  Fro the tyme that it beginneth firſt to ſpring
                  And hath ſo longe a lyfe, as ye may ſe
                  Yet at the laſt, waſted is the tre
                  Conſydreth eke, howe that the harde ſtone
                  Vnder our fete, on whiche we reeade & gone
                  Yet waſteth it, as it lyeth in the wey
                  The brode ryuer ſomtyme wexeth drey
                  The great townes, ſe we waue and wende
                  Than ye ſe that al thys thyng hath ende
                  And man and waman ſe ſhal we alſo
                  That nedeth in one of the termes two
                  That is to ſayne, in youthe orels in age
                  He mote be deed, a kyng as wel as a page
                  Some in his bedde, ſome in the depe ſee
                  Some in the large felde, as ye may ſe
                  It helpeth not, al gothe that ylke wey
                  Than may ye ſe that al thyng mote dey
                  what maketh this, but Iupiter the Kyng?
                  That is prince, and cauſe of al thyng
                  Conuertyng al to hys propre wyl
                  From whiche it is deryued ſothe to tel
                  And here agayne, no creature on lyue
                  Of no degre, auayleth for to ſtryue
                  Than is it wyſedome, as thynketh me
                  To make vertue of neceſſyte
                  And take it wel, that we may not eſchewe
                  And namely that to vs al is dewe
                  And who ſo grutcheth aught, he dothe folye
                  And rebel is to hym that al may gye
                  And certaynly, a man hath moſte honour
                  To dyen in hys excellence and flour
                  whan he is ſyker of hys good name
                  Thā hath he don his frendes ne him no ſham
                  And gladder ought his frendes be of his deth
                  whan with honour y yolde is vp the breth
                  Than whan his name apalled is for age
                  For al foryeten is hys vaſſellage
                  Than is it beſt, as for a worthy ſame
                  To dyen, whan he is beſt of name
                  The contrarye of al thys is wylfulneſſe
                  why grutchen we▪ why haue we heuyneſſe
                  That good Arcite, of cheualry the floure
                  Departed is, with dutye and with honoure
                  Out of this foule priſon, of thys lyfe
                  why grutchen here his coſyn and hys wyfe
                  Of his welfare, that loueth hym ſo wele?
                  Can he hem thāke? nay god wot neuer a dele
                  That bothe his ſoule, and eke hem offende
                  And yet they mowe not her luſtes amende?
                  ¶what may conclude of thys longe ſtory
                  But after ſorowe, I rede vs be mery
                  And thanke Iupiter of al his grace
                  And er we departen from thys place
                  I rede we maken of ſorowes two
                  One perfyte ioye, laſtyng euer mo
                  And loke nowe where moſt ſorowe is heryn
                  
                     There wol I fyrſt amende and begyn.
                  Suſter quod he, thys is my ful aſſent
                  Wyth al the people of my parlement
                  That gentle Palamon, your owne knyght
                  That ſerueth you with wyl, herte, & myght
                  And euer hath done, ſythe ye fyrſt hym knew
                  That ye ſhal of your grace vpon hym rewe
                  And take hym for huſbonde and for lorde
                  Lene me your honde, for thys is our accorde.
                  Let ſe nowe of your womanly pyte
                  He is a kynges brother ſonne parde
                  And though he were a poore bachelere
                  Syn he hath ſerued you ſo many a yere
                  And had for you ſo great aduerſyte
                  It muſte ben conſydred, leueth me
                  For gentle mercy ought to paſſen ryght.
                  Than ſayd he thus to Palamon ye Knight
                  I trowe chere nede lytel ſarmonyng
                  To make you to aſſenten to thys thyng
                  Cometh nere, & taketh your lady by ye honde
                  Bytwyxt hem was maked anon the bonde
                  That hyght matrimony or maryage
                  By all the counſayle of the baronage
                  And thus with al blyſſe and melodye
                  Hath Palamon ywedded Emelye.
                  ¶And god that al this world hath wrought
                  Sende him his loue, yt it hath ſo dere bought
                  For nowe is Palamon in al wele
                  Lyuyng in blyſſe, in richeſſe, and in hele
                  And Emelye hym loueth ſo tenderly
                  And he her ſerueth ſo gentelly
                  That neuer was ther no worde hē bytwene
                  Of ielouſye, or of any other tene
                  Thus endeth Palamon and Emelye
                  And god ſaue al thys fayre companye.
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Knyghtes tale, and here foloweth the Myllers Prologue.
               
                  WHan that the knight had thus hys tale ytolde
               In al the companye nas ther yong ne olde
               That he ne ſayd, it was a noble ſtory
               And worthy to be drawen in memory
               And namely the gentyls euerychone
               Our hoſte lough and ſware, ſo mote I gone
               This gothe a right, vnbokled is the male
               Let ſe nowe who ſhal tel another tale
               For truely, the game is wel begonne
               Nowe telleth ſyr monke yf ye donne
               Somwhat, to quyte with the knyghtes tale
               ¶The myller for dronken was al pale
               So that vnnethes vpon hys horſe he ſatte
               Ne nolde auale neyther hoode ne hatte
               Ne abyde no man for hys curteſye
               But in Pylates voyce he began to crye
               And ſwore by armes, bloode, and bones
               I can a noble tale for the nones
               with which I wol nowe quyte ye Knight his tale
               ¶Our hoſte ſawe that he was dronkē of ale
               And ſayd: abyde Robyn leue brother
               Some better man ſhal tel vs fyrſt an other
               Abyde, and let vs wirche thriftely.
               ¶By goddes ſoule (ꝙ he) that wol not I
               For I wol ſpeke, or els go my way
               Our hoſte anſwerde: tel on a dyuelway
               Thou arte a foole, thy wytte is ouercome
               Nowe herkeneth quod yu myller, al & ſome
               But fyrſt I make proteſtacion
               That I am dronke, I knowe it by my ſoun
               And therfore yf I miſpeke or ſay
               wyte it the ale of Sothwarke, I you pray
               For I wol tel a legende and a lyfe
               Bothe of a carpenter and hys wyfe
               Howe that a clerke ſet a wrightes cappe.
               ¶The Reue anſwerde &, ſaid, ſtynte thy clap
               Let be thy lende dronken harlottry
               It is a ſynne, and eke a great folye
               To apayren any man, or hym defame
               And eke to bryng wyues in ſuche blame
               Thou mayſt ynouge of other thynges ſayn.
               Thys dronkē myller ſpake ful ſone agayn
               And ſayd: leue brother Oſwolde
               who hath no wyfe is no cokolde
               But I ſay not therfore that thou arte one
               There ben ful good wyues many one
               why arte thou angry with my tale now
               I haue a wyfe parde, as wel as thou
               Yet nolde I for al the oxen in my plough
               Take vpon me more than ynough
               To demen of my ſelfe that I am one
               I wol beleue that I am none.
               An huſbonde ſhulde not ben inquiſytyſe
               Of goddes priuete, ne of hys wyfe
               For ſo he fynde goddes foyſon there
               Of the remenaunt, nedeth nat to enquere.
               what ſhulde I more ſay, but this Myllere
               He nolde his wordes for no man forbere
               But tolde his chorles tale in this manere
               
                  Me forthynketh I ſhal reherce it here
               And therfore, euery gentle wight I pray
               Demeth not for goddes loue, that I ſay
               Of yuel entent, but that I mote reherce
               Her tales al, ben they better or werſe
               Or els fa
                     ••
                  en ſome of my matere
               And therfore, who ſo lyſt it not to here
               Turne ouer the lefe, and choſe another tale
               For ye ſhal fynde ynowe great and ſmale
               Of hyſtorial thyng, that toucheth gentilneſſe
               And eke moralite, and holyneſſe
               Blame not me, yf that ye choſe amys
               The Myller is a chorle, ye knowe wel this
               So was the Reue eke, and other mo
               And harlotry they tolde eke bothe two
               Auyſe you, and put me out of blame
               And eke men ſhuld not make erneſt of game.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Myllers prologue, and here after foloweth hys tale. 
               
               
                  WHylom ther was dwellyng in Oxenforde
               A ryche gnoffe, yt geſtes helde to borde
               And of his craft he was a carpenter
               Wyth hym there was dwelling a poore ſcoler
               Had ylerned arte, but al his fantaſye
               Was turned to lerne Aſtrologye
               And coude a certayne concluſyons
               To demen by interogacions
               If that men aſked hym in certayne houres
               whan yt men ſhulde haue drought or ſhoures
               Or yf men aſked hym what ſhulde befall
               Of euery thyng, I may not reken al.
               Thys clerke was cleped hende Nycholas
               Of derne loue he coude and of ſolas
               And therto he was ſlye and ryght priue
               And ylyke to a mayden meke to ſe
               A chambre had he in that hoſtelry
               Alone, withouten any company
               Ful fetouſly dight with herbes ſote
               And he hym ſelfe as ſwete as is the rote
               Of lycores, or of any ſytuwale
               His almagiſte, and bokes great and ſmale
               His after lagour, longyng for hys arte
               His augrym ſtones lyeng fayre a parte
               On ſhelues couched at his beddes heed
               Hys preſſe ycouered with a foldyng reed
               And al aboue there lay a gay ſautrye
               On whiche he made on nyghtes melodye
               So ſwetely, that al the chambre ronge
               And Angelus ad virginem he ſonge
               
                  And after that he ſonge the kynges note
               Ful ofte bleſſed was hys mery throte
               And thus the ſwete clerke hys tyme ſpente
               After hys frendes fyndynge and hys rente.
               ¶Thys carpenter had wedded new a wyfe
               whych that he loued more then hys lyfe
               Of eyghtene yere ſhe was of age
               Ielous he was, and kepte her ſtrayte in cage
               For ſhe was wyld, and yonge: & he was olde
               And demed hym ſelfe to ben a cokewolde
               He knewe not Cato: for hys wytte was rude
               That bad men wedde her ſimilitude
               Men ſhulde wedde after her aſtate
               For youth and elde is often at debate
               But ſyth he was fallen in the ſnare
               He muſt enduren, as other folke hys care
               Fayre was this yōge wyfe, & therwithal
               As any wyſele her body gentle and ſmale
               A ſeynte ſhe weared, barred al wyth ſylke
               A barme clothe, as whyte as morowe mylke
               Vpon her lendes, ful of many a gore
               whyt was her ſmock, & embrouded al byfore
               And eke behynde on her colere aboute
               Of cole blacke ſylke, within and eke without
               The tapes of her whyte volypere
               were of the ſame ſute of her colere
               Her fylet brode of ſylke, and ſet ful hye
               And ſykerly, ſhe had a lykerous eye
               Ful ſmale ypulled were her browes two
               And tho were bent, and black as any ſlo
               She was moche more blyſful for to ſe
               Then is the newe Perienet tre
               And ſofter then the wol is of a wether.
               And by her gyrdel honge a purſe of lether
               Taſſed wyth ſylke, and perled wyth latoun
               In al thys worlde, to ſeken vp and doun
               There nys no man ſo wyſe, yt couth thenche
               So gay a popelote, or ſo gay a wenche
               Ful bryghter was the ſhynyng of her hewe
               Then in the towre the noble forged newe
               But of her ſonge, it was ſo loude & erne
               As any ſwalowe ſyttynge on a berne
               Therto ſhe couth ſkyppe, & make a game
               As any kydde or calfe folowyng hys dame
               Her mouth was ſwete, as braket or ye methe
               Or horde of apples, lyeng in hey or hethe
               wynſynge ſhe was, as is a ioly colte
               Longe as a maſte, & vpryght as a bolte
               A broche ſhe bare on her lowe collere
               As brode as the boſſe of a bokelere
               Her ſhoes were laſed on her legges hye
               She was a primrole, and a pyggeſkye
               For any lorde to lyggen in hys bedde
               Or yet for any good yoman to wedde.
               ¶Nowe ſir and efte ſire, ſo byfel the caas
               That on a day thys hende Nycholas
               Fel with thys yonge wyfe to rage and pley
               whyle that her huſbonde was at Oſeney
               As clerkes ben ful ſotel and queynte
               And priuely he caught her by the queynte
               And ſayd: I wys but I haue my wyll
               For derne loue of the lemman I ſpyll
               And helde her faſte by the haunche bones
               And ſayd: lemman loue me wel at ones
               Or I wol dyen alſo god me ſaue
               And ſhe ſpronge as a colte in a traue
               And with her heed ſhe wrieth faſt away
               And ſayd: I wol not keſſe the by my ſay
               why let be quod ſhe, let be Nycholas
               Or I wol crye out harrowe and alas
               Do way your handes for your curteſye
               Thys Nycholas gan mercy for to crye
               And ſpake ſo fayre, & profered hym ſo faſte
               That ſhe her loue graunted hym at laſte
               And ſwore her oth, by ſ. Thomas of Kent
               That ſhe wolde bene at hys cōmaundement
               when that ſhe may her leyſer wel aſpye
               My huſbonde is ſo ful of ielouſye
               That but ye wayte wel, and be priue
               I wotte ryght wel I nam but deed, ꝙ ſhe
               Ye mote ben ful derne as in thys caas.
               Nay therof care ye not, quod Nycholas
               A clerke had lytherly byſet hys whyle
               But yf he couth a carpenter begyle
               And thus they were accorded, and yſworne
               To awayten a tyme, as I haue ſayd byforne
               And whē Nicholas had don thus euery dele
               And thacked her aboute the lendes wele
               He kyſſed her ſwete, then taketh hys ſautry
               And playeth faſte, and maketh melody
               Then fel it thus, that to ye paryſh cherche
               (Chriſtes owne workes for to werche)
               Thys good wyfe wente vpon an holydaye
               Her forheed ſhone as bryght as any daye
               So was it waſhe, when ſhe let her werke
               ¶Now was ther of ye chirch a paryſh clerke
               The whych that was cleaped Abſolon
               Croulle was hys heare, & as golde it ſhon
               And ſtrouted as a fanne large and brode
               Ful ſtreyght & euen lay hys ioly ſhode
               Hys rode was redde, hys eyen gray as goos
               with Poules wyndowes coruē on his ſhoos
               In hoſen redde he wente fetouſly
               Gyrde he was ful ſmale and properly
               
                  Al in a kyrtel of lyght waget
               Ful fayre and thycke ben the poyntes ſet
               And therupon he had a gay ſurplyſe
               As whyte as is the bloſome on the ryſe
               A mery chylde he was, ſo god me ſaue
               wel coude he let bloode, clyppe, and ſhaue
               And make a chartre of lande, & a quytaunce
               In twenty maner coude he tryp and daunce
               After the ſkole of Oxenforde tho
               And wyth hys legges caſten to and fro
               And play ſonges on a ſmale rybyble
               Therto he ſonge ſomtyme a loude quinyble
               And as wel couth he playe on a geterne
               In al the towne nas brewhouſe ne tauerne
               That he ne vyſyted wyth hys ſolas
               There any gay tapſtere was
               But ſoth to ſay he was ſomwhat ſquaimous
               Of fartynge, and of ſpeche daungerous.
               ¶Thys Abſolon, that was ioly and gaye
               Goth wyth a cenſer on the ſondaye
               Cencyng the wyues of the paryſhe faſte
               And many a louely loke on hem he caſte
               And namely on thys carpenters wyfe
               To loke on her hym thought a mery lyfe
               She was ſo propre, and ſwete as lycorous
               I dare wel 
                     •
                  ayne yf ſhe had ben a mous
               And he a catte, he wold haue her hente anon
               Thys paryſhe clerke, thys ioly Abſolon
               Hath in hys herte ſuch a loue longynge
               That of no wyſe toke he none offerynge
               For curteſye he ſayd he wolde none
               The moone, whē it was night bryght ſhone
               And Abſolon hys geterne hath ytake
               For paramours he thought for to wake
               And forth he goeth, ielous and amerous
               Tyl he came to the carpenters hous
               A lytle after the cockes had ycrowe
               And dreſſed hym by a ſhot wyndowe
               That was vpon the carpenters wall
               He ſyngeth in hys voyce gentle and ſmall
               Nowe dere lady, yf thy wyl be
               I pray you that ye wol rewe on me
               Ful wel accordyng to hys geternynge.
               ¶Thys carpenter awoke, & herde him ſynge
               And ſpake vnto hys wyfe anon
               what Alyſon, heres thou not Abſolon
               That chaūteth thus vnder our boures wal?
               And ſhe aunſwerd her huſbande ther withal
               Yes god wot, I here hym euery dele
               This paſſeth forth, what wil ye bet thē wele
               Fro day to day, thys ioly Abſolon
               So woeth her, that hym was wo bygon
               He waketh al the nyght, and al the day
               He kēbeth hys lockes brode, & made him gay
               He woeth her by meanes and brocage
               And ſwore, he wolde ben her owne page
               He ſyngeth brokkyng as a nyghtyngale
               He ſent her pyment, meth, and ſpyced ale
               And wafres pypynge hotte out of the glede
               And for ſhe was of toun, he profred her mede
               For ſome folke wol be wonne for rycheſſe
               And ſome for ſtrokes, & ſome with gētleneſſe
               Somtyme to ſhew his lyghtnes & maſtrye
               He playeth Heraudes on a ſkaffolde hye
               But what auayleth hym, as in thys caas?
               So loueth ſhe thys hende Nicholas
               That Abſolon may blowe the buckes horne
               He ne had for hys laboure but aſkorne
               And thus ſhe maketh Abſolon her ape
               And al hys requeſt turneth to a iape
               Forſoth thys prouerbe it is no lye
               Men ſay thus alway, the nye ſlye
               Maketh the ferre loue to be loth
               For though ye Abſolon be woode or wroth
               Bycauſe that he ferre was from her ſyght
               Thus nye Nycholas ſtode in hys lyght
               But now beare the well hende Nycholas
               For Abſolon may wayle & ſynge alas
               And ſo byfel it on a ſaterbay
               Thys carpenter was gone to Oſnay
               And hende Nicholas and Alyſon
               Accorded were to thys concluſion
               That Nycholas ſhulde ſhapen hem a wyle
               Thys ſely ielous carpenter to begyle
               And yf ſo be the game went aryght
               She ſhulde ſlepe in hys armes al nyght
               For thys was hys deſyre, and hers alſo
               And ryght anone, wythout wordes mo
               Thys Nycholas no lenger wolde tarye
               But doth ful ſofte vnto hys chambre carye
               Both meate and drynke, for a day or twey
               And to her huſbande bade her for to ſey
               Yf that he aſked after Nycholas
               She ſhulde ſaye ſhe nyſt where he was
               Of al that daye ſhe ſawe hym not with cyte
               She trowed he was in ſome maladye
               For no crye that her mayde coude cal
               He nolde anſwere, for naught yt might befal
               ¶Thus paſſeth forth al the ylke ſaterday
               That Nycholas ſtyl in hys chambre lay
               And ete, dranke, & ſlept, & dyd what him lyſte
               Tyl ſonday, that the Sunne goeth to reſte
               ¶Thys ſely carpenter hath great maruayle
               Of Nicolas, or what thinge might him eyle
               
                  And ſayd: I am a drad by ſaynte Thomas
               It ſtondeth not aryght with Nycholas
               God ſhylde that he dyed ſodaynly
               This worlde is nowe ful tykel ſekerly
               I ſawe to day a corſe borne to cherche
               That now on mōday laſt I ſaw him werche
               Go vp (quod he vnto hys knaue) anone
               Cleape at his dore, & knocke faſt with a ſtone
               Loke howe it is, and tel me boldely.
               ¶This knaue wente vp ful ſturdely
               And at the chambre dore, whyle that he ſtode
               He cryed and knocked as he were woode
               What howe? what do ye mayſter Nicholay?
               Howe may ye ſlepe al this longe day?
               But al for naught, he herde not aworde.
               An hole he founde ful lowe vpon a borde
               There as the catte was wonte in to crepe
               And at that hole he loked in ful depe
               And at the laſte he had of hym a ſyght
               ¶Thys Nicholas ſate euer gapyng vpright
               As he had keyked on the newe mone
               A down he gothe, & tolde his mayſter ſone
               In what aray he ſawe thys ylke man
               ¶This carpenter to blyſſen hym began
               And ſayd: nowe helpe vs ſeynt Frideſwyde
               A man wot lytel what ſhal hym betyde
               This man is fallen, with hys Aſtronomye
               In ſome woodneſſe, or in ſome agonye
               I thought aye wel howe it ſhulde be
               Men ſhulden not knowe of goddes priuete
               Ye bleſſed be alway the leude man
               That naught but onely his byleue can.
               Right ſo ferde another clerke wt aſtronomy
               He walked in to the feldes for to pry
               Vpon the ſterres, to wete what ſhulde befal
               Tyl he was in a marlpyt yfal
               He ſawe not that, yet by ſaynte Thomas
               Me reweth ſore on hende Nicholas
               He ſhal be arated out of hys ſtudyeng
               If that I may, by Ieſus heuen kyng.
               Get me a ſtaffe, that I may vnderſpore
               Whyle that thou Robyn heueſt vp the dore
               He ſhal out of hys ſtudyeng, as I geſſe
               And to the chambre dore he gan hym dreſſe
               Hys knaue was a ſtronge carle for the nones
               And by the haſpe bare vp the dore at ones
               Into the ſtore the dore fel anone.
               ¶This Nicholas ſate as ſtyl as any ſtone
               And euer gaped vpwarde into the eyre.
               This carpenter wende he were in diſpeyre
               And hente hym by the ſhulders myghtyly
               And ſhoke hym harde, and cryed ſpytouſly
               what Nicholas, what how loke adowne
               Awake, and thynke on Chriſtes paſſyon
               I crouche yt from elues & frō wicked wightes
               Therwith the nightſpel he ſaid anonrightes
               On foure halues of the houſe aboute
               And on the threſholde of the dore without
               Ieſu Chryſt, and ſaynt Benedyght
               Blyſſe this houſe from euery wycked wight
               Fro the nyghtes mare the wyte Pater noſter
               where wonneſt thou ſaynt Peters ſuſter?
               ¶And at the laſte thys hende Nicholas
               Gan for to ſyke ſore, and ſayd alas
               Shal al this worlde be loſte eſtſones nowe?
               This carpēter anſwerde: what ſayſt thou?
               what thinke on god, as we do men yt ſwynke
               This Nicholas anſwerde: fetch my drinke
               And after wol I ſpeke in priuete
               Of certayne thynges, that toucheth the & me
               I wol tellen it none other man certayne.
               This carpēter goth down, & cometh agayn
               And brought of myghty ale a large quarte
               And whan that eche of hem had dronkē hys parte
               This Nicholas, his dore faſte ſhette
               And downe the carpenter by hem ſette
               And ſayd: Iohn hoſte myne lefe and dere
               Thou ſhalte vpon thy trouthe ſwere me here
               That to no wight thou ſhalt my coūſel wrey
               For it is Chriſtes counſayle that I ſay
               And yf thou tel it any man, thou arte forlore
               For this vengeaūce thou ſhalte haue therfore
               That yf thou wray me, thou ſhalt be woode.
               ¶Nay Chriſt it forbyd for hys holy bloode
               Quod tho this ſely man, I am no blabbe
               Ne though I ſay it, I am not lefe to gabbe
               Say what thou wolte, I ſhal it neuer tel
               To childe ne wyfe, by him that harowed hel.
               Nowe Iohn (ꝙ Nicholas) I wol nat lye
               I haue yfounden in myn aſtrologye
               As I haue loked in the moone bright
               That now on monday next, at quarter night
               Shal fal a rayne, & that ſo wylde & woode
               That halfe ſo great was neuer Noes floode
               This world (he ſaid) in leſſe than in an houre
               Shal al be dreynte, ſo hydous is the ſhoure
               Thus ſhal mankynde drenche, & leſe her lyfe.
               This carpēter anſwerd & ſaid: alas my wife
               And ſhal ſhe drenche? Alas myn Alyſon
               For ſorowe of this he fel almoſte adoun
               And ſaid: Is there no remedye in thys caas?
               Yes yes ful good (quod hende Nicholas)
               If thou wolt werche after lore and rede
               Thou maiſt not werchē after thyn own hede
               
                  For thus ſayeth Salomon, yt was ful trewe
               worke al by coūſayle, & thou ſhalt not rewe
               And yf thou wylt werken by good counſayle
               I vndertake, wythout maſt or ſayle
               Yet ſhal I ſaue her, and the and me
               Haſt thou not herde howe ſaued was Noe?
               when yt our lorde had warned hym byforne
               That al ye worlde with water ſhuld be lorne
               Yes (quod the carpenter) ful yore ago
               ¶Haſt thou not herde (quod Nicholas) alſo?
               The ſorowe of Noe wyth hys feloſhyp
               Or that he myght gete hys wyfe to ſhyppe
               Hym had leuer, I dare wel vndertake
               At thylke tyme, then al hys wethers blake
               That ſhe had a ſhyp herſelfe alone
               And therfor woſt thou what is beſt to done?
               Thys aſketh haſte, and of an haſty thynge
               Men may not preche ne make taryenge
               Anone go get vs faſt into thys inne
               A knedyng trowe or els a kemelyn
               For eche of vs, but loke that they ben large
               In which me mowe ſwymmē as in a barge
               And haue therin vytayles ſufficiante
               But for a day, fye on the remenante
               The water ſhal aſlake and gon awaye
               Aboute prime vpon the nexte daye
               But Robyn may not wetē of thys thy knaue
               Ne eke thy mayde Gylle, I may not ſaue
               Aſke not why; for though thou aſke me
               I wol not tel goddes priuete
               Suffyſeth the, but yf thy wyttes be madde
               To haue as great a grace as Noe hadde
               Thy wyfe ſhal I wel ſaue out of doute
               Go nowe thy way, & ſpede the here aboute
               But when thou haſt for her, & the, and me
               Ygetten vs theſe knedynge tubbes thre
               Then ſhalt thou hange hem in ye rofe ful hye
               That no man of our purueyaunce eſpye
               And when yu haſt done thus as I haue ſayde
               And haſt our vytayle fayre in hem ylayde
               And eke an axe to ſmyte the corde a two
               when yt the water cometh, that we may go
               And breake an hole on hye vpon the gable
               Vnto the garden warde, ouer the ſtable
               That we may frely paſſen forth our waye
               when that the great ſhoure is gone awaye
               Then ſhalt yu ſwym as mery I vndertake
               As doth ye whyt ducke after her drake
               Then wol I clepe, howe Alyſon, how Iohn
               Be mery: for the floode wol paſſe anon
               And thou wolt ſayn, hayle maſter Nicholay
               Good morowe: for I ſe wel that it is day
               And then we ſhul be lordes al our lyfe
               Of al the worlde, as was Noe and his wyfe
               But of one thynge I warne the ful ryght
               Be wel auyſed on that ylke nyght
               That we be entred into the ſhyppes borde
               That none of vs ne ſpeake not a worde
               Ne clepe ne crye, but ben in hys prayer
               For it is goddes owne heſte dere.
               ¶Thy wife & thou mot hāge farre a twinne
               For that betwyxte you ſhalbe no ſynne
               No more in lokynge then there ſhal in dede
               Thys ordinaunce is ſayd, go God the ſpede
               To morowe at nyght, whē men be al aſlepe
               Into our knedynge tubbes wol we crepe
               And ſytten there, abydynge goddes grace
               Go now thy waye, I haue no lenger ſpace
               To make of thys no lenger ſermonyng
               Men ſayne thus: ſend ye wyſe, & ſay nothyng
               Thou art ſo wyſe, it nedeth the not to teche
               Go ſaue our lyues, and that I the beſeche
               ¶Thys ſely capenter goeth forth his waye
               Ful ofte he ſayd, alas and welawaye
               And to hys wyfe he tolde hys priuete
               And ſhe was ware, & knewe it bet then he
               what al thys queynt caſt was for to ſey
               But natheles, ſhe ferde as ſhe wolde dry
               And ſayd: alas, go forth thy way anone
               Helpe vs to ſkape, or we be deed echone
               I am thy trewe very wedded wyfe
               Go dere ſpouſe, and helpe to ſaue our lyfe
               Lo, whych a great thynge is affection
               Men may dye of ymagynacion
               So depe may impreſſion be take.
               Thys ſely carpenter begynneth to quake
               Hym thynketh verely that he may ſe
               Noes ſtoode come waltrynge as the ſee
               To drenchen Alyſon, hys hony dere
               He wepeth, waileth, and maketh ſory cher
                     •
                  
               
               He ſyketh, wyth many a ſory thought
               He gothe, & getteth hym a knedyng trough
               And after a tubbe, and a kemelyn
               And priuely he ſent hem to hys in
               And hynge hem in the rofe ful priuely
               Hys owne honde, he made hym ladders thre
               To clymben by the ronges, & by the ſtalkes
               Into the tubbes hongyng by the balkes
               And hem vitayled, both trough and tubbe
               wyth breed and cheſe, & good ale in a tubbe
               Suffyſyng ryght ynowe, as for a daye
               But er that he had made al thys arraye
               He ſent hys knaue, and eke hys wenche alſo
               Vpon hys nede to London for to go
               
                  And on ye monday, when it drowe to nyght
               He ſhette his dore, without candel lyght
               And dreſſed al thyng, as it ſhulde be
               And ſhortly clomben vp al thre
               They ſytten ſtyl not fully a furlonge way
               Now pater noſter clum, ſayd Nicolay
               And clum ꝙ Iohan, & cluom ſayd Aliſon
               Thys carpenter ſayd hys deuocion
               And ſtyl he ſyt, and byddeth hys prayere
               Awaytynge on the rayne, yf he it here.
               ¶The deed ſlepe, for wery beſyneſſe
               fel on thys carpenter, ryght as I geſſe
               Aboute curfewe tyme, or lytel more
               For trauayle of hys goſt he groneth ſore
               And efte he routeth, for hys heed myſlay
               And down of ye ladder thē ſtalketh Nicolay
               And Alyſon ful ſofte after ſhe ſpedde
               wythout wordes mo they went to bedde
               There as the carpenter was woned to lye
               There was the reuel, and the melodye
               And thus lyeth Alyſon and Nycholas
               In buſyneſſe of myrth and ſolas
               Tyl that the bel of laudes gan to rynge
               And freres in the chaunſel gon to ſynge.
               ¶Thys paryſh clerke, thys amerous Abſolō
               
               That is for loue alway ſo wo bygon
               Vpon the monday was at Oſenay
               wyth company, hym to dyſporte and play
               And aſked vpon a caſe a cloyſterere
               Ful priuely, after Iohn the carpentere
               And he drewe him a parte out of the chyrche
               And ſaid I not: I ſaw him not here wyrche
               Syth ſaturday, I trowe that he be went
               For tymbre, there our Abbot hath hym ſent
               For he is wont for tymbre for to go
               And dwellen at the grange a day or two
               Or els he is at hys houſe certayne
               where that he be, I can not ſothly ſayne.
               Thys Abſolon, ful ioly was and lyght
               And thouȝt, now is my time to walk alnight
               For ſekerly, I ſawe hym not ſterynge
               About hys dore, ſyth day began to ſprynge
               So mote I thriue, I ſhal at cockes crowe
               Ful priuely knocke at hys wyndowe
               That ſtant ful lowe vpon hys boures wal
               To Alyſon wol I nowe tellen al
               My loue longynge: for yet I ſhal not myſſe
               That at the leeſt way I ſhal her kyſſe
               Some maner comforte ſhal I haue parfaye
               My mouth hath ytched al thys longe daye
               That is a ſygne of kyſſynge at the leeſt
               Alnyght me mette eke, that I was at a feeſt
               Therfore I wol go ſlepe an houre or twey
               And al the nyght then wol I walke & pley.
               ¶When yt the fyrſt cocke hath crowe anon
               Vp ryſt thys ioly louer Abſolon
               And hym arayeth gay, and in queynt deuyce
               But fyrſt he cheweth greyns and lycoryce
               To ſmellen ſote, or he had kempt hys here
               Vnder hys tonge a trueloue he bere
               For therby he wende to ben graciouſe
               He rometh to the carpenters houſe
               And ſtyll he ſtante vnder the ſhotwyndowe
               Vnto hys breſt it raught, it was ſo lowe
               And ſofte he knocked, wyth a ſemely ſoun.
               what do ye honycombe, ſwete Alyſoun?
               My fayre byrde, my ſwete ſynamome
               Awaketh lemman myne, and ſpeaketh to me
               Ful lytel thynken ye vpon my wo
               That for your loue I ſwelt there as I go
               No wonder is though I ſwelte and ſwete
               I morne as dothe the lambe after the tete
               I wys lemman, I haue ſuche loue longyng
               That lyke a turtle trewe is my mornyng
               I may not eaten no more then may a mayde
               Go fro the wyndowe Iacke foole, ſhe ſayde
               As helpe me God and ſwete ſaynt Iame
               I loue another, or els I were to blame
               wel bet then the (by Ieſu) Abſolon
               Go forth thy waye, or I wol caſte a ſton
               And let me ſlepe, a twenty dyuelway
               ¶Alas quoth Abſolon, and welaway
               That trewe loue was euer ſo yuel byſette
               Then kyſſe me, ſyn it may be no bette
               For Ieſus loue, and for the loue of me.
               wylt yu then go thy waye therwith ꝙ ſhe?
               ¶Ye certes lemman, quoth thys Abſolon
               Then make the redy (ꝙ ſhe) I come anon
               And vnto Nycholas ſhe ſayd ſtyl
               Nowe peace, and thou ſhalt laugh thy fyl
               This Abſolon down ſet him vpō his knees
               And ſayd: I am a lorde at al degrees
               For after thys I hope there cometh more
               Lemman thy grace, & ſwete byrde thy nore.
               The wyndowe ſhe vndoth, & that in haſte
               Haue do (ꝙ ſhe) and ſpede the faſte
               Let not our neyghbours the aſpye.
               This Abſolō gan wype his mouth ful drye
               Derke was the nyght, as pytche or cole
               And at ye wyndow ſhe put out her ers hole
               And Abſolon him felte neyther bet ne wers
               But with his mouth he kyſt her bare ers
               Ful ſauerly, or he were ware of thys.
               A backe he ſterte, & thought it was amys
               
                  For wel he wyſte, a woman hath no berde
               He felte a thyng al rowe, and longe herde
               And ſayd: fye, alas what haue I do?
               ¶Te he quod ſhe, & clapte the wyndowe to
               And Abſolon gothe forthe a ſory paas
               A berde a berde, ſayd hende Nycholas
               By goddes corpus, this gothe fayre & wele.
               This ſely Abſolon herde it euery dele
               And on hys lyppe he gan for angre byte
               And to him ſelue he ſayd, I ſhal the quyte
               who rubbeth now, who froteth now his lips
               with duſt, wt ſonde, with ſtrawe, with chyps
               But Abſolon? that ſaythe ful often alas
               My ſoule betake I to Sathanas
               But me were leuer thā al this town, quod he
               Of this diſpyte auenged for to be.
               ¶Alas (quod he) alas yt I ne had ybleynt
               His hotte loue is colde, and al yqueynt
               For fro the tyme that he had kyſte her ers
               Of paramours he ſet not a kers
               For he was healed of hys maladye
               Ful ofte paramoures he gan defye
               And wepe as dothe a chylde that is ybete
               A ſofte pace he wente ouer the ſtrete
               Vnto a ſmythe, men callen dan Gerueys
               That in hys forge ſmyteth plowe harneys
               He ſharpeth ſhares, and culters beſyly
               This Abſolon knocketh al eaſily
               And ſaid vndo Gerneys, and that anon
               ¶What who arte thou? It am I Abſolon
               What Abſolon, what for Chriſtes ſwete tre
               Why ryſe ye ſo rathe
                     •
                  ey benedicite
               what eyleth you? ſome gay gyrle god it wote
               Hath brought you thus on the berytote
               By ſaynte note, ye wote wel what I mene
               ¶This Abſolon ne raught not a bene
               Of al his play no worde agayne he gaſſe
               He hath more towe on hys diſtaffe
               Than Geruays knewe, & ſayd frende ſo dere
               The hote cultre, in the chymeney here
               As lene it me, I haue therwith to done
               I wyl bryng it the agayne ful ſone.
               ¶Gerueys anſwerde: certes were it golde
               Or in a poke nobles al vntolde
               Thou ſhuldeſt it haue, as I am trewe ſmyth
               Eye criſtes fote, what wol ye don therwith?
               Therof (quod Abſolon) be as be may
               I ſhal wel tellen the by to morowe day
               And caught the culter by the colde ſtele
               Ful ſofte out at the dore gan he ſtele
               And went vnto the carpenters wal
               He coughed fyrſt, & knocked ther withal
               Vpon the wyndowe, right as he dyd ere.
               ¶This Alyſon anſwerde: who is there
               That knocketh ſo? I warāte he his a thefe.
               Why nay (ꝙ he) god wot my ſwete lefe
               I am thyn Abſolon, thyn owne derlyng
               Of golde (ꝙ he) I haue ye brought a ryng
               My mother yaue it me, ſo god me ſaue
               Ful fyne it is, and therto wel ygraue
               This wol I yeue the, yf thou me kyſſe.
               This Nycholas was ryſſen for to pyſſe
               And thought he wolde amenden all the iape
               He ſhulde kyſſe his ers er that he ſkape
               And vp the wyndowe dyd he haſtely
               And out his ers he put ful priuely
               And ouer the buttockt, to the haunche boon
               And therwith ſpake this clerke, this Abſolon
               Speke ſwete byrde, I not where thou arte.
               ¶This Nycholas anon let fleen a farte
               As great as it had ben a thunder dent
               That with the ſtroke he was welny yblent
               And he was redy with hys yron hote
               And Nycholas in the arſe he ſmote.
               Of gothe the ſkyn an hondbrede about
               The hotte cultor brende ſo hys toute
               And for the ſmerte he wende for to dye
               As he were woode, he gan for to crye
               Helpe, water, water, for goddes herte
               This carpenter out of hys ſlomber ſterte
               And herde one crye water, as he were wood
               And thought, alas now cometh Noes flood
               And ſette hym vp without wordes mo
               And with an axe, he ſmote the corde a two
               And downe gothe al, he foūde neyther to ſel
               Breed ne ale, but downe ſhortly he fel
               Vpon the flore, and there a ſwowne he lay
               ¶Vp ſterte than Alyſon & hende Nycholay
               And cryed out, and harrowe in the ſtrete
               The neyghbours, both ſmal and grete
               In ronne, for to gauren on thys man
               That a ſwoune lay, palyſhe and wan
               For with that fal broſten hath he his arme
               But ſtonden he muſte vnto hys owne harme
               For whan he ſpake, he was yborne adoun
               Wyth hende Nycholas, and Alyſoun
               They told euery man, that he was woode
               He was agaſte ſo of Noes floode
               Throughe fantaſye, that of hys vanyte
               He hath getten hym knedyng tubbes thre
               And hath hem honged in the rofe aboue
               And that he prayed hem for goddes loue
               To ſytten in the roofe par companye
               The folke gan laughen at his fantaſye
               
                  And in to the roofe they kyken and they gape
               And turned al hys erneſt in to a iape
               For what ſo this carpenter anſwerde
               It was for naught, no man his reaſon herde
               With othes great, he was yſworne adowne
               For eueryche clerke anon helde with other
               They ſaid ye mā was wood, my leue brother
               And euery wyght gan laughen at this ſtrife.
               ¶Thus ſwyued was the carpenters wyfe
               For al hys kepyng, and hys ielouſye
               And Abſolon hath kyſt her neyther eye
               And Nycholas is ſkalded in the toute
               Thys tale is done, & God ſaue al the route.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Myllers tale, and here after foloweth the Reues Prologue.
               
                  WHan folke had laughed at thys nyce caas
               Of Abſolon & hende Nycolas
               Dyuers folke dyuerſly they ſayde
               But for the more parte they loughe & playde
               Ne at thys tale I ſawe no man hym greue
               But it were onely Oſwolde the reue
               Bycauſe he was of carpenters crafte
               A lytel yre in hys herte ylafte
               He gan to grutchen and blamen it a lyte
               Sothly quod he, ful wel couthe I ye quyte
               Wyth bleryng of a proude myllers eye
               If that me lyſt to ſpeke of rybaudrye
               But eke I am olde, me luſt not play for age
               Graſſe tyme is done, my fodder is forage
               This whyte toppe writeth myne olde yeres
               For ſōtyme yolow was, now white bē myn heres
               But yet I fare as doth an open ers
               That ylke frute is euer lenger the wers
               Tyl it be 
                     •
                  otten in molloke, or in ſtre
               we olde men, I dreden ſo fare we
               Tyl we be rotten can we not be rype
               we hoppē alway, while the world wol pype
               For in our wyl there ſtyketh euer a nayle
               To haue an hore heed and a grene tayle
               As hath a leke, for though ourmight be gone
               Our wyl deſyreth folye euer in one
               For whā we may not don, thā wol we ſpekē
               
               Yet in our aſſhen olde, is fyre yreken.
               ¶Four gledes han we, whiche I ſhal deuyſe
               Auauntyng, lyeng, angre, and couetyſe
               Theſe four ſparkles longen on to elde
               Our olde lymmes mowe wel ben vnwelde
               But wyl ne ſhal not fayle, that is ſothe
               And yet haue I alway a coltes tothe
               As many a yere as it is paſſed henne
               Syn that my tappe of lyfe began to renne
               For ſikerly, whan I was borne anone
               Dethe drowe the tappe of lyfe, & let it gone
               And euer ſyns hath the tappe yronne
               Tyl that almoſt al empty is the tonne
               The ſtreme of life now droppeth on ye chimb
               The ſely tonge may wel ringe and clymb
               Of wretchedneſſe, that paſſed is ful yore
               with olde folke ſaue dotage is no more
               ¶whan yt our hoſt had herde this ſermoning
               He gan to ſpeke as lordly as a kyng
               And ſayd: what amounteth al thys wytte?
               what ſhal we ſpeke al day of holy wrytte?
               The dyuel made a Reue to preche
               Or a ſouter a ſhypman, or a leche.
               Say forthe thy tale, and tary nat the tyme
               Lo Depforde, and it is halfe way pryme
               Lo Grenewyche, that many a ſhrewe is in
               It were tyme thy tale for to begyn
               ¶Nowe ſirs quod this Oſwolde the Reue
               I pray you al, that ye not you greue
               That I anſwere, and ſomdele ſet hys houſe
               For leful it is with force, force of ſhoufe
               This dronken myller hath ytolde vs here
               Howe that begyled was a carpentere
               Parauenture in ſkorne, for I am one
               And by your leaue, I ſhal hym quyte anone
               Ryght in his churles termes wol I ſpeke
               I pray to God hys necke mote breke
               He can wel in myne eye ſene a ſtalke
               But in his owne he can not ſene a balke
               ¶Here endeth the Reues Prologue.
            
            
               
               
                   ¶Here begynneth the Reues tale.
               
                  AT Trompynton, not far fro Cambridge
               Ther gothe a broke, and ouer that a bridge
               Vpon the whyche broke ther ſtant a mell
               And this is very ſothe, as I you tel
               A myller was there dwellyng many a day
               As any pecocke he was proude and gay
               Pypen he couthe, and fyſſhen, & nettes bete
               And turne cuppes, & wel wraſtle and ſhere
               Aye by hys belte he bare a longe pauade
               And of a ſworde ful trenchaunt was ye blade
               A ioly popere bare he in hys pouche
               Ther was no mā for peryl durſt hym touche
               A Shefelde thwytel bare he in hys hoſe
               Roūde was his face, & camyſed was his noſe
               As pylled as an ape was hys ſkull
               He was a market beater at the full
               There durſt no wyght honde on him ledge
               But he ne ſwore he ſhulde abedge
               A theſe he was for ſothe, of corne and mele
               And that a ſlye, and vſaunt for to ſtele
               His name was hoten deynous Symkyn
               A wyfe he had, comen of noble kyn
               The parſon of the towne her father was
               with her he yafe ful many a panne of bras
               For that Symkym ſhulde in his bloode alye
               She was yfoſtred in a nonnerye
               For Symken wolde no wyfe, as he ſayde
               But ſhe were wel ynouriſſhed, and a mayde
               To ſauen hys aſtate of yomanrye
               And ſhe was proude, and perte as a pye
               A ful fayre ſyght was it vpon hem two
               On holy dayes byforne her wolde he go
               with hys typet wounden aboute his heed
               And ſhe came after in a gyte of reed
               And Symken had hoſen of the ſame
               There durſt no wyght clepen her but dame
               was none ſo hardy, that wente by the way
               That with her ones durſt rage or play
               But yf he wolde be ſlayne of Symkyn
               with pauade, or with knyfe, or bodkyn
               For ielous folkes ben perillous euermo
               Algates they wolde her wyues wende ſo
               And eke for ſhe was ſomdele ſmoterlyche
               She was as dygne as water in a dyche
               And as ful of hoker, and of beſmare
               As thoughe that a lady ſhulde her ſpare
               what for her kyndred, and her nortelrye
               That ſhe had lerned in the nonnerye.
               ¶A doughter had they bytwyxt hem two
               Of twenty yere, withouten any mo
               Sauyng a chylde yt was of halfe yere of age
               In cradell it lay, and was a propre page
               This wenche thicke and wel ygrowen was
               wyth camyſed noſe, and eyen gray as glas
               
                  with buttockes brode, & breſtes rounde & hye
               But right fayre was her heare, I wol not lie
               The parſon of ye town, for ſhe was ſo fayre
               In purpoſe was to maken her hys heyre
               Bothe of hys catell, and hys meſuage
               And ſtraunge he made it of her maryage
               Hys purpoſe was to be ſtowen her hye
               Into ſome worthy blode of auncetry
               For holy churches good mote ben diſpended
               Oh holy churches blode that is diſcended
               Therfore he wolde, hys holy blode honour
               Though that he holy churche ſhulde deuour
               ¶Great ſoken hath this Myller out of dout
               with whete and malte, of all the londe about
               And namely ther was a great college
               Men clepen it the Solere hall of Cambrege
               Ther was her whete, & eke her malt igroūde
               And on a day it happed in a ſtounde
               Sicke lay the Manciple, on a malady
               Men wenden wiſely that he ſhulde dye
               For which this myller ſtale both whete and corn
               An hundred tyme more than beſorn
               For there before, he ſtale but curteyſly
               But nowe he was a thefe outrageouſly
               For wiche the warden chydde and made fare
               But therof ſette the Myller nat a tare
               He craked, boſted, and ſwore it nas nat ſo
               Thā were there yonge poore ſcholers two
               That dwelten in the hall, of whiche I ſay
               Teſtife they were, and luſty for to play
               And onely for her myrthe, and her reuelrye
               Vpon the warden beſtly they crye
               To yeue hem leaue, but a lytel ſtounde
               To gon to my
                     •
                  , to ſene her corne ygrounde
               And hardely they durſt lay her necke
               The myller ſhuld not ſteale hem half a pecke
               Of corne by ſleyght, ne by force hem reue.
               And at the laſt the warden yaue hem leue
               Iohan hight that one, & Aleyn hight ye other
               Of o town they were both, yt hight Strother
               Farre in the northe, can I not tel where.
               This Aleyn maketh al redy his gere
               And on a horſe, the ſacke he caſte anon
               Forthe goth Aleyn the clerke, and alſo Iohn
               With good ſworde and bockeler by her ſyde
               Iohn knewe the way, hym nedeth no gyde
               And at the myl dore the ſacke down he layth
               ¶Aleyn ſpake firſt: al hayle Symkē in fayth
               Howe fares thy fayre doughter, & thy wyfe?
               Aleyn welcom (quod Symken) by my lyfe
               And Iohn alſo: how now? what do ye here?
               By god Simōd (ꝙ Iohn) nede has no pere
               Him behoueth ſerue him ſelfe yt has no ſwain
               Or els he is a fole, as clerkes ſayne
               Our Manciple I hope he wyl be deed
               Swa werkes aye the wanges in his heed
               And therfore is I come, and eke Alayne
               To grynde our corne & cary it home agayne
               We pray you ſpede vs heme in that ye may
               It ſhalbe don, quod Symkyn, be my fay
               what wol ye don, while it is in hande
               By god, ryght by the hopper wol I ſtande
               Quoth Iohn: & ſen how gates ye corne goth in
               Yet ſawe I neuer by my father kyn
               Howe that the hopper wagges to and fra
               Alayne anſwerd: Iohan wylte thou ſa
               Than wol I be byneth by my crowne
               And ſe howe the mele falles adowne
               Into the troughe, that ſhalbe my diſporte
               Quoth Iohan, in fay I may ben one of your ſorte
               I is as ill a myllere as is ye.
               This Myller ſmyleth at her nycite
               And thought al nys done but for a wyle
               They w
                     •
                  ne that no man may hem begyle
               But by my thryfte, yet ſhal I blere her eye
               For al the ſleyght in her philoſofye
               The more queynte clerkes that they make
               The more wol I ſteale whan I take
               In ſtede of floure yet wol I gyue hem brēne
               The greateſt clerkes ben not the wyſeſt men
               As whilom to the wolfe ſpake the Mare
               Of al her arte counte I not a tare.
               ¶Out at the dore he gothe ful priuely
               Whan that he ſawe his tyme, ſubtelly
               He loked vp & downe, tyl he had yfounde
               The clerkes horſe, there as he ſtode ybounde
               Behynde the Mylle, vnder a leſſel
               And to the horſe he gothe him fayre and wel
               He ſtrypeth of the bridel ryght anon.
               And whā ye horſe was loce, he gan to gon
               Towarde the fen, there wylde mares rynne
               And forth wt wehe, through thicke & thynne
               The myller gothe agayne, no worde he ſaide
               But doth his note, & wt theſe clerkes playde
               Tyl yt her corne was fayre & wel ygrounde
               And whan the meale was ſacked & ybounde
               This Iohn goth out, & fonde her hors away
               And gan to crye, harowe and welaway
               Our horſe is loſte Aleyne for goddes banes
               Steppe on thy fete mā, come forth al atanes
               Alas our wardeyn has hys palfray lorne.
               ¶This Aleyn al forgate bothe mele & corne
               Al was out of mynde hys huſbondrye
               what, whylke way is he gon? he gan to crye.
               
                  The wyfe came leapyng inwarde at a rene
               She ſayd alas, he gothe to the fenne
               with wylde mares, as faſte as he may go
               Vnthāke come on hys honde, yt bonde him ſo
               And he yt better ſhulde haue knyt the reyne.
               Alas ꝙ Iohn, Aleyn for Chriſtes peyne
               Lay downe thy ſwerde, & I ſhal myn alſwa
               I is ful ſwyfte God wafe as is a raa
               By goddes ſale he ſhal not ſkape vs bathe?
               why ne haddeſt thou put the capel in ye lathe?
               Il heyle Aleyn by god thou is a fonne.
               ¶Theſe ſely clerkes han ful faſte yronne
               Towarde the fenne, Aleyn and eke Iohn
               And whan the myller ſawe yt they were agō
               
               He halfe a buſſhel of her floure hath take
               And bade hys wyfe knede it in a kake
               He ſayd, I trowe the clerkes were a ferde
               Yet can a myller make a clerkes berde
               For al her arte, yet let hem gon her way
               Lo where they gon, let the chyldren play
               They get him not ſo lightly by my crowne
               Theſe ſely clerkes rennen vp and downe
               With kepe kepe, ioſſa wartherere
               Ga whyſtle thou, and I ſal kepe hym here
               But ſhortly, tyl it was very nyght
               They couth not though they did al her might
               Her caple catche, he ran away ſo faſte
               Tyl in a dyche they caught hym at the laſte
               ¶
                     •
                  ery and wete, as beeſtes in the rayne
               Cometh ſely Iohn, & wt hym cometh Alayn
               Alas (quod Iohn) the day that I was borne
               Nowe are we dryuen to hethē and to ſkorne
               Our corne is ſtole, men wol vs fooles cal
               Bothe the warden, and our felowes al
               And namely the myller, waylaway
               Thus playneth Iohn, as he gothe by yt way
               Towarde the myll, & bayarde in his honde
               The myller ſyttyng by the fyre he fonde
               For it was night & ferther might they nought
               But for the loue of god they hym beſought
               Of herbrough and eaſe, as for her peny
               ¶The myller ſaid ayen, if there ben any
               Suche as it is, yet ſhal ye haue your part
               My houſe is ſtrayte, but ye haue lerned art
               Ye can by argument make a place
               A myle brode, of twenty foote of ſpace
               Let ſe nowe yf thys place may ſuffyſe
               Or make it rōmer wt ſpeche, as is your gyſe
               Now Symōd (ſaid Iohn) by ſaint Cutberde
               Aye is thou mery, & that is fayre anſwerde
               I haue herd ſai, mē ſhuld takē of twa thīges
               Swylk as he fyndes or ſwilke as he bringes
               But ſpecially I pray the hoſte dere
               Get vs ſome meate & drinke, & make vs chere
               And we wyl pay trewly at the ful
               With empty honde, men may no haukes tul
               Lo here our ſyluer redy for to ſpende.
               The myller to ye towne his doughter ſende
               For ale and breed, and roſted hem a goos
               & bounde her hors he ſhulde no more go loos
               And in his own chambre he made a bedde
               With ſhetes & with chalons fayre yſpredde
               Not from his owne bedde, ten fote or twelue
               Hys doughter had a bedde al by her ſelue
               Right in the ſame chambre, by and by
               It myght be no bette, and the cauſe why.
               Ther was no rowmer herbrowe in yt place
               They ſoupen, & they ſpeken of myrth & ſolace
               And dronken euer ſtronge ale at beſte
               Aboute mydnight went they to reſte.
               ¶Wel hath this myller vernyſhed his heed
               Ful pale he was for dronken, & nothyng reed
               He galpeth, and he ſpeketh through his noſe
               As he were in the quacke, or in the poſe
               To bedde he gothe, and with him his wyfe
               As any Iay was ſhe lyght and iolyfe
               So was her ioly whyſtel wel ywette
               The cradell at the beddes fete was ſette
               To rocken, and to yeue the chylde to ſouke
               And whan yt dronken was al in the crouke
               To bedde went the daughter ryght anon
               To bedde gothe Aleyn and eke Iohn
               There nas no more, hem neded no dwale
               This myller hath ſo wiſely bybbed ale
               That as an horſe he ſnorteth in hys ſlepe
               Ne of hys tayle behynde he toke no kepe
               His wyfe bare to hym a bordon wel ſtrong
               Men might hem here route a forlonge.
               The wenche routeth eke par company.
               ¶Aleyn the clerke, that herde this melody
               He poked on Iohn, & ſaide ſlepeſt thou?
               Herdeſt thou euer ſwylke a ſange er nowe
               Lo Nuylke a couplyng is ytwyxt hem all
               A wylde fyre on her bodyes fal,
               Who herde euer ſwylke a ferly thyng?
               Ye, they ſhal haue the floure of yuel endyng
               Al this lange nyght tydes me no reſte
               But yet naforce, al ſhal be for the beſte
               For Iohan (ſayd he) as euer mote I thriue,
               If that I may, yon wenche wol I ſwyue
               Some eſement hath lawe ſhapen vs
               For Iohn there is a lawe that ſaythe thus
               That yf a man in one poynte ben a greued
               That in an other he ſhal be releued
               
                  Our corne is ſtolne, ſothly it is no nay
               And we haue had an yuel fyt to day
               And ſyn I ſhal haue none amendement
               Agayne my loſſe I wyl haue myn eſement
               By goddes ſale, it ſhal none other be.
               ¶Thys Iohan anſwerde: Aleyn, auyſe the
               The myller is a peryllous man, he ſayde
               And yf that he out of his ſlepe abrayde
               He myght don vs bathe a vilonye.
               Aleyn anſwerd: I coūt him not worth a fly
               And vp he ryſte, and by the wenche he crept.
               This wenche lay vpright, and faſte ſlept
               Tyl he ſo nye was, er ſhe myght aſpye
               That it had ben to late for to crye
               And ſhortly for to ſayne, they were at on
               Now play Aleyn, for I wol ſpeke of Iohn.
               This Iohn lay ſtyl a forlonge way or two
               And to hym ſelfe he maketh routh and wo
               Alas (ꝙ he) this is a wycked iape
               Nowe may I ſay, I is but an ape
               Yet hath my felowe ſomwhat for his harme
               He hath the myllers doughter in hys arme
               He auntreth hym, and hath hys nede yſpedde
               And I lye as a draffe ſacke in my bedde
               And whan this iape is tolde a nother dey
               I ſhal be holde a daffe, or a cokeney
               I wol aryſe, and auntre me it by my fay
               Vnhardy is vnſely, thus men ſay.
               And vp he coſe, and ſoftely he wente
               Vnto the cradel, and in his arme it hent
               And bare it ſoftely to his beddes fete
               Sone after the wyfe her routyng lete
               And gan awake, and went her out to pyſſe
               And came agayn, & gan the cradell myſſe
               And groped here & there, but ſhe foūde none
               Alas (ꝙ ſhe) I had almoſte myſgone
               I had almoſt gone to the clerkes bedde
               Eye benedycite, than had I foule yſpedde
               And forthe ſhe gothe, tyl ſhe the cradel fonde
               She gropeth alway further with her honde
               And founde ye bedde, & thought nat but good
               Bycauſe that the cradel by it ſtode
               And nyſte where ſhe was, for it was derke
               But fayre & wel ſhe crepte in by the clerke
               And lyeth ful ſtil, & wold haue caught a ſlepe
               within a while this Iohn the clerke vp lepe
               And on this good wyfe he layde ful ſore
               So mery a fyt had ſhe nought ful yore
               And pricked harde & depe, as he were madde
               This ioly lyfe haue theſe two clerkes ladde
               Tyl that the thyrde cocke began to ſyng.
               ¶Aleyn waxe wery in the dawnyng
               For he had ſwonken al the longe nyght
               And ſayd, farwel Malyn ſwete wyght
               The day is comen, I may no lenger byde
               But euermo, where ſo I go or ryde
               I am thyn owne clerke, ſo haue I hele.
               Nowe dere lemman (ꝙ ſhe) go, farwele
               But or thou go, one thyng I wol the tell
               Whā thou wendeſt homwarde by the Mell
               Ryght at the entre of the dore behynde
               Thou ſhalt a cake of halfe a buſſhel fynde
               That was ymaked of thyn owne mele
               Whiche that I helpe my ſyre to ſtele
               And good lemman god the ſaue and kepe
               And with yt worde ſhe gan almoſte to wepe.
               ¶Aleyn vpriſt, and thought er it dawe
               He wolde go crepen in by his felawe
               And founde the cradel with his honde anon
               By god thought he, al wronge haue I gon
               My heed is totty of my ſwynke to nyght
               That maketh me that I go not aryght
               I wot wel that by ye cradel I haue myſſe go
               Here lyeth the Myller and hys wyfe alſo
               And forthe he gothe on twenty dyuel way
               Vnto the bedde, there as the myller lay
               He wende haue cropen by his felowe Iohn
               And by the Myller he crepte in anon
               And caught hym by the necke, & ſoft he ſpake
               And ſayd: Iohan, thou ſwyneſheed awake
               For Chriſtes ſoule, and here a noble game
               For by that lorde, that called is ſaynt Iame
               As I haue thriſe in this ſhorte nyght
               Swyued the myllers doughter bolt vpright
               whyles thou haſte, as a cowarde ben agaſte.
               Ye falſe harlot (quod the myller) haſte
               A falſe traytour, falſe clerke (quod he)
               Thou ſhalte be deed by goddes dignyte
               who durſte be ſo bolde to diſparage
               My doughter, that is come of ſuche lynage
               And by the throte bolle he caught Alayn
               And he him hent diſpytouſly agayne
               And on the noſe he ſmote him with his feſt
               Downe ran the blode ſtreme vpon his breſt
               And in the flore, wyth mouthe & noſe ybroke
               They walowen, as dothe pygges in a poke
               And vp they gon, and downe ayen anone
               Tyl that the myller ſpurnde on a ſtone
               And downe he fyl backwarde vpon his wyfe
               That wyſte nothyng of this nyce ſtryfe
               For ſhe was fal a ſlepe a lytel wyght
               with Iohn the clerke, yt waked had alnyght
               And with the fal, out of her ſlepe ſhe brayde
               Helpe holy croſſe of Bromholme ſhe ſayde
               
                  In manus tuas, lorde to the I cal
               Awake Symonde, the fende is on me fal
               My herte is broken, helpe I am but deed
               There lieth one on my wombe & on my heed
               Helpe Symkyn, for theſe falſe clerkes fyght
               This iohn ſtert vp, as faſt as euer he might
               And graſpeth by the walles to and fro
               To fynde a ſtaffe, and ſhe ſtert vp alſo
               And knewe the e
                     •
                  tres bet thā dyd this Iohn
               And by the wal ſhe founde a ſtaffe anon
               And ſawe a lytel ſhemeryng of a light
               For at an hole in ſhone the moone bright
               And by that lyght ſhe ſawe hem bothe two
               But ſykerly ſhe nyſte who was who
               But as ſhe ſey a whyte thyng in her eye
               And whan ſhe gan this whyte thyng aſpye
               She wende the clerke had weared a voluper
               And wt the ſtaffe ſhe drowe alway ner & ner
               And wende haue hyt this Aleyn at ful
               And ſmote the myller on the pylled ſkul
               That down he gothe, & cryed, harowe I dye
               Theſe clerkes bete hym wel, and let hym lye
               And arayeth hem, and toke her horſe anon
               And eke her meale, and on her way they gon
               And at the mylle dore they toke her cake
               Of halfe a buſhel floure, wel ybake.
               Thus is the proude myller wel ybete
               And hath yloſt the gryndyng of the whete
               And payde for the ſupper euery dele
               Of Aleyn and of Iohan, that bete hym wele
               Hys wyfe is ſwyued, and his doughter als
               Lo ſuche it is a Myller to be fals
               And therfore this prouerbe is ful ſothe
               Hym dare not wel wene that yuel dothe
               A gylour ſhal hym ſelfe begyled be
               And god that ſytte hye in maieſte
               Saue al this company, great and ſmale
               Thus haue I quyt the myller in his tale.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Reues tale, and here foloweth the Cokes prologue.
               
                  
                     THe Coke of London, whyle that the Reue ſpake
                  For ioye hym thought he claude hym on the bake
                  A ha (ꝙ he) for Chriſtes paſſyon
                  This myller hath a ſharpe concluſyon
                  Vpon his argument of herby gage
                  Wel ſayd Salomon in hys langage
                  Ne bryng not euery man in to thyn hous
                  For herbrowyng by nyght is perelous
                  Wel ought a man auyſed for to be
                  Whom that he brought in to hys pryuete
                  I pray to god ſo yeue me ſorowe and care
                  If euer ſythen I hyght Hodge of ware
                  Herde I myller bette yſette awerke
                  He had a iape of malyce in the derke.
                  But god forbyd that we ſtynten here
                  And therfore yf ye vouche ſafe to here
                  A tale of me, that am a poore man
                  I wol you tel as wel as I can
                  A lytel iape, that fel in our cyte
               
               
                  ¶Our hoſt ſayd, ſyr a graunte it the
                  Nowe tel on Rodger, loke that it be good
                  For many a paſty haſte thou letten blood
                  And many a Iacke of Douer haſt thou ſolde
                  That hath be twyſe hotte and twyſe colde
                  Of many a pilgrym haſt thou Chriſtes curſe
                  For of thy parſſe yet fare they the worſe
                  That they haue eaten wyth thy ſtobel goos
                  For in thy ſhoppe is manye a ſlye loos
                  Nowe tel on gentle Rogere by thy name
                  But yet I pray the be not wrothe for game
                  A man may ſay ful ſothe in game and play.
               
               
                  ¶Thou ſayſt ful ſothe (ꝙ Roger) by my ſay
                  But ſoth play, quade play, as ye ſleming ſaith
                  And therfore Henry Baylly by thy fayth
                  Be thou not wrothe, or we departen here
                  Though that my tale ben of an hoſtelere
                  But natheleſſe, I wol not tellen it yet
                  But er we parte, ywys thou ſhalte be quyt
                  And therwithal he lough and made chere
                  And ſayd his tale, as ye ſhullen after here.
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Cokes prologue, and here foloweth hys tale.

                  
               
               
                  APrentiſe whilom dwelte in our cyte
               And of the crafte of vitaylers was he
               Galiard he was, as goldfynch in the ſhawe
               Browne as a bery, a proper ſhorte felawe
               with lockes blake, kempt ful fetouſly
               Daunce he couthe ful wel and ioltly
               He was called Perkyn Reuelour
               He was as ful of loue and paramout
               As is the hyue ful of hony ſwete
               wel was the wenche wyth hym might mete
               At euery bridal wolde he ſyng and hoppe
               He loued bette the tauernes than the ſhoppe
               For whan any ridyng was in chepe
               Out of the ſhoppe thider wolde he lepe
               Tyl that he had al the ſyght iſeyn
               And daunced wel, he wolde not come ageyn
               And gather hym a meyny of hys ſorte
               To hop and ſyng, and make ſuche diſporte
               And there they ſetten ſteuyn for to mete
               To playen at the diſe in ſuche a ſtrete
               For in the cyte nas there no prentiſe
               That fayrer couthe caſten a payre of diſe
               Than Perken couthe, and therto he was fre
               Of his diſpence, in place of priuyte
               That founde his maiſter wele in his chafare
               For oftymes he founde his bore ful bare
               For ſikerly, a prentiſe reuelour
               That haunteth diſe, riotte, or paramour
               His maiſter ſhal it in hys ſhoppe abye
               Al haue he no parte of the mynſtralcy
               For thefte and riotte, they ben conuertible
               Al can he play on gettron or on ribible
               Reuel and trouthe, as in lowe degre
               They ben ful wrothe al day, as men may ſe
               This ioly prentiſe, with his mayſter abode
               Tyl he were nye out of his prentiſhode
               Al were he ſnybbed bothe early and late
               And ſomtyme ledde with reuel to Newgate
               But at the laſt, his maiſter him be thought
               Vpon a day, whan he hys paper ſought
               Of a prouerbe, that ſaith this ſame worde
               welbette is rotten apple out of horde
               Than that it rote al the remenaunt
               So fareth it by a riottous ſeruaunt
               It is moche leſſe harme to let him paſſe
               Than he ſhende al the ſeruaūtes in the place
               Therfore his maiſter gaue hym a quitaunce
               And badde him go, wt ſorowe & myſchaunce
               And thus this ioly prentiſe had his leue
               Nowe lette hym riot al the nyght or leue
               And for there is no thefe without a louke
               That helpeth hym to waſte or to ſouke
               Of that he bribe can, or borowe may
               Anon he ſent hys bedde and hys array
               Vnto a compere of hys owne ſorte
               That loued dice, reuel, and diſporte
               And had a wyfe, that helde for countenaunce
               A ſhoppe, and ſwyued for her ſuſtenaunce.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Cokes tale, & here foloweth the man of lawes prologue.
               
                  
                  OVr hoſte ſaw wel, that the bright ſonne
               The arke of hys artifyciall daye hath ronne
               The fourthe parte, & halfe an hour more
               And though he were not depe expert in lore
               He wyſte it was the eyghtene day
               Of Apryl, that is the meſſanger to May
               And ſawe wel, that the ſhadowe of euery tre
               Was as in lengthe, the ſame quantyte
               As was the body erecte, that cauſed it
               And therfore by the ſhadowe he roke his wit
               That Phebus, whiche yt ſhone clere & bright
               Degrees was fourty clomben of hyght
               And for that daye, as in latitude
               It was ten of the clocke, he gan conclude
               And ſodaynly he plight hys horſe aboute.
               ¶Lordynges (ꝙ he) I warne you al ye route
               The fourthe parte of thys day is gon
               Now for the loue of God and of ſaynt Iohn
               Leſeth no tyme, as ferforth as ye may
               Lordinges the tyme waſteth both night and day
               And ſtealeth from vs, what priuely ſlepyng
               And what through negligēce in our wakyng
               As doth ye ſtreme, that turneth neuer agayn
               Diſcendynge fro the moūtayne in to ye playn
               Wel can Seneke, and many a phylyſofre
               By waylen tyme, more than golde in cofre
               For loſſe of catel may recouered be
               But loſſe of tyme ſhendeth vs (ꝙ he)
               It wol not come ayen withouten drede
               No more than wol Malkyns maydenhede
               Whan ſhe hath loſte it in her wantonneſſe
               Let vs not mowlen thus in ydelneſſe.
               Syr man of lawe (ꝙ he) ſo haue I blys
               Tel vs a tale anon, as forwarde is
               Ye ben ſubmytted, through your fre aſſent
               To ſtonden in this caſe at my iugement
               Aquyteth you now of your beheſte
               Than haue ye done your deuer at the leſte.
               ¶Hoſte (ꝙ he) de pardeuxied aſſent
               To breke forwarde is not myn entent
               Byheſte is dette, and I wol holde fayne
               Al my beheſt, I can no better ſayne
               For ſuch law as a mā yeueth an other wight
               He ſhulde hym ſelue vſen it by ryght
               Thus wol our text: But natheles certayne
               I can right now no thrifty tale ſayne
               That Chaucer (though he can but leudly
               On metres and in rymyng craftely)
               Hath ſayd hem, in ſuche Englyſſhe as he can
               Of olde tyme, as knoweth many a man
               And yf he haue not ſayd hem leue brother
               In one boke, he hath ſayd hem in another
               For he hath tolde of louers vp and doun
               Mo than Ouyde made of mencioun
               In his Epyſtels, that ben ful olde
               what ſhuld I tellē hem, ſythen they ben tolde
               In youthe he made of ſyxe al a lone
               And ſythen he hath ſpoken of euerychone
               Theſe noble wyues, and theſe louers eke
               who ſo that wol hys large volume ſeke
               Cleped the ſayntes lyues of Cupyde
               There may he ſe the large woundes wyde
               Of Lucreſſe, and of Babylon Thiſbe
               The ſwerde of Dydo for the falſe Enee
               The tre of Phillis for her Demophoon
               The playnte of Deianire, and of Hermyon
               Of Artadna, and of Hyſiphilee
               The ba
                     •
                  ayne yle ſtondyng in the ſee
               That dreynte Lyandre for his Hero
               The teares of Heleyn, and eke the wo
               Of Briſets, and of Laodomia
               The crueltie of quene Media
               The lytel chyldren hongyng by the hals
               For the Iaſon, that was of loue ſo fals
               Of Hypermiſtra, Penelope, and Alceſte
               Your wyfehode he cōmendeth with the beſte
               But certaynly no worde ne writeth he
               Of thylke wycked enſample of Canace
               That loued her owne brother ſynfully
               Of ſuche curſed ſtories I ſay fy
               Or els of Tyro Appolloneus
               Howe that the curſed kyng Antyocus
               Byrafte his doughter of her maydenhede
               That is ſo horrible a tale for to rede
               whan he her drewe vpon the pament
               And therfore he of ful auiſement
               Nolde neuer write in uon of hys ſermons
               Of ſuche vnkynde abhominations
               Ne I ne wol non reherce, yef that I may
               But of my tale howe ſhal I don thys day
               Me were lothe be lykened doutles
               To Muſes, that men clepeth Piryades
               Methamorphoſeos wotte what I mene
               But natheles I reche not a bene
               Though I come after hym with Haubake
               I ſpeke in proſe, and let hym rymes make
               And with that worde, he with a ſobre chere
               Began hys tale, as ye ſhullen after here.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the man of lawes Prologue, and here foloweth hys tale.

                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        O Hateful harme, condyciō of pouert.
                     With thurſt, with colde, with hūgre ſo cōfoūded
                     To aſken helpe, the ſhameth in thyn hert
                     If thou non aſke, wt nede thou art ſo wounded
                     that very nede vnwrapeth al thy woūdes hid
                     Maugry thyn heed, thou muſt for indygence
                     Or ſtele, or begge, or borowe thy diſpence
                  
                  
                     Thou blameſt Chriſt, and ſayeſt ful bytterly
                     He miſdeparteth rycheſſe temporall
                     Thy neyghbour thou wyteſt ſynfully
                     And ſayeſt, tyou haſte to lytel, & he hath all
                     Parfay, ſayſt thou, ſomtyme he reken ſhall
                     whan that his tayle ſhal brenne in glede
                     For he nought helpeth nedeful in her nede
                  
                  
                     Herken what is the ſentence of the wyſe
                     Better is to dyen, than to haue indygence
                     Thyne ſelfe neygbour wol the diſpyſe
                     If thou be poore, farwel thy reuerence
                     Yet of the wyſe man take thys ſentence
                     Al the dayes, poore men ben wycke
                     Beware therfore or thou come to the pricke
                  
                  
                     If thou be poore, thy brother hateth the
                     And al thy frendes fleeth fro the, alas
                     O ryche marchauntes ful of wele be ye
                     O noble prudent folke, as in this caas
                     Your bagges ben not fylde with ambes aas
                     But wt cyſe ſynke, yt renneth for your chaūce
                     At Chriſtenmaſſe, mery may ye daunce
                  
                  
                     Ye ſeken loude & ſee for your wynnynges
                     As wyſe folke ye knowen al the ſtate
                     Of reignes, ye ben fathers of tidynges
                     And tales, bothe of peace and debate
                     I was right nowe of tales deſolate
                     Nere that a marchant, gone is many a yere
                     Me taught a tale, whiche ye ſhullen here.
                  
                  
                     
                        IN Surrey whilō dwelte a company
                     Of chapmen rych, and therto ſad and trewe
                     That wyde were ſenten her ſpicery
                     Clothes of golde, and ſatten ryche of hewe
                     Her chafare was ſo thryfty and ſo newe
                     That euery wight hath deyntie to chafare
                     Wyth hem, and eke to ſellen hem her ware
                  
                  
                     Nowe fel it, that the maiſters of that ſorte
                     Han ſhapen hem, to Rome for to wende
                     Were it for chapmanhode, or for diſporte
                     Nō other meſſangere wold the thyder ſende
                     But comē hem ſelfe to Rome, thys is ye ende
                     And in ſuche place as thought hē auauntage
                     For her entent, they taken her herbygage
                  
                  
                     
                     Soiourned hā theſe marchaūtes in ye town
                     Certayne tyme, as fel to her pleaſaunce
                     But ſo byfel, that the excellent renowne
                     Of the emperours doughter dame Cuſtaūce
                     Reported was, with euery cyrcumſtaunce
                     Vnto theſe ſurreyn marchaūtes, in ſuch wiſe
                     Fro day to day, as I ſhal you deuyſe
                  
                  
                     This was the comen voyce of euery man
                     Our emperour of Rome, god hym ſe
                     A doughter hath, yt ſythen the worlde began
                     To rekē as wel her goodneſſe as her beaute
                     Nas neuer ſuche a nother as is ſhe
                     I pray to god in honour her ſuſtene
                     And wolde ſhe were of al Europe the quene
                  
                  
                     In her is hye beautie, without pride
                     Youthe, without grenhede or folye
                     To al her werkes vertu is her gyde
                     Humbleſſe hath ſlayne in her al tyrannye
                     She is a myrrour of al curteſye
                     Her herte is very chambre of holyneſſe
                     Her honde myniſtre of fredom and almeſſe
                  
                  
                     And al this voyce was ſoth, as god is trew
                     But now to our purpoſe let vs turne agayn
                     Theſe marchātes han dō fret her ſhips new
                     And whā they han this bliſful mayden ſeyn
                     Home to Surrey ben they went ageyn
                     And done her nedes, as they han done yore
                     And lyuen in welth, I can ſay no more.
                  
                  
                     Now fel it, yt theſe marchātes ſtodē in grace
                     Of hym that was the Soudon of Surrye
                     For whā yt they came frō any ſtraunge place
                     He wolde of hys benygne curteſye
                     Maken hem good chere, & beſyly aſpye
                     Tydynges of ſondry realmes for to lere
                     The wonders that they might ſeen or here
                  
                  
                     Amonge other thynges ſpecially
                     Theſe marchantes haue hym tolde of dame Cuſtaunce
                     So gret nobleſſe, in erneſt ceryouſly
                     That this Soudō hath cauȝt ſo great pleſāce
                     To han her fygure in hys remembraunce
                     And al his luſte, and al hys beſy cure
                     was for to loue her, whyle his lyfe may dure
                  
                  
                     Parauenture in that ylke large boke
                     Which that cleped is the heuē, twritten was
                     with ſterres, whan that he his byrthe toke
                     That he for loue ſhulde han his dethe, alas
                     For in the ſterres, clerer than is the glas
                     Is written god wot, who ſo coude it rede
                     The dethe of euery man withouten drede
                  
                  
                     In ſterres many a wynter there byfore
                     was written the deth of Hector & of Achilles
                     Of Pompey and Iulius, or they were bore
                     The ſtryfe of Thebes, and of Hercules
                     Of Sampſon, Turnus, and of Socrates
                     The dethe: but that mens wyttes ben ſo dull
                     That no wyght can wel rede it at the full
                  
                  
                     This Soudō for his priue counſayle ſene
                     And ſhortly of thys mater for to pace
                     He hath to hem declared al hys entent
                     And ſaid hē certain, but yf he might haue grace
                     To haue Cuſtaūce, withyn a lytel ſpace
                     He nas but deed, and charged hem to hye
                     To ſhapen for his lyfe ſome remedye.
                  
                  
                     Diuers men, diuerſly they ſayden
                     The argument they caſten vp and doun
                     Many a ſubtell reaſon forthe they layden
                     They ſpeken of Magike, and abuſyoun
                     But finally, as in concluſyoun
                     They can not ſeen in that non auauntage
                     Ne in non other way, ſaue in maryage
                  
                  
                     Than ſawe they therin ſuche difficulte
                     By way of reaſon, to ſpeke al playne
                     Bycauſe that there was ſuche diuerſyte
                     Bitwene her bothe lawes, that they ſayne
                     They trow yt no chriſten prince wolde fayne
                     wedden hys chylde vnder our lawes ſwete
                     That vs was taught, by Mahounde our prophete
                  
                  
                     And he anſwerde: rather than I leſe
                     Cuſtaunce, I wol be chriſten doutels
                     I mote ben hers, I may non other cheſe
                     I pray you holde your argumentes in pees
                     Saueth my lyfe, and be not recheles
                     To getten her, that hath my lyfe in cure
                     For in thys wo, I may not long endure
                  
                  
                     what nedeth greater delatatyon
                     I ſay, by treatie and ambaſſadrye
                     And by the popes meditation
                     And al the chirche, and al the cheualry
                     That in diſtruction of Maumetry
                     And in encreaſe of Chriſtes lawe dere
                     They ben accorded, as ye ſhal here.
                  
                  
                     
                     Howe that the Soudon and his baronage
                     And al hys lieges, ſhulde ichriſtned be
                     And he ſhal han Cuſtaunce in mariage
                     And certayne golde, I not what quantite
                     And her to fynde ſufficient ſurete
                     The ſame accord was ſworne on eyther ſyde
                     Now fayre Cuſtaūce, almyghty god ye gyde
                  
                  
                     Nowe woldē ſom men waiten, as I geſſe
                     That I ſhulde tellen al the purueyaunce
                     That the Emperour of hys nobleſſe
                     Hath ſhapen for hys daughter dame Cuſtāce
                     Wel may men knowē, that ſo gret ordynāce
                     May no man tellen in a lytell clauſe
                     As was arayde for ſo hyghe a cauſe
                  
                  
                     Biſhoppes ben ſhapē with her for to wēde
                     Lordes and ladies, and knightes of renown
                     And other folke ynowe, this is the ende
                     And notifyed is throughout the town
                     That euery wight, with great deuotioun
                     Shulde pray Chryſt, that he this mariage
                     Receyue in gree, and ſpede this voyage
                  
                  
                     The day is come of her departyng
                     I ſay the woful day natural is come
                     That there may be no lengre tarieng
                     But forwarde they hem dreſſe al and ſome
                     Cuſtaunce, that with ſorowe is al ouercome
                     Ful pale ariſt, and dreſſheth her to wende
                     For wel ſhe ſey, there is non other ende
                  
                  
                     Alas, what wondre is it though ſhe wept
                     That ſhal be ſent to a ſtraunge nation
                     Fro frendes, that ſo tenderly her kept
                     And to be bounden vnder ſubiectyon
                     Of one, ſhe knoweth not his condityon
                     Huſbondes ben al good and han ben yore
                     That knowen wyues, I dare ſay no more
                  
                  
                     Father (ſhe ſaid) thy wretched child cuſtāce
                     Thy yonge daughter, foſtred vp ſo ſofte
                     And ye my mother, my ſoueraigne pleaſance
                     Ouer al thyng (out take Chriſt on lofte)
                     Cuſtaunce your child her cōmaundeth ofte
                     Vnto your grace: for I ſhal to Surrye
                     Ne ſhal I neuer more ſe you with eye
                  
                  
                     Alas, vnto the Barbary nation
                     I muſt anon, ſithen it is your wyl
                     But Chriſt that ſtarfe for our redemption
                     So yeue me grace, his heſtes to fulfyl
                     I wretched womā no force though I ſpyll
                     women are borne to thraldom and penaūce
                     And to ben vnder mannes gouernaunce
                  
                  
                     I trow at Troy, whā Thurus brake ye wal
                     Of Ilyon, ne whan brente was Thebes cite
                     Ne Rome for the harme of Hanybal
                     That Romayns hath inēqueſhed tymes thre
                     Nas herde, ſuche tendre wepyng for pyte
                     As was in the chambre for her departyng
                     But forth ſhe mote, wheder ſhe wepe or ſyng
                  
                  
                     O fyrſt mouyng cruel firmament
                     Wyth thy diurnal ſwegh, that croudeſt aye
                     And hurtleſte al fro Eft to Occident
                     That naturally wolde holde another way
                     Thy croudyng ſet the heuen in ſuche array
                     At the begynnyng of this feirs voyage
                     That cruel Mars hath ſlayne this maryage
                  
                  
                     O infortunate aſſendent tortuous
                     Of whiche the lorde is helpeleſſe fal, alas
                     Out of hys angle, into his derkeſt houſe
                     O Mars, O occiſer, as in thys caas
                     O feble Moue, vnhappy ben thy paas
                     Thou knitteſt yt there thou nart not receyued
                     Ther thou were wel, fro thēce art yu wayued
                  
                  
                     Imprudent emperour of Rome, alas
                     was there no philoſofer in thy towne?
                     Is no tyme bette than other in ſuche cas?
                     Of voiage, is there none electiowne?
                     Namely to folke of hye conditioun
                     Nat whan a rote is of a byrthe iknowe
                     Alas we ben to leude, or to ſlowe
                  
                  
                     To ſhip is brought this woful faire mayd
                     Solempnely, with euery cyrcumſtaunce
                     Nowe Ieſu Chriſt be with you al (ſhe ſayd)
                     Ther nys no more, but fare wel fair Cuſtāce
                     She payneth her to make good countenaūce
                     And forthe I let her ſayle in this manere
                     And tourne I wol agayne to my matere.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Explicit prima pars: et ſequitur pars ſecunda.
                  
                     
                     
                        THe mother of the Soudon, wel of vices
                     Aſpyed hathe her ſonnes playne entent
                     Howe he 
                           〈◊〉
                         lete hys olde ſacrifyces
                     And right anon, ſhe for her counſayle ſent
                     And they ben comen, to know what ſhe ment
                     And whan aſſembled was thys folke in fere
                     She ſette her down, & ſayd, as ye ſhal here.
                  
                  
                     Lordes (quod ſhe) ye knowen euerichone
                     Howe that my ſonne is in poynt to lete
                     The holy lawes of our Alkaron
                     Yeuen by goddes meſſangere Machomete
                     But one auowe to grete God I hete
                     The lyfe ſhal rather out of my body ſtert
                     Or Machomettes lawe go out of my hert
                  
                  
                     What ſhulde vs tyden of thys newe lawe
                     But thraldome to our bodies and penaunce
                     And afterwarde in hel to ben drawe
                     For we reneyed Mahounde our creaunce?
                     But lordes, wol ye make aſſuraunce
                     As I ſhal ſay, aſſentyng to my lore
                     And I ſhal make vs ſafe for euermore
                  
                  
                     They ſworen, and aſſenten euery man
                     To lyue with her and dye, and by her ſtonde
                     And eueriche in the beſt wiſe that he can
                     To ſtrengthen her, ſhal his frendes fonde
                     And ſhe hath this empriſe take in honde
                     Whiche ye ſhal here, that I ſhal deuiſe
                     And to hem al ſhe ſpake in thys wyſe.
                  
                  
                     we ſhul vs fyrſt fayne, chriſtendom to take
                     Colde water ſhal not greue vs but a lyte
                     And I ſhal ſuche a reuel and a feeſt make
                     That as I trowe, I ſhal the Soudon quyte
                     For tho his wife be chriſtened neuer ſo white
                     She ſhal haue nede to waſhe away the rede
                     Though ſhe a fonte ful of water wt her lede
                  
                  
                     O Soudonneſſe, rote of iniquite
                     Virago, thou Symyram the ſecounde
                     O ſerpent vnder femenynete
                     I lyke to the ſerpent depe in hell ybounde
                     O fayned woman, al that may counfounde
                     Vertu and innocence, throug thy malyce
                     Is bredde in the, a neſt of euery vyce.
                  
                  
                     O Sathan enuyous, ſyn thylke day
                     That thou were chaſed from our herytage
                     wel kneweſt thou to women the olde way
                     Thou madeſt Eue to bryng vs in ſeruage
                     Thou wolte fordone this chriſten maryage
                     Thyne inſtrument, ſo welaway the whyle
                     Makeſt thou of womē, whā thou woltbegile
                  
                  
                     This Soudoneſſe, whō I blame & wery
                     Let priuely her counſayle gon her way
                     what ſhulde I in this tale lenger tarye?
                     She rydeth to the Soudon on a day
                     And ſayd hym, that ſhe wolde renye her lay
                     And chriſtendom of preſtes hondes fonge
                     Repentyng her, ſhe hethen was ſo longe
                  
                  
                     Beſechyng hym, to done her that honour
                     That ſhe might haue ye Chriſtē folke to feſte
                     To pleſen hem, I wol don my labour
                     The Soudō ſaythe, I wol don at your heſte
                     And knelyng, thanketh her of that requeſte
                     So glad he was, he nyſt not what to ſay
                     She kiſt her ſonne, & home ſhe goth her way
                  
                  
                     Aryued ben theſe chriſten folke to londe
                     In Surre, with a great Solempne route
                     And haſtely this Soudon ſent his ſonde
                     Fyrſt to his mother, & al the reygne aboute
                     And ſayd, hys wyfe was comen out of doute
                     And praydē hem for to ryden ayenſt ye quene
                     The honoure of hys reygne for to ſuſtene
                  
                  
                     Great was the preſe, & ryche was the raye
                     Of Surreyens, and Romayns ymette yfere
                     The mother of the Soudon, ryche and gay
                     Receyueth her with al glad chere
                     As any mother myght her doughter dere
                     Vnto the next cyte there beſyde
                     A ſofte paas ſolempnely they ryde
                  
                  
                     Nought trowe I, the triumphe of Iulyus
                     Of whiche that Lucan maketh ſuche a boſt
                     was royaller, and more curious
                     Than was thaſſemblyng of this bliſful hoſt
                     But this Scorpyon, this wycked goſt
                     The ſodonneſſe, for al her flatteryng
                     Caſt vnder al thys, ful mortally to ſtyng
                  
                  
                     The Soudon cometh himſelfe ſone after this
                     So ryally, that wonder is to tel
                     He welcometh her wyth moche ioye & blys
                     And thus in myrthe & ioye I let hem dwel
                     The fruyte of euery tale is for to tel
                     
                        When tyme come, mē thought it for the beſt
                     That reuel ſtynte, and men gone to reſt
                  
                  
                     The tyme come, this olde Soudōneſſe
                     Ordened hath ye ferſt, of whych I tolde
                     And to the feeſt, chriſten folke hem dreſſe
                     In general, both yonge and olde
                     There may men feeſt and ryalte beholde
                     And deyntes mo then I can deuyſe
                     But al to dere they boughten it or they ryſe
                  
                  
                     O Soudon, wo yt euer thou art ſucceſſour
                     To worldly bliſſe, ſpringed with bytterneſſe
                     The ende of ioye, of our worldly laboure
                     wo occupyeth the ende of our gladneſſe
                     Herken thys counſayle, for thy ſekerneſſe
                     Vpon thy glad day haue thou in mynde
                     The vnware wo or harm, yt cometh behynde
                  
                  
                     For ſhortly for to tellen at a worde
                     The Soudon, and the chriſten euerychone
                     Ben al to hewe, and ſtycked at the borde
                     But it were onely dame Cuſtaunce alone
                     Thys olde Soudonneſſe, curled crone
                     Hath wyth her frēdes done thys curſed dede
                     For ſhe her ſelfe wolde al the countre lede
                  
                  
                     Ne there was ſurreyn none yt was cōuerted
                     That of the coūſayle of the Soudon wot
                     That he nas al to heawe, er he aſterted
                     And Cuſtaūce han they taken anone fotehot
                     And in a ſhyppe al ſterneleſſe (god wot)
                     They han her ſet, & bydden her lerne to ſayle
                     Out of Surrey ayenwarde to Itayle
                  
                  
                     A certayne treſour, that ſhe thyder ladde
                     And ſoth to ſayne, vytayle great plente
                     They han her yeuen, & clothes eke ſhe had
                     And ſorth ſhe ſayled in the ſalte ſe
                     O my cuſtaunce ful of benignite
                     O Emperours yonge doughter dere
                     He that is lorde of fortune, be thy ſtere
                  
                  
                     She bleſſeth her, and wt ful pytous voyce
                     Vnto the croſſe of Chriſt, tho ſayd ſhe
                     O clere, o welful aulter, holy croice
                     Reed of the lambes blode, ful of pyte
                     That waſhe ye worlde fro ye olde iniquite
                     Me fro the fende, and fro hys clawe kepe
                     That daye that I ſhal drenchen in the depe.
                  
                  
                     Victorious tree, protection of trewe
                     That onely worthy were for to bere
                     The kynge of heuē, with hys woūdes newe
                     The whyte lambe, that hurt was wt a ſpere
                     Flemere of fendes, out of hym and here
                     On whych thy lymmes, faythfully extenden
                     Me kepe, & yeue me myght my lyfe to amēdē
                     
                  
                  
                     Yeares and dayes fleteth thys creature
                     Thrughout ye ſee of Grece, vnto the ſtrayte
                     Of Marocke, as it was her auenture
                     O, many a ſory mele may ſhe bayte
                     After her death ful ofte may ſhe wayte
                     Or that the wylde waues wolde her dryue
                     Vnto the place there ſhe ſhulde aryue.
                  
                  
                     Men mightē aſkē, why ſhe was not ſlayne
                     Eke at the feeſt, who myght her body ſaue?
                     I anſwere to that demaunde agayne
                     who ſaued Daniel in that horrible caue?
                     Ther euery wyght, were he maſter er knaue
                     was wyth the lyon frette or he aſterte
                     No wyght but god, that he bare in his herte
                  
                  
                     God lyſt to ſhewe his wonderful myracle
                     In her, for ſhe ſhuld ſene his mighty werkes
                     Chriſt that is to euery harme tryacle
                     By certayne meanes often, as knowē clerkes
                     Doth thinge for certayne ende, yt ful derke is
                     To mans wytte, that for our ignoraunce
                     Ne can not knowe hys prudent purueyaūce
                  
                  
                     Now ſyth yt ſhe was not at ye feeſt yſlawe
                     who kepeth her fro the drenchyng in the ſee?
                     who kept Ionas in the fyſhes mawe
                     Tyl he was ſpouted out at Neniue?
                     wel may mē knowe, it was no wight but he
                     That kept ye people Ebrake from drenchyng
                     wyth drye fete, through the ſee paſſyng
                  
                  
                     Who hath the foure ſpirites of ye tempeſte
                     That power had, both to anoye lande & ſee
                     Both north and ſouth, & alſo weſt and eſte
                     Anoyeth nether ſee, ne lande, ne tre
                     Sothly the cōmaunder therof was he
                     That fro ye tempeſt aye thys woman kepte
                     As wel when ſhe woke as when ſhe ſlepte
                  
                  
                     wher might this womā mete & drynke haue
                     Thre yere & more, how laſteth her vitayle
                     who fedde the Egipcyan Marye in the caue
                     Or in deſerte (none but Chriſt ſans fayle)
                     Fyue thouſand folk it was as gret maruaile
                     
                        With loues fyue and fyſſhes two to fede
                     God ſent his toyſon at her great nede.
                  
                  
                     She driueth forthe in to our Occian
                     Throughout the wylde ſee, tyl at the laſte
                     Vnder an holde, that nempne I ne can
                     Fer in Northumberlōde, the waue her caſte
                     And in the ſande her ſhyppe ſtycked ſo faſte
                     That thence nolde it not of al a tyde
                     The wyl of Chriſt was yt ſhe ſhuld ther byde
                  
                  
                     The conſtable of the caſtel downe is fare
                     To ſeen this wrecke, & al the ſhyp he ſought
                     And fonde this wery woman ful of care
                     He founde alſo the treſoure that ſhe brought
                     In her langage, mercy ſhe beſought
                     The lyfe out of her body for to twyn
                     Her to delyuer of wo that ſhe was in
                  
                  
                     A mauer latyn corrupte was her ſpeche
                     But algates therby was ſhe vnderſtonde
                     The conſtable, whā hym lyſt no lenger ſeche
                     Thys woful woman brought he to londe
                     She kneleth downe, & thāketh goddes ſonde
                     But what ſhe was, ſhe wolde no man ſey
                     For ſoule ne fayre, though ſhe ſhulde dey
                  
                  
                     She ſayd ſhe was ſo maſed in the ſee
                     That ſhe foryate her mynde, by her trouthe
                     The conſtable of her hath ſo great pyte
                     And eke his wyfe, that they wepen for routh
                     She was ſo dyligent withouten ſlouthe
                     To ſerue and pleſe eueryche in that place
                     That al her louen, that loken in her face
                  
                  
                     The cōſtable, & dame Hermegilde his wyfe
                     Were paynems, and that cōtre euery where
                     But Hermegylde loued her ryght as her lyfe
                     And Cuſtaunce hath ſo long ſoiourned there
                     In oriſons, with many a bytter tere
                     Tyl Ieſu hath conuerted through his grace
                     Dame Hermegylde, cōſtableſſe of that place.
                  
                  
                     In al that londe durſt no chriſten route
                     Al chriſten folke ben fledde from that coūtre
                     Through paynems, that conquered al about
                     The plages of the North, by londe and ſee
                     To wales fledde the chriſtianyte
                     Of olde Bretons, dwellyng in that Ile
                     There was her refuge, for the meane whyle
                  
                  
                     But yet nas ther neuer chriſtē bretō ſo exiled
                     That there nas ſome in her priuete
                     Honoured Chriſte, & heathen folke begyled
                     And nye the caſtel ſuche there dwellen thre
                     That one of hym was blynde, & might not ſe
                     But it were with thylke eyen of his mynde
                     with whiche men ſeen, after they ben blynde
                  
                  
                     Bright was the ſonne, as in ſomers day
                     For whiche the conſtable, and his wyfe alſo
                     And Cuſtaunce, han taken the ryght way
                     Towarde the ſee, a furlong waye or two
                     To playen, and to romen to and fro
                     And in her walke, thre blynde men they met
                     Croked and olde, with eyen faſte yſhette
                  
                  
                     In ye name of Chriſt, cryed this blind bretō
                     
                     Dame hermegylde, yeue me ſyght agayne
                     This lady ware a frayde of the ſoun
                     Leſte that her huſbonde, ſhortly for to ſayne
                     wold her for Ieſus Chriſtes lore haue ſlayne
                     Til Cuſtāce made her bolde, & bad her werch
                     The wyl of Chriſt, as doughter of his cherch
                  
                  
                     The cōſtable wore abaſhed of that ſyght
                     And ſayd: what amounteth al thys fare?
                     Cuſtance anſwerde: ſyr it is Chriſtes might
                     That helpeth folke out of the fendes ſnare
                     And ſoferforth ſhe gan our lawe declare
                     That ſhe the conſtable, er that it was eue
                     Cōuerted hath, & on Chriſt made hym bileue
                  
                  
                     This cōſtable was nothing lord of this place
                     Of which I ſpeke, ther he Cuſtaunce fonde
                     But kept it ſtrongly, many a wynter ſpace
                     Vnder Alla, kyng of Northumberlonde
                     That was ful wyſe, & worthy of hys honde
                     Agayne the Scottes, as men may wel here
                     But tourne I wol agayne to my matere.
                  
                  
                     Sathan, that euer vs wayteth to begyle
                     Sawe of Cuſtaunce al her perfectioun
                     And caſt anon how he might quyte her wyle
                     And made a yong knight, yt dwelt in the toun
                     Loue her ſo hotte, of foule affectioun
                     That verily, hym thought yt he ſhulde ſpyll
                     But he of her ones might haue his wyll
                  
                  
                     He woeth her, but it aueyled nought
                     She wolde do no ſynne by no wey
                     And for diſpyte, he compaſſed in his thought
                     To maken her on ſhamfull dethe to dey
                     He wayteth whan the conſtable is awey
                     
                        And priuely on a nyght he crepte
                     In to Hermegildes chambre whyle ſhe ſlept
                  
                  
                     Wery forwaked in her oriſons
                     Slepeth Cuſtaunce and Hermegylde alſo
                     This knight, through Sathans tēptacions
                     Al ſoftely is to the bedde ygo
                     And cut the throte of Hermegylde a two
                     And layde ye blody knyfe by dame Cuſtaūce
                     And went his waye, ther god yeue him myſchaunce.
                  
                  
                     Sone after cometh ye cōſtable home agayne
                     And eke Alla, that kynge was of that lande
                     And ſawe hys wyfe dyſpytouſly yſlayne
                     For whych he wepte and wronge his hande
                     And in the bedde the blody knyfe he fonde
                     By dame Cuſtāce, alas what myght ſhe ſay?
                     For very wo, her wytte was al away
                  
                  
                     To kynge Alla was tolde al this myſchaūce
                     And eke the tyme, & where, & in what wyſe
                     That in a ſhyppe was foūden this Cuſtaūce
                     As here before ye han herde me deuyſe
                     The kynges herte, for pyte gan aryſe
                     when he ſawe ſo benygne a creature
                     Fal in dyſeaſe and in myſaduenture
                  
                  
                     For as ye lābe towarde hys death is brought
                     So ſtante this innocent beforne the kyng
                     This fals knight, yt hath this treſō wrought
                     Bereth her on hād, yt ſhe hath don this thing
                     But natheleſſe there was great mornyng
                     Amonge the people, & ſayd they can not geſſe
                     That ſhe had done ſo great a wyckedneſſe
                  
                  
                     For they han ſene her euer ſo vertuouſe
                     And louyng Hermegylde, right as her lyfe
                     Of this bare witneſſe eueryche in that houſe
                     Saue he that Hermegyld ſlow wt hys knyfe
                     This gētle kyng hath caught a great motyfe
                     Of this wytnes, & thought he wold enquere
                     Deper in thys caſe, the trouth to lere
                  
                  
                     Alas Cuſtaunce, thou haſt no champion
                     Ne fyght canſt thou not, ſo welaway
                     But he that ſtarft for our redempcion
                     And bonde Sathan, & yet lyth there he laye
                     So be thy ſtronge champion thys daye
                     For but yf Chriſt on the myracle kyth
                     without gylt thou ſhalt be ſlayne aſwyth
                  
                  
                     She ſet her doune on knees, & thus ſhe ſayde
                     Immortal god, that ſauedeſt Suſanne
                     Fro falſe blame, and thou mercyful mayde
                     Marye I meane, doughter to ſaynt Anne
                     Byforne whoſe chylde angels ſynge Oſanne
                     Yf I be gyltleſſe of thys felonye
                     My ſocoure be, or els ſhal I dye
                  
                  
                     Haue ye not ſene ſomtyme a pale face
                     (Amonge a prees) of hym that hath ben lad
                     Toward his deth, wher as him get no grace
                     And ſuch a colour in his face hath had
                     That mē might know his face yt was byſtad
                     Amonges al the faces in that route
                     So ſtandeth Cuſtaunce, & loketh her aboute
                  
                  
                     O quenes, lyuynge in proſperite
                     Ducheſſes, and ye ladyes euerychone
                     Haue ſome routh on her aduerſite
                     An emperours doughter ſtante alone
                     She hath no wiȝt, to whō to make hermone
                     O bloode royal, that ſtondeth in this drede
                     Farre ben thy frendes at thy great nede
                  
                  
                     Thys Alla kyng, hath ſuch compaſſioun
                     As gentle herte is ful of pyte
                     That from hys eyen ran the water doun
                     Nowe haſtely do fette a boke (quod he)
                     And yf thys knyght wol ſwere, how that ſhe
                     Thys woman llowe, yet wol we vs auyſe
                     whom that we wol ſhal ben our iuſtyſe
                  
                  
                     A breton boke, wrytten wyth Euangeles
                     was fette, and theron he ſwore anone
                     She gylty was, and in the meane whyles
                     An hande hym ſmote on the necke bone
                     That downe he fyl atones, as a ſtone
                     And both hys eyen braſt out of hys face
                     In ſyght of euery body in that place
                  
                  
                     A voyce was herde, in generall audience
                     That ſayd: Thou haſt dyſclandred gyltles
                     The doughter of holy chyrch, in hye preſence
                     Thus haſt thou done, & yet I holde my pees
                     Of this maruayle, agaſt was al the prees
                     As dyſmayde folke, they ſtoden euerychone
                     For drede of wreche, ſaue Cuſtaunce alone
                  
                  
                     Great was ye drede, & eke the repentaūce
                     Of hem that hadden wrought ſuſpection
                     Vpon thys ſely innocent Cuſtaunce
                     And for thys myracle, in concluſion
                     And by Cuſtaunces mediation
                     
                        The kynge, and many another in that place
                     Conuerted was, thanked by goddes grace
                  
                  
                     This falſe knight was ſlayn for his vntroth
                     By iudgement of Alla haſtely
                     And yet Cuſtaūce, had of his death gret roth
                     And after this, Ieſus of hys mercy
                     Made Alla wedden ful ſolempnely
                     Thys holy mayde, that is ſo bryght & ſhene
                     And thus hath chriſt made Cuſtaūce a quene
                  
                  
                     But who was woful, yf I ſhulde not lye
                     Of thys weddyng? but Donogelde & no mo
                     The kynges mother, full of tyranny
                     Her thought her curſed hert braſt a two
                     She wolde not her ſonne had do ſo
                     Her thought a deſpyte, that he ſhulde take
                     So ſtraunge a creature vnto hys make
                  
                  
                     Me lyſt not of the chaffe ne of the ſtree
                     Make ſo longe a tale, as of the corne
                     what ſhulde I tel of the royalte
                     Of ye mariage, or whych courſe goth beſorne
                     who bloweth in a trompe or in an horne
                     The frute of euery tale is for to ſaye
                     They eaten and drynken, daunce and playe
                  
                  
                     They gon to bedde, as it was ſkyl & ryght
                     For though ye wyues ben ful holy thynges
                     They muſt take in pacience anyght
                     Such maner neceſſaries, as ben pleaſynges
                     To folke that han wedded hem with rynges
                     And lay a lytel her holyneſſe aſyde
                     As for the tyme, it may none other betyde
                  
                  
                     On her he gatte a man chylde anone
                     And to a byſhoppe, and to hys conſtable eke
                     He toke hys wyfe to kepe, when he is gone
                     To Scotlandwarde, hys fo men for to ſeke
                     Now fayre Cuſtāce, yt is ſo humble & meke
                     So longe is gone wyth chylde tyl that ſtyl
                     She halte her chābre abyding Chriſtes wyl
                  
                  
                     The tyme is come, a man chylde ſhe bare
                     Mauricius at fontſtone they hym calle
                     This conſtable doth forth come a meſſanger
                     And wrote to hys kynge, yt cleped was Alle
                     Howe that thys blyſful tydynge is byfal
                     And other tydynges nedeful for to ſay
                     He taketh the letter, & forth he goth his way
                  
                  
                     Thys meſſanger to done hys anauntage
                     Vnto the kynges mother rydeth ſwythe
                     And ſalueth her ful fayre in hys langage
                     Madame (quod he) ye maye be glad & blythe
                     And thanketh god an hūdred thouſand ſythe
                     My lady quene hath chylde, wythoutē doute
                     To ioye and blyſſe of all thys reygne aboute
                  
                  
                     Lo here the letters ſealed of thys thynge
                     That I mote beare, in al the haſt I may
                     Yf ye wol ought vnto your ſonne the kynge
                     I am your ſeruaunt both nyght and day
                     Donegylde anſwerde, as at thys tyme nay
                     But here I wol al nyght thou take thy reſte
                     To morowe wol I ſay the what my leſte
                  
                  
                     This meſſāger drōke ſadly both ale & wyne
                     And ſtolen were hys letters priuely
                     Out of hys bore, whyle he ſlepte as a ſwyne
                     And counterfeted was ful ſubtelly
                     Another letter, wrought ful ſynfully
                     Vnto the kynge dyrecte of thys matere
                     Fro hys conſtable, as ye ſhal after here
                  
                  
                     The letter ſp
                           •
                        ke, the quene delyuered was
                     Of ſo horrible a fendlyche creature
                     That in the caſtel none ſo hardy was
                     That any whyle durſt therin endure
                     The mother was an elſe by auenture
                     I come, by charmes or by ſorcery
                     And euery wyght hateth her company
                  
                  
                     wo was this kyng, whē he yt letter had ſeyn
                     But to no wyght he tolde hys ſorowes ſore
                     But wyth hys owne honde he wrote ageyn
                     welcome the ſonde of Chriſt for euermore
                     To me, that am newe lerned in hys lore
                     Lorde, welcome be thy luſt & thy pleaſaunce
                     My iuſt I put al in thyne ordynaunce
                  
                  
                     Kepeth this childe, al be it foule or fayre
                     And eke my wyfe, vnto myne home cōmyng
                     Chriſt when him lyſt, may ſende me an heyre
                     More agreable then thys, to my lykynge
                     Thys letter he ſealeth priuely wepynge
                     whych to the meſſangere was taken ſone
                     And forth he goth, ther nys no more to done
                  
                  
                     O meſſanger, fulfylled of dronkenneſſe
                     Strōge is thy breth, thy lymmes faltrē aye
                     And thou bewrayeſt al ſecretneſſe
                     Thy mynde is lorne, thou ianglyſt as a iaye
                     Thy face is turned in a newe araye
                     
                        There dronkenneſſe reyneth in any route
                     There nys no coūſayle hyd wythoutē doute
                  
                  
                     O Donegild, I ne haue no englyſh digne
                     Vnto thy malyce, and thy tyrannye
                     And therfore to the fende I the reſygne
                     Let hym endyte of thy traytrye
                     Fye mannyſhe fye: O nay by god I lye
                     Fye fendyſhe ſpirit
                           •
                         for I dare wel tel
                     Though thou here walke, thy ſpirit is in hel
                  
                  
                     This meſſāger cometh fro ye kynge agayne
                     And at the kynges mothers houſe he lyght
                     And ſhe was of thys meſſanger ful fayne
                     And pleaſed hym in al that euer ſhe myght
                     He dronke, and wel hys gyrdel vnder pyght
                     He ſlepeth, and he ſnorteth in hys gyſe
                     Al nyght, tyl the ſonne gan aryſe
                  
                  
                     Efte were hys letters ſtolen euerychon
                     And counterfeted letters in thys wyſe:
                     The kynge cōmaundeth hys conſtable anon
                     Vp payne of hongyng on an hye iewyſe
                     That he ne ſhulde ſuſtren in no wyſe
                     Cuſtaunce, wythin hys realme for to abyde
                     Thre dayes, and a quarter of a tyde
                  
                  
                     But in the ſame ſhyppe, as he her fonde
                     Her and her yonge ſonne, and al her gere
                     He ſhulde croude, and put fro the londe
                     And charge her, that ſhe neue
                           •
                         eft come there
                     O Cuſtaunce, wel may thy goſte haue fere
                     And ſlepynge in thy dreame, ben in penaūce
                     when Donegylde, caſt al thys ordynaunce
                  
                  
                     This meſſāger on ye morow when he woke
                     Vnto the caſtel halte the nexte way
                     And to the Conſtable he the letter toke
                     And when that he thys pytous letter ſey
                     Ful ofte he ſayd (alas) and welaway
                     Lord Chriſt (ꝙ he) how may this world endure
                     So ful of ſynne is many a creature
                  
                  
                     O myghty god, yf that it be thy wyl
                     Syn thou art ryghtful iuge, how may it be?
                     That thou wylt ſuffer innocence to ſpyl?
                     And wycked folke to raygne in proſperite
                     O, good cuſtaunce (alas) ſo wo is me
                     That I mote be thy tourmētour, or els dey
                     On ſhames death, ther nys none other wey
                  
                  
                     Wepen both yonge & olde in that place
                     when that the kynge thys curſed letter ſent
                     And Cuſtaunce wyth a deadly pale face
                     The fourth day, towarde her ſhyp ſhe went
                     But natheleſſe, ſhe taketh in good entent
                     The wyl of Chriſt, & knelyng in the ſtronde
                     She ſayd Lorde, aye welcome be thy ſonde
                  
                  
                     He that me kepte fro that falſe blame
                     whyles I was on the lande amonge you
                     He can me kepe fro harme, & eke fro ſhame
                     In the ſalte ſee, al though I ſe not howe
                     As ſtronge as euer he was, he is nowe
                     In hym truſte I, and in hys mother dere
                     That is to me, my ſayle and eke my ſtere
                  
                  
                     Her lytel chylde lay wepynge in her arme
                     And knelynge pytouſly, to hym ſhe ſayde
                     Peace lytel ſonne, I wol do the none harme
                     wyth that her kercher of her heed ſhe brayde
                     And ouer hys lytel eyen ſhe it layde
                     And in her arme, ſhe lulleth it ful faſte
                     And into heuen her eyen vp ſhe caſte
                  
                  
                     Mother (quod ſhe) & mayde bright Mary
                     Soth is, that through womans eggement
                     Mankinde was lorne, & dampned aye to dye
                     For whych thy chylde was on croſſe yrent
                     Thy blyſful eyen ſawe al hys turment
                     Then is there no compariſon bytwene
                     Thy wo, and any wo that man may ſuſtene
                  
                  
                     Thou ſe thy chylde yſlayne byfore thyn eyen
                     And yet now lyueth my lytel chylde parſaye
                     Nowe lady bryght, to whom al woful cryen
                     Thou glory of womanheed, thou fayre may
                     Thou hauen of refute, bryght ſterre of day
                     Rewe on my chylde, of thy gentylneſſe
                     That reweſt on euery ruful in dyſtreſſe
                  
                  
                     O lytel chelde (alas) what is thy gylte?
                     That neuer wroughteſt ſynne, as yet parde
                     why wol thyne hard father haue the ſpylte?
                     O mercy: dere conſtable (quod ſhe)
                     As let me lytel chylde dwel here wyth the
                     And yf thou darſt not ſauen hym fro blame
                     So kyſſe hym ones in hys fathers name
                  
                  
                     Therwyth ſhe loketh backward to ye lōde
                     And ſayd: farewel huſbande routhleſſe
                     And vp ſhe ryſt & walked downe the ſtronde
                     Toward the ſhyp, her foloweth al the prees
                     & euer ſhe prayeth her child to holdē his pees
                     
                        And taketh her leue, and with an holy entent
                     She bleſſeth her, and into ye ſhyppe ſhe went
                  
                  
                     Vitayled was the ſhippe, it is no drede
                     Habundantly, ſor her full long ſpace
                     And other neceſſaries that ſhulde nede
                     She had inowe, heried be goddes grace
                     For wynde & weder, almighty god purchace
                     And bringe her home, I can no better ſay
                     But in the ſee, ſhe driueth forthe her way
                  
                  
                     Alla the kyng cometh home ſone after this
                     Vnto hys caſtel, of whyche I tolde
                     And aſketh where his wyfe & hys chylde is
                     The conſtable gan aboute hys herte to colde
                     And playnly al the maner hym tolde
                     As ye han herde, I can tel it no better
                     And ſheweth the king his ſeale and his letter
                  
                  
                     And ſayd: lorde as ye commaunded me
                     Vp payne of dethe, ſo haue I done certayne
                     This meſſanger turmented was tyl he
                     Muſt beknowen, and tel plat and playne
                     Fro night to night, in what place he had lain
                     And thus by wytte and ſubtel enqueryng
                     ymagened was, by whō this harm gā ſpring
                  
                  
                     The honde was knowē, yt the letter wrote
                     And al the venym of this curſed dede
                     But in what wyſe, certaynly I note
                     The effecte is this, that Alla out of drede
                     His mother ſlow, that may men playnly rede
                     For that ſhe traytoure was to her alegaunce
                     Thus endeth old Douegild with miſchaūce
                  
                  
                     The ſorowe that this Alla nyght & day
                     Maketh for hys childe, and for hys wyfe alſo
                     There is no tonge that it tel may
                     But nowe wol I to Cuſtaunce go
                     That fleteth in the ſee, in payne and wo
                     Fyue yere and more, as lyked Chriſtes ſonde
                     Or that her ſhyppe aproched vnto londe
                  
                  
                     Vnder an hethen caſtel, at the laſte
                     Of whiche the name in my text I not fynde
                     Cuſtaunce and eke her chylde the ſet vp caſte
                     Almighty god, that ſaueth al mankynde
                     Haue on Cuſtāce, & on her chyld ſome mynde
                     That fallen is in hethen honde efte ſone
                     In poynte to ſpyl, as I ſhal tel you ſone
                  
                  
                     Downe fro the caſtel cometh ther many a wight
                     To gauren on this ſhyppe, & on Cuſtaunce
                     But ſhortly fro the caſtel on a nyght
                     The lordes ſtewarde, god yeue him miſchaū
                        ce
                     A thefe, that had renyed our 
                           •
                        ceaunce
                     Came into the ſhyp alone, and ſayd he ſholde
                     Her lemman be, whether ſhe wolde or nolde
                  
                  
                     Wo was the wretched woman tho bygō
                     
                     Her chylde cryed, and ſhe cryed pitouſly
                     But blyſful Marye holpe her anon
                     For with her ſtroglyng, wel and mightyly
                     The thefe ouer the borde al ſodaynly
                     And in the ſee he drenched for vengaunce
                     And thus hath chriſt vnwēmed kept Cuſtāce
                  
                  
                     O ſoule luſte of luxure, lo thyn ende
                     Nat onely that thou faynteſt mans mynde
                     But verily, thou wolt his body ſhende
                     The ende of thy werke, or of thy luſtes blynd
                     Is cōplayning: how many one may mē fynd
                     That not for werke ſomtyme, but for thētent
                     To don this ſynne, ben eyther ſlayne or ſhent
                  
                  
                     How may this weke womā haue yt ſtrēgth
                     Her to defende agaynſt this renegate?
                     O Golyas, vnmeſurable of length
                     Howe might Dauid make the ſo mate?
                     So yonge, and of armure ſo deſolate
                     Howe durſt he loke on thy dredful face?
                     wel may men 
                           〈◊〉
                        , it is but goddes grace.
                  
                  
                     Who yaue Iudith courage or hardyneſſe
                     To ſleen hym Holofernes in hys tente
                     And to delyuer out of wretchydneſſe
                     The people of God? I ſay for this entent
                     That ryght as God, ſpyrite and vygore ſente
                     To hem, and ſaued hem out of miſchaunce
                     So ſent he might and vigore to Cuſtaunce
                  
                  
                     Forth goth her ſhip thorow ye narow mouth
                     Of Subalter and ſepte, fletyng aye
                     Somtyme weſte, & ſomtyme northe & ſouth
                     And ſomtyme eſte, ful many a wery daye
                     Tyl Chriſtes mother, ybleſſed be ſhe aye
                     Hath ſhapen, through her endleſſe goodneſſe
                     To make an ende of al her heuyneſſe.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Explicit ſecunda pars: et ſequitur pars tertia.
                  
                     
                     
                        NOw let vs ſtynte of Cuſtance but a throwe
                     And ſpeke we of the Romayne Emperoure
                     That out of Surrey hath by letters knowe
                     The ſlaughter of chriſten folke, & diſhonour
                     Done to hys doughter, by a falſe traytour
                     I meane the curſed wycked Soudonneſſe
                     That at the feeſt, let ſleen bothe more & leſſe
                  
                  
                     For whiche this Emperour hath ſent anon
                     Hys ſenatour, with royal ordinaunce
                     And other lordes, god wote many one
                     On Surreyns to done hye vengeaunce
                     They brennē, ſleen, & bringē hem to miſchāce
                     Ful many a day: but ſhortly this is the ende
                     Homward to Rome, they ſhapē hem to wēde
                  
                  
                     This ſenatour repayreth with victorye
                     To Rome warde, ſaylyng ful royally
                     And met the ſhyp dryuyng, as ſayth the ſtory
                     In whiche Cuſtaunce, ſate ful pitouſly
                     Nothyng knewe he what ſhe was, ne why
                     She was in ſuche array, ne ſhe nolde ſey
                     Of her eſtate, thoug ſhe ſhulde dey
                  
                  
                     He bryngeth her to Rome, and to his wyfe
                     He yaue her, and her yonge ſonne alſo
                     And with the ſenatour ſhe ladde her lyfe
                     Thus can our lady bryng out of wo
                     Woful Cuſtaunce, and many another mo
                     And longe tyme dwelled ſhe in that place
                     In holy werkes euer, as was her grace.
                  
                  
                     The ſenatours wyfe her aunte was
                     But for al that, ſhe knewe her neuer the more
                     I wol no lenger tarye in thys caas
                     But to kyng Alla, ye whiche I ſpake of yore
                     That for hys wyfe wepeth, and ſyketh ſore
                     I wol retourne, and let I wyl Cuſtaunce
                     Vnder the ſenatours gouernaunce.
                  
                  
                     ¶Kyng Alla, which yt had his mother ſlayne
                     Vpon a day fel in ſuche repentaunce
                     That yf I ſhortly tellen al ſhal, & playne
                     To Rome he cometh, to receyue hys penaūce
                     And putten him in the churches ordinaunce
                     In hye & in lowe, and Ieſu Chriſt beſought
                     Foryeue hys wycked werkes, yt he wrought
                  
                  
                     The fame anon through Rome town is born
                     Howe Alla kyng, ſhal come on pilgrymage
                     By herbegers that wenten hym byforne
                     For whiche the ſenatour, as was vſage
                     Rode hym agayne, and many of hys lynage
                     As wel to ſhewen hys hye magnifycence
                     As to done any kyng reuerence.
                  
                  
                     ¶Great chere dothe thys noble ſenatour
                     To kyng Alla, and he to hym alſo
                     Eueryche of hem dothe other great honour
                     And ſo byfel, that on a day or two
                     This ſenatour is to kyng Alla go
                     To feeſt, and ſhortly yf I ſhal not lye
                     Cuſtaunces ſonne went in hys companye
                  
                  
                     Som mē wold ſayne, at ye requeſt of Cuſtance
                     This ſenatour had ladde thys childe to feeſt
                     I may not tellen euery circumſtaunce
                     Be as be may, there was he at leſte
                     But ſothe it is, right at hys mothers heſte
                     Byforn Alla, duryng the meate ſpace
                     The chylde ſtode, lokyng in the kynges face
                  
                  
                     This Alla kyng, hath of thys chyld great wonder
                     And to the ſenatour he ſayd anon
                     whoſe is ye fayre chyld, that ſtondeth yonder?
                     I not (quod he) by god and by ſaynt Iohn
                     A mother he hath, but father hath he non
                     That I of wote, but ſhortly in a ſtounde
                     He tolde Alla, howe the childe was founde
                     But God wote (quod this ſenatour alſo)
                     So vertuous a lyuer in my lyfe
                     Ne ſawe I neuer, as ſhe, ne herde of mo
                     Of wordly woman, mayden, ne of wyfe
                     I dare wel ſay, ſhe had leuer a knyfe
                     Through her breſt, than ben a womā wycke
                     There is no mā couthe bryng her to yu pricke
                  
                  
                     Nowe was the chylde as lyke Cuſtaunce
                     As poſſyble is, a creature for to be
                     This Alla hath the face in remembraunce
                     Of Dame Cuſtaunce, and theron muſed he
                     Yeue that the childes mother were aught ſhe
                     That is his wyfe, and priuely he ſyght
                     And ſpedde hym fro the table, that he myght
                  
                  
                     Parfay he thought, ye fantome is in myn heed
                     I ought deme of ſkylful iugement
                     That in the ſalte ſee my wyfe is deed
                     And afterwarde he made hys argument
                     What wot I, yf Chriſt hath hyther ſent
                     My wyfe by ſee? as wel as he her ſente
                     To my countrey, fro thens yt ſhe was wente
                  
                  
                     
                     And after anone, home wyth the ſenatour
                     Goeth Alla, for to ſe thys wonder chaunce
                     Thys ſenatour doth Alla great honour
                     And haſtely he ſente after Cuſtaunce
                     But truſteth wel, her luſt not to daunce
                     when ſhe wyſt wherfore was that ſonde
                     Vnneth vpon her fete myght ſhe ſtonde.
                  
                  
                     Whē Alla ſaw his wife, fayre he her gret
                     And wept, that it was rough for to ſe
                     For at the fyrſt loke he on her ſet
                     He knewe wel verely that it was ſhe
                     And for ſorowe, as dombe ſtante as a tre
                     So was her herte ſhet in dyſtreſſe
                     when ſhe remembreth hys vnkyndneſſe
                  
                  
                     Twyſe ſhe ſowned in her owne ſyght
                     He wepeth and hym excuſeth pytouſly
                     Nowe god (ꝙ he) and hys hallowes bryght
                     So wylly on my ſoule haue mercy
                     That of your harme, as gyltleſſe am I
                     As is Maurice my ſonne, ſo lyke your face
                     Els the fende me fetch out of thys place.
                  
                  
                     Longe was ye ſobbyng, & the bytter payne
                     Or that her woful herte myght ceſe
                     Great was the pyte to here hem complayne
                     Thrugh which plaintes gan her wo encreſe
                     I pray you al my laboure to releſe
                     I may not tel her wo, tyl to morowe
                     I am ſo wery to ſpeake of her ſorowe
                  
                  
                     But fynally, when that ye ſoth is wyſte
                     That Alla gyltleſſe was of her wo
                     I trowe an hundred tymes ben they kyſte
                     And ſuch a blyſſe is there bytwyxt hem two
                     That ſaue the ioye, that laſteth euermo
                     There is no lyke, that any creature
                     Hath ſeyen or ſhal, whyle ye world may dure
                  
                  
                     Tho prayed ſhe her huſbande mekely
                     In releſynge of her pytous payne
                     That he wolde praye her father ſpecially
                     That of hys maieſty he wolde enclyne
                     To vouchſafe ſomdaye wyth hym to dyne
                     She prayed hym eke, he ſhulde by no waye
                     Vnto her father no worde of her to ſaye
                  
                  
                     Some mē wold ſay, yt the chyld Maurice
                     Doth thys meſſage vntyl thys Emperour
                     But as I geſſe, Alla was not ſo nyſe
                     To hym that was of ſo ſoueraygne honour
                     As he that is of chriſten folke the flour
                     Sent any chylde, but it is bette to deme
                     He went hym ſelfe, and ſo it may wel ſeme
                  
                  
                     Thys Emperour graunted gentelly
                     To come to dyner, as he hym byſought
                     That al was redy he loked beſely
                     Vpon this chyld, & an his doughter thought
                     Alla goeth to hys ynne, and as hym ought
                     Arrayde for thys feeſt in euery wyſe
                     As farforth as hys connynge may ſuffyce
                  
                  
                     The morow came, & Alla gan hym dreſſe
                     And eke his wyfe, the Emperour for to mete
                     And forth they ryde in ioye and in gladneſſe
                     And when ſhe ſawe her father in the ſtrete
                     She lyght a downe and falleth hym to fete
                     Father (ꝙ ſhe) your yonge chylde Cuſtaunce
                     Is nowe ful clene out of your remembraūce
                  
                  
                     I am your doughter Cuſtaunce (ꝙ ſhe)
                     That whylom ye han ſent into Surrye
                     It am I father, that in the ſalte ſee
                     was put alone, and dampned for to dye
                     Nowe good father, I you mercy crye
                     Sende me no more into hethenneſſe
                     But thanken my lorde here of hys kyndneſſe
                  
                  
                     who can the pytous ioye tellen al
                     Bytwyxt hem three ſyn they bē thus ymette
                     But of my tale make an ende I ſhal
                     The day goth faſt, I wol no longer lette
                     Thys glad folke to dyner ben ſette
                     In ioye and blyſſe, at meate I let hem dwell
                     A thouſande folde welmore then I can tel
                  
                  
                     This chyld Mauris was ſythin emperour
                     Made by the pope, and lyued chriſtenly
                     To Chriſtes churche he dyd great honour
                     But I let al thys ſtory paſſen by
                     Of Cuſtaunce is my tale ſpecially
                     In olde Romayne ieſtes men may fynde
                     Maurys lyfe, I beare it not in mynde
                  
                  
                     This kynge Alla, when he hys tyme ſey
                     wyth thys Cuſtaūce, his holy wyfe ſo ſwete
                     To Englande ben they come the ryght wey
                     where as they lyue in ioye and in quyete
                     But lytel whyle it laſteth I you hete
                     Ioye of this worlde, for tyme wol not abyde
                     Fro daye to nyght, it chaungeth as the tyde
                  
                  
                     
                     Who lyued euer in ſuch delyte a daye
                     That he ne meued eyther in conſcience
                     Or yre, or tallent of ſome kyn affraye
                     Enuye or pryde, or paſſion, or offence?
                     I ne ſaye, but for thys ende, & thys ſentence
                     That lytel whyle in ioye or in pleaſaunce
                     Laſteth the blyſſe of Alla wyth Cuſtaunce
                  
                  
                     For deth, yt taketh of hye & lowe his rente
                     when paſſed was a yere, euen as I geſſe
                     Out of thys worlde kynge Alla he hente
                     For whom Cuſtaūce hath ful gret heuyneſſe
                     Nowe let vs prayen god hys ſoule bleſſe
                     And dame Cuſtaunce, fynally to ſay
                     Towarde ye towne of Rome goeth her way
                  
                  
                     To Rome is come thys holy creature
                     And fyndeth her father hole and ſounde
                     Nowe is ſhe ſkaped al her auenture
                     And when that ſhe her father hath yfounde
                     Downe on her knees goeth ſhe to grounde
                     wepynge for tenderneſſe in herte blythe
                     She heryeth god, an hūdred thouſand ſythe
                  
                  
                     In vertue and holy almeſdede
                     They lyuen al, and neuer a ſonder wende
                     Tyl death departen hem, thys lyfe they lede
                     And fareth nowe wel, my tale is at an ende
                     Now Ieſu chriſt, yt of his myght may ſende
                     Ioye after wo, gouerne vs in hys grace
                     And kepe vs al, that ben in thys place
                  
               
            
            
               ¶Thus endeth the man of lawes tale, and here foloweth the Squyers prologue.
               
                  OVr hooſt on hys ſtyroppes ſtode anone
               And ſayd: good men herkeneth euerychone
               Thys was a thryfty tale for the nones
               Syr paryſh preeſt (ꝙ he) for goddes bones
               Tel vs a tale, as was thy forwarde yore
               I ſe wel that ye lerned men in lore
               Can moche good, by goddes dignite
               The parſon hym anſwerde, benedicite
               what cyleth the man, ſo ſynfully to ſwere?
               ¶Our hoſt anſwerd, O Ienkyn be ye there
               Now good mē (ꝙ our hoſt) herkeneth to me
               I ſmel a loller in the wynde (ꝙ he)
               Abydeth for goddes dygne paſſion
               For we ſhall haue a predication
               Thys loller here, wol prechen vs ſomwhat.
               ¶Nay by my fathers ſoule, that ſhal he nat
               Sayd the Squyer, here ſhal he not preche
               Here ſhal he no goſpel gloſe ne teche
               we leueth al in the great god (quod he)
               He wolde ſowen ſome dyffyculte
               Or ſprynge cockel in our clene corne
               And therfore hooſt, I warne the byforne
               My lolly body, ſhal a tale tel
               And I ſhal ryngen you ſo mery a bel
               That I ſhal waken al thys companye
               But it ſhal not ben of philoſofye
               Ne phiſyke, ne termes queynte of lawe
               There is but lytel laten in my mawe
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Squyers prologue, and hereafter foloweth hys tale.

                  
               
               
                  
                     AT Sarra, in the lāde of Tartary
                  There dwelt a kynge that warred Surry
                  Thrugh which ther died many a douȝty mā
                  
                  Thys noble kynge was called Cambuſcā
                  
                  Whych in hys tyme was of ſo great renoun
                  That there nas no where, in no regioun
                  So excellent a lorde in al thynge
                  Hym lacked naught that longed to a kynge
                  As of the ſecte, of whych he was borne
                  He kept hys laye, to whych he was ſworne
                  And therto he was hardy, wyſe, and ryche
                  And pytous and iuſte alwaye ylyche
                  Trewe of his worde, benygne & honorable
                  Of hys corage, as any centre ſtable
                  Yonge, freſhe, & ſtronge, in armes deſyrous
                  As any bacheler of al hys hous
                  A fayre perſon he was, and fortunate
                  And kept alwaye ſo royal aſtate
                  That there nas no where ſuch another man
                  This noble kyng, this tartre, this Cābuſcā
                  
                  Had two ſonnes by Eltheta hys wyfe
                  Of whych the eldeſt hyght Algarſyfe
                  That other was cleped Camballo.
                  ¶A doughter had thys worthy kynge alſo
                  That yongeſt was, and hyght Canace
                  But for to tel you al her beaute
                  It lyeth not in my tonge, ne in my connynge
                  I dare not vndertake ſo hye a thynge
                  Myne Englyſhe eke is vnſufficient
                  It muſte be a rethor excellent
                  That couth his colours, longyng for ye arte
                  Yf he ſhulde dyſtryue here euery parte
                  I am none ſuch I muſte ſpeake as I can
                  And ſo byfel, that thys Cambuſcan
                  Hath twenty wynter borne hys dyademe
                  As he was wonte, fro yere to yere I deme
                  He let the feeſt of hys natiuite
                  Done cryen throughout Sarra hys cyte
                  The laſte ydus of Marche, after the yere
                  Phebus the ſonne, full 
                        •
                     oly was and clere
                  For he was nye hys exaltation
                  In Martes face, and in hys mantion
                  In Aries, the collorike, the hote ſygne
                  Ful luſty was the wether and benygne
                  For whych the foules, agaynſt ye ſonne ſhene
                  
                     what for the ſeaſon, and the yonge grene
                  Ful loude ſonge her affections
                  Hem ſemed han getten hem protections
                  Ayen the ſwerde of wynter kene and colde.
                  ¶Thys Cābuſcā, of which I haue you tolde
                  In royal veſtementes, ſyt on hys deys
                  wyth dyademe, ful hye in hys paleys
                  And helde hys feeſt ſo royal and ſo ryche
                  That in thys worlde nas there none it lyche
                  Of whych, yf I ſhall tel of al the array
                  Then wolde it occupye a ſommers day
                  And eke it nedeth not to deuyſe
                  At euery courſe, the ordre of her ſeruyce
                  I wol not tel of her ſtraunge ſewes
                  Ne of her ſwannes, ne of her heronſewes
                  Eke in that lande, as tellen knyghtes olde
                  Ther is ſome meate, that is ful dainty holde
                  That in thys lande men retche of it but ſmal
                  There is no man that maye reporten all.
                  I wyl not tarye you, for it is pryme
                  And for it is no frute, but loſſe of tyme
                  Vnto my fyrſt purpoſe I wol haue recourſe
                  ¶And ſo byfel that after the thyrde courſe
                  whyſe that thys kyng ſyt thus in his noblay
                  Herkenyng his minſtralles her thinges play
                  Beforne hym at hys borde delicyouſly
                  In at the halfe dore al ſodeynly
                  There come a knyght on a ſtede of braſſe
                  And in hys honde abrode myrrour of glaſſe
                  Vpon hys thombe he had of golde a rynge
                  And by hys ſyde a naked ſwerde hongynge
                  And vp he rydeth to the hye borde
                  In al the hall ne was there ſpoke a worde
                  For maruayle of ye knyght, hym to beholde
                  Ful beſely they wayten yonge and olde
                  ¶This ſtraūge knyght yt come thus ſodenly
                  Al armed ſaue hys heed, ful royally
                  Salued kynge and quene, and lordes al
                  By ordre, as they ſytten in the hall
                  wyth ſo hye reuerence and obeyſaunce
                  As wel in ſpeche as in countenaunce
                  That Gawyn wyth hys olde curteſye
                  Thoughe he come ayen out of fayre
                  Ne coude him not amende of no worde
                  And after this, before the hye borde
                  He with a manly voyce ſayd his meſſage
                  After the forme vſed in his langage
                  without vyce of ſyllable or of letter
                  And for his tale ſhulde ſeme the better
                  Accordant to his wordes was his chere
                  As teacheth arte of ſpeche hem that it lere
                  Al be that I can not ſowne his ſtyle
                  Ne I ne can not clymben ſo hye a ſtyle
                  Yet ſaye I thus, as to my comen entente
                  Thus much amoūteth al that euer he mente
                  Yf it ſo be, that I haue it in my mynde
                  ¶He ſayd: The kynge of Araby and of Ynde
                  My liege lorde, on thys ſolempne day
                  Salueth you, as he beſt can and may
                  And ſendeth you, in honoure of your feeſt
                  By me that am redy at your heeſt
                  Thys ſtode of braſſe, that eaſely and wel
                  Can in the ſpace of a daye naturel
                  This is to ſay, in foure & twenty houres
                  where ſo ye lyſt, in drought or in ſhoures
                  Beren your body into euery place
                  Into whych your herte wylleth to pace
                  without weme of you, through foule or faire
                  Or yf ye lyſt to fleen in the eyre
                  As doth an Egle, when hym lyſt to ſore
                  This ſame ſtede ſhal beare you euermore
                  withouten harme, tyl ye ben there you leſte
                  Though that ye ſlepen on his backe and reſt
                  And turne agayn with ye writhyng of a pyn
                  He that it wrought coude ful many a gyn
                  He wayted ful many a conſtellation
                  Or he had done this operatyon
                  And knew ful many a ſeale & many a bonde.
                  This myrrour eke yt I haue in myne honde
                  Hath ſuch a myght, that men may in it ſe
                  when there ſhal fallen any aduerſite
                  Vnto your reygne, or to your ſelfe alſo
                  And openly ſe, who is your frende and foe
                  And ouer al thys, yf any lady bryght
                  Hath ſet her herte on any myner wyght
                  Yf he be falſe, ſhe ſhal the treaſon ſe
                  Hys newe loue, and al hys ſubtylte
                  So openly, that there ſhal nothynge hyde
                  Wherfore agayne this luſty ſommer tyde
                  Thys myrrour & thys rynge, that ye maye ſe
                  He hath ſente to my lady Canace
                  Your excellent doughter that is here
                  ¶The vertue of thys rynge, yf ye woll here
                  Is thys, that yf ſhe lyſt it for to were
                  Vpon her thombe, or in her purſe it bere
                  There is no foule, that fleeth vnder heuen
                  That ſhe ne ſhal vnderſtande hys ſteuen
                  And knowe hys meanynge openly & playne
                  And anſwere hym in hys langage agayne
                  And euery graſſe that groweth vpon rote
                  She ſhal wel know, & whom it wol do bote
                  Al be hys woūdes neuer ſo depe and wyde
                  ¶This naked ſwerde, yt hangeth by my ſyde
                  Such vertue hath, yt what man ſo ye ſmyte
                  
                     Throughout his armure it wol karue & byte
                  were it as thycke as a braunched oke
                  And what mā that is woūded wyth yu ſtroke
                  Shal neuer be hole, tyl that you lyſt of grace
                  To ſtroken him with ye platte in thylke place
                  There he is hurte, thys is as moche to ſayne
                  Ye mote wyth the platte ſwerde agayne
                  Stroken hym in the wounde, & it wol cloſe
                  Thys is very ſoth wythouten gloſe
                  It fayleth not, whyles it is in your holde.
                  And whē this kniȝt hath thus his tale tolde
                  He rydeth out of the halle, & downe he lyght
                  Hys ſtede, whych that ſhone as ſonne bryght
                  Stante in the courte ſtyl as any ſtone
                  The knyght is into chambre ladde anone
                  He is vnarmed, and to the meate yſette
                  And al that harneys byforne hym ſette
                  This is to ſayne, the ſwerd & eke ye myrrour
                  Al borne was into the hye tour
                  wyth certayne offycers ordeyned therfore
                  And to Ca
                        •
                     ace the rynge is bore
                  Solemnely, there ſhe ſat at the table
                  But ſekerly wythout any fable
                  The horſe of braſſe, yt may not be remeued
                  It ſlante, as it were to the grounde yglewed
                  There maye no man out of the place it dryue
                  For none engyne, or wyndlas, or polyue
                  And cauſe why, for they can not the crafte
                  And therfore in the place they hau it lafte
                  Tyl yt the kniȝt hath taught hem ye manere
                  To voyden hym, as ye ſhal after here.
                  ¶Great was ye prees, that ſwarmed to & fro
                  To gauren on the horſe, that ſtandeth ſo
                  For it ſo hye was, & ſo brode and longe
                  So wel proporcioned for to ben ſtronge
                  Ryght as it were a ſtede of Lumbardye
                  Therwyth ſo horſly, and ſo quycke of eye
                  As it a gentle courſer of Poyle were
                  For certes, fro hys tayle to hys ere
                  Nature ne arte coude hym not amende
                  In no degre, as al the people wende
                  But euermore her moſte wonder was
                  Howe that it couth gon, and was of bras
                  It was of fayrie, as the people ſemed
                  Dyuers folke dyuerſly they demed
                  As many heedes, as many wyttes there ben
                  They murmure, as doth a ſwarme been
                  And made of ſkylles after her fanteſyes
                  Reherſynge of the olde poetryes
                  And ſayden it was ylyke the Pegaſe
                  The horſe that had wynges for to flee
                  Or els it was the Grekes horſe Synon
                  That brought Troye to dyſtruccion
                  As men in thys olde bokes rede.
                  Myne herte (ꝙ one) is euermore in drede
                  I trowe ſome men of armes ben therin
                  That ſhapen hem thys cytie for to wyn
                  It were right good, yt ſuch thynges were know
                  An other rowned to his felow low
                  And ſayd he lyed, for it is rather ylyke
                  An apparence made by ſome magyke
                  As iogglours playen at theſe feaſtes grete
                  Of ſondry thoughtes, thus they iāgle & trete
                  As leude people demeth comenly
                  Of thynges that ben made more ſubtelly
                  Then they can in her leudneſſe comprehende
                  They demen gladly to the badder ende.
                  And ſome of them wondren on ye myrrour
                  That borne was vp to the mayſter toure
                  Howe men myght in it ſuch thynges ſe.
                  And other anſwerd, certes it myght wel be
                  Naturally by compoſicyons
                  Of angels and of ſlye reflections
                  And ſayden in Rome was ſuche on
                  They ſpeken of Alocen and Vitilion
                  And Ariſtote, that wryteth in her lyues
                  Of queynte myrrours, and of proſpectiues
                  As knowen they that han her bokes herde.
                  And other folke han wōdred on ye ſworde
                  That wolde perce through euery thynge
                  And fel in ſpeche of Telophus the kynge
                  And of Achylles for hys queynte ſpere
                  For he couth wyth it heale and dere
                  Right in ſuch wyſe as mē may wt the ſwerde
                  Of which right now ye haue your ſeluē herd
                  They ſpeken of ſondry hardyng of metal
                  And ſpeken of medycyns eke wythal
                  And how, and when it ſhulde hardened be
                  whych is vnknowe algate to me.
                  ¶Tho ſpeake they of Canaces rynge
                  And ſayden al, that ſuche a wonder thynge
                  Of crafte of rynges herde they neuer non
                  Saue that Moſes, and kynge Salomon
                  Had a name of connynge of ſuch arte
                  Thus ſayen the people, & drawē hem aparte
                  But natheleſſe, ſome ſayden that it was
                  wonder to maken o
                        •
                      ſerue aſhen, glas
                  And yet is glas not 
                        •
                     yke aſhen of ferne
                  But ſo they han knowen it ſo ferne
                  Therfore they ſeſen her iāglyng & her wōder
                  As ſore wondren ſome on cauſe of thōder
                  On ebbe & fludde, on goſſomer, and on myſte
                  And on al thynge, tyl the cauſe is wyſte.
                  Thus ianglen they, and demē and deuyſe
                  
                     Tyl that the kyng gan fro hys borde aryſe.
                  ¶Phebus hath lefte the angle merydional
                  And yet aſcendyng was the beeſt royal
                  The gentle Lyon with his Aldrian
                  Whan that this tartre Kyng Cambuſcan
                  Roſe from his borde, there as he ſate ful hye
                  Byforne hym gothe the loude mynſtralcye
                  Tyl he came to hys chambre of paramentes
                  There as they ſownen dyuers inſtrumētes
                  That is lyke an heuen for to here
                  Nowe dauncen luſty Venus chyldrē dere
                  For in the fyſhe her lady ſate ful hye
                  And loketh on hem with a frendly eye.
                  ¶This noble kyng is ſette vpon hys trone
                  This ſtraunge knyght is fet to hym ful ſone
                  And in the daunce he gothe with Canace
                  Here is the reuel and the iolyce
                  That is not able a dul man to deuyſe
                  He muſt hau knowe loue and her ſeruyſe
                  And ben a feeſtlyche man, as freſſhe as May
                  That ſhulde you deuyſe ſuche araye.
                  ¶who coulde you tellen the forme of daūces
                  So vncouth and ſo freſh countenaunces
                  Suche ſubtyll lokynges and diſſimulinges
                  For drede of ialouſe mens apperceyuynges
                  No man but Lancelot, and he is deed
                  Therfore I paſſe ouer al this luſty heed
                  I ſay no more, but in this iolyneſſe
                  I lete hem, tyl men to ſupper dreſſe.
                  ¶The ſteward byddeth ſpyces for to hye
                  And eke the wyne, in al this melodye
                  The vſhers and the ſquyers ben ygone
                  The ſpyces and the wyne is comen anone
                  They eten & dronkē, & whā this had an ende
                  Vnto the temple, as reaſon was, they wende
                  The ſeruyce is done, they ſoupen al by day
                  what nedeth it to reherſen her array?
                  Eche man wot wel, that at a kynges feeſt
                  Is plenty, to the moſte and to the leeſt
                  And deyntes mo, than ben in my knowynge.
                  And after ſupper gothe this noble kynge
                  To ſeen this horſe of braſſe, with al his route
                  Of lordes and of ladyes hym aboute
                  Such wōdrig ther was on his hors of bras
                  That ſythen the great ſiege of Troye was
                  There as men wondred on an horſe alſo
                  He was there ſuch a wondring, as was tho
                  But fynally, the kyng aſketh the knyght
                  The vertue of thys horſe and the myght
                  And prayde him to tellen of his gouernaūce.
                  The horſe anon gan to tryppe and daunce
                  whā yt this knightlayde honde on hys rayne
                  And ſayd, ſyr there is no more to ſayne
                  But whan you lyſte to ryden any where
                  Ye mote tryll a pyn, ſtante in hys ere
                  whiche I ſhal tel you bytwene vs two
                  Ye mote nempne hym to what place alſo
                  Or to what countre you lyſt to ryde
                  And whan ye come there you lyſte abyde
                  Bydde hym diſcende, and trylle a nother pyn
                  For therin lyeth the effecte of al the gyn
                  And he wol downe diſcende, & don your wyl
                  And in that place he wol abyde ſtyl
                  Though al ye world had the cōtrary ſworne
                  He ſhal not thens be ythrowe ne yborne
                  Or yf you lyſt bydde hym thens gon
                  Tryl thys pyn, and he wol vanyſhe anon
                  Out of the ſyght of euery maner wyght
                  And come ayen, be it day or nyght
                  whan that you lyſt to clepen hem agayne
                  In ſuche a gyſe, as I ſhal to you ſayne
                  Bytwyxt you and me, and that ful ſone
                  Ryde whā you lyſt, ther nis no more to done
                  ¶Enfourmed whā ye kyng was of ye knyght
                  And hath conceyued in hys wytte aright
                  The maner and the forme of al thys thyng
                  Ful glad and ful blythe, the noble kyng
                  Repayreth to hys reuel, as byforne
                  The brydel is in to the toure yborne
                  And kept amonge his iewels leſe and dere
                  The horſe vanyſſhed, I not in what manere
                  Out of her ſyght, ye get no more of me
                  But thus I lete in luſte and iolyte
                  This Cambyſcan, hys lordes feſtyng
                  Tyl wel nye the day began to ſpryng.
               
               
                  ¶Explicit prima pars
                        •
                     et ſe quitur pars ſecunda.
                  
                     THe nortee of digeſtyon, the ſlepe
                  Gan on hem wynke, & bad hem take kepe
                  That myrth, drinke, & labour wol haue reſte
                  And with a galping mouthe hem al he keſte
                  And ſayd, it was tyme to lye adoun
                  For blode was in hys domynacyoun
                  Cheryſſeth blode, natures frende (ꝙ he)
                  They thankē him galpyng, by two by thre
                  And euery wight gan drawe him to his reſte
                  As ſlepe hem bade, they toke it for the beſte.
                  Her dremes ſhul not now ben it olde for me
                  Ful were her heedes of fumoſyte
                  That cauſeth dremes, of whyche ther is no charge
                  They ſlepen, tyl it was pryme large
                  
                     The moſte parte, but it were Canace
                  She was ful meſurable, as women be
                  For of her father had ſhe take her leue
                  To gon to reſt, ſone alter it was eue
                  Her lyſt not appalled for to be
                  Nor on the morowe, vnfeſtlyche for to ſe
                  And ſlept her fyrſt ſlepe, and awoke
                  For ſuche a ioy ſhe in her herte toke
                  Both of her queynt Rynge, & of her myrrour
                  That twenty tymes ſhe chaunged her colour
                  And in her ſlepe, ryght for impreſſyon
                  Of her myrrour, ſhe had a viſyon
                  Wherfore, or the ſonne vp gan glyde
                  She cleped her maiſtreſſes her beſyde
                  And ſayd, her luſte for to aryſe.
                  ¶Theſe olde women, that ben gladly wyſe
                  As is her mayſtreſſe, anſwerde her anon
                  And ſayd: madame, whither wol ye gon
                  Thus erly
                        •
                      for folke ben al in reſte.
                  ¶I wol (quod ſhe aryſe) for me leſte
                  No lenger for to ſlepe, but walken aboute.
                  Her mayſtreſſe cleped wome a great route
                  And vp they ryſe, wel ten or twelue
                  Vp ryſeth freſſhe Canace her ſelue
                  As ioly and bright, as the yonge ſonne
                  That in the Ram is four degrees vp ronne
                  No hygher was he, whan ſhe redy was
                  And ſorthe ſhe walketh an eaſye paas
                  Arrayed after the luſty ſeaſon ſote
                  Lightly for to playen, & to walken on fete
                  Nought but fyue or ſixe of her meyne
                  And in a trenche, fer in the parke gethe ſhe.
                  ¶The vapour, whiche yt fro the erth glode
                  Maketh the ſonne to ſeme ruddy and brode
                  But natheleſſe, it was ſo fayre a ſyght
                  That it made al her hertes for to lyght
                  What for the ceaſon, and for the morownyng
                  And for the ſoules that ſhe herde ſynge
                  For right anon, ſhe wyſte what they ment
                  Right by her ſonge, and knewe al her entent
                  ¶The knotte why, that euery tale is tolde
                  If it be taryed tyl luſte be colde
                  Of hem that han it herkened after yore
                  The ſauour paſſeth, euer lenger the more
                  For fulſomneſſe of prolixite
                  And by the ſame reaſon thynketh me
                  I ſhulde vnto the ſame knot condiſcende
                  And make of her walkyng ſone an ende.
                  ¶Amydde a ti
                        •
                     , for drye as whyt as chalke
                  As Canace was playeng in her walke
                  There ſate a fauron ouer her heed ful hye
                  That with a pytous voyce gan to crye
                  That al the wodde reſowned of her cry
                  And beaten had her ſelfe ſo pytouſly
                  With bothe her wynges, tyl the reed blode
                  Ran endelonge the tre, there as ſhe ſtode
                  And euer in one, ſhe cryed and ſhright
                  And with her becke, her ſeluen ſo ſhe pyght
                  That there nas Tygre, ne cruel beſte
                  That dwelleth in wodde, eyther in foreſte
                  That nolde hā wept, yf that they wepe coude
                  For ſorowe of her, ſhe ſhright alway ſo loude
                  For there nas neuer yet man on lyue
                  If that he couthe a faucon wel diſcryue
                  That herde of ſuche another of fayreneſſe
                  As wel of plumage, as of gentylneſſe
                  Of ſhappe, of al that might trekened be
                  A faucon peregryn than ſemed ſhe
                  Of ſcrude londe, & euermore as ſhe ſtoode
                  She ſwouned now & now, for lacke of blood
                  Tyl welny is ſhe fal fro the tree.
                  ¶This fayre kynges doughter, this Canace
                  That on her fynger bare the queynte rynge
                  Thrugh which ſhe vnderſtod wel euery thīg
                  That any foule may in hys leden ſayne
                  And coude anſwere hym in his leden agayne
                  Hath vnderſtande, what this faucon ſeyde
                  And welny for routhe almoſt ſhe deyde
                  And to the tre ſhe gothe ful haſtely
                  And on this faucon loketh ful pytouſly
                  And helde her lappe abrod, for wel ſhe wyſte
                  The faucon muſte fallen from the twyſte
                  Whā yt ſhe ſwouned next, for lacke of bloode
                  A longe whyle to wayten there ſhe ſtoode
                  Tyl at the laſte ſhe ſpake in this manere
                  Vnto the hauke, as ye ſhalen after here.
                  ¶What is the cauſe, yf it be for to tell
                  That ye ben in this furyal payne of hell
                  Quod Canace, vnto this hauke aboue
                  Is thys for ſorowe of dethe, or loſſe of loue?
                  For as I trowe, theſe ben cauſes two
                  That cauſen moſt a gentyll hert wo
                  Of other harme it nedeth not to ſpeke
                  For ye vpon your ſelfe you wreke
                  Whiche proueth wel, that eyther ire or drede
                  Mote ben encheſon of your cruell dede
                  Syu that I ſe none other wyght you chace
                  For the loue of god, ſo doth your ſelfe grace
                  Or what may be your helpe, for weſt or eſt
                  Ne ſawe I neuer er now, no byrde ne beeſt
                  That farde with hym ſelue ſo pytouſly
                  Ye ſlee me with your ſorowe veryly
                  I haue of you ſo great compaſſioun
                  For goddes loue come fro the tre adowne
                  
                     And as I am a kynges doughter trewe
                  If that I veryly the cauſes knewe
                  Of your diſeaſe, yf it lay in my myght
                  I wolde amende it, certes or it be nyght
                  As wyſely helpe me great god of kynde
                  And herbes ſhal I right ynowe fynde
                  To hele with your hurtes haſtely
                  Tho ſhright this faucon yet more ſpitouſly
                  Than euer ſhe dyd, & fell to grounde anone
                  And lyeth a ſwoune deed as is a ſtone
                  Tyl Canace hath in her lappe itake
                  Vnto the tyme ſhe gan of ſwoune awake
                  And after that ſhe of ſwoune gan abreyde
                  Ryght in her haukes leden thus ſhe ſayde
                  That pite renneth ſoone in gentyl herte
                  (Felyng his ſemilitude in paynes ſmerte)
                  Is proued al day, as men may ſe
                  As wel by werke as by authorite
                  For gentle hert kepeth gentilneſſe
                  I ſe wel, that ye haue of my diſtreſſe
                  Campaſſyon, my fayre Canace
                  Of very womanly benignyte
                  That nature in your principles hath ſette
                  But for none hope for to fare the bette
                  But for to obey vnto your hert free
                  And for to make other beware by me
                  As by the whelpe, chaſtiſed is the Lyon
                  Right for that cauſe, and for that concluſyon
                  Whyle that I haue a leyſer and a ſpace
                  Myne harm I wol confeſſen or I pace
                  And euer while that one her ſorowe tolde
                  That other wepte, as ſhe to water wolde
                  Tyl that the Faucon badde her to be ſtyl
                  And with a ſike, thus ſhe ſayd her tyl.
                  ¶There I was bredde, alas that ilke day
                  And foſtred in a roche of marble gray
                  So tenderly, that nothyng eyleth me
                  I ne wiſt not what was aduerſyte
                  Tyl I coude flye, ful hye vnder the ſkye
                  There dwelte a Terſelet me faſt by
                  That ſemed wel of al gentylneſſe
                  Al were he ful of trayſon and of falſneſſe
                  It was ſo wrapped vnder humble chere
                  And vnder hewe of trouth, & in ſuche manere
                  Vnder pleaſaunce, and vnder buſy payne
                  That no wight coud haue wede he coud fain
                  So depe in greyne he dyed his colours
                  Right as a ſerpent hideth him vnder flours
                  Tyl he may ſe hys tyme for to byte
                  Right ſo, this God of loues ipocrite
                  Dothe ſo hys ſerymones and obeyſaunce
                  with his diſſimulynge, & fayre aſſemblaunce
                  That ſowneth vnto gentilneſſe of loue
                  As in a tombe is al the fayre aboue
                  And vnder the cors, ſuche as ye wote
                  Suche was this ipocrite colde and hote
                  And in this wyſe he ſerued his entent
                  That ſaue the fende, non wiſt what he ment
                  Tyl he ſo long had weped and complayned
                  And many a yere hys ſeruyce to me yfayned
                  Tyl that myn hert, to pitous and to nyce
                  Al innocent of hys cruel malyce
                  For ferde of hys dethe, as thought me
                  Vpon hys othes and hys ſuretee
                  Graunted hym loue, vpon this condition
                  That euermore myn honour and my renoun
                  were ſaued, bothe preuy and apert
                  This is to ſay, that after hys deſert
                  I yaue hym al myn hert and all my thought
                  God wote, and in other wyſe nought
                  And toke his hert in chaunge of myn for aye
                  But ſothe is ſayd, gone ſythen many a day
                  A trewe wight and a thefe thynketh not one
                  And whan he ſawe the thyng ſo fer ygone
                  That I graunted hym fully my loue
                  In ſuche a gyſe, as I haue ſayd aboue
                  And yeuen hym my trewe hert as fre
                  As he ſwore he yafe his hert to me
                  Anon this Tygre, ful of doubleneſſe
                  Fyll on hys knees with ſo deuout humbleſſe
                  with hye reuerence, and eke by his chere
                  So lyke a gentyl louer, as of manere
                  So rauyſhed, as it ſemed for ioye
                  That neuer Troylus, ne Paris of Troy
                  Iaſon certes, ne non other man
                  Syn Lamet was, that alderfyrſt began
                  To louen two, as writen folke beforne
                  Ne neuer ſythen Adam was borne
                  Ne couthe man by twenty thouſande parte
                  Counterfete the ſophymes of hys arte
                  Ne were worthy to vnbocle hys galoche
                  Ther doubleneſſe or faynyng ſhulde aproche
                  Ne ſo couth thanke a wight, as he dyd me
                  His maner was an heuen for to ſe
                  Tyl any woman, were ſhe neuer ſo wyſe
                  So paynteth he hys chere poynt deuyſe
                  As wel hys wordes, as hys countenaunce
                  And I ſo loued hym for hys obeyſaunce
                  And for the trouthe that I demed in his hert
                  That yf ſo were, that any thyng hym ſmert
                  Al were it neuer ſo lyte, and I it wyſt
                  Me thought I fetel dethe at my herte twyſt
                  And ſhortly, ſo ferforth this thyng went
                  That my wyl was his wylles inſtrument
                  
                     That is to ſay, my wil obeyed his wyl
                  In al thyng, as ferre as reaſon fyl
                  Kepyng the boundes of my worſhyp euer
                  Ne neuer had I thyng ſo lefe ne ſo leuer
                  As hym god wote, ne neuer ſhal no mo
                  This laſt lenger than a yere or two
                  That I ſuppoſed of hym nothyng but good.
                  But fynally, thus at the laſt it ſtode
                  That fortune wolde that he moſt twyn
                  Out of that place, whiche that I was in
                  where me was wo, it is no queſtyon
                  I can not make of it diſcriptyon
                  For o thyng dare I tel boldely
                  I knowe what the payne of dethe is therby
                  Suche harm I felte, that he ne might beleue
                  ¶So on a day of me he toke hys leue
                  So ſorowfully eke, that I wende verely
                  That he had felte as moche harm as I
                  whā that I herde him ſpeke, & ſaw his hewe
                  But natheles, I thought he was ſo trewe
                  And eke that he repaire ſhulde agayne
                  withyn a lytel whyle ſothe to ſayne
                  And reaſon wolde eke, that he muſt go
                  For hys honour, as ofte happeth ſo
                  That I made vertue of neceſſite
                  And toke it wel, ſythe it muſt nedes be
                  As I beſt might, I hidde fro hym my ſorow
                  And toke him by ye hond, ſeit Iohn to borow
                  And ſayd thus: lo I am yours al
                  Beth ſuche as I haue ben to you and ſhal
                  what he anſwerde, it nedeth not reherce
                  who can ſayn bet than he, who can do wers?
                  whan he had al wel yſaid, than hath he done
                  Therfore behoueth hym a longe ſpone
                  That ſhal eten with a fende, thus herd I ſay
                  So at the laſt he mote forth hys way
                  And forthe he ſle
                        •
                     th til he come there him leſt
                  whan it come hym to purpoſe for to reſt
                  I trowe he had thylke text in mynde
                  That al thyng repayring to hys kynde
                  Gladeth him ſelue, thus ſayn men as I geſſe
                  Men louen of kynde newfangleneſſe
                  As briddes don, that men in cages fede
                  For though yu nyght & day take of hem hede
                  And ſtrawe her cage fayre and ſofte as ſylke
                  And gyue hem ſugre, hony, breed and mylke
                  Yet right anon as hys dore is vppe
                  He with his fete wold ſporne adown his cup
                  And to the wood he wolde, and wormes eate
                  So newfangled ben they of her meate
                  And louen nouelries of proper kynde
                  No gentylneſſe of blode may hem bynde
                  So ferde thys Tercelet, alas the day
                  Tho he were gentel borne, freſhe and gaye
                  And goodly for to ſe, and humble and free
                  He ſawe vpon a tyme a kyte flee
                  And ſodaynly he loued this kyte ſo
                  That al hys loue is clene fro me goo
                  And hath hys trouthe falſed in this wyſe
                  Thus hathe the kyte my loue in her ſeruyce
                  And I am lorne without remedy.
                  And with ye worde this faucon gan to crye
                  And ſwouned ofte in Canaces barme
                  Great was ye ſorowe for that haukes harme
                  That Canace, and all her women made
                  They nyſt how they might her faucon glade
                  But Canace home bereth here in her lappe
                  And ſoftely in playſters gan her wrappe
                  There as ſhe wt her becke had hurt her ſelue
                  Nowe can not Canace but herbes delue
                  Out of the grounde and make ſalues newe
                  Of herbes precious and fyne of hewe
                  To helen with the hauke fro day to nyght
                  She dothe her beſyneſſe, and all her might
                  And by her beddes heed ſhe made a mewe
                  And couered it with veluettes blewe
                  In ſygne of trouthe, that is in women ſene
                  And al withouten ye Mewe is peynted grene
                  In which were peynted al theſe falſe foules
                  As ben theſe tydefes, tercelettes, and owles
                  Ryght for diſpyte were peynted hem beſyde
                  Pyes on hem for to crye and chyde
                  Thys leue I Canace her hauke kepynge
                  I wol nomore as nowe ſpeke of her rynge
                  Tyl it come efte to purpos for to ſayn
                  How that this faucon gate her loue agayn
                  Repentant, as the ſtory telleth vs
                  By mediatyon of Camballus
                  The kynges ſonne, of whiche I of tolde
                  But henſforthe I wol my proces holde
                  To ſpeken of auentures, and of batayls
                  That yet was neuer herd of ſo gret marue
                        •
                     ls
                  Fyrſt wol I tel you of Cambuſcan
                  That in hys tyme many a cyte wan
                  Howe that he wan Theodora to hys wyfe
                  And after wol I ſpeke of Algarſyfe
                  For whom ful ofte in great peryl he was
                  Ne had he ben holpen by the horſe of bras
                  And after wol I ſpeke of Camballo
                  That fought in liſtes with the brethern two
                  For Canace, er that he myght her wyn
                  And there I left, I wol agayn begyn.
                  ¶Explicit ſecunda pars.
               
               
                  
                  Apollo whirleth vp his chare ſo hye
                  Tyl that the god Mercurius houſe he ſlye.
                  
                     ¶There can be founde no more of this foreſayd tale, whiche hath ben ſought in dyuers places
                  
               
            
            
               ¶Here foloweth the wordes of the Marchaunt to the Squyer, and the wordes of the Hoſt to the Marchaunt.
               
                  IN fayth Squyer, thou haſt the wel iquyt
               And gentelly, I prayſe wel thy wyt
               Quod the Marchaunt, conſydryng thyne youth
               So felyngly thou ſpekeſt I the alouth
               As to my dome, there is non that is here
               Of eloquence, that ſhalbe thy pere
               Yf that thou lyue, God gyue the ryght good chaunce
               And in vertue ſende the perſeueraunce
               For of thy ſpekyng I haue great deynte
               I haue a ſonne, and by the Trinite
               I had leuer thā twenty poūdeſworth londe
               (Though it nowe were fallen in my honde)
               He were a man of ſuche diſcreſſyon
               As that ye ben: fye on poſſeſſyon
               But yf a man be vertuous with all
               I haue my ſonne ſhybbed, and yet ſhal
               For he to vertue lyſteth nat to entende
               But for to play at dyſe, and to ſpende
               And leſe al that he hath, is his vſage
               And he had leuer talke with a page
               Than to cōmen with any gentyl wight
               where he myght lerne gentelneſſe aryght
               Strawe for your gentylneſſe (ꝙ our hoſt)
               what marchaunt, pardy wel thou woſt
               That eche of you mote tellen at the leſt
               A tale or two, or breken your beheſt
               That know I wel (ꝙ the marchāt) certain
               I pray you haue me nat in diſdayn
               Though I to thys mā ſpeke a worde or two
               ¶Tel on thy tale withouten wordes mo
               Gladly ſyr hoſt (ꝙ he) I wol obey
               Vnto your wyl, nowe herkeneth what I ſay
               I wol you nat contray in no wyſe
               As farre as my wittes may ſuffyſe
               I pray to god that it may pleſen you
               Than wotte I wel, it is good ynow.
            
            
               ¶Thus ende the wordes of the hoſt and the marchant, and here foloweth the Marchauntes prologue.
               
                  WEpyng and waylyng, care and other ſorowe
               I haue ynowe, both euyn and eke a morowe
               Quod the Marchaunt, and ſo haue other mo
               That wedded be, I trowe that it be ſo
               For wel I wote it fareth ſo by me
               I haue a wyfe, the worſt that may be
               For though the fende coupled to her were
               She wold him ouermatch I dare wel ſwere
               What ſhulde I reherce in ſpecial
               Her hygh malyce: ſhe is a ſhrewe at all
               There is a longe and a large difference
               Betwyxt Griſyldes great pacience
               And of my wyfe the paſſyng cruelte
               Were I vnbounde, alſo mote I the
               I wolde neuer efte come in the ſnare
               We wedded men lyue in ſorowe and care
               Aſſay who ſo wol, and he ſhal fynde
               That I ſay ſothe, by ſaynt Thomas of Inde
               As for the more parte, I ſay nat al
               God ſhelde that it ſhulde ſo befal
               Ah good ſyr hoſt, I haue wedded be
               Theſe monethes two, and more nat parde
               And yet I trowe he that all hys lyfe
               Hath wedded be, thoug men hym ryfe
               In to the hert, ne couthe in no manere
               Tel ſo moche ſorowe, as I nowe here
               Coude tell, of my wyues curſedneſſe
               Now ꝙ our hoſt marchant, ſo god yt bleſſe
               Syn ye be ſo moche knowe of that arte
               Ful hertely I pray you tell vs parte
               Gladly quod he, but of myn owne ſore
               For ſory hert I tel may no more.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Marchauntes prologue, and here foloweth hys tale.

                  
               
               
                  WHylō there was dwellyng in Lombardy
               A worthy knyght, that borne was at Pauy
               In whiche he lyued in great proſperyte
               And ſyxty yeare a wyfeles man was he
               And folowed aye hys bodely delyte
               On women, there as was his appetyte
               As don theſe foles that ben ſeculeres
               And whan that he was paſt ſixty yeres
               were it for holyneſſe or dotage
               I can not ſayn, but ſuche a great corage
               Had this knyght to ben a wedded man
               That day and nyght he dothe al that he can
               To eſpy, where that he wedded myght be
               Prayeng oure lorde to graunten hym that he
               Myghten ones knowen of that blyſful lyfe
               That is bitwixt an huſbande and hys wyfe
               And for to lyuen vnder that holy bonde
               with which god fyrſt man and womā bonde
               Non other lyfe (ſayd he) is worthe a bean
               For wedlocke is ſo eaſy and ſo clean
               That in this worlde it is a paradiſe
               Thus ſaith this olde knyght that is ſo wyſe.
               And certaynly, as ſothe as god is kyng
               To take a wyfe, it is a glorious thyng.
               And n
                     •
                  mely whan a man is olde and hore
               Than is a wyfe the frute of hys treſore
               Than ſhulde he take a yonge wyfe & a faire
               On which he might engendren him an heire
               And lede his lyfe in ioye and in ſolace
               where as theſe bachelers ſyngen alas
               whan that they fynden any aduerſyte
               In loue, whiche nys but chyldes vanyte
               And trewly it ſytte wel to be ſo
               That bachelers han ofte payne and wo
               On brotel grounde they bylden brotelneſſe
               They finde freelte, whā they wenē ſecreneſſe
               They lyue but as bryddes or beeſtes
               In lyberte, and vnder nyce areſtes
               There as a wedded man in hys eſtate
               Lyueth a lyfe bliſfully and ordinate
               Vnder the yoke of mariage ybounde
               wel may his hert in ioye and bliſſe habounde
               For who can be ſo buxome as a wyfe?
               who is ſo trewe and eke ſo tentife
               To kepe hym ſicke and hole? as is hys make
               For wel ne wo ſhe nyl hym nat forſake
               She nys nat wery hym to loue and ſerue
               Though that he lye bedreed tyl he ſterue
               And yet ſome clerkes ſayn, that it is nat ſo
               Of whiche Theophraſt is one of tho
               what force though Theophraſt lyſt to lye
               Ne take no wyfe (ꝙ he) for hyſbondrye
               As for to ſpare in houſholde thy diſpence
               A trewe ſeruaunt doth more dilygence
               Thy good to kepe, than thyn owne wyfe
               For ſhe wol clayme halfe parte al her lyfe
               
                  And yf that thou be ſycke, ſo god me ſaue
               Thy very frendes or a trewe knaue
               wol kepe the better, thē ſhe that wayteth aye
               After thy good, and hath done many a daye
               And yf thou take a wyfe, to the vntrewe
               Ful ofte tyme it ſhal the ſore rewe
               Thys ſentence, and an hundred ſithes worſe
               wryteth thys mā there, god hys bones curſe
               But take no kepe of ſuche vanyte
               Defyeth Theophraſt, and herkeneth me.
               ¶A wyfe is goddes yefte verely
               Al other maner yeftes hardely
               As landes, rentes, paſture, or cōmune
               Or mouables, al ben yeftes of fortune
               That paſſen, as a ſhadowe on a wal
               But drede not, yf playnly ſpeake I ſhal
               A wyfe wol laſt and in thyne houſe endure
               wel lenger then the lyſt parauenture
               Mariage is a ful great ſacrament
               He whych hath no wyfe I holde him ſhent
               He lyueth helples, and al deſolate
               I ſpeake of folke in ſecular eſtate.
               And herkneth why, I ſay not this for nouȝt
               A woman is for mannes helpe ywrought
               The hye god, wen he had Adam maked
               And ſawe hym alone belly naked
               God of hys great goodneſſe ſayd than
               Let vs make an helpe to thys man
               Lyke to hymſelfe, and then he made Eue
               Here may ye ſe, and hereby may ye preue
               That a wyfe is mannes helpe and comforte
               Hys paradyſe terreſtre and hys dyſporte
               So buxome and ſo vertuous is ſhe
               They muſt nedes lyue in vnyte
               One fleſhe they ben, & two ſoules as I geſſe
               Not but one herte in wele and in dyſtreſſe
               A wyfe, ah ſaynt Mary, benedicite
               Howe myght a man haue any aduerſite
               That hath a wyfe, certes I can not ſey
               The blyſſe that is betwyxte hem twey
               There may no tonge tellen or hert thynke
               Yf he be poore, ſhe helpeth hym to ſwynke
               She kepeth hys good, & waſteth neuer a dei
               Al that her huſbande luſt, her lyketh wel
               She ſayeth not ones naye, when he ſayth ye
               Do thys (ſayeth he) al redy ſyr (ſayth ſhe)
               ¶O blyſful order of wedlocke precious
               Thou arte ſo mery, and eke ſo vertuous
               And ſo cōmended, and ſo approued eke
               That euery mā, that halte hym worth a leke
               Vpon hys bare knees ought all hys lyfe
               Thanken god, that hym hath ſent a wyfe
               Or praye to god hym for to ſende
               A wyfe, to laſt vnto hys lyues ende
               For then hys lyfe is ſette in ſekerneſſe
               He may not be dyſceyued, as I geſſe
               So that he werche after hys wyues rede
               Then may he boldely bear
                     •
                  n vp hys hede
               They ben ſo trewe and alſo wyſe
               For whych, yf thou wolt werchen as ye wyſe
               Do alway ſo, as women wol the rede
               Lo how that Iacob, as theſe clerkes rede
               By good counſayle of hys mother Rebecke
               Bounde the kydde ſkynne about hys necke
               For whych hys fathers beniſon he wan
               Lo Iudyth, as the ſtory tel can
               By wyſe counſayle goddes people kept
               And ſlewe hym Holofernes whyle he ſlept
               Lo Abigail by counſayle, howe ſhe
               Saued her huſbande Nabal, when that he
               Shulde haue be ſlayne. And loke Heſter alſo
               By good counſayle delyuered out of wo
               The people of God, & made him Mardochere
               Of Aſſuere enhaunſed for to be.
               ¶There nys nothynge in gree ſuperlatyfe
               (As ſayeth Senec) aboue an humble voyfe
               Suffre thy wynes tonge, as Caton byt
               She ſhal cōmaūde, and thou ſhalt ſuſtre it
               And yet ſhe wol obey of curteſye
               A wyfe is keper of thyne huſbondrye
               wel may the ſycke man wayle and wepe
               There as there nys no wyfe ye houſe to kepe
               I warne the, yf wyſely thou wylt werche
               loue wel thy wift, as chriſt loueth his cherch
               Yf thou loue thy ſelfe, thou loueſt thy wyfe
               No man hateth hys fleſhe: but in hys lyfe
               He foſtreth it, and therfore byd I the
               Cheryſhe thy wyfe, or thou ſhalt neuer ithe
               Huſbande & wyfe, what ſo men iape or playe
               Of worldly folke holde the ſeker waye
               They be ſo knit, ther may none harme betide
               And namely vpon the wyues ſyde
               For which this Ianuary, of which I tolde
               Conſydred hath in hys dayes olde
               The luſty lyfe, the vertuous quiete
               That is in mariage hony ſwete
               And for hys frendes on a daye he ſent
               To tellen hem theffecte of hys entent.
               ¶wyth face ſadde, his tale hath he hem tolde
               He ſayd frendes, I am hoore and olde
               And almoſt (god wot) on the pyttes brynke
               Vpon my ſoule ſomwhat muſt I thynke
               I haue my body folyſhly dyſpended
               Bleſſed be god, it ſhal ben amended
               
                  For I wol ben certayne a wedded man
               And that anone in al the haſt I can
               Vnto ſome mayde, fayre and tender of age
               I pray you ſhapeth for my mariage
               All ſodeynly, for I wol not abyde
               And I wol fonden to eſpye on my ſyde
               To whom I may be wedded haſtely
               But for as moche as ye ben more then I
               Ye ſhullen rather ſuche a thynge eſpyen
               Then I, and there me luſte beſt to alyen
               But one thing war
                     •
                  e I you my frēdes dere
               I wol none olde wyfe haue in no manere
               She ſhal not paſſe fyftene yere certayne
               Olde fyſhe & yonge fleſhe wol I haue fayne
               Better is (ꝙ he) a pyke then a pykerel
               And better then olde befe is the tender veel
               I wol no woman of thyrty wynter age
               It nys but be anſtrawe and great forage
               And eke theſe olde wedowes (god it wote)
               They connen ſo moche crafte in wades bote
               So moche broken harme when hem lyſt
               That wyth hem ſhulde I neuer lyue in reſt
               For ſondrye ſcholes maketh ſubtel clerkes
               A woman of many ſcholes halfe a clerke is
               But certaynly a yonge thynge may men gye
               Ryght as mē may warme war wt hādes ply
               wherfore I ſaye you plainly in a clauſe
               I nyl none olde wyfe haue for thys cauſe
               For yf ſo were that I had myſchaunce
               And in her couth haue no pleaſaunce
               Then ſhulde I lede my lyfe in auoutry
               And ſo ſtreyght to the deuel when I dye
               Ne chyldren ſhulde I none vpon her geten
               Yet had I leuer houndes had me eten
               Then that myne heritage ſhulde fal
               In ſtraunge handes: and thus I tel you al
               I dote not, I wote the cauſe why
               Men ſhulde wedden: & forthermore wot I
               There ſpeaketh many a man of mariage
               That wot nomore of this thē doth my page
               For whych cauſe men ſhulde take a wyfe
               Yf he may not lyuen chaſt hys lyfe
               Take hym a wyfe wyth great deuotion
               Bycauſe of leful procreation
               Of chyldren, to the honoure of god aboue
               And not only for paramour or for loue
               And for they ſhulden lechery eſchewe
               And yelde her dettes when that it is dewe
               Or for that eche man ſhulde helpen other
               In myſchefe, as a ſuſter ſhulde the brother
               And lyue in chaſtite ful heuenly
               ¶But ſyrs (by your leaue) that am not I
               For god be thanked, I dare make auaunt
               I fele my lymmes hole and ſufficiaunt
               To done al that a man belongeth to
               I wote my ſelfe beſt what I may do
               Though I be hore, I fare as doth a tre
               That bloſſometh er that frute ywoxe be
               The bloſſomed tre is neyther drye ne deed
               I fele no where hore but on my heed
               Myne herte and my lymmes bene as grene
               As laurel is through the yere to ſene
               And ſythen that ye haue herd al myn entent
               I pray you to my wyll ye wol aſſent
               Dyuers men dyuerſly hym tolde
               Of mariage many enſamples olde
               Some blameth it, ſome prayſeth it certayne
               But at the laſt, ſhortly for to ta ſayn
               (As al daye falleth altereacion
               Betwyxt frendes in dyſputation)
               There fel a ſtryfe betwyxt hys brethren two
               Of whych that one was cleped Placebo
               Iuſtynus ſothly called was that other
               ¶Placebo ſayd: O Ianuary brother
               Ful lytel nede han ye my lorde ſo dere
               Counſayle to axe of any that is here
               But that ye ben ſo ful of ſapience
               That you ne lyketh for your hye prudence
               To vayne fro the worde of Salomon
               Thys worde ſayth he vnto euerychone
               worke al thynge by counſayle, thus ſayd he
               And then ſhalt thou not repent the
               But tho that Salomon ſpeake ſuch a worde
               Myne owne dere brother and my lorde
               So wyſely god my ſoule bryng to eaſe & reſt
               I holde your owne counſayle for the beſt.
               For brother myne, take of me thys motyfe
               I haue ben now a court man al my lyfe
               And god wote, though I now vnworthy be
               I haue ſtanden in ful great degre
               Abouen lordes in ful great eſtate
               Yet had I neuer wyth none of hem debate
               I neuer hem contraryed truely
               I wote wel that my lorde can more then I
               That he ſayeth, I holde it ferme and ſtable
               I ſay the ſame, or els thynge ſemblable
               A ful great foole is any counſaylour
               That ſerueth any lorde of hye honour
               That dare preſume, or ones thynke it
               That his coūſaile ſhuld paſſe his lordes wy
                     •
                  
               
               Nay, lordes be no fooles be my fay
               Ye haue your ſelfe ſpoken here to day
               So hye ſentence, ſo holy & ſo wel
               That I conſent, and conferme euery del
               
                  Your wordes al, and your opinyon
               By god there nys no man in al thys town
               Ne in Itayle, coude bette haue ſayd
               Chriſt holdeth hym of thys ful wel a payde
               And trewly it is an hye corage
               Of any man that is ſtopen in age
               To taken a yong wyfe, by my father kyn
               Your hert hongeth on a ioly pyn
               Doth now in this matere right as you leſt
               For finally I holde it for the beſt.
               ¶Iuſtynus that aye ſatte and herde
               Right in thys wyſe to Placebo he anſwerde
               Nowe brother myne be pacyēt I you pray
               Sith ye haue ſaid, now herkeneth what I ſay
               ¶Senec among other wordes wyſe
               Saith, that a man ought hym wel auyſe
               To whom he yeueth hys londe or his catel
               And ſythens I ought auyſe me right wel
               To whom I gyue my good away fro me
               wel moche more I ought auyſed be
               To whom I gyue my body: for alway
               I warne you wel it is no childes play
               To take a wyfe wichout auyſement
               Men muſt enquere (this is myne aſſent)
               whether ſhe be ſobre, wiſe, or dronkelwe
               Or proude, or other wayes a ſhrewe
               A chider, or a waſter of thy good
               Other riche or poore, or els a man is wood
               Al be it ſo, that no man fynde ſhal
               Non in this worlde, that trotteth hole in all
               Ne man, ne beeſt, ſuche as men can deuyſe
               But natheles, it ought ynough ſuffyſe
               with any wyfe, yf ſo were that ſhe had
               Mo good thewes, than her vices badde
               And al thys aſketh layſer to enquere
               For god wotte I haue wept many a tere
               Ful preuely, ſythe I had a wyfe
               Praiſe who ſo wol a wedded mannes lyfe
               Certeyn I fynde in it but coſt and care
               And obſeruaunces of all blyſſes bare
               And yet god wote, my neyghbours about
               And namely of women many a rout
               Sayn that I haue the moſt ſtedfaſt wyfe
               And eke the mekeſt one that beareth lyfe
               But I wot beſt, where wryngeth me my ſho
               Ye may for me, right as you lyſt do
               Auyſe you, ye ben a man of age
               Howe that ye entren into mariage
               And namely with a yonge wife and a fayre
               By him that made water, erthe, and ayre
               The yongeſt man that is in al this rout
               Is beſy ynowe to bringe it about
               To haue his wyfe alone, truſteth me
               Ye ſhal nat pleaſen her yeres thre
               This is to ſayn, to don her pleſaunce
               A wyfe aſketh ful moche obſeruaunce
               I praye you that ye be nat yuel apayde
               wel (ꝙ this Ianuary) & haſt thou al ſayd?
               Strawe for thy Sence, & for thy prouerbes
               I count it nat worth a pannyer ful of herbes
               Of ſchole termes, wiſer men than thou
               As thou haſt herde, aſſenteth it right nowe
               To my purpoſe Placebo, what ſay ye?
               I ſay it is a curſed man (ꝙ he)
               That letteth matrymony ſekerly
               And with that worde they riſen ſodaynly
               And ben aſſented fully, that he ſhulde
               Be wedded whan him liſt, & where he wolde
               Hyghe fantaſy and curiouſneſſe
               Fro day to day, gan in the ſoule empreſſe
               Of Ianuary, about hys mariage
               Many fayre ſhappe, and many fayre viſage
               There paſſeth throug his hert night by night
               Al who ſo toke a myrrour polyſſhed bright
               And ſette it in a comen market place
               Than ſhulde he ſe many a figure pace
               By his myrrour, and in the ſame wyſe
               Gan Ianuary within his thought deuyſe
               Of maydens, whiche that dwellen beſyde
               He wyſt nat where he myght abyde
               For yf that one had beautie in her face
               Another ſtout ſo in the peoples grace
               For her ſadneſſe and her benignyte
               That of the people gretteſt voyce had ſhe
               And ſome were riche, and had badde name
               But natheles bitwixt erneſt and game
               He at laſt apoynted hym on one
               And lete al other from his hert gone
               And cheſe her of his awne authorite
               For loue is blynde al day, and may nat ſe
               And whan yt he was in his bedde ybrought
               He purtreyde in hys hert and in hys thought
               Her freſhe beaute, and her age tender
               Her middle ſmal, her armes long and ſlender
               Her wiſe gouernaunce, and her gentylneſſe
               Her womanly bearyng, and her ſadneſſe
               And whā that he was on her condiſcended
               Him thoght his choiſe myght nat bē amēded
               For whan that he him ſelfe concluded had
               Him thought eche other mannes wyt ſo bad
               That impoſſyble it were to reply
               Ayenſt his choice, this was hys fanta
                     •
                  y
               ¶His frendes ſent he to, at his inſtaunce
               And prayeth hem to don hym that pleſaunce
               
                  That haſtely they wolde to hym come
               He wolde abrydgen her labour al and ſome
               Nedeth nomore for hym to go ne ryde
               He was appoynted there he wolde abyde
               ¶Placebo came, and eke hys frendes ſone
               And alder fyrſt he bad hem al a bone
               That none of hem none argumentes make
               Ayenſt hys purpoſe that he hath ytake
               which purpoſe was pleaſaūt to god (ſaid he)
               And very grounde of hys proſperite.
               He ſaid there was a mayden in the towne
               whych of beauty hath great renowne
               Al were it ſo, ſhe were of ſmal degre
               Suffyſeth hym her youth and her beaute
               whych mayde he ſaid, he wold haue to wyfe
               To leden in eaſe and in holyneſſe hys lyfe
               And thanked god, yt he myght hauen her al
               That no wyght hys blyſſe parten ſhal
               And prayeth hem to labour in thys nede
               And ſhapeth that he fayle not to ſpede
               For then he ſayd, hys ſprete was at eaſe
               Then is (ꝙ he) nothynge maye me dyſpleaſe
               Saue o thynge prycketh in my conſcience
               The whych I wol reherce in your preſence.
               ¶I haue (ꝙ he) herde ſayd ful yore ago
               There may no mā haue parfyte blyſſes two
               Thys is to ſay, in earth and eke in heuen
               For though he kept him fro the ſynnes ſeuen
               And eke from euery braunche of thylke tre
               Yet is there ſo parfyte proſperite
               And ſo great eaſe and luſt in mariage
               That euer I am agaſt nowe in myne age
               That I ſhal lede nowe ſo mery a lyfe
               So delycate wythout wo or ſtryfe
               That I ſhal haue myne heuen in earth here
               For ſythen very heuen is bought ſo dere
               wyth tribulation and great penaunce
               How ſhulde I then lyuyng in ſuch pleaſaūce
               As al wedded men done wyth her wyues
               Come to ye bliſſe, ther chriſt eterne on lyue is
               Thys is my drede, and ye my brethren twey
               Aſſoyleth me thys queſtion I you prey.
               ¶Iuſtinus, whych that hated hys foly
               Anſwered anon ryght in hys iapery
               And for he wolde hys longe tale abrege
               He wolde none authorite allege
               But ſayd: ſyr, ſo there be none obſtacle
               Other then thys, god of hys hye myracle
               And of hys mercy may for you ſo wyrche
               That er ye han your ryghtes of holy chyrche
               Ye may repent of wedded mannes lyfe
               In whych ye ſayen is neyther wo ne ſtryfe
               And els god forbede, but yf he ſent
               A wedded man grace hym to repent
               wel ofter, rather then a ſyngle man
               And therfore ſyr, the beſt rede that I can
               Dyſpayreth you not, but haue in memory
               Parauenture ſhe may be your purgatory
               She may by goddes meane & goddes whip
               Then ſhal your ſoule vp to heuen ſkip
               Swyfter thē doth an arowe out of a bowe
               I hope to god here after ye ſhal knowe
               That ther nys none ſo great felicite
               In mariage, ne neuer none ſhal be
               That you ſhal let of your ſaluation
               So that ye vſe it as ſkyl is and reaſon
               The luſtes of your wyfe attemperatly
               And that ye pleaſe her not to amorouſly
               And that ye kepe you eke fro other ſyn
               My tale is done, for my wytte is thyn
               Beth not agaſt herof my dere brother
               But let vs wade fro thys matter to another
               The wyfe of Bath, yf ye vnderſtande
               Of mariage, whych ye haue in hande
               Declareth ful wel in a lytel ſpace
               Fareth now wel, god haue you in hys grace
               And wt this worde, Iuſtyne & his brother
               Han take her leaue, and eche of hem of other
               For when they ſawe it muſt nedes be
               They wrought ſo by wyſe and ſlye treate
               That ſhe thys mayde whych May hyght
               As haſtely as euer that ſhe myght
               Shal wedded be to thys Ianuary
               I trowe it were to longe to you to tary
               Yf I you tolde of euery eſcrite and bonde
               By whych ſhe was feſted in hys londe
               Or for to herken of her ryche arraye
               But fynally ycomen is the daye
               That to chyrch both ben they went
               For to receyue the holy ſacrament
               Forth cometh ye preſt, wt ſtole about his neck
               And badde her be lyke Sara and Rebecke
               In wyſedome and trouth of mariage
               And ſayd hys oriſons, as is the vſage
               And crouched hem, & bad god ſhuld hem bles
               And made al ſeker ynowe wyth holyneſſe
               Thus ben they wedded wyth ſolempnite
               And at feeſt ſytteth he and ſhe
               wyth other worthy folke vpon the deys
               Al ful of ioye and blyſſe is the paleyes
               And ful of inſtrumentes and of vytayle
               The mooſt deyntes of al Itaile
               Beforne him ſtode inſtrumētes of ſuch ſown
               That Orpheus, ne of Thebes Amphion
               
                  Ne made neuer ſuch a melody.
               ¶At euery cours came loude mynſtralcy
               That neuer Ioab tromped for to here
               Neyther Theodomas yet halfe ſo clere
               At Thebes, when the cytie was in doute
               Bacchus the wyne hem ſkynketh al aboute
               And Venus laugheth on euery wyght
               For Ianuary was become her knyght
               And wolde both aſſayen hys corage
               In lybertie, and eke in mariage
               And wyth her fyre bronde in her hōde about
               Daunceth before the bryde and al the rout
               And certaynly, I dare wel ſayen ryght this
               Emenius that god of weddynge is
               Saw neuer in his life, ſo mery a wedded mā
               
               Holde thou thy peace thou poet Marcian
               That wryteſt vs that ylke weddynge mery
               Of her philology and hym Mercury
               And of the ſonges that the Muſes ſonge
               To ſmal is both thy penne & eke thy tonge
               For to dyſcriuen of thys mariage
               whē tēder youth hath iwedded ſtouping age
               There is ſuch myrth, yt it may not be written
               Aſſayeth your ſelfe, then may ye wytten
               Yf that I lacke or none in thys matere
               May that ſytte, wyth ſo benigne a chere
               Her to beholde, it ſemed fayrey
               Quene Heſter loked neuer wyth ſuch an eye
               On Aſſuere, ſo meke a loke hath ſhe
               I may you not deuyſe al her beaute
               But thus moche of her beaute tel I may
               That ſhe was like ye bryght morow of May
               Fullylde of al beaute, and of pleaſaunce
               This Ianuary is rauyſhed in a traunce
               And at euery tyme he loke in her face
               But in hys herte, he gan her to manace
               That he yt night, ī his armes wold her ſtrein
               Harder, then euer Parys dyd Heleyn
               But natheles, yet had he great pyte
               That ylke nyght offende her muſte he
               And thought, alas, O tender creature
               Now wolde god ye myght wel endure
               Al my corage, it is ſo ſharpe and kene
               I am agaſt ye ſhal it not ſuſtene
               But god forbede, that I dyd al my myght
               Now wolde god that it were waxe nyght
               And that the nyght wolde laſt euer mo
               I wolde that al theſe people were ago
               And fynally he doth all hys labour
               As he beſt myght, ſauynge hys honour
               To haſt hem fro the meat in ſubtel wyſe
               The tyme came, that reaſon was to ryſe
               And after that men dauncen, & drynke faſt
               And ſpices all about the houſe they caſt
               And ful of ioye and blyſſe is euery man
               Al but a ſquyer, that hyght Damian
               whych carfe before the knyght many a day
               He was ſo rauyſhed on hys lady May
               That for very payne he was ny wode
               Almoſt he ſwelte, and ſouned there he ſtode
               So ſore hath Venus hurt hym wt her brand
               So freſhe ſhe was, and therto ſo lycande
               And to hys bedde he went hym haſtely
               No more of hym at thys tyme ſpeke I
               But there I let hym wepe ynowe & playne
               Tyl ye freſhe May wol rewen on hys payne.
               O perilous fyre, yt in the bedſtraw bredeth
               O famyler foe, that hys ſeruyce bedeth
               O ſeruaunt traytour, falſe homely hewe
               Lyke to the adder ſlye in boſome vntrewe
               O Ianuary dronken in pleſaunce
               God ſhylde vs al from your iniquitaunce
               Of mariage, ſe howe thys Damian
               Thyne owne ſquyer and thy borne man
               Entendeth to done the villany
               God graunt the thyne homely foe to eſpye
               For in thys worlde nys wers peſtilence
               Then homely foe, al daye in thy preſence
               Parfourmed hath the ſon his arke dyurne
               No lenger may the body of hym ſoiourne
               On oriſont, as in that latitude
               Nyght wt hys mantel, that is darke & rude
               Gan for to ſprede, the hemyſpery about
               For whych departed is the luſty rout
               Fro Ianuary, wyth thanke on euery ſyde
               Home to her houſes luſtely they ryde
               There as they done her thynges, as am leſt
               And when they ſawe her tyme to go to reſt
               Sone after thys luſty Ianuary
               wol go to bedde, he wolde no lenger tary
               He drynketh ypocras, clarrey, and vernag
                     •
                  
               
               Of ſpyces hote, to encreaſe hys corage
               And many a lectuary had he full fyne
               Such as the curſed monke dan Cōſtantyne
               Hath wrytten in hys boke of Coitu
               To eaten hem al he nolde nothyng eſchewe
               And thus to hys preuy frendes ſayd he
               For goddes loue, as ſone as it may be
               Let voyde al this houſe in curteys wiſe ſone
               ¶Men drinkē, and the trauers drewe anone
               So haſted Ianuary, it muſt be done
               The bryd was brought to bed as ſtyl as ſton
               And whē the bed was with ye preeſt ybleſſed
               Out of ye chābre hath euery wight hē dreſſed
               
                  And Ianuary hath faſt in armes take
               Hys freſhe May, hys paradyſe, hys make
               He lulleth her, he kyſſeth her ful ofte
               wyth thycke bryſtels of hys berde vnſofte
               I lyke ye ſkyn of Hoūdfyſh, as ſharp as brere
               For he was ſhaue al newe in hys manere
               He rubbeth her vpon her tendre face
               And ſayd thus: Alas, I mote treſpace
               To you my ſpouſe, and you greatly offende
               Or tyme come, that I wol downe dyſcende
               But natheles, conſydreth thys (ꝙ he)
               There nys no workman, what ſo euer he be
               That may both wyrche wel and haſtely
               Thys wol be done at leyſer parfytly
               It is no force howe longe that we play
               In trewe wedlocke coupled be we tway
               And bleſſed be the yoke that we bene in
               For in our actes we mowe do no ſyn
               A man may do no ſynne wyth hys wyfe
               Ne hurte hym ſelfe wyth hys owne knyfe
               For we haue leaue to play vs by the lawe
               Thus laboureth he, tyl the day gan dawe
               And then he taketh a ſoppe in fyne clarre
               And vpryght in hys bedde then ſytteth he
               And after that he ſyngeth full loude & clere
               And kyſt hys wyfe, and maketh wantō chere
               He was al coltyſhe, and ful of ragery
               And ful of gergon, as is a flecked pye
               The ſlacke ſkynne aboute hys necke ſhaketh
               whyle that he ſonge, ſo chaūteth he & craketh
               But god wot what May thought ī her herte
               when ſhe hym ſawe, vpſyttyng in hys ſherte
               In hys nyght cappe, with hys necke lene
               She prayſeth not his playeng worth a bene
               Then ſayd he thus: my reſt wol I take
               Now daye is come, I may no lenger wake
               And downe he layd his heed, & ſlept til prime
               And afterward, when that he ſaw hys tyme
               Vp ryſeth Ianuary, but the freſhe May
               Holdeth her chambre to the fourth day
               As vſage is of wyues for the beſt
               For euery labour ſomtyme mote haue reſt
               Or els longe may he not endure
               Thys is to ſay, no lyues creature
               Be it fyſhe or beeſt, brydde or man
               Now wol I ſpeake of woful Damian
               That langureth for loue, as ye ſhal here
               Therfore I ſpeke to hym in thys manere.
               ¶I ſay, O ſely Damian, alas
               Anſwere to thys demaunde, as in thys caas
               Howe that thou to thy lady freſhe May
               Tel thy wo? ſhe wol alwaye ſaye nay
               Eke yf thou ſpeke, ſhe wol thy wo bewray
               God be thyn helpe, I can no better ſay
               Thys ſycke Damian in Venus fyre
               So brenneth, that he dyeth for deſyre
               For whych he put hys lyfe in auenture
               No lenger myght he in thys wyſe endure
               But priuely a penner gan he borowe
               And in a lettre wrote he al hys ſorowe
               In maner of a complaynt or a lay
               Vnto thys fayre and freſhe lady May
               And in a purſe of ſylke, hōgyng on hys ſhert
               He hath it put, and layde it at hys hert
               ¶The mone at noone tyde that ylke day
               (That Ianuary hath ywedded freſhe May)
               Out of Taure was in the Cancre gleden
               So longe hath May in her chambre bydden
               As cuſtome is, vnto theſe nobles al
               A bryde ſhal not eaten in the hal
               Tyl dayes foure, or thre at the leeſt
               I paſſed bene, then let her gon to feeſt
               ¶The fourth day cōplete fro noon to noone
               when that the hye maſſe was ydone
               In hal ſat thys Ianuary and May
               As freſhe as is thys bryght ſomers day
               And ſo befyl, how that thys good man
               Remembreth hym vpon thys Damian
               And ſayd: ſaynt Mary how may thys be
               That Damian entendeth not to me?
               Is he aye ſycke: or how may thys betyde?
               Hys ſquyers which that ſtodē hym beſyde
               Excuſed hym, bycauſe of hys ſyckneſſe
               whych letted hym to done hys beſyneſſe
               None other cauſe myght make hym tary
               That me forthynketh (ꝙ this Ianuary)
               He is a gentle ſquyer be my trouthe
               If that he dyed, it were harme and routhe
               He is as wyſe, dyſcrete, and ſecre
               As any man that I wote of hys degre
               And therto manly and ſeruyſable
               And for to be a thryfty man ryght able
               But after meate, as ſone as euer I may
               I wol my ſelfe vyſete hym, and eke May
               To done hym al the comforte that I can
               And for that worde, hym bleſſed euery man
               That of hys bounte and of hys gentylneſſe
               He wolde ſo comforten in hys dyſtreſſe
               Hys ſquyer, for it was a gentle dede
               Dame (ꝙ thys Ianuary) take good hede
               That after meate, ye and your wemen al
               (when ye haue ben in chābre out of this hal)
               That al ye gone to ſe thys Damian
               Doth hym dyſporte, he is a gentyl man
               
                  And telleth hym that I wol hym viſite
               Haue I nothyng but reſted me a lyte
               And ſpede you faſt, for I wol abyde
               Tyl that ye ſlepe faſt by my ſyde
               And with that worde he gan to hym cal
               A ſquyer, that was Marſhal of hys hal
               And tolde him certayn thynge that he wolde
               This freſh May hath ſtreight her way ihold
               with al her women, vnto this Damyan
               Downe by hys beddes ſyde ſat ſhe then
               Confortyng hym as goodly as ſhe may
               This Damyan, whā that he his tyme ſay
               In ſecrete wyſe, hys purſe and eke hys byl
               (In whiche he had written al hys wyl)
               Hath put in to her honde withouten more
               Saue that he ſyghed wonders depe and ſore
               And ſothly, to her ryght thus ſayd he
               Merry, and that ye diſcouer nat me
               For I am deed, yf that this thyng be kydde
               This purſe hath ſhe in her boſome hydde
               And went her way, ye gete no more of me
               But vnto Ianuary icome is ſhe
               And on hys beddes ſyde ſhe ſytte ful ſofte
               He taketh her, and kyſſeth her ful ofte
               And layde hym downe to ſlepe, & that anon
               She fayned her, as that ſhe muſt gon
               There as ye wote, yt euery wight hath nede
               And whan ſhe of this byl hath taken hede
               She rent it al to cloutes, and at laſt
               In to the preuy, ſothly ſhe it caſt.
               who ſtudieth nowe but faire freſſhe May?
               And adown by Ianuary ſhe lay
               That ſlepte, tyl the cough hath hym awaked
               Anon he prayde her to ſtripe her al naked
               He wolde of her (he ſaid) haue ſome pleaſaūce
               He ſaid her clothes dyd hym encombraunce
               And ſhe obeyeth be ſhe leſe or lothe
               But leſt that precious folke be wt me wrothe
               Howe that he wrought, I dare nat to you tel
               Or whether ſhe thought it paradiſe or hel
               But I lette hem worche in her wyſe
               Tyl euynſong ryng, that they muſt aryſe
               Were it by deſteny or by auenture
               were it by influence, or by nature
               Or conſtellation that in ſuche eſtate
               The heuen ſtode, that tyme fortunate
               (Was for to put a byl of Venus warkes)
               For al thyng hath tyme, as ſayn clerkes
               To any woman for to gete her loue
               I can nat ſay, but the great god aboue
               That knoweth, that non acte is cauſeles
               He demeth al, for I wol holde my pees.
               But ſothe is this, howe yt this freſhe May
               Hath take ſuche impreſſyon that day
               Of pyte, on thys ſicke Damyan
               That fro her hert ſhe dryue ne can
               The remembraunce for to downe hym eaſe
               Certayn (thought ſhe) whom thys thyng diſpleaſe
               I recke not, for this I hym aſſure
               I loue hym beſt of any creature
               Though he no more had than hys ſhert.
               Lo pyte renneth ſoone in gentyl hert
               Here may ye ſe, howe excelent franchiſe
               In women is, whan they hem narow auyſe
               Some tyrant is, as there ben many one
               That hath an hert as harde as any ſtone
               Which wolde haue lete him ſterue in ye place
               wel rather thā haue graunted hym her grace
               And her reioyſed in her cruel pride
               And nat haue retched to been an homycide.
               Thys gentyl may, fulfylled of al pyte
               Right ſo of her honde a lettre made ſhe
               In whiche ſhe graunteth him her very grace
               There lacketh nought, but only tyme & place
               where that ſhe might to hys luſt ſuffyſe
               For it ſhal be, right as he wol deuyſe
               And whan ſhe ſawe her tyme vpon a day
               To viſite this Damyā goth thys faire May
               And ſubtelly this lettre down ſhe thryſt
               Vnder hys pyllowe, rede it yf hym lyſt
               She taketh him by ye hond, & herd him twiſt
               So ſecretely, that no wight of it wyſt
               And badde hym ben al hole, & forth ſhe went
               To Ianuary, whan that he for her ſent.
               Vp ryſeth Damyan the next morowe
               Al paſſed was hys ſickeneſſe and hys ſorowe
               He kembeth hym and proy
                     •
                  eth hym a piketh
               And dothe all that hys lady luſt and lyketh
               And eke to Ianuary he gothe as lowe
               As euer dyd a dogge for the bowe
               He is ſo pleſaunt to euery man
               For crafte is al, who that it can
               That euery wight is fayn to ſpekē him gode
               And fully in hys ladyes grace he ſtode
               Thus lette I Damyan about his nede
               And in my tale, forthe I wol procede.
               ¶Some clerkes holden that felycite
               Stont in delyte, and therfore certayn he
               Thys noble Ianuary with al hys might
               In honeſt wyſe, as longeth to a knyght
               Shope hym to lyue ful delyciouſly
               Hys houſyng, hys array, as honeſtly
               To hys degre, was made as a kynges
               Among other of hys honeſt thynges
               
                  He had a garden walled al with ſtone
               So faire a garden was there neuer none
               For out of dout, I verily ſuppoſe
               That he that wrote the Romant of the Roſe
               Ne couth of it the beaute wel deuyſe
               Ne Priapus, ne myght nat ſuffyſe
               Though he be god of gardens, for to tell
               The beaute of the garden, and of the wel
               That ſtont vnder a laurer alway grene
               Ful ofte tyme kyng Pluto and hys quene
               Proſerpina, and al her fayrie
               Diſporten hem, and maken melodye
               About that wel, and daunced as men tolde
               This noble knight, this Ianuary the olde
               Suche deynte hath, in it to walke and play
               That he wol ſuffre no wight to bere the kay
               Saue he hym ſelfe, for the ſmal wicket
               He bare alway of ſyluer a clycket
               with which, whan that hym lyſt vnſhet
               And whan that he wolde pay hys wyfe her det
               In ſomer ſeaſon, thider wolde he go
               And May his wife, & no wight but they two
               And thinges whiche yt were nat don a bedde
               He in the garden parfourmed hem & ſpedde
               And in thys wyſe, many a mery day
               Lyued this Ianuary and thys freſhe May
               But worldly ioye may nat alway endure
               To Ianuary, ne to no lyueng creature.
               ¶O ſodayne hap, O thou fortune vnſtable
               Lyke to the Scorpion diſceyuable
               That ſlatreſt wt thy heed whā yu wolt ſtynge
               Thy tayle is deth, thrugh thyn enuenomyng
               O brotel ioye, O ſwete poyſon queynt
               O monſter, that ſo ſodaynly canſt peynt
               Thy gyftes, vnder the hewe of ſtedfaſtneſſe
               That thou diſcryueſt bothe more and leſſe
               why haſt thou Ianuary thus deſceyued?
               And haddeſt hym for thy frende receyued
               And now thou haſt beraft hym both his eyen
               For ſorowe of whiche deſyreth he to dyen
               Alas, this noble Ianuary that is ſo fre
               Amydde his luſt and his proſperite
               Is woren blynde, and al ſodaynly
               His dethe therfore deſyreth he vtterly
               And therwithal, the fyre of ielouſy
               (Leſt that his wyfe ſhulde fal in ſome foly)
               So brent hys hert, that he wolde fayne
               That ſome man, bothe hym & her had ſlayne
               For neuer after hys dethe, ne in hys lyfe
               Ne wolde he that ſhe were loue ne wyfe
               But euer lyue a wedowe in clothes blake
               Sole, as the turtle doth yt hath loſt her make
               But at the laſt, after a mouth or tway
               His ſorowe gan to ſwage, ſothe to ſay
               For whan he wyſt it might non other be
               He paciently toke hys aduerſyte
               Saue out of dout may he nat for gone
               That he nas ielous euer more in one
               whiche ielouſy, it was ſo outragious
               That neyther in hal ne in non other hous
               Ne in non other place neuer mo
               He nolde ſuffre her, neyther ryde ne go
               But if that he had honde on her alway
               For whiche ful often wepeth freſhe May
               That loueth Damyan ſo benignely
               That ſhe mote eyther dye ſodaynly
               Or els ſhe mote haue hym at her leſt
               She wayteth whan her hert ſhulde to breſt
               Vpon that other ſyde Damyan
               Become is, the ſorowfulleſt man
               That euer was, for neyther night ne day
               Ne myght he ſpeke a worde to freſhe May
               As to his purpoſe of no ſuche matere
               But yf that Ianuary muſt it here
               That had an honde vpon her euer mo
               But natheles, by writyng to and fro
               And preuy ſygnes, wiſt he what ſhe ment
               And ſhe knewe al the ſygnes of hys entent.
               ¶O Ianuary, what myght the it auayle?
               Tho thou mighteſt ſe, as fer as ſhippes ſayle
               For as good is a blynde man diſceyued be
               As to be diſceyued, whan that a man may ſe.
               Lo Argus, which had an hundred eyen
               For all that euer he couthe pore and prien
               Yet was he blent, and god wotte ſo ben mo
               That wenen wiſely that it is nat ſo
               Paſſe ouer is an eaſe, I ſay no more
               This freſh May, of which I ſpake of yore
               In warme waxe hath printed this clycket
               That Ianuary bare of that ſmall wicket
               By whiche vnto hys garden ofte he went
               And Damyan that knewe her entent
               The clycket counterfayted priuely
               There nys no more to ſay, but haſtely
               Some wonder by this clycket ſhal betyde
               whiche ye ſhul heren, yf ye wol abyde.
               ¶O noble Ouide, ſoth ſayeſt thou god wote
               what ſleight is it, though it be long and hote
               That he nyl fynde it out in ſome manere
               By Pyrramus and Thiſbe, maye men lere
               Though they were kept ful lōg ſtreyt ouer al
               They ben accorded, rownyng through a wal
               Ther nis no wight couth fynde ſuch a ſleight
               But nowe to purpoſe, er yt dayes eyght
               
                  Were paſſed, er the moneth of Iule befyll
               That Ianuary hath caught ſo great a wyl
               Through egging of his wife, him for to play
               In his garden, & no wight but they tway
               That in a morowe, vnto this May ſayd he
               Ryſe vp my wife, my loue, my lady free
               The turtel voyce is herde my lady ſwete
               The wynter is gon, with al his raynes wete
               Come forth now with thyn eyen columbyne
               Nowe fayrer ben thy breſtes than is wyne
               The garden is encloſed al about
               Come forth my white ſpouſe out of dout
               Thou haſt me wounded in my hert, o, wyfe
               No ſpotte in the nas in al thy lyfe
               Come forth and lette vs taken our diſport
               I cheſe the for my wyfe and my confort
               Suche olde leude wordes vſed he
               On Damyan a ſygne made ſhe
               That he ſhulde go before with hys clicket
               This Damyan hath opened this wicket
               And in he ſtert, and that in ſuche manere
               That no wight might it ſe ne here
               And ſtyl he ſate vnder a buſſhe anon.
               This Ianuary, as blynde as is a ſton
               with May in hys honde, and no wight mo
               In to hys freſhe garden is he go
               And clapte to the wicket ſodainly.
               Nowe wyfe (ꝙ he) here nys but thou & I
               That arte the creature that I beſt loue
               For by that lorde that ſytte vs al aboue
               I had leuer dyen on a knyfe
               Than the offende, dere trewe wyfe
               For goddes ſake thynke howe I the chees
               Nat for couetiſe, ne other good doutlees
               But onely for the loue I had to the
               And though that I be olde and may nat ſe
               Be to me trewe, and I woll tel you why
               Certes, thre thynges ſhal ye wyn therby
               Firſt loue of Chriſt, & to your ſelfe honour
               And al myn heritage, town and toure
               I gyue it you, maketh charters as ye lyſt
               Thys ſhal be don to morowe er ſonne ryſt
               So wiſely god my ſoule bring to blyſſe
               I pray you on couenaunt that ye me kyſſe
               And though yt I be ielous wite me nought
               Ye ben ſo depe enprented in my thought
               That whan I conſyder your beaute
               And therwithal, the vnlikly elde of me
               I may nat certes, though I ſhulde dye
               Forbere, to ben out of your company
               For very loue, this is withouten dout
               Now kyſſe me wife, and lette vs rome about
               This freſh May, whā ſhe theſe wordes herd
               Benygnely to Ianuary anſwerde
               But fyrſt and forwarde ſhe began to wepe
               I haue (ꝙ ſhe) a ſoule for to kepe
               As wel as ye, and alſo myn honour
               And of wyfehode thilke tender flour
               whiche that I haue enſured in your honde
               whan that the preeſt to you my body bonde
               wherfore I wol anſwere in this manere
               By the leaue of you my lorde ſo dere
               I pray god that neuer dawe that day
               That I ne ſterue, as foule as woman may
               Yf euer I do to my kynne that ſhame
               Or els that I empayre ſo my name
               That I be falſe, and yf I do that lacke
               Do ſtripe me, and putte me in a ſacke
               And in the next ryuer do me drenche
               I am a gentyl woman, and no wenche
               why ſpeke ye thus, but men ben euer vntrew
               And women haue reprofe of you, aye newe
               Ye can non other cōmunyng, I leue
               But ſpeke to vs of vntruſt and repreue
               And with ye word ſhe ſawe where Damiā
               
               Sate in the buſhe, and knele he began
               And with her fynger ſygnes made ſhe
               That Damyan ſhulde clymbe vp on a tre
               That charged was with frute, & vp he went
               For verily he knewe al her entent
               And euery ſygne that ſhe couth make
               welbet than Ianuary her owne make
               For in a letter ſhe had tolde him al
               Of this mater, howe that he worch ſhal
               And thus I lete hym ſytte in the pery
               And Ianuary and May romyng ful mery.
               ¶Bright was the day, & blewe ye fyrmament
               Phebus of golde doun hath his ſtremes ſent
               To gladen euery flour with hys warmneſſe
               He was that tyme in Geminy, as I geſſe
               But lytel fro hys declynation
               The cauſer of Iouis exaltation
               And ſo byfel that bright morowe tyde
               That in the garden, on the farther ſyde
               Pluto, that is the kyng of Fayrye
               And many a lady in hys company
               Folowyng his wyfe, the quene Proſerpyne
               Eche after other ryght as a lyne
               whiles ſhe gadred floures in a mede
               In Claudian ye may the ſtory rede
               Howe in his griſely carte he her fette
               This kyng of Fayry doun hym ſette
               Vpon a benche of turues freſhe and grene
               And right anon thus ſayd he to hys quene
               
                  My wyfe (ꝙ he) that may nat ſay nay
               The experience ſo proueth it euery day
               The treaſon, which that women doth to mā
               
               Tenne hundred thouſande tel I can
               Notable, of your vntrouth and brotelneſſe
               O Salomon, richeſt of al richeſſe
               Fulfylde of ſapience, and of worldly glory
               Ful worthy ben thy wordes in memory
               To euery wight, that witte and reaſon can
               Thus prayſeth he the bounte of man
               Among a thouſande men yet fonde I one
               But of al women fonde I neuer none
               Thus ſaith ye kyng, yt knoweth your wickedneſſe
               And Ieſus filius Sirach, as I geſſe
               Ne ſpeketh of you but ſelde reuerence
               A wylde fyre, a corrupte peſtilence
               So fal vpon your bodies yet to nyght
               Ne ſe ye nat thys honorable knyght?
               Bicauſe (alas) that he is blynde and olde
               His owne man ſhal maken him cokolde
               Lo where he ſytte, the lechour in the tre
               Nowe wol I graunt of my maieſte
               Vnto this olde blynde worthy knyght
               That he ſhal haue agayn hys eye ſyght
               whan that hys wyfe wolde don him villany
               Than ſhal he knowe al her harlotry
               Bothe in repreſe of her and other mo.
               Yea ſhal (ꝙ Proſerpyne) and wol ye ſo?
               Nowe be my mothers ſoule ſyr I ſwere
               That I ſhal yeuen her ſufficient anſwere
               And al women after her ſake
               That though they ben in any gylte itake
               with face bolde, they ſhullen hem ſelue excuſe
               And bere hym doun, that wolde hem accuſe
               For lacke of anſwere, non of hem ſhul dyen
               Al had he ſey a thyng with bothe hys eyen
               Yet ſhulde we women ſo viſage it hardely
               And wepe and ſwere, and chide ſubtelly
               That ye ſhal ben as leude as gees
               What recketh me of your auctoritees?
               I wotte wel this iewe, this Salomon
               Founde of vs women foles many one
               But though he ne fonde no good woman
               Yet there hath ifonde many an other man
               women ful trewe, ful good, & ful vertuous
               witneſſe of hem that dwel in Chriſtes hous
               with martyrdom, they preued her conſtaunce
               The Romain ieſtes eke make remembraūce
               Of many a very trewe wyfe alſo
               But ſyr, be nat wrothe that it be ſo
               Though that he ſaid he fond no good womā
               
               I pray you take the ſentence of the man
               He ment thus, that in ſouerayn bounte
               Nys non but god, that ſytteth in trynyte.
               Eye, for very god that nys but one
               what make ye ſo moche of Salomon?
               what though he made a temple goddes hous
               what though he were riche and glorious?
               So made he a temple of falſe goddis
               How might he don a thing ye more forbode is
               Parde as faire as ye hys name enplaſter
               He was a lechour, and an idolaſter
               And in his elde, very god forſoke
               And yf that god nadde (as ſaith the boke)
               Yſpared hym for hys fathers ſake, he ſhulde
               Haue loſt his reygne ſoner than he wolde
               I ſette nat of al the villany
               That ye of women write, a butterflye
               I am a woman, nedes mo
                     •
                  e I ſpeke
               Or els ſwel, tyll myn hert breke
               For ſythen he ſayd, that we ben ianglereſſes
               As euer more I hole broke my treſſes
               I ſhal nat ſpare for no curteſy
               To ſpeke hem harme, that wold vs villany
               Dame (ꝙ this Pluto) be no lenger wroth
               I gyue it vp: but ſythe I ſwore myn othe
               That I wolde graunt hym hys ſyght ayen
               My worde ſhal ſtande, yt warn I you certeyn
               I am a kyng, it ſytte me nat to lye.
               And I (ꝙ ſhe) a quene of Fayrie
               Her anſwere ſhe ſhal haue I vndertake
               Lette vs no mo wordes herof make
               Forſoth I wol no lenger you contrary.
               Nowe lette vs turne agayn to Ianuary
               That in the garden with this faire May
               Syngeth merier than the popyngay
               You loue I beſt, and ſhal, and other non
               So long about the aleyes is he gon
               Tyl he was comen ayenſt thylke pery
               where as this Damyan ſytteth ful mery
               On hye, among theſe freſhe leues grene.
               This freſhe Maye, that is ſo bright & ſhene
               Gan for to ſike, and ſayd: alas my ſyde
               Nowe ſyr (ꝙ ſhe) for ought that may be tyde
               I muſt haue of theſe peeres that I here ſe
               Or I more dye, ſo ſore longeth me
               To eten of the ſmal peeres grene
               Helpe for her loue that is heuyn quene
               I tel you wel a woman in my plyte
               May haue to frute ſo great an appetyte
               That ſhe may dyen, but ſhe it haue
               Alas (ꝙ he) that I ne had here a knaue
               That couth clymbe, alas, alas (ꝙ he)
               For I am blynde, ye ſyr no force (ꝙ ſhe)
               
                  But wolde ye vouchſafe for goddes ſake
               The pety in your armes for to take
               For wel I wotte that ye myſtruſt me
               Than ſhulde I clymbe wel ynough (ꝙ ſhe)
               So I may fote myght ſette vpon your backe
               Forſoth ſayd he, in me ſhal be no lacke
               Might I you helpe with myne hert blode
               He ſtoupeth doun, & on hys backe ſhe ſtode
               And caught her by a twiſt, and vp ſhe goth
               Ladyes I praye you be nat wroth
               I can nat gloſe, I am a rude man
               And ſodaynly anon this Damyan
               Gan pullen vp the ſmocke, and in he thronge
               A great tent, a thrifty and a longe
               She ſayd it was the meryeſt fytte
               That euer in her lyfe ſhe was at yet
               My lordes tent ſerueth me nothyng thus
               It foldeth twifolde by ſwete Ieſus
               He may nat ſwyue worth a leke
               And yet he is ful gentyl and ful meke
               This is leuer to me than an euynſong
               And whan that Pluto ſawe thys wronge
               To Ianuary he gaue agayn his ſyght
               And made hym ſe aſwel as euer he myght
               And whan he had caught his ſyght agayn
               Ne was there neuer man of thyng ſo fayn
               But on his wyfe his thought was euer mo
               Vp to the tree he caſt his eyen two
               And ſaw how Damian his wife had dreſſed
               In ſuche manere, it may nat be expreſſed
               But yf I wolde ſpeke vncurteſly
               And vp he ya
                     •
                   a roryng and a crye
               As dothe the mother whan the child ſhal dye
               Out helpe, alas (harowe) he gan to crye
               For ſorowe almoſt he gan to dye
               That his wife was ſwyued in the pery
               O ſtronge lady hore what doſt thou?
               ¶And ſhe anſwered: ſyr what ayleth you?
               Haue pacience and reaſon in your mynde
               I haue you holpen of both your eyen blynde
               Vp peryl of my ſoule, I ſhal nat lyen
               As me was taught to helpe with your eyen
               was nothyng bette for to make you ſe
               Than ſtrogle with a man vpon a tree
               God wote I dyd it in ful good entent
               ¶Strogle (ꝙ he) yea algate in it went
               Styffe and rounde as any bel
               It is no wonder though thy bely ſwel
               The ſmocke on hys breſt lay ſo theche
               And euer me though he poynted on ye breche
               God gyue you bothe on ſhames deth to dyen
               He ſwyued the, I ſawe it with myne eyen
               And els I be honged by the halſe
               Than is (ꝙ ſhe) my medicyn falſe
               For certayn, yf that ye myght ſe
               Ye wolde nat ſay theke wordes to me
               Ye haue ſome glymſyng, and no parfite ſight
               I ſe (ꝙ he) as wel as euer I might
               Thanked be god, with bothe myne eyen two
               And by my trouth me thought he dyd ſo
               Ye maſe ye maſe, good ſyr (ꝙ ſhe)
               This thanke haue I for that I made you ſe
               Alas (ꝙ ſhe) that euer I was ſo kynde
               Now dame (ꝙ he) let al paſſe out of minde
               Come down my lefe, and if I haue miſſayde
               God helpe me ſo, as I am yuel apayde
               But by my fathers ſoule, I wende haue ſeyn
               Howe that this Damyan had by the leyn
               And that thy ſmocke had lyen vpon his breſt
               Ye ſyr (ꝙ ſhe) ye may wene as ye leſt
               But ſyr, a man that waketh out of hys ſlepe
               He may nat ſodaynly wel taken kepe
               Vpon a thyng, ne ſe it parfitely
               Tyl that he be adawed verily
               Right ſo a man that longe hath blynde be
               Ne may nat ſodaynly ſo wel yſe
               Firſt whan the ſight is newe comen agayn
               As he that hath a daye or two yſayn
               Tyl that your ſight iſtabled be a while
               There may ful many a ſight you begyle
               Beware I pray you, for by heuen kyng
               Ful many a man weneth to ſe a thyng
               And it is al another than it ſemeth
               He that myſconceyueth ofte myſdemeth
               And with that worde ſhe lepe doun fro ye tre
               This Ianuary, who is gladde but he?
               He kyſſeth her, he clyppeth her ful ofte
               And on her wombe he ſtroketh her ful ſofte.
               And to hys paleys home he hath her ladde
               Nowe good men I pray you, beth ye al glad
               Thus endeth here my tale of Ianuary
               God bleſſe vs al, and hys mother Mary.
            
            
               ¶Thus endeth the Marchauntes tale, and here foloweth the wife of Bathes prologue.

                  
               
               
                  EXperience, though none authorite
               Were in this worlde, is ryght ynowe for me
               To ſpeake of wo that is in mariage
               For lordinges, ſith I twelue yere was of age
               Thonked be god, that is eterne on lyue
               Huſbondes at chirche dore haue I had fyue
               If I ſo ofte myght haue wedded be
               And al were worthy men in her degre.
               But me was tolde not longe ago twys
               That ſythen Chriſt went neuer but onys
               To weddyng, in the caue of Galilee
               That by thylke enſample taught he me
               That I ne ſhulde wedded be, but ones.
               ¶Lo here, which a ſharpe word for ye nones
               Beſyde a wel, Ieſu god and man
               Spake in rep
                     •
                  efe of the Samaritan
               Thou haſt had fyue huſbandes (ꝙ he)
               And that ilke man that now hath the
               Is not thyne huſbonde: thus ſayd he certayn
               what he ment therby I can not ſayn
               But that I aſke, why the fyfte man
               was n
                     ••
                   huſbonde to the Samaritan
               Howe many myght ſhe haue in mariage?
               Yet herde I neuer tellen in myne age
               Vpon this nombre trewe diffynition
               Men may deuyne, and gloſen vp and doun
               But wel I wotte expreſſe without lye
               God badde vs for to wexe and multiply
               That gentyl text can I wel vnderſtonde
               Eke wel I wotte (he ſaid) myne huſbonde
               Shuld leaue father & mother, and take to me
               But of nombre no mention made he
               Of bigamye or of octogamye
               Why ſhul men ſpeke of it villany?
               Lo he the wyſe kyng Salomon
               I trowe had wyues mo than one
               As wolde god it leful were to me
               To be refreſhed halfe ſo ofte as he
               which a gifte of god had he, for al hys wyuis
               No man hath ſuch, yt in this worlde a lyue is
               God wotte this noble kynge, as to my wytte
               The fyrſt nyght had many a mery fytte
               with eche of hem, ſo wel was hym & lyue
               Bleſſed be god, I haue had fyue
               welcome the ſyxte whan euer he ſhal
               For ſothe I wol not kepe me chaſte in al
               whan myne huſbonde is fro the world ygon
               Some cryſten man ſhal wedde me anon
               For than the apoſtel ſaythe, that I am fre
               To wedde a godde ſhalbe, where it lyketh me
               He ſaythe, that to be wedded is no ſynne
               Better is to be wedded then to brynne
               What recketh me though folke ſay villany
               Of ſhrewde Lameth, and of hys bigamy
               ¶I wotte wel Abraham was an holy man
               And Iacob eke, as fer as euer I here can
               And eche of hem had wyues mo than two
               And many another holy man alſo
               Where can ye ſay in any maner age
               
                  That euer god defended mariage
               By expreſſe wordes? I pray you tel me
               Or where cōmaunded he virginyte?
               I wotte as wel as ye, it is no drede
               The Apoſtel, whan he ſpake of maydenhede
               He ſayd, therof precept had he none
               Men may counſayle a woman to be one
               But counſaylyng is no cōmaundement
               He put it in our owne iugement
               For had god cōmaunded maydenheoe
               Thā had he dampned weddyng out of drede
               And certes, yf there were no ſede yſowe
               Virginite than wherof ſhulde it growe?
               Poule durſt not comaunde at the leſte
               I thing, of which his maiſter yafe none heſte
               The darte is ſet vp for virgynite
               Catche who ſo may, who renneth beſte let ſe.
               But thys worde is not take of euery wight
               But there as god lyſt yeue it of his might
               I wotte wel that the apoſtel was a mayde
               But natheleſſe, though that he wrote & ſayde
               He wolde that euery wight were ſuche as he
               Al nys but counſayle to virginite
               And for to ben a wyfe he yaue me leue
               Of indulgence, ſo it be not to repreue
               To wedde me, yf that my make dye
               without exception of bygamye
               Al were it good no woman for to touche
               He ment as in hys bedde or in hys couche
               For peryl is, bothe fyre and towe to aſſemble
               Ye knowe what this enſample may reſemble
               This is al and ſome, he helde virginite
               More parfyte than weddyng in freelte.
               ¶Freelte clepe I, but yf that he and ſhe
               wolde lede her lyfe al in chaſtyte
               I graunt it wel, I haue none enuye
               Though maydenhede preferre bygamye
               It lyketh hem to be clene in body and goſte
               Of myne eſtate I wol make no boſte
               For wel ye know, a lorde in his houſholde
               Hath nat euery veſſel al of golde
               Some ben of tree, and don her lorde ſeruyce
               God clepeth folke to hym in ſondry wyſe
               And eueriche hath of god a proper gifte
               Some this, ſome that, as hym lyketh ſhifte
               Virginyte is great perfection
               And contynence eke with deuocion
               But Chriſt, that of perfection is wel
               Badde nat euery wight he ſhulde go ſel
               Al that he had, and gyue it to the poore
               And in ſuche wiſe folowe hym and his lore
               He ſpake to hem, that wolde lyue parfitly
               And lordinges (by your leaue) that am nat I
               I wol beſtowe the floure of al myne age
               In the actes and frute of mariage
               Tel me alſo, to what concluſyon
               were membres made of generation?
               And of ſo parfite wiſe a wight iwrought
               Truſteth wel, they were nat made for nouȝt
               Gloſe who ſo wol, and ſaye vp and doun
               That they were made for purgatioun
               Of vryne, and other thynges ſmale
               And eke to knowe a female from a male
               And for non other cauſe, what ſay ye no?
               The experience wotte wele it is nat ſo
               So that the clerkes be nat with me wroth
               I ſaye that they were maked for bothe
               This is to ſayn, for offyce and for eaſe
               Of engendrure, there we nat god diſpleaſe
               why ſhulde men els in her bokes ſette
               That man ſhulde yelde to hys wyfe her dette
               Now wherwith ſhuld he pay his paymēt?
               It he ne vſed his ſely inſtrument
               Than were they made vpon a creature
               To purge vryn, and eke for engendrure
               But I ſay nat, that euery wight is holde
               That hath ſuche harneſſe, as I to you tolde
               To gon and vſen hem in engendrure
               Than ſhulde men take of chaſtite no cure
               Chriſt was a mayde, and ſhapen as a man
               And many a ſaynt, ſythen the worlde began
               Yet lyued they euer in parfyte chaſtite
               I nyl enuy no virginyte
               Lette hē with bredde of pure whete be fedde
               And lette vs wyues eate barly bredde
               And yet with barly bred, Marke tel can
               Our lorde Ieſu refreſhed many a man
               In ſuche a ſtate as god hath cleped vs
               I wol perſeuer, I nam nat precious
               In wifehode wol I vſe myn inſtrument
               As frely as my maker hath it ſent
               If I be daungerous, god gyue me ſorowe
               My huſbōd ſhal it haue both euyn & morow
               whan that him lyſt come forth & pay his det
               An huſbande wol I haue I wol nat let
               whiche ſhal be bothe my dettour & my thral
               And haue his tribulation with al
               Vpon his fleſhe, while that I am hys wyfe
               I haue the power duryng al my lyfe
               Vpon his proper body, and nat he
               Right thus the apoſtle tolde to me
               And badde our huſbondes for to loue vs wel
               Al this ſentence me lyketh euery del.
               ¶Vp ſtert the Pardoner, and that anon
               
                  Nowe dame ꝙ he, by god & by ſaynt Iohn
               Ye ben a noble prechour in thys caas
               I was about to wedde a wyfe, alas
               what, ſhulde I bye it on my fleſhe ſo dere?
               Yet had I leuer wedde no wyfe to yere
               Abyde ꝙ ſhe, my tale is not begon
               Nay, thou ſhalt drynke of another ton
               Er that I go, ſhal ſauer worſe then ale
               And when that I haue tolde forth my tale
               Of tribulation that is in mariage
               Of whych I am expert in al myne age
               Thys is to ſay, my ſelfe haue ben the whyp
               Then mayſt th
                     •
                  u cheſe whyther yu wylt ſyp
               Of thylke tonne, that I ſhal ſet abroche
               Beware of it, er thou to nere aproche
               For I ſhal tel enſamples mo then ten
               who ſo wol not beware by other men
               By hym ſhal other men corrected be
               Theſe ſame wordes wryteth Ptholome
               Rede in hys almageſt, and take it there.
               Dame I wol pray you, yf your wyll were
               Sayd thys pardoner, as ye began
               Tel forth your tale, ſpareth for no man
               And teache vs yonge men of your practycke
               Gladly (ꝙ ſhe) yf it may you lyke
               But that I praye to al thys company
               Yf that I ſpeake after my fantaſy
               As taketh not agrefe of that I ſay
               For myne entent is not but to play
               Now ſyrs, then ſhal I tel forth my tale?
               As euer mote I drynke wyne or ale
               I ſhal ſay ſoth, tho huſbondes that I had
               Thre of hem were good, and two were bad
               The thre good men were ryche and olde
               Vnnethes myght they the ſtatute holde
               In whych they were bounden vnto me
               Ye wote wel what I meane of thys parde
               As god me helpe, I laugh when I thynke
               Now pirouſly a night I made hem to ſwinke
               But by my faye, I tolde of it no ſtore
               They had me yeue her londe and her treſore
               Me neded no lenger to do diligence
               To wynne her loue, and hem reuerence
               They loued me ſo wel by god aboue
               That I ne tolde no deynte of her loue
               A wyſe woman wol beſy her euer in one
               To gete her loue, ther as ſhe hath none
               But ſythen I had hem holly in my honde
               And that they had gyue me al her londe
               what, ſhulde I take kepe hem for to pleaſe?
               But yf it were for my profyte and myn eaſe
               I ſette hem ſo a worke by my faye
               That many a nyght they ſongen wel away
               The bacon was not fet for hem I trowe
               That ſome men haue in Eſſex at Dōmowe
               I gouerned hem ſo wel after my lawe
               That eche of hem ful blyſful was & fawe
               To brynge me gaye thynges fro the fayre
               They were ful fayne whē I ſpake hem fayre
               For god it wote, I chydde hem ſpytouſly
               Nowe herkeneth howe I bere me properly.
               Ye wyſe wyues that can vnderſtande
               Thus ſhul ye ſpeake, and bere hem on hande
               For halfe ſo boldly there can no man
               Swere and lye, as a woman can
               I ſaye not thys by wyues that ben wyſe
               But yf it be, when they hem myſſe auyſe
               A wyſe wyfe ſhal, yf that ſhe can her gode
               Bere hem in honde the cowe is wode
               And take wytneſſe of her owne mayde
               Of her aſſent: but herkeneth howe I ſayde.
               ¶Syr olde ſteynarde, is thys thyn array
               why is my neyghbours wyfe ſo gay?
               She is honoured ouer al where ſhe goth
               I ſytte at home, and haue no thryfty cloth
               what doſt thou at my neyghbours hous?
               Is ſhe ſo fayre art thou ſo amorous?
               what rowneſt thou wt our mayd benedicite
               Syr olde lechour, let thy iapes be
               And yf I haue a goſſyp or a frende
               (wythout gylt) thou chydeſt as a fende
               Yf that I walke or play vnto hys houſe
               Thou comeſt home as dronkē as a mouſe
               And precheſt on thy benche wyth euel prefe
               Thou ſayeſt to me, it is a great myſchefe
               To wedde a poore woman for coſtage
               And yf that ſhe be rych of hygh parage
               Then ſayſt thou, it is a very tourmentry
               To ſuffre her pryde and her melancoly
               And yf that ſhe be fayre, thou very knaue
               Thou ſayeſt that euery holour wol her haue
               She may no whyle in chaſtite abyde
               That is aſſayled on euery ſyde
               Thou ſayſt ſome folke deſyrē vs for rycheſſe
               Some for our ſhape, & ſome for our fairneſſe
               And ſome, for ſhe can eyther ſynge or daunce
               And ſome for gentylneſſe or for daliaunce
               Some for her handes and her armes ſmale
               Thus goeth al to the deuel by thy tale
               Thou ſayſt mē may not kepe a caſtel wall
               It may ſo longe aſſayled be ouer all
               And yf that ſhe be foule, thou ſayeſt that ſhe
               Coueteth euery man that ſhe may ſe
               For as a ſpaneyl, ſhe wol on hem lepe
               
                  Tyll yt ſhe fynde ſome man yt wold her chepe
               Ne none ſo gray geſe goth there in the lake
               (As ſayſt thou) wol ben wythout her make
               And ſayſt, it is a harde thynge for to welde
               A wyght, that no man wol his thanke helde
               Thus ſayſt thou lorel, when yu goſt to bed
               That no wyſeman nedeth for to wedde
               Ne no man that entendeth vnto heuen
               wyth wylde thunder dent and fyre leuen
               Mote thy wycked necke be to broke.
               Thou ſayſt, droppyng houſes, & eke ſmoke
               And chydyng wyues, maken men to flee
               Out of her owne houſe, ah, benedicite
               what ayleth ſuch an olde man for to chyde?
               Thou ſayſt, we wyues wol our vyces hyde
               Tyl we be faſt, and then we wol hem ſhewe
               wel may thys be a prouerbe of a ſhrewe.
               Thou ſayſt, yt oxen, horſe, aſſes, & houndes
               They ben aſſayde at dyuers ſtoundes
               Baſyns, lauers, er that men hem bye
               Spones, ſtoles, and al ſuche huſbondrye
               And ſo be pottes, clothes, and arrayes
               But folke of wyues maken none aſſayes
               Tyl they ben wedded, olde dottarde ſhrewe
               And ſayſt, how we wol thē our vyces ſhewe
               Thou ſayeſt alſo, that it dyſpleaſeth me
               But yf that thou wylt prayſe my beaute
               And but thou pore alwaye on my face
               And clepe me fayre dame in euery place
               And but thou make a feeſt on that yſke day
               That I was borne, & make me freſhe & gay
               And but thou done to my norice honour
               And to my chamberer wythin my bour
               And to my fathers folke, and hys alyes
               Thus ſayeſt thou olde barel ful of lyes
               And yet of our prentyſe Ienkyn
               For hys cryſpe heer, ſhynyng as golde fyne
               And for he ſquyreth me both vp and down
               Haſt thou caught a falſe ſuſpectioun
               I wol hym not, tho yu were deed to morowe.
               But tel me this, why hideſt thou wt ſorowe
               The keyes of thy cheſt away fro me?
               It is my good as wel as thyne parde
               what, weneſt yu make an ydiot of our dame
               Nowe by ye lorde, yt called is ſaynt Iame
               Thou ſhalt not both though yu were wode
               Be mayſter of my body and of my good
               That one yu ſhalt forgon maugre thyne eyen
               what helpeth it of me to enquere and ſpyen?
               I trowe thou woldeſt locke me in thy chyſt?
               Thou ſhuldeſt ſaye: wyfe, go where you lyſt
               Take your dyſporte, I wol leue no tales
               I knowe you for a trewe wyfe dame Ales
               we loue no man, that taketh kept or charge
               where that we go, we wol be at our large
               ¶Of al men ybleſſed mote he be
               The wyſe aſtrologien dan Ptholome
               That ſayth thys prouerbe in his almageſt
               Of al men hys wyſedome is the beſt
               That recketh not who hath ye world in hāde
               By thys prouerbe thou ſhalt vnderſtande
               Haue thou ynowe, what dare ye recke or care
               Howe merely that other folke fare
               For certes, olde dottarde by your leue
               Ye ſhal haue queynte ynowe at eue
               He is to great a nygarde that wol werne
               A man, to lyght a candel at hys lanterne
               He ſhal haue neuer the laſſe lyght parde
               Haue thou ynowe, thou darſt not playne the
               Thou ſayſt alſo, that yf we make vs gaye
               wyth clothes, or wyth precious arraye
               That it is peryl of our chaſtite
               And yet with ſorow, thou muſt enforſen the
               And ſaye theſe wordes in the apoſtels name
               In habyte made with chaſtite & ſhame
               Ye women ſhulde appareyle you (ꝙ he)
               And not in treſſed heir, and gaye perre
               As perle, ne wyth golde, ne clothes ryche
               After the texte, ne after thy rubryche
               I nyl not worche as moche as a gnatte.
               ¶Thou ſayeſt alſo, I was lyke a catte
               But who ſo wolde ſenge the cattes ſkynne
               Then wolde the catte dwellen in hys ynne
               And yf the cattes ſkyn be ſlicke and gaye
               She nyl not dwel in houſe halfe a daye
               But forth ſhe wol or any daye be dawed
               To ſhewe her ſkyn, and gon a carrewaued.
               ¶Thus thou ſayeſt, yf I be gay ſyr ſhrewe
               I wol ren out, my borel for to ſhewe
               Syr olde foole, what helpeth the to ſpyen
               For though thou play Argus wt hys. C. eyen
               To be my wardcors, as he can beſt
               In fayth he ſhal not kepe me but me leſt
               Yet couth I make hys berde, ſo mote I the
               ¶Thou ſayeſt eke, yt there ben thynges thre
               The whyche troublen al thys erth
               And that no wyght may endure the ferth
               O, lefe ſyr ſhrewe, Ieſu ſhorte thy lyfe
               Yet precheſt thou, & ſayeſt: an hateful wyfe
               I rekened is, for one of theſe myſchaunces
               Ben there none other reſemblaunces?
               That ye maye lyken your parable to
               But yf a ſely wyfe be one of tho.
               Thou lykeneſt eke, womens loue to hell
               
                  To barayn londe, there water may nat dwel
               Thou lykeneſt it alſo to wylde fyre
               The more it brenneth, the more it hath deſyre
               To conſume any thyng that brent wolde be.
               Thou ſaieſt, right as wormes ſhendē a tre
               Right ſo a wyfe diſtroyeth her huſbonde
               This knowen they that ben to wyues bonde
               ¶Lordīges, right thus as ye haue vnderſtōd
               Bare I ſtiffely myn olde huſbande on honde
               That thus they ſayden in her dronkneſſe
               And al was falſe, but as I toke witneſſe
               Of Ienkyn, and of my nece alſo
               O lorde the payne I dyd hem, and the wo
               Ful gyltles by goddes ſwete pyne
               For as an horſe, I couth both byte & whyne
               I couth playn, though I were in the gylte
               Or els often tyme I had ben ſpylte
               who ſo fyrſt to myl cometh, fyrſt grynt
               I playned fyrſt, and ſo was our warre iſlynt
               They were ful glad to excuſen hem blyue
               Of thyng, that they a gylt neuer in her lyue
               Of wenches wol I bere hem on honde
               whan yt for ſicke, vnnethes might they ſtond
               Yet tickled I his hert, for that he
               Wende I had of him ſo great cheerte
               I ſwore, that al my walkyng out by nyght
               Was for to eſpy wenches, that he dight
               Vnder that colour had I moche myrthe
               For al ſuche witte, is gyuen vs in oure birthe
               Diſceite, wepyng, ſpynnyng, god hath gyue
               To women, kyndly while that they lyue
               And thus of o thyng I may auaunt me
               At thende I had the beſt in eche degre
               By ſleyght or force, or by ſome maner thyng
               As by contynual murmure or grutchyng
               Namely a bedde had they miſchaunce
               There wolde I chide, & don bē no pleſaunce
               I wolde no lenger in the bedde abyde
               (Yf I felte hys arme ouer my ſyde)
               Tyl he had made his raunſom vnto me
               Than wolde I ſuffre hym do hys nycete
               And therfore, euery man thys tale I tel
               wyue who ſo may, al ben for to ſel
               with empty hondes men may no haukeslure
               For wynnyng wolde I al his luſt endure
               And make me than a fayned appetite.
               And yet in bacon had I neuer delyte
               That maked me euer yt I wolde hem chide
               For though the pope had ſytten hem beſyde
               I wolde nat ſpare hem at her own borde
               For be my trouth I quit hem word for word
               As helpe me very god omnypotent
               Tho I right nowe ſhulde make my teſtamēt
               I ne owe hem a worde, but it is quytte
               I brought it ſo about by my wytte
               That they muſt gyue it vp, as for the beſt
               Or els had we neuer ben in reſt
               For though he loked as wode as a lyon
               Yet ſhulde he fayle of hys concluſyon.
               Than wolde I ſay, good lete take kepe
               Howe mekely loketh wylken ſhepe
               Come nere my ſpouſe, & let me kyſſe your cheke
               Ye ſhulde be al pacient and meke
               And haue aſwete ſpiced conſcience
               Sithe ye ſo preche of Iobs pacyence
               Suffreth alway, ſyth ye ſo wel can preche
               And but yf you do, we ſhal you teche
               That it is fayre to haue a wyfe in pees
               One of vs two mote obeyen doutles
               And ſithe a man is more reſonable
               Than a woman is ye muſt ben ſufferable
               what ayleth you to grutche thus and grone?
               Is it for ye wolde haue my queynt alone?
               why take it al, lo, haue it euery del
               Peter I ſhrewe you, but ye loue it wel.
               For if I wolde ſel my belechoſe
               I couth walke as freſhe as any roſe
               But I wol kepe it for your owne toth
               Ye be to blame by god, I ſay you ſoth
               Suche maner wordes had we on honde
               Now wol I ſpeke of my fourth huſbonde.
               ¶My fourth huſbonde was a reuelour
               This is to ſay, he had a paramont
               And I was yong and ful of ragery
               Stubburne and ſtronge, and ioly as a pye
               wel coude I daunce to an harpe finale
               And ſyng ywis, as a nyghtingale
               Whā I had dronkē a draught of ſwete wine
               Metellus, the ſoule churle the ſwyne
               That with a ſtaffe byrafte hys wyfe her lyfe
               For ſhe droke wine: though I had be his wife
               Ne ſhulde he nat haue daunted me fro drinke
               And after wyne of Venus muſt I thynke
               For alſo ſeker, as colde engendreth hayle
               A lycorus mouth muſt haue a lecherous taile
               In women vynolent is no defence
               This knowe lechours by experience.
               But lorde Chriſt, whan it remembreth me
               Vpon my youth, and my iolyte
               It tickleth me about myne hert rote
               Vnto this day it dothe myne hert bote
               That I haue had my worlde, as in my tyme
               But age alas, that al wol enuenyme
               Hath me birafte my beaute, and my pith
               
                  Let go farewel, the deuel go therwyth
               The floure is gone, there nys no more tel
               The bran (as I beſt can) nowe mote I ſel
               But yet to be ryght mery wol I fonde
               Now forth to tel of my fourth huſbonde.
               ¶I ſaye I had in hert great dyſpyte
               That he of any other had delyte
               But he was quyte, by god and by ſaynt Ioce
               I made hym of the ſame wode a troce
               Not of my body in no foule manere
               But certaynly, I made folke ſuch chere
               That in hys owne grece I made hym fry
               For anger, and for very ielouſy
               By god, in erth I was hys purgatory
               For whych I hope hys ſoule be in glory
               For god it wote, he ſatte ful ofte and ſonge
               when that hys ſhoe ful bytterly him wronge
               There was none, ſaue god and he, that wyſt
               In many wyſe, howe ſore that I him twyſt
               He dyed when I came fro Hieruſalem
               And lyeth in graue vnder the Rode beem
               Al nys hys tombe ſo curious
               As was the ſepulture of hym Darius
               whych that Appelles wrought ſo ſubtelly
               It is but waſt to bury hym preciouſly
               Let him farwel, god giue his ſoule good reſt
               He is nowe in hys graue and in hys cheſt.
               ¶Nowe of my fyfth huſbande wol I tel
               God let neuer hys ſoule come in hel
               And yet was he to me the moſt ſhrewe
               That fele I on my rybbes al by rewe
               And euer ſhal, vnto myne endynge day
               But in our bedde he was ſo freſhe and gay
               And therwythal, he couth ſo wel me gloſe
               when that he wolde haue my bele choſe
               That though he had me bete on euery bone
               He couth wynne ayen my loue anone
               I trowe I loued hym the better, for that he
               was of hys loue ſo daungerous to me
               we women haue, yf that I ſhal not lye
               In thys matere, a queynt fantaſy
               wayte what thyng we may not lightly haue
               Therafter wol we alday crye and craue
               Forbyd vs thynge, and that deſyren we
               Preſe on faſt, and then wol we flee
               wyth daunger vttren we al our chaffare
               Great prees at market maketh dere ware
               And to great chepe is holde at to lytel pryce
               Thys knoweth euery woman that is wyſe.
               ¶My fyfth huſbande, god hys ſoule bleſſe
               whych I toke for loue and no rycheſſe
               He ſomtyme was a clerke of Oxenforde
               And had lefte ſchole, & wēt at home to borde
               wyth my goſſyp, dwellynge in our town
               God haue her ſoule, her name was Alyſoun
               She knewe my hert, and eke my priuety
               Better then our paryſhe preeſt ſo mote I the
               To her bewrayed I my counſayle al
               For had my huſbande pyſt agaynſt the wal
               Or done a thynge, yt ſhulde haue coſt his lyfe
               To her, and another worthy wyfe
               And to my nece, whych that I loued wel
               I wolde haue tolde hys counſayle euery dell
               And ſo I dyd ful often god it wote
               That made hys face ful ofte reed and hote
               For very ſhame, and blamed hym ofte, for he
               Had tolde to me ſo great a preuyte.
               ¶And ſo befyl, that ones in a lent
               So ofte tyme I to my goſſyp went
               For euer yet I loued to go gaye
               And for to walke in March, Apryll, & Maye
               Fro houſe to houſe, to herken ſondry tales
               That Ienkē clerke, & my goſſep dame Ales
               And I my ſelfe, into the feldes went
               My huſbonde was at london al that lent
               I had the better layſer for to pleye
               And for to ſe, and eke for to be ſey
               Of luſty folke, what wyſt I where my grace
               was ſhapen for to ben, or in what place?
               Therfore made I my viſytations
               To vigilles, and to proceſſions
               To preachyng eke, and to pilgrymages
               To playes of myracles, and to mariages
               And weared on my gay ſkarlet gytes
               The wormes, theſe moghtes, ne theſe mites
               Vpon my parel frette hem neuer a del
               And woſt thou why? for they were vſed wel
               Nowe wol I tel forth what happed me
               I ſaye, that in the feldes walked we
               Tyl truely we had ſuche daliaunce
               Thys clerke and I, that of my purueyaunce
               I ſpeake to hym, and ſayd how that he
               Yf I were wedowe, ſhulde wedde me
               For certaynly, I ſay for no bobaunce
               Yet was I neuer wythout purueyaunce
               Of mariage, ne of other thynges eke
               I holde a mouſſes wytte not worth a leke
               That hath but one hole to ſterten to
               And yf that fayle, then is al ydo.
               I bare hym on hāde he had enchaūted me
               My dame taught me forſoth that ſubtylte
               And eke I ſayd, I mette of hym al nyght
               He wolde a ſlayne me, as I laye vpryght
               And al my bedde was ful of very blood
               
                  But yet I hope truely he ſhulde do me good
               For blode betokeneth gold, as I was taught
               & al was fals, I dremed of him right nauȝt
               But as I folowed aye my dames lore
               As wel of that, as of other thynges more.
               But now ſyr let me ſe, what ſhal I ſayne?
               Aha, by god I haue my tale agayne
               when yt my fourth huſbande was on bere
               I wept algate, and made ſory chere
               As wyues moten, for it is vſage
               And wyth my kerchefe couered my vyſage
               But for that I was pu
                     •
                  ueyed of a make
               I wept but ſmal, and that I vndertake
               To church was my huſbād borne on morow
               wyth neyghbours, that for hym made ſorow
               And Ianken our clerke was one of tho
               As helpe me god, when that I ſawe him go
               After the bere, me thought he had a payre
               Of legges and of fete, ſo clene and ſo fayre
               That al my herte I yaue vnto hys holde
               He was I trowe, twenty wynter olde
               And I was fourty, yf that I ſhal ſaye ſothe
               But yet I had alway a coltes tothe
               Gaptothed I was, & that bycame me wele
               I had the printe of dame Venus ſeele
               As helpe me god, I was a luſty one
               And fayre, ryche, & yonge, and wel bygone
               And truely, as myn huſbande tolde me
               I had the beſt queynte that myght be
               For certes I am al fully Venetian
               In felynge, and my herte is Marcian
               Venus me yaue my luſt & my lycorouſneſſe
               And Mars yaue me my ſturdy hardyneſſe
               Myn aſcendent was Taure, & Mars therin
               Alas alas, that euer loue was ſyn
               I folowed aye myne inclination
               By vertue of my conſtellation
               That made me I couth not wythdrawe
               My chambre of Venus from a good felawe
               Yet haue I Martes marke vpon my face
               And alſo in another preuy place
               For god ſo wyſly be my ſaluation
               I loued neuer by no dyſcretion
               But euer folowed myne appetyte
               Al were he ſhorte, longe, blacke, or whyte
               I toke no kepe, ſo that he lyked me
               Howe poore he was, ne eke of what degre.
               what ſhuld I ſay▪ but at ye monethes ende
               Thys ioly clerke Ianken, that was ſo hende
               Hath wedded me wyth great ſolempnite
               And to hym ya
                     •
                  e I al the lande and fee
               That euer was yeuen me here byfore
               But afterwarde repented me ful ſore
               He nolde ſuffre nothynge of my lyſte
               By god he ſmote me ones wyth hys fyſt
               For that I rente out of hys boke a lefe
               That of that ſtroke, my eres wext defe
               Stubborne I was, as is a lyoneſſe
               And of my tonge a very tanglereſſe
               And walke I wolde, as I had done byforne
               Fro houſe to houſe, although he had it ſworn
               For which ful oft tyme wolde he preche
               And me of olde Romayne ieſtes teche
               How he Sulpicius Gallus left hys wyfe
               And her forſoke terme of hys lyfe
               Not but for open heed he her ſey
               Lokynge out at hys dore on a dey
               An other Romayne tolde he me by name
               That for hys wyfe was at a ſommer game
               wythout hys wetynge, he forſoke her eke
               And then wolde he vpon hys Byble ſeke
               That ylke prouerbe of Eccleſiaſte
               where he cumaundeth, and forbyddeth faſt
               A mā ſhal not ſuffre his wife go royle about
               Thē wolde he ſay ryght thus out of donte
               ¶who ſo buyldeth hys houſe al of falowes
               And pricketh his blynd horſe ouer ye falowes
               And ſuffreth his wyfe for to ſeche hallowes
               He is worthy to be hanged on the gallowes
               But al for nought, I ſet not an hawe
               Of hys prouerbes, ne of hys olde ſawe
               Ne I wolde not of hym corrected be
               I hate hym that my vyces telleth me
               And ſo do mo (god wotte) then I
               Thys made hym wood wyth me al vtterly
               I nolde nat forbere him in no caas
               Now wol I ſay you ſoth by ſaint Thomas
               why that I rent out of hys boke a le
                     •
                  e
               For whych he ſmote me that I was defe
               He had a boke, that gladly nyght and daye
               For hys dyſporte, he wolde rede alway
               He cleped it Valery, and Theophraſt
               At whych boke he lough alway ful faſt
               And eke ther was a clerke ſomtime at Rome
               A cardinal, that hyght ſaynt Ierome
               That made a boke ayenſt Iouinian
               In whych boke there was eke Tertulian
               Criſyppus, Trotula, and Helowys
               That was abbeſſe not farre fro Parys
               And eke the parables of Salomon
               Ouydes arte, and bokes many one
               And al theſe were bounden in one volume
               And euery nyght and day was hys cuſtome
               (when he had leyſer and vacatioun
               
                  From other worldly occupatioun)
               To reden in this boke of wycked wyues
               He knewe of hem mo legendes and lyues
               Than ben of good women in the Byble
               For truſteth wel, it is an impoſſyble
               That any clerke wolde ſpeke good of wyues
               But yf it ben of holy ſayntes lyues
               Ne of non other woman neuer the mo
               Who peynted the lyon, tel me who?
               By god, yf women had writen ſtories
               As clerkes han, within her oratories
               They wold haue writtē of men more wickedneſſe
               Than al the marke of Adam may redreſſe
               The chyldren of Mercury and Venus
               Ben in her workyng ful contrarious
               Mercury loueth wyſedom and ſcience
               And Venus loueth riot and diſpence
               And for her dyuers diſpoſition
               Eche falleth in others exaltation
               And thus god wotte, Mercury is deſolate
               In Piſces, where Venus is exaltate
               And Venus falleth wher Mercury is reyſed
               Therfore no woman of no clerke is preyſed
               The clerke whan he is old, & may nought do
               Of Venus werkes, nat worth his olde ſhoe
               Than ſytte he doun, and write in his dotage
               That women can nat kepe her mariage
               But nowe to purpoſe, why I tolde the
               That I was beten for a boke parde
               Vpon a nyght I enken, that was our ſyre
               Redde vpon his boke, as he ſate by the fyre
               Of Eue fyrſt, that for her wickedneſſe
               was al mankynde brought to wretchedneſſe
               For which yt Ieſu chriſt hym ſelfe was ſlayn
               That bought vs with his hert blode agayn
               Lo here expreſſe of women may ye fynde
               That woman was the loſſe of al mankynde
               Tho rad he me how ſāpſon loſt his heeres
               Slepyng, his lemā cut hem with her ſheres
               Thorowe which treſon loſt he both his eyen
               Tho rad he me, yf that I ſhal nat lyen
               Of Hercules, and of his Deianyre
               That cauſed him to ſette him ſelfe a fyre
               Nothyng forgate he the care and the wo
               That Socrates had with his wyues two
               Howe that Xantippe caſt pyſſe on his heed
               This ſely man ſatte ſtyl, as he were deed
               He wyped his heed, no more durſt he ſayn
               But er the thonder ſtynt there cometh rayn
               Of Paſiphae, that was quene of Crete
               For ſhreudneſſe him thought that tale ſwete
               Fye, ſpeke no more, it is a griſely thynge
               Of her horrible luſt and her lykyng
               Of Clytenneſtra for her lechery
               That falſely made her huſbande for to dye
               He rad it with wel good deuoſion
               He tolde me eke, for what occaſyon
               Amphiaraus at Thebes loſt his lyfe
               My huſbonde had a legende of hys lyfe
               Eriphilem that for an ouche of golde
               Hath preuely vnto the grekes tolde
               where that her huſbonde hyd him in a place
               For which he had at Thebes ſory grace
               Of Lyma tolde he me, and of Lucy
               They both made her huſbondes for to dye
               That one for loue, that other was for hate
               Lyma her huſbonde on an euyn late
               Enpoyſoned had, for that ſhe was his foe
               Lucia lykerous loued her huſbonde ſo
               That for he ſhulde alway vpon her thynke
               She gaue hym ſuche a loue maner drynke
               That he was deed, er it were morowe
               And thus algates huſbondes han ſorowe
               Than tolde he me, howe one Latumeus
               Complayned to his felowe Arius
               That in his garden growed ſuche a tree
               On whych (he ſayd) that hys wyues thre
               Honged hem ſelfe for hertes diſpitous
               O lefe brother (ꝙ this Arius)
               Yeue me a plant of thys blyſful tree
               And in my garden planted ſhal it be.
               Of later date of wyues hath he redde
               That ſome han ſlayn her huſbondes in bedde
               And let her lechour dight hem al the nyght
               whiles that the cors lay in ſlore vpright
               And ſome had dryue nayles in her brayne
               whiles they ſlepe, & thus they haue hē ſlayn
               Some haue yeue hem poyſon in her drynke
               He ſpake more harme than hert may thynke
               And therwithal he knewe mo prouerbes
               Than in this world there groweth graſſe or herbes
               Bette is (ꝙ he) thyne habitation
               Be with a lyon, or a foule dragon
               Than with a woman vſyng for to chyde
               Bette is (ꝙ he) hygh in the rofe to abyde
               Than with an angry wife down in an hous
               They ben ſo wicked and ſo contrarious
               They haten, that her huſbondes louen aye
               He ſaid, a woman caſt her ſhame away
               whan ſhe caſt of her ſmocke: and farther mo
               A fayre woman, but ſhe be chaſt alſo
               Is lyke a golde ryng on a ſowes noſe
               who coude wene, or who coude ſuppoſe
               The wo, that in myne hert was and pyne
               
                  And whan I ſawe he wolde neuer fyne
               To reden on this curſed boke al nyght
               Al ſodaynly thre leues haue I plyght
               Out of hys boke, right as he radde, and eke
               I with my fyſt ſo toke hym on the cheke
               That in the fyre he fell backwarde a doun
               And vp he ſtert, as dothe a wode lyoun
               And with his fyſt he ſmote me on myne heed
               That in the flore I laye as I were deed
               And whan he ſey howe ſtyl that I lay
               He was a gaſt, and wold haue fledde awaye
               Tyl at the laſt out of my ſwoun I brayde
               Oh, haſt thou ſlayn me falſe thefe I ſayde
               For my loude thus haſt thou murdred me?
               Er I be deed, yet wol I ones kyſſe the
               And nere he cam, and kneled faire a doun
               And ſaid: dere ſuſter, ſwete Alyſoun
               As helpe me god I ſhal the neuer ſmyte
               That I haue don, it is thy ſelfe to wyte
               Foryeue it me, and that I the beſeke
               And yet efte ſones I hytte hym on the cheke
               And ſayd: thefe, thus moche am I be wreke
               Nowe wol I dye, I may no lenger ſpeke.
               But at the laſt, with mokel care and wo
               we fel accorded within our ſeluen two
               He yaf me al the brydel in myne honde
               To haue the gouernaunce of houſe & londe
               And of hys tonge, and of hys honde alſo
               And made hym bren his boke anon tho
               And whan I had goten vnto me
               By maiſtry, al the ſoueraynte
               Than he ſayd: myne own trewe wyſe
               Dothe as thou lyſte, the terme of al thy lyfe
               Kepe thyne honour, and eke myne eſtate
               Alter that day we had neuer debate
               God helpe me ſo, I was to hym as kynde
               As any wyfe fro Denmarke vnto Inde
               And alſo trewe, and ſo was he to me
               I praye to god, that ſytte in maieſte
               So blyſſe hys ſoule, for his mercy dere
               Nowe wol I ſay my tale yf ye wol here.
               ¶The frere lough whan he had herd al this
               Nowe dame (ꝙ he) ſo haue I ioye or blyſſe
               This is a long preamble of a tale
               And whan the Sompner herd yt frere gale
               Lo (ꝙ this ſompner) by goddes armes two
               A frere wol entermete hym euermo
               Lo good men, a flye and eke a frere
               wol fal in euery diſhe and eke matere
               what ſpekeſt thou of preambulation?
               what amble or trot, eyther peace or ſyt a doū
               
               Thou letteſt our diſporte in this matere.
               ¶Yea wolt thou ſo ſyr Sōpner (ꝙ ye Frere)
               Nowe by my faye I ſhal, er that I go
               Tel of a Sompner, ſuche a tale or two
               That al the folke ſhul laugh in this place.
               Nowe els frere I beſhrewe thy face
               (Quod this ſompner) and I be ſhrewe me
               But yf I tel tales two or thre
               Of freres, er I come to Sittyngburne
               That ſhal make thyne hert for to murne
               For wel I wotte thy pacience is goon.
               ¶Our Hooſt cried peace, and that anoon
               And ſayd: Lette the woman tel her tale
               Ye faren as folke, that dronken ben of ale
               Do dame, tel forthe your tale, & that is beſte
               Al redy ſyr (ꝙ ſhe) ryght as you leſte
               If I haue lycence of thys worthy frere
               Yes dame, tel forthe your tale, I wol it here.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the wyfe of Bathes prologue, and here begynneth her tale.
               
                  I In the olde dayes of kynge I
                     •
                  
                  toure
               (Of which the Bretons ſpeken great honour)
               Al was thys londe fulfylled of fairy
               The Elfe quene, with her ioly company
               Daunſed ful ofte in many a grene mede
               This was the olde opinyon as I rede
               I ſpeke of many an hundred yere a go
               But nowe can no man ſe none elfes mo
               For nowe the great charyte and prayers
               Of lymytours and other holy freres
               That ſerchen euery lande and euery ſtreme
               As thicke as motes in the ſonne beme
               Bliſſyng halles, chambres, kichens, & boures
               Cyties borowes, caſtelles, and hye toures
               Thropes, bernes, ſhepens, and deyties
               This maketh, that there ben no fayries
               For there as wonte to walke was an elfe
               There walketh now the lymitour hym ſelfe
               In vndermeles, and in mornynges
               And ſaythe hys matyns, & hys holy thynges
               As he gothe in hys lymitacioun
               women may go ſafely vp and doun
               In euery buſhe, and vnder euery tre
               There nys none other incubus but he
               And he ne wyl done hem no diſhonour
               
                  ¶And ſo fel it, that this kyng Arrour
               Had in his houſe a luſty bacheler
               That on a day come rydyng fro the ryuer
               And happed, that alone as he was borne
               He ſawe a mayde walkyng hym byforne
               Of whiche mayde anon, maugre her hede
               (By very force) he berafte her maydenhede
               For whiche oppreſſion was ſuche clamour
               And ſuche purſute vnto kyng Artour
               That dampned was this knyght to be deed
               By courſe of lawe, & ſhuld haue loſt his heed
               Peraduenture ſuche was the ſtatute tho
               But that the quene, and other ladyes mo
               So longe prayden the kyng of grace
               Tyl he his lyfe graunted in that place
               And yaue hym to the quene, al at her wyl
               To cheſe where yt ſhe wolde hym ſaue or ſpil
               The quene thāketh ye king wt al her might
               And after this, thus ſpake ſhe to the knyght
               whan ſhe ſey her tyme on a day
               ¶Thou ſtandeſt yet (ꝙ ſhe) in ſuche aray
               That of thy lyfe yet haſte thou no ſuerte
               I graunte yt thy lyfe, if that thou cauſt tel me
               what thyng is it, that women moſte deſyren
               Beware, and kepe thy necke bone from yren
               And yf thou canſte not tel it me anon
               Yet wol I yeue the leue for to gon
               A twelue moneth and a day, to ſeke and lere
               An anſwere ſuffycient in this matere
               And ſuertie wol I haue, er that thou paſſe
               Thy body for to yelde in this place.
               ¶wo was the knight, & ſoroufully he ſyketh
               But what? he may not done al as him lyketh
               And at laſte he cheſe hym or to wende
               And come ayen, ryght at the yeres ende
               with ſuch anſwer, as god wold hym puruay
               And taketh his leue, & wēdeth forth his way
               He ſeketh euery houſe and euery place
               where as he hopeth for to fynde grace
               To lerne, what thyng women louen mooſt
               But he ne couthe aryuen in no cooſt
               where as he myght fynde in this matere
               Two creatures accordyng yfere
               Some ſayd, women loued beſt rycheſſe
               Some ſayd honour, ſome ſayd iolyneſſe
               Some ſayd riche aray, ſome ſaid luſt a bedde
               And ofte tyme to ben wydowe and wedde.
               Some ſayd, that our herte is moſte y eſed
               whan that we ben flatered and ypleſed
               He gothe ful nye the ſothe, I wol not lye
               A man ſhal wynne vs beſte with flaterye
               And with attendaunce, and with buſyneſſe
               Ben we ilymed bothe more and leſſe.
               And ſome men ſayn, how yt we louen beſte
               For to ben fre, and do right as vs leſte
               And that no man repreue vs of our vyce
               But ſay that we be wyſe, & nothyng nyce
               For trewly there nys none of vs al
               If any wight wol clawe vs on the gall
               That we nyl kyke, for that he ſayth vs ſothe
               Aſſay, and he ſhal fynde it, that ſo dothe
               For be we neuer ſo victous within
               we wol be holden wyſe and clene of ſyn
               And ſome men ſayn, yt great delite haue we
               For to ben holde ſtable and eke ſecre
               And in o purpoſe ſtedfaſtly to dwel
               And nat bewray thyng that men vs tel
               But that tale is nat worthe a rake ſtele
               Parde we women con nothyng hele
               witneſſe of Midas, wol ye here the tale
               ¶Ouyde, among other thynges ſmale
               Said, Midas had vnder his long heeres
               Growyng on his heed, two aſſes eeres
               The whiche vice he hidde, as he beſte myght
               Ful ſubtelly from euery mannes ſyght
               That ſaue his wyfe, there wiſt of it no mo
               He loued her moſt, and truſted her alſo
               He prayde her, that to no creature
               She nolde tellen of his diſfygure.
               She ſwore him, nat for al ye world to wyn
               She nolde do that villany, ne that ſyn
               To makē her huſbonde haue ſo foule a name
               She nolde nat tel it for her own ſhame
               But natheles, her thought that ſhe dyde
               That ſhe ſo long ſhulde a counſayle hyde
               Her thought it ſwole ſo ſore about her hert
               That nedely ſome worde ſhe moſt a ſtert
               And ſyth ſhe durſt tellen it to no man
               Down to a marris faſt by ſhe ran
               Tyl ſhe came there, her hert was on a fyre
               And as a byttour bumbeth in the myre
               She layd her mouth vnto the water adown
               Bewray me nat thou water with thy ſown
               Quod ſhe, to the I tel it, and to no mo
               My huſbonde hath long Aſſes eres two
               Nowe is myne hert al hole, nowe it is out
               I myght no lenger kepe it out of dout.
               ¶Here mowe ye ſe, though we a tyme abyde
               Yet out it mote, we can no counſayle hyde
               The remenaunt of the tale, yf ye wyl here
               Redeth Ouyde, and there ye may it lere.
               ¶This knight, of which my tale is ſpecially
               whan that he ſawe, he might not come therby
               This is to ſay, what women louen moſte
               
                  Within his herte ſorowful was hys goſte
               But home he gothe, he myght nat ſoiourne
               The day was come, he muſte home returne
               And in his way, it happed hym to ryde
               In al hys care, vnder a foreſte ſyde
               Where he ſawe vpon a daunce go
               Of ladyes foure and twenty, and yet mo
               Toward the daūce he drowe him, & yt yerne
               In hope that ſome wyſedome ſhuld he lerne
               But certaynly, er that he came fully there
               Vanyſhed was the daūce, he niſte not where
               No creature ſawe he that bare lyfe
               Saue in ye grene, he ſaw ſytting an old wife
               A fouler wyght there may no man deuyſe
               Agayne the knyght the olde wyfe gan aryſe
               And ſayd: ſyr knight, here forth lyeth no way
               Tel me what ye ſeken by your fay
               Parauenture it may the better be
               This olde folke conne moche thyng (ꝙ ſhe)
               ¶My lyfe mother (ꝙ thys knyght) certayne
               I nam but deed, but yf that I can ſayne
               what thyng it is, yt womē moſte deſyre
               Coude ye me wilſe, I wolde quite wel your hyre
               Plight me thy trouth here in my hōde (ꝙ ſhe)
               The next thyng that I require the
               Thou ſhalte it do, yf it be in thy myght
               And I wol tel it you, or it be nyght.
               Haue here my trouth (ꝙ ye knight) I graunt
               ¶Than quod ſhe, I may me wel auaunt
               Thy lyfe is ſafe, for I wol ſtonde therby
               Vpon my lyfe, the quene wyl ſay as I
               Let ſe, whiche is the proudeſt of hem al
               That weareth on a kerchefe or a cal
               That dare ſay nay, of that I ſhal you teche
               Let vs go forthe without lenger ſpeche.
               Tho rowned ſhe a piſtel in his ere
               And bade hym to be glad, and haue no fere.
               ¶whā they ben comē to ye court, thys knyght
               Sayd, he had holde his day, as he had hight
               And redy was hys anſwere, as he ſayde
               Ful many a noble wyfe, and many a mayde
               And many a wydowe, for that they be wyſe
               The quene her ſelfe, ſyttyng as a iuſtyſe
               Aſſembled ben, his anſwere for to here
               And afterwarde this knight was bode apere
               To euery wight cōmaunded was ſylence
               And that the knyght ſhulde tel in audyence
               That thyng that worldly women loued beſt
               This knyght ne ſtode not ſtyl as doth a beſte
               But to his queſtion anon anſwerde
               with manly voyce, that al the courte it herde
               My liege lady: generally, quod he
               women deſyren to haue ſoueraynte
               As wel ouer her huſbondes as her loue
               And for to ben in maiſtrye hem aboue
               This is your moſte deſyre, though ye me kyl
               Dothe as you lyſte, I am here at your wyl.
               ¶In al the courte nas there wyfe ne mayde
               Ne wydowe, that contraried, that he ſayde
               But ſayd, he was worthy han his lyfe.
               And with ye worde, vp ſterte the olde wyfe
               which yt the knight fonde ſyttyng on ye grene
               Mercy (ꝙ ſhe) my ſouerayne lady quene
               Er that your couete departe do me right
               I taught this anſwere vnto thys knyght
               For whiche he plight me hys trouthe there
               The fyrſt thyng I wolde of hym requere
               He wolde it do, yf it lay in hys might
               Before the courte thā praye I the ſir knight
               (Quod ſhe) that thou me take vnto thy wyfe
               For wel thou woſte, that I haue kept thy life
               If I ſay falſe, ſaye nay vpon thy fay
               ¶This knight anſwerd, alas and welaway
               I wote right wel, that ſuche was my beheſte
               For goddes loue cheſe a newe requeſte
               Take al my good, and let my body go.
               Nay ꝙ ſhe, than I ſhrewe vs bothe two
               For though that I be foule, olde and poore
               I nolde for al the metal ne the ore
               That vnder erthe is graue, or lythe aboue
               But yf I thy wyfe were and thy loue.
               ¶My loue (ꝙ he) nay my dampnation
               Alas that any of my nacion
               Shulde euer ſo foule diſparaged be
               But al for naught, the ende is this, that he
               Cōſtrayned was, yt nedes muſt he her wedde
               And taketh this olde wyfe, & gothe to bedde
               ¶Nowe wolden ſome men ſay parauenture
               That for my neglygence, I do no cure
               To tellen you the ioye and the array
               That at the feeſt was that ylke day.
               To the which thing anſwere ſhortly I ſhal
               I ſay there was no ioy ne feeſt at al
               There nas but heuyneſſe and moche ſorowe
               For priuely he wedded her on a morowe
               And al day after hydde hym as an oule
               So wo was hym, his wife loked ſo foule
               Gret was ye ſorow ye knight had ī his thouȝt
               whan he was with his wife a bedde ibrouȝt
               He waloweth, and turneth to and fro.
               ¶His olde wyfe lay ſmylyng euermo
               And ſayd: O dere huſbonde, O benedicite
               Fareth euery knight thus as ye?
               Is this the lawe of kyng Artours houſe
               
                  Is euery knyght of his loue ſo daungerouſe
               I am your owne loue, and eke your wyfe
               I am ſhe, whiche that ſaued hath your lyfe
               And certes yet dyd I neuer you vnryght
               why fare ye thus with me the fyrſt nyght
               Ye 
                     •
                  acen lyke a man that had loſte hys witte
               Fy, what is my gilte: for gods loue tel me it
               And it ſhal be amended yf I may.
               ¶Amended (ꝙ this knyght) alas nay nay
               That wol not ben amended neuer mo
               Thou arte ſo lothly, and ſo olde alſo
               And therto comen of ſo lowe a kynde
               That litel wōder is thogh I walow & wind
               So wolde god (ꝙ he) myne herte wold breſt.
               ¶Is this (ꝙ ſhe) the cauſe of your onreſt?
               Ye certaynly quod he, no wonder nys.
               ¶Nowe ſyr (ꝙ ſhe) I couthe amende al this
               If that me lyſt, er it were dayes thre
               So wel ye myght beare you vnto me.
               But for ye ſpeke of ſuche gentylneſſe
               As is diſcended out of olde richeſſe
               That therfore ſhullen ye be gentilmen
               Suche errogaunce is not worthe an hen,
               Lo who that is moſte vertuous alway
               Preuy and aperte, and moſt entendeth aye
               To do the gentyl dedes, that he can
               Take hym for the greateſt gentylman.
               Chriſt wolde we claymed of hym our gentylneſſe
               Not of our elders, for our olde richeſſe
               For though they yeue vs al her herytage
               For which we claymen to ben of hye parage
               Yet may they not byquethe, for no thyng
               To none of vs, her vertuous lyuyng
               That made hem gentylmen ycalled be
               And badde vs folowen hem in ſuche degre.
               ¶Wel can the wyſe poete of Florence
               That hyght Daunte, ſpeke in thys ſentence
               Lo in ſuche maner ryme is Dauntes tale
               Ful ſelde vp ryſeth by his braunches ſmale
               Proweſſe of man: for god of his goodneſſe
               wol that we clayme of hym oure gentylneſſe
               For of our elders may we nothyng clayme
               But tēporal thyng, yt mē may hurte & maym
               Eke euery wight wote this as wel as I
               If gentilneſſe were planted naturally
               Vnto a certayne lynage downe the lyne
               Preuy & aperte, than wolde they neuer fyne
               To done of gentilneſſe the fayre offyce
               They might don no vilanye ne vice.
               Take fyre & beare it in to the derkeſt hous
               Bytwixt this and the mounte Caucaſus
               And let men ſhytte the dores, and go thenne
               Yet wol the fyre as fayre lye and brenne
               As twenty thouſande men might it beholde
               His offyce natural aye wol it holde
               Vp peryl of my lyfe, 
                     •
                  yl that it dye.
               ¶Here may ye ſe wel, howe that gentrye
               Is not annexed to poſſeſſion
               Sythen folke don not her operacion
               Alway as dothe the fyre, lo in hys kynde
               For god it wotte, men may ful often fynde
               A lordes ſonne done ſhame and vilanye
               And he that wol haue praiſe of hys gentrye
               For he was borne of a gentil houſe
               And had his elders noble and vertuouſe
               And nyl him ſelfe don no gentil dedes
               Ne folowe his gentil auncetre that deed is
               He nys not gentyl, be he duke or erle
               Fye vilaynes, ſynful dedes maketh a cherle
               For gentilneſſe nys but the renomie
               Of thyne aunceters, for her hygh bountie
               Whiche is a ſtronge thyng to thy perſone
               The gentylneſſe cometh fro god alone
               Than cometh our very gentylneſſe of grace
               It was nothyng byqueth vs with our place.
               ¶Thynketh howe noble, as ſayth Valerius
               was thylke Tullius Hoſtilius
               That out of pouertie roſe to hye nobleſſe
               Redeth Senek, and redeth eke Boece
               There ſhal ye ſeen expreſſe, no drede is
               That he is gentil, that dothe gentil dedes
               And therfore dere huſbonde, I thus conclude
               All were it that myne aunceters were rude
               Yet may that hye god, and ſo hope I
               Graunt me grace to lyue vertuouſly
               Than am I gentil, whan I begynne
               To lyue vertuouſly, and leuen ſynne
               And there as ye of pouertie me repren
                     •
                  
               
               The hye god, on whom that we byleue
               In wylful pouerte cheſe to lede his lyfe
               And certes euery man, mayde, and wyfe
               Maye vnderſtonde, Ieſu heuen kyng
               Ne wolde not cheſe a viciouſe lyuyng
               Glad pouert is an honeſt thyng certayne
               This wol Seneke and other clerkes ſayne
               who ſo wolde hold him payde of his pouerte
               I holde hym ryche, al had he not a ſherte
               He that coueyteth is a ful poore wyght
               For he wolde han, that is not in hys myght
               But he yt naught hath, ne coueyteth to haue
               Is rych, al though ye holde him but a knaue
               Very pouert is ſynne properly
               Iuuenal ſaythe of pouert merily
               The poore man, whan he gothe by the way
               
                  Byforne theues, he may ſynge and play
               Pouert is hateful good
                     •
                  and as I geſſe
               A ful great bringer out of buſyneſſe
               A great amendet eke of ſapience
               To hym that taketh it in pacience
               Pouert is, al thoughe it ſeme elenge
               Poſſeſſion, that no wyght wol-chalenge.
               Pouerte ful often, whan a man is lowe
               Maketh hys god and eke him ſelfe to knowe
               Pouert a ſpectacle is, as thynketh me
               Through which one may his very frendes ſe
               And therfore, ſyn that I you not greue
               Of my pouert, no more me repreue
               ¶Nowe ſyr, eke of elde ye repreued me
               And certes ſyr, though none autorite
               Were in no booke, ye gentils of honour
               Sayne that men ſhuld an old wight honour
               And clepe hem father for her gentilneſſe
               And autours ſhal I fynde, as I geſſe.
               ¶Now there as ye ſayn, yt I am foule & olde
               Than drede you not to ben a coke wolde
               For fylthe, elthe, and foule, alſo mote I the
               Ben great wardeyus vpon chaſtite
               But natheles, ſyn I knowe your delyte
               I ſhal fulfyl your worldly appetyte
               Cheſe now (ꝙ ſhe) one of theſe thīges tw
                     •
                  y
               To haue me foule and olde, tyl that I dry
               And be to you a trewe humble wyfe
               And neuer you diſpleaſe in al my lyfe
               Or els wol ye haue me yonge and fayre
               And take your auenture of the repayre
               That ſhal come to your houſe, bycauſe of me
               Or in ſome other place, may wel be▪
               
               Now cheſe your ſeluē, whether yt you lyketh
               ¶This knyght auyſeth hym, and ſore ſyketh
               But at the laſt, he ſayd in this manere:
               My lady and my loue, and wyfe ſo dere
               I put me in your wyſe gouernaunce
               Cheſeth your ſelfe, which maye be more pleſaūce
               And moſte honour to you and me alſo
               I do no force whether of the two
               For as you lyketh, it ſuffyſeth me.
               Thā haue I gote of you ye maiſtry (ꝙ ſhe)
               Syn I may cheſe, & gouerne as my leſte
               Ye certes wyfe, ꝙ he) I holde it for the beſte.
               kyſſe me (ꝙ ſhe) we ben no lenger wrothe
               For by my trouthe, I wol be to you bothe
               This is to ſay, to be bothe fayre & good
               I pray to god that I mote ſterue wood
               But I to you be alſo good and trewe
               As euer was wyfe ſythē ye world was newe
               And but I be to morowe as fayre to ſene
               As any lady, empreſſe, or quene
               That is bytwene the Eſte & eke the weſte
               Dothe with my lyfe right as you leſte
               Caſt vp the courteyn, and loke howe it is.
               ¶And whan the knyght ſawe al this
               That ſhe ſo fayre was, and ſo yonge therto
               For ioy he hente her in his armes two
               His herte bathed in a bathe of blyſſe
               A thouſande tymes a rowe he gan her kyſſe
               And ſhe obeyed hym in euery thyng
               That mought done hym pleaſure or lykyng
               And thus they lyued vnto her lyues ende
               In parfyte ioy: and Ieſu Chriſt vs ſende
               Huſbondes meke, yonge, and freſhe a bedde
               And grace to ouerlyue hem that we wedde.
               And eke I pray to god, to ſhort her lyues
               That wyl not be gouerned by her wyues
               And olde, and angry nygardes of diſpence
               God ſende hem ſone a very peſtylence.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the wyfe of Bathes tale and here begynneth the ſtreres prologue.
               
                  THis worthy lymytour, thys noble frere
               He made alway a maner lourynge chere
               Vpon the Sompner, but for honeſte
               No vilaynes worde as yet to hym ſpake he
               But at the laſt, he ſayd to the wyfe
               Dame, god yeue you right good lyfe
               Ye haue touched here, alſo mote I the
               In ſchole mater, a ful great diffyculte
               Ye haue ſayd moche thyng right wel I ſaye
               But dame, here as we ryden by the waye
               Vs nedeth not to ſpeken but of game
               And lete auctorites a goddes name
               To prechyng, and to ſchole of clargy.
               But yf it lyke vnto this companye
               I wol you of a Sompner tel a game
               Parde ye may wel knowe by the name
               That of a Sompner may no good be ſayde
               I pray, that none of you be yuel a payde
               A ſompner is a renner vp and doun
               with maundementes, for fornycation
               And is ybeate at euery townes ende.
               Tho ſpake our hoſt & ſaid: ſir ye ſhulde ben hende
               And curteys, as a man of your eſtate
               In this companye we wol no debate
               
                  Telleth your tale, and let the ſompner be
               Nay (ꝙ the Sompner) let hym ſay to me
               what ſo hym lyſt: whan it cometh to my lote
               By god I ſhal hym quite euery grote
               I ſhal hym tel whiche a great honour
               It is, to be a flatteryng lymytour
               And eke of many an other maner cryme
               whiche nedeth not to reherſen at this tyme
               And hys offyce I ſhal hym tel iwys
               Our hoſte anſwerde: peace, no more of thys
               And afterwarde he ſayd vnto the frere
               Tel forthe your tale, myn own maiſter dere.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Freres prologue, and here after foloweth his tale. 
               
               
                  WHylom there was dwellyng in my countre
               An archedeken, a man of hye degre
               That boldly dyd execution
               In puniſhyng of fornication
               Of withcrafte, and eke of baudrie
               Of defamacion, and aduoutrie
               Of churche reues, and of teſtamentes
               Of contractes, and lacke of ſacramentes
               Of vſure, and of ſymonye alſo
               But certes lechours dyd he moche wo
               They ſhulden ſynge, yf they weren hente
               And ſmale tythers, they were foule iſhent
               If any perſon wolde vpon hem playne
               There might aſterte hem no pecunyal payne
               For ſmale tythes, and ſmal offrynge
               He made the people pitouſly to ſynge
               For er the biſhop caught hem with hys hoke
               They were in the archedekens booke
               And than had he (through hys iurdictyon)
               Power to done on hem correction
               He had a Sompner redy to his honde
               A ſlyer boye was there none in Englonde
               For ſubtelly he had his eſpiayle
               That taught hym where he myght auayle.
               He couthe ſpare of lechours one or two
               To techen hym to foure and twenty mo
               For thogh this ſōpner wode were as an hare
               To tel his harlotrye I wol not ſpare
               For we ben out of hys correction
               They haue of vs no iurdiction
               Ne neuer ſhullen, terme of al her lyues.
               ¶Peter ſo ben women of the ſtewes
               (ꝙ this Sompner) yput out of our cure
               Peace with miſchaūce, & with miſauenture
               Sayd our hoſte, and let hym tel hys tale
               Now telleth forthe, & let the Sompner gale
               Ne ſpareth not, myne owne maiſter dere.
               ¶This fals thefe, this Sōpner (ꝙ the frere)
               Had alway baudes redy to hys honde
               As any hauke to lure, in Englonde
               That telleth hym al the ſecre that they knew
               For her aquayntaūce was not come of newe
               They weren his aprouers priuely
               He toke hym ſelfe a great profyte therby
               His maiſter knewe not alway what he wan
               Without maundement, a leude man
               He coude ſommon, on payne of chriſtes curſe
               And they were glad to fyllen hys purſe
               And made hym great feeſtes at the nale
               And right as Iudas had purſes ſmale
               And was a thefe, right ſuche thefe was he
               His maiſter had but halfe his deutie
               He was (yf I ſhal yeuen hym hys laude)
               A thefe, a ſompner, and eke a baude.
               He had eke wenches of hys retinue
               That whether ſyr Roberde, or ſyr Hue
               Or Iohan, or Rafe, or who ſo that it were
               That lay by hem, they tolde it in his eere
               Thus were ye wenches and he of one aſſent
               And he wolde fetche a fayned maundement
               
                  And ſommon hem to the chapitre bothe two
               And pylle the man, and let the wenche go
               Than wolde he ſay, frende I ſhal for thy ſake
               Do ſtryken the out of our letters blake
               The dare no more as in this caſe trauayle
               I am thy frende, there I may the auayle
               Certayne he knewe of bribries mo
               Than poſſible is to tel in yeres two
               For in this worlde nys dogge for the bowe
               That can an hurte dere from an hole knowe
               Bet than the Sompner knewe a ſlye lechour
               Or auoutrer, or els any paramour
               For that was the fruite of al hys rente
               Therfore on it he ſette al hys entent.
               And ſo befyl that ones on a day
               This Sompner waytynge euer on his pray
               Rode for to ſommō an old wedowe a ribybe
               Faynyng a cauſe, for he wolde haue a bribe
               And happed that he ſawe beforn hym ryde
               A gay yoman vnder a foreſt ſyde
               A bowe he bare, and arowes bright & ſhene
               He had vpon him a courtpye of grene
               An hatte vpon his heed with ſtrynges blake
               Sir ꝙ this ſompner, haile and wel ytake
               ¶Welcome ꝙ he, and euery good felawe
               whider rideſt yu vnder this grenwode ſhawe
               Sayd this yoman, wolte thou ferre to day?
               This ſompner hym anſwerd, and ſayd nay
               Here faſt by (ꝙ he) is myne entent
               To ryden, for to reyſen vp a rent
               That longeth to my lordes dewte.
               Arte thou than a bayly: ye (ꝙ he)
               He durſt nat than, for very fylth and ſhame
               Say that he was a Sompner, for the name
               Depardieur, ꝙ this yoman, lefe brother
               Thou arte a bayly, and I am another
               I am vnknowen, as in this countre
               Of thyne acqueyntaunce I wol pray the
               And eke of brotherhed, yf that thou liſt
               I haue golde and ſyluer in my chiſt
               Yf that ye happe to come in our ſhyre
               Al ſhal be thyne, right as thou wolt deſyre
               Graūt mercy ꝙ this ſompner, by my faithe
               Euerich in other his trouthe laythe
               For to be ſworne brethern, tyl they dey
               And with yt worde they riden forth her wey
               This ſompner wt that, was as ful of iāgles
               As ful of venym, as ben theſe wariangles
               And euer enquyring vpon euery thyng
               Brother ꝙ he, where is your dwellyng
               Another day, yf that I ſhulde you ſeche?
               This yoman hym anſwerde in ſoft ſpeche
               Brother ꝙ he, ferre in the North countre
               where as I hope ſomtyme I ſhal the ſe
               Or we departe, I ſhal the ſo wel wyſſe
               That of myne houſe thou ſhalte neuer myſſe
               Now brother ꝙ this ſompner, I you pray
               Teche me, while we ryden by the way
               Sith that ye ben a baylye, as am I
               Some ſubtelte, tel me faithfully
               In myne offyce, howe I may moſt wynne
               And ſpareth nat for conſcience ne for ſynne
               But as my brother, tel me howe don ye
               Nowe by my trouth brother dere ſayd he
               As I ſhal tellen the a faithful tale
               My wages ben ful ſtraite and ſmale
               My lorde is harde to me and daungerous
               And myne offyce ful laborous
               And therfore, by extortion I leue
               Forſothe al that men wol me yeue
               Algate by ſleyght or by violence
               From yere to yere, I wyn al my diſpence
               I can no better tellen faithfully
               Nowe certes ꝙ this ſompnour, ſo fate I
               I ſpare nat to take god it wote
               But yf it be to heuy or to hote
               That I may getten in counſayle priuely
               No maner conſcience of that haue I
               Nere myne extorcion I myght not lyuen
               Of ſuche iapes wol I nat be ſhriuen
               Stomake ne conſcience knowe I non
               I ſhrewe al theſe ſhrift fathers euerichon
               wel be we met by god and ſwete ſaynt Iame
               But lefe brother, tel me thy name
               Quod this ſompner, in thys mean while
               This yoman gan a lytel for to ſmyle
               ¶Brother ꝙ he, wolte thou that I the tel?
               I am a fende, my dwellyng is in hel
               And here I ride about my purchaſyng
               To wete where I may gete any thyng
               My purchaſe is theffecte of al my rent
               Loke howe thou rideſt for the ſame entent
               To wyne good, thou reckeſt neuer howe
               Right ſo fare I, for ride wol I nowe
               Vnto the worldes ende for a pray
               Ah, ꝙ this ſompner, benedicite, what ye ſay
               I wende ye were a woman trewly
               Ye haue a mannes ſhappe as wel as I
               Haue ye a fygure than determynate
               In hel, there ye ben in your eſtate?
               Nay certaynly ꝙ he, there haue we non
               But whan vs lyketh, we can take vs one
               Or els make you ſeme we ben ſhape
               Somtyme lyke a man or lyke an ape
               
                  Or lyke an Angel can I ryde or go
               It is no wonder thyng though it be ſo
               A louſy iuggler can diſceyue the
               And parde yet can I more crafte than he
               why ꝙ the Sompnour, ride ye thā or gon
               In ſondrie ſhappe, and nat alway in one?
               For we ꝙ he, wol vs ſuche forme make
               As moſt able is our prayes for to take
               what maketh you to haue al this labour?
               ¶Ful many a cauſe lefe ſyr Sompnour
               Sayd this fende, but al thyng hath tyme
               The day is ſhort, and it is paſſed pryme
               And yet ne gote I nothyng in this day
               I wol enrende to wynnyng, yf that I may
               And nat entende our wyttes to declare
               For brother myne, thy wyttes ben al to bare
               To vnderſtand al, though I wolde tel hē the
               But for thou aſkeſt why laboren we
               For ſomtyme be we goddes inſtrumentes
               And meanes to don his cōmaundementes
               what that hym luſt on his creatures
               In dyuers arte and in dyuers fygures
               withouten hem we haue no might certayn
               Yf that him lyſt to ſtonden there agayn
               And ſomtyme at our praye haue we leue
               Onely the body, & nought the ſoule to greue
               wytneſſe of Iob, whom we deden wo
               And ſomtyme haue we myght of bothe two
               This is to ſayn, of body and ſoule eke
               And ſomtyme we ben ſuffred for to ſeke
               Vpon a man, and don his ſoule vnreſt
               And nat his body, and al is for the beſt
               whan he withſtandeth our temptation
               It is a cauſe of hys ſaluation
               Al be it that it was nat our entent
               He ſhuld be ſafe, but that we wolde him hent
               And ſomtyme be we ſeruauntes vnto man
               As the archbyſſhoppe ſaynt Dunſtan
               And to the Apoſtel eke ſeruaunt was I
               Yet tel me ꝙ this Sompnour faithfully
               Make ye you newe bodies thus alway
               Of elementes▪ the fende anſwered nay
               Somtyme we fayn, and ſomtyme we aryſe
               with deed bodies in ſondrie wiſe
               And ſpeke as renably, fayre and wel
               As the Phitoneſſe dyd to Samuel
               And yet wolde ſome men ſay it was nat he
               I do no force of your deuynite
               But o thyng I warne the, I wol nat iape
               Thou wolte algates wete howe we be ſhape
               Thou ſhalt herafterwarde (my brother dere)
               Come, where the nedeth nat of me to lere
               For thou ſhalt by thyne own experience
               Conne in the chare rede of thys ſentence
               Bette than Vergyl, while he was on lyue
               Or Daunt alſo. Nowe lette vs ride blyue
               For I wol holde company with the
               Tyl it be ſo that thou forſake me
               Nay ꝙ this ſompnour, yt ſhal nat betide
               I am a yoman knowen ful wyde
               My trouth wol I holde to yt, as in this caas
               For though thou were the deuyll Sathanas
               My trouth wol I holde to my brother
               As I am ſworne, and eche of vs to other
               For to be trewe brother in this caas
               And brother, we gon to our purchaas
               Take thou thy parte, that men wol the yeue
               And I ſhal myne, and thus ſhal we both leue
               And yf that any of vs haue more than other
               Let him be trew, & parte it with his brother
               I graunt ꝙ the deuyl, by my fay
               And wt that worde they riden forth her way
               And right at thentrynge of the rownes ende
               (To which ye ſompner ſhope him for to wēd)
               They ſawe a carte, that charged was wt hay
               which that a carter droue forth on his way
               Depe was the way, for which the carte ſtode
               This carter ſmote, & ſtriued as he were wode
               Heit ſcot heit brok, what ſpare ye for ye ſtones
               The fende ꝙ he, you fetch both body & bones
               As ferforth as euer ye were yfoled
               So moche wo as I haue for you tholed
               The deuyl haue al, both horſe, carte, & hay
               ꝙ this ſompnour, here ſhal we haue a pray
               And nere ye fende he drew, as nouȝt ne were
               Ful preuily, and rowned in his ere
               Herken brother herken, by thy fayth
               Hereſt thou what the carter ſaith?
               Hent it anon, for he hath yeue it the
               Both hay and carte, and eke his caples thre
               Nay ꝙ the deuyl, god wotte neuer a dele
               It is nat his entent truſt me wele
               Aſke him thy ſelfe, yf thou troweſt nat me
               Or els ſtynt a whyle and thou ſhalte ſe.
               This carter thacked his horſe on ye croupe
               And they begon to drawe and to ſtoupe
               Heit nowe ꝙ he, that Ieſu chriſt you bleſſe
               And al his hondy werke both more and leſſe
               That was wel ytwight myn own lyard boy
               I pray god ſaue the and ſaynt Loye
               Nywe is my carte out of the ſlowe parde.
               Lo brother ꝙ the fende, what tolde I the
               Here may ye ſeen myn owne dere brother
               The carle ſpake o thīg but he thouȝt another
               
                  Lette vs go forth about our viage
               Here wyn we nothyng vpon cariage
               whā yt they comē ſomwhat out of ye town
               Thys Sompner to his brother gan to rown
               Brother ꝙ he, here wonneth an olde rebecke
               That had almoſt as lefe to leſe her necke
               As for to yeue a peny of her good
               I wol haue .xij. pens tho that ſhe were wood
               Or I wol ſompne her to our offyce
               And yet god wotte of her knowe I no vyce
               But for thou canſt nat, as in this countre
               wynne thy coſt, take here enſample of me.
               This Sōpner clappeth at ye wedowes gate
               Come out he ſayd, thou olde veritrate
               I trowe thou haſt ſome frere or preeſt wt the
               who clappeth ther ſaid this wife, benedicite
               God ſaue you ſyr, what is your ſwete wyl
               I haue ꝙ he, of ſommōs of the here a byl
               Vp payne of curſyng loke that thou be
               To morowe before our Archdeacons kne
               To anſwere to the court of certayn thynges
               Nowe lorde ꝙ ſhe, Ieſu kyng of kynges
               So wiſely helpe me, as I ne may
               I haue ben ſycke, and that ful many a day
               I may nat go ſo ferre, ꝙ ſhe, ne ryde
               But I be deed, ſo pricketh it in my ſyde
               May I nat aſke a lybel ſyr Sompnour
               And anſwere there by my proctour
               To ſuche thyng as men wolde appoſen me?
               Yes ꝙ this Sompnour, paye anon let ſe
               Twelfe pens to me, and I wyl the acquyte
               I ſhal no profyte haue therof but lyte
               My maiſter hath the profyte, and nat I
               Come of and lette me ryden haſtely
               Gyue me .xii. pens I may no lenger tary
               Twelf pens ꝙ ſhe, lady ſaynt Mary
               So wiſely helpe me out of care and ſynne
               This wyde world though I ſhuld it wynne
               Ne haue I nat .xij. pens within my holde
               Ye knowe wel, that I am poore and olde
               Kyth your almeſſe on me poore wretche
               Nay than ꝙ he, the foule fende me fetche
               Yf I the excuſe, though thou ſhuldeſt be ſpylt
               Alas ꝙ ſhe, god wotte yet haue I no gylt
               ¶Paye me ꝙ he, or by ſwete ſaynt Anne
               I wol bere away thy newe panne
               For dette, whiche thou oweſt me of olde
               whan thou madeſt thyne huſbonde cokolde
               I payde at home for thy correction
               Thou lyeſt ꝙ ſhe, by my ſaluation
               Ne was I neuer er nowe, wedowe ne wyfe
               Sompned vnto your court in al my lyfe
               Ne neuer I nas but of my body trewe
               Vnto the deuyl blacke and rough of hewe
               Yeue I thy body and my panne alſo.
               And whan the deuyll herde her curſe ſo
               Vpon her knees, he ſayd in this manere
               Nowe mably, myne owne mother dere
               Is this your wyl in erneſt that ye ſey?
               The deuyl ꝙ ſhe, fette him er I dey
               And pan and al, but he wol hym repent.
               Nay olde ſtotte, that is nat myne entent
               Quod this Sompner, for to repent me
               For any thyng that I haue had of the
               I wolde I had thy ſmocke and euery clothe.
               Nowe brother ꝙ the deuyl, be nat wrothe
               Thy body and this pan is myne by right
               Thou ſhalt with me to hel yet to nyght
               where thou ſhalte knowen of our preuyte
               More than a maiſter of deuynite
               And with ye worde the foule fende him hēt
               Body and ſoule, he with the deuyl went
               where that Sompnours haue their heritage
               And god that made after hys ymage
               Mankynde, ſaue and gyde vs al and ſome
               And leue the ſompnour good man to become
               Lordīges I coud haue told you, ꝙ this frere
               Had I had leyſer, of this Sompnour here
               After the text of Chriſt, Poule, and Iohn
               And of other doctours many one
               Suche peynes, as your hertes myght agryſe
               Albeit ſo, that no tonge may it deuyſe
               Though yt I might a thouſande wynter tel
               The peynes of that curſed houſe of hel
               But for to kepe vs fro that curſed place
               Wake, and prayeth Ieſu of hys grace
               So kepe vs from the temptour Sathanas
               Herkeneth this worde, beware as ī this caas
               The lyon ſytteth in his awayte alway
               To ſlee the innocent, yf that he may
               Diſpoſeth aye your hertes to withſtonde
               The fende, yt you wolde make thral & bonde
               He may not tempte you ouer your myght
               For Chriſt wol be your champion & knyght
               And prayeth, that this ſompnour him repēte
               Of hys miſdede, er that the fende hym hente.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Freres tale, and begynneth the Sompners prologue.
               
                  
                  THis Sompner in his ſtyropes hye ſtode
               Vpon this frere, his herte was ſo wode
               That lyke an aſpē lefe he quoke for yre
               Lordynges (ꝙ he) but one thyng I deſyre
               I you beſeche, that of your curteſy
               Sythens ye han herde this falſe frere lye
               As ſuffreth me I may my tale tel
               This frere boſteth that he knoweth hel
               And god wote that is lytel wonder
               Freres and fendes ben but lytel a ſonder
               For parde, ye han ofte tyme herde tell
               Howe that a frere rauyſhed was to hel
               In ſpyrit ones by a viſyoun
               And as an angel ledde hym vp and doun
               To ſhewe hym the paynes that there were
               In al the place ſawe he not a frere
               Of other folke he ſawe ynowe in wo
               Vnto the aungel ſpake the frere tho
               Nowe ſyr ꝙ he, han freres ſuche a grace
               That none of hem ſhal come in this place?
               ¶Yes ꝙ this aungel, many a myllyoun
               And vnto Sathanas ladde he hym adoun
               And nowe hath Sathanas ſuche a tayle
               Broder than of a Caryke is the ſayle
               Holde vp thy tayle thou Sathanas (ꝙ he)
               Shewe forthe thyn erſe, let the frere ſe
               where is the neſte of freres in this place
               And er that halfe a forlonge way of ſpace
               (Right as bees ſwarmen out of an hyue)
               Out of the dyuels erſe they gan dryue
               Twenty thouſande freres on a route
               And throughout hel ſwarmed al aboute
               And comen ayen, as faſte as they might gon
               And into his erſe they crepten euerychon
               He clapte hys tayle ayen, and lay ſtyl.
               ¶This frere, whan he loked had his fyl
               Vpon the turmentes of thys ſory place
               His ſpyrite god reſtored of hys grace
               Vnto hys body ayen, and he awoke
               But natheles, yet for fere he quoke
               So was the dyuels erſe aye in hys mynde
               That is his heritage of very kynde
               God ſaue you al, ſaue this curſed frere
               My prologue wol I ende in this manere.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Sompners prologue, and foloweth his tale.

               
               
                  
                     LOrdynges ther is in Yorkſhyre as I geſſe
                  A marſhy countrey called Holderneſſe
                  In whiche there went a lymytour aboute
                  To preach, and eke to begge, it is no doute
                  And ſo byfel that on a day thys frere
                  Had preched in a church in his manere
                  And ſpecially abouen euery thyng
                  Exited he the people in hys prechyng
                  To trentals, and to yeuen for goddes ſake
                  
                     wherwith men mighte holy houſes make
                  There as diuyne ſeruyce is honoured
                  Not there as it is waſted and deuoured
                  Ne there it nedeth not for to be yeuen
                  As to poſſeſſeioners that mowen els lyuen
                  Thonked be god, in wele and haboundaunce
                  Trentals delyuereth (ſayde he) fro penaunce
                  Her frendes ſoules, as wel olde as yonge
                  If that they by haſtely iſonge
                  Not for to holde a preeſt ioly and gay
                  (He ſyngeth not but one meſſe a day)
                  Delyuereth out (ꝙ he) anon the ſoules
                  Ful harde it is with fleſhe hoke or wt oules
                  To ben yelawed, or to brenne or bake
                  Nowe ſpedeth you haſtely for Chriſtes ſake.
                  And whan this frere had ſaid al his entent
                  with qui cum patre, forthe hys way he went
                  whē folke ī church, had yeue him what hē leſt
                  He went his way, no 
                        •
                     enger wolde he reſt
                  with ſcryppe & typped ſtaffe, ytucked hye
                  In euery houſe he gan to pore and prye
                  And begged mele and cheſe, or els come
                  His felowe had a ſlaſſe typped with horne
                  A payre of tables al of Iuory
                  And a poyntel poliſhed fetouſly
                  And wrote alway the names as he ſtoode
                  Of al folke, that yaue hym any goode
                  Aſkaunce as he wolde for hem prey
                  Yeue vs a buſhel wheate, malte or rey
                  A goddes kychel, or a tryppe of cheſe
                  Or els what ye lyſt, I may not cheſe
                  A goddes halfpeny, or a maſſe peny
                  Or yeue vs of your brawne, yf ye haue any
                  A dagon of your blanket, leue dame
                  Our ſuſter dere, lo here I write your name
                  Bacon or befe, or ſuche thyng as ye fynde
                  A ſturdy harlot went hem ay behynde
                  That was her hoſtes man, and bare a ſacke
                  And that mē yaue hem, layde it on his backe
                  And whan he was out at the dore anone
                  He planed away the names euerychone
                  That he before had written in his 
                        •
                     ables
                  He ſerued hem with ny
                        •
                     les and with fables
                  ¶Nay there thou lyeſt Sōpner (ꝙ the frere)
                  Peace (ꝙ our hoſt) for Chriſtes mother dere
                  Tel forthe thy tale, and ſpare it not at al
                  So thrine I ꝙ the Sompner, ſo I ſhal
                  ¶So longe he went fro hous to houſe til he
                  Came to an houſe, ther as he was wont to be
                  Refreſhed more than in an hundred placis
                  Sicke lay the good man, whoſe the place is
                  Bedred vpon a couche lowe he lay
                  Deus hic (ꝙ he) O Thomas frend good day
                  Sayd this frere, curteſſy and ſofte
                  Thomas god yelde it you, ful ofte
                  Haue I vpon this benche faren ful wele
                  Here haue I eaten many a mery mele
                  And fro the benche he droue away the catte
                  And layde adowne hys potent and his hatte
                  And eke his ſcryppe, & ſet hym ſofte adowne
                  His felowe was go walked in to the towne
                  Forthe with his knaue, in to that hoſtelrye
                  where as he ſhope him that ilke night to lye.
                  ¶O dere maiſter, quod this ſyke man
                  Howe haue ye faren ſythen Marche began
                  I ſawe you not this fourtenight and more.
                  ¶God wot (ꝙ he) laboured haue I ful ſore
                  And ſpecially for thy ſaluacion
                  Haue I ſayd many a preciouſe oriſon
                  And for our other frendes▪ god hem bleſſe
                  I haue this day ben at your churche at meſſe
                  And ſayd a ſermon, after my ſymple wytte
                  Not al after the text of holy writte
                  For it is harde to you, as I ſuppoſe
                  And therfore I wol teche you al the gloſe
                  Gloſyng is a glorious thyng certayne
                  For letter ſleeth, as we clerkes ſayne
                  There haue I hem taught to ben charitable
                  And ſpende her good there as it is reſonable
                  And there I ſawe our dame, a where is ſhe?
                  ¶Yonder in the yerde, I trowe ſhe be
                  Sayd thys man, and ſhe wol come anon
                  ¶Eye mayſter welcom ye be by ſaynt Iohn
                  Sayd this wyfe, howe fare ye hertely?
                  ¶This frere aryſeth vp ful curteſſy
                  And her enbraſeth in his armes narowe
                  And kyſſeth herſwetely, & cherketh as a ſparowe
                  wt his lippes, dame (ꝙ he) right wele
                  As he that is your ſeruaunt euery dele
                  Thanked be god, that you yaue ſoule & lyfe
                  Yet ſawe I not this day ſo fayre a wife
                  In al the churche, ſo god ſaue me
                  Ye god amende al fautes ſyr (ꝙ ſhe)
                  Algates welcome ye be, by my fay
                  Graūt mercy dame, yt haue I foūde alway
                  But of your great goodneſſe, by your leue
                  I wol pray you, that ye not you greue
                  I wol with Thomas ſpeke a lytel throwe
                  Theſe curates ben ful neglygent & ſlowe
                  To gropen tenderly a mannes conſcience
                  In ſchrift, & in prechyng is my diligence
                  And to ſtudye on Peters wordes & Poules
                  I walke to fyſhe chriſten mennes ſoules
                  To yelde Ieſu Chriſt his propre rent
                  
                     To ſprede hys wordes, is al myne entent.
                  ¶Nowe by your leue dere mayſter (ꝙ ſhe)
                  Chydeth hym wel for ſaynt charite
                  He is as angry as a pyſſe myre
                  Though that he haue al that he can deſyre
                  Though I hī wry anight, & make hī warme
                  And ouer hym lay my legge or myne arme
                  He groneth lyke our bore yt lyeth in the ſtye
                  Other dyſporte of hym ryght none haue I
                  I may not pleaſe hym in no maner caas
                  O Thomas, ie voꝰ die, Thomas Thomas
                  This maketh ye fende, this muſt ben amēded
                  Ire is a thynge that god hyghly defended
                  And therof wol I ſpeake a worde or two.
                  ¶Now mayſter (ꝙ the wyfe) er that I go
                  what wol ye dyne? I wol go ther aboute.
                  Now dame (ꝙ he) i
                        •
                      vous die ſans doute
                  Haue I not of a capon but the lyuer
                  And of your whyte breed, but a ſhyuer
                  And after that a roſted pygges heed
                  (But I nolde not for me no beeſt were deed)
                  Then had I ynowe for my ſuffyſaunce
                  I am a man of lytel ſuſtinaunce
                  My ſpirite hath hys foſteryng in the byble
                  My body is aye ſo redy and ſo penyble
                  To wake, that my body is dyſtroyde
                  I pray you dame, be ye nought anoyde
                  Though I ſo frendly you my coūſaile ſhewe
                  By god, I nolde haue tolde it but a fewe.
                  ¶Nowe ſyr (ꝙ ſhe) but one worde er ye go
                  My chylde is deed, within theſe wekes two
                  Sone after that ye wente out of thys toun
                  Hys death ſawe I by reuelacioun
                  Sayd thys frere, at home in our dortoure
                  I dare wel ſayne, er that halfe an houre
                  After hys death, I ſawe hym borne to blyſſe
                  In myne auiſioun, god me ſo wyſſe
                  So dyd our ſexten, and our fermerere
                  That han ben true freres thys fyftye yere
                  They may now, god be thanked of hys lone
                  Maken he
                        •
                      iubely, and wa
                        •
                     ken alone
                  And vp I aroſe, and al our couente eke
                  wyth many a teere tryllynge on our cheke
                  wythouten noyſe or claterynge of belles
                  Te deum was our ſonge, and nothinge elles
                  Saue that to Chriſt I ſayd an oriſon
                  Thankynge hym of my reuelacion
                  For ſyr and dame, truſteth me ryght wel
                  Our oriſons ben more effectuel
                  And more we ſene of Chriſtes ſecret thinges
                  Thē borel folke, although they were kynges
                  we lyue in pouerte, and in abſtinence
                  And borel folke in rycheſſe and dyſpence
                  In meate & drynke, and in her foule delyte
                  we han thys worldly luſte al in dyſpyte
                  Lazar and Diues, lyueden dyuerſly
                  And dyuers guerdons had they therby
                  who ſo wol pray, he muſte faſte & be clene
                  And fatte hys ſoule, & make hys body lene
                  we fare as ſayth the apoſtle, cloth and foode
                  Suffyſeth vs, though they be not ful goode
                  The clenneſſe & the faſtynge of vs freres
                  Maketh that Chriſt accepteth our prayeres.
                  ¶Lo Moyſes, fourty dayes & fourty nyght
                  Faſted, er that the hye god of hys myght
                  Spake wyth hym in the mounte of Synay
                  wyth empty wombe, faſtynge many a day,
                  Receyued he the lawe, that was wrytten
                  wyth goddes fynger, & Hely wel ye witten
                  In mount Horeb, er he had any ſpeche
                  wyth the hygh god, that is our ſoules leche
                  He faſted longe, and was in contemplaunce.
                  ¶Aaron, yt had the temple in gouernaunce
                  And eke the other preſtes euerychone
                  Into the temple when they ſhulde gone
                  To prayen for the people, and done ſeruyce
                  They nolde drynke in no maner wyſe
                  No drynke, that dronke myght hem make
                  But there in abſtinence praye and wake
                  Leſt that they deden take hede what I ſaye
                  But they be ſobre that for the people praye
                  ware that I ſaye, no more for it ſuffyſeth
                  Our lorde Ieſu, as holy wryte deuyſeth
                  Yaue vs enſample of faſtynge and prayers
                  Therfore we mendicantes, we ſely freres
                  Ben wedded to pouerte and continence
                  To charite, humbleneſſe, and abſtinence
                  To perſecution for ryghtwyſneſſe
                  To wepynge, myſericorde and clenneſſe
                  And therfore maye ye ſe that our prayeres
                  (I ſpeke of vs mendicant, we freres)
                  Ben to the hye god more acceptable
                  Then yours, wyth your feeſt at your table.
                  ¶Fro Paradyſe fyrſt, yf I ſhal not lye
                  was man outchaſed for hys glotonye
                  And chaſt was man in paradyſe certayn
                  But herken yow Thomas what I ſhal ſayn
                  I haue no texte therof, as I ſuppoſe
                  But I fynde it in maner of a gloſe
                  That ſpecially our ſwete lorde Ieſus
                  Spake thys by freres, when he ſayd thus
                  Bleſſed be they that poore in ſpirite bene
                  And ſo forth al the goſpel maye ye ſene
                  whether it be lyker our perfection
                  
                     Or hers that ſwymmen in poſſeſſion
                  Fye on her pompe, and on her glotonye
                  And in her leudneſſe, I hem defye
                  Me thynketh they be lyke Iouinian
                  Fatte as a whale, and walkynge as a ſwan
                  As vinolent as botel in the ſpen
                        •
                     e
                  Her prayers is of ful lytel reuerence
                  when they for ſoules ſay ye pſalme of Dauid
                  Lo bouffe they ſayn (Cor meum eructauit)
                  who foloweth Chriſtes goſpel & hys lo
                        •
                     e
                  But we that humble be, chaſte, and poore
                  werkers of goddes worde, & not auditours
                  Therfore ryght as an hauke at a ſours
                  Vp ſpryngeth into the eyre, ſo prayeres
                  Of charitable and chaſt buſy freres
                  Maken her ſours to goddes eeres two
                  Thomas Thomas, ſo mote I ryde or go
                  And by that lorde that cleped is ſaynt Yue
                  Ne yu our brother were, yu ſhuldeſt not thryue
                  For in our chapiter pray we daye and nyght
                  To Chriſt that he the ſende helth & myght
                  Thy body for to welden haſtely.
                  ¶God wore ꝙ he, nothynge therof fele I
                  As helpe me Chriſt, as in fewe yeres
                  Haue I ſpended vpon dyuers maner freres
                  wel many a poūde, yet fare I neuer the bette
                  Certayne my good haue I almoſt beſette
                  Fare wel my good, for it is almoſte ago.
                  The frere anſwered, o Thomas doſt yu ſo?
                  what nedeth the dyuers freres ſeche?
                  what nedeth him that hath a parfyte leche
                  To ſechen other leches in the toun?
                  Your inconſtaunce is your confuſioun
                  Holde ye me then, or els our couent
                  To prayen for you inſufficient?
                  Thomas, that tape nys not worth a myte
                  Your maladye is for we haue to lyte
                  A, yeue that couent halfe a quarter otes
                  And yeue that couent foure & twenty grotes
                  And yeue that frere a penny, and let hym go
                  Nay nay Thomas, it may nothynge be ſo
                  what is a ferthyng worth parted in twelue?
                  Lo, eche thynge that is oned in hym ſelue
                  Is more ſtronge then when it is ſo ſcatered
                  Thomas, of me thou ſhalt not ben yflatered
                  Thou wolſt haue al our labour for nought
                  The hye god yt al thys world hath wrought
                  Sayeth, yt the workman is worthy his hyre
                  Thomas, nought of your treaſoure I deſyre
                  As for my ſelfe, but that al our couent
                  To praye for you is aye ſo dyligent
                  And for to buylden Chriſtes owne chyrche
                  Thomas, yf ye wol lerne for to wyrche
                  Of buyldynge vp of chyrches may ye fynde
                  Yf it be good, in Thomas lyfe of Inde.
                  Ye lyggen here ful of anger and of yre
                  with which ye deuel ſetteth your hert on fyre
                  And chyden here thys holy innocent
                  Your wyfe, that is ſo meke and pacient
                  And therfore trowe me Thomas if you leſte
                  Ne chyde not wyth thy wyfe, as for the beſte
                  And beare thys worde awaye by thy fayth
                  Touchinge ſuch thing, lo what ye wyſe ſayth
                  wythin thy houſe be thou no lyon
                  To thy ſubiectes do thou none oppreſſion
                  Ne make not thyne acquayntaunce to 
                        ••
                     e
                  And yet Thomas, eftſones charge I the
                  Beware of her that in thy boſome ſlepeth
                  ware the of the ſerpent, that ſo ſlyly crepeth
                  Vnder the graſſe, and ſtyngeth ful ſubtelly
                  Beware my ſonne, and herken paciently
                  That twēty thouſāde mē han loſt her lyues
                  For ſtryuinge with her lēmans & her wyues
                  Nowe ſens ye haue ſo holy and meke a wyfe
                  what nebeth you Thomas to make ſtryfe?
                  There nys ywyſſe no ſerpent ſo cruel
                  (when mē treden on his tayle) ne halfe ſo fell
                  As a womā is, whē ſhe hath caught an yre
                  Vengeaunce is then al her deſyre.
                  ¶Ire is a ſynne, one of the greateſt of ſeuen
                  Abhominable vnto the hygh god of heuen
                  And to hym ſelfe it is a dyſtruction
                  Thys euery leude vycare and p
                        •
                     rſon
                  Can ſaye, how yre engendreth homecyde
                  Ire is in ſoth the executour of pryde
                  I coulde of yre ſay ſo muche ſorowe
                  That my tale ſhulde laſt tyl to morowe
                  And therfore I pray god both daye & nyght
                  That to an yrous man he ſende lytell myght
                  It is great harme, and eke great pyte
                  To ſet an yrous man in hye degre
               
               
                  Whylom there was an yrous poteſtate
                  As ſayeth Seneke, that durynge hys eſtate
                  Vpon a daye out rydden knyghtes two
                  And as fortune wolde it ſhulde be ſo
                  That one of hem cam home, yt other nought
                  Anone the knyght before ye iudge is brought
                  That ſaid thus: thou haſt thy felowe ſlayne
                  For whych I deme the to the death certayne
                  And to another knyght cōmaunded he
                  Go lede hym to the death I charge the
                  And it hapned as they went by the wey
                  Towarde the place where he ſhulde dey
                  
                     The kniȝt came, which mē wēde had be dede
                  Then thought they it was the beſt rede
                  To lede them both to the iudge agayne
                  They ſaydē lorde, the knight hath not ſlayne
                  Hys felowe, here he ſtante hole alyue.
                  Ye ſhullen be deed (ꝙ he) ſo mote I thryue
                  That is to ſaye, both one, two, and thre,
                  And to the fyrſt knyght, ryght thus ſpake he.
                  I dampned the, thou muſt algate be deed
                  And thou muſte alſo leſe nedes thyne heed
                  For thou arte cauſe why thy felowe deyth
                  And to ye thyrde knyght, ryght thus he ſeyth
                  Thou haſt not done that I cōmaunded the
                  And thus he dyd hem ſlayne al thre.
               
               
                  Irouſe C
                        ••
                     hyſes was eke dronkelewe
                  And aye dely
                        •
                      hym to ben a ſhrewe
                  And ſo byfel a lorde of hys meyne
                  That loued wel vertuous moralite
                  Said on a day betwyxt hem two right thus
                  A lorde is loſt, yf he be aught vicious
                  And dronkenneſſe eke is a foule recorde
                  Of any man, and namely of a lorde
                  There is many an eye and many an eere
                  Awaytynge on a lorde, he notte where
                  For goddes loue drynketh more temporatly
                  wyne maketh a man to leſe wretchedly
                  Hys mynde and hys lymmes euerychone.
                  ¶The reuers ſhalte thou ſe (ꝙ he) anone
                  And preue it by thyne owne experience
                  That wyne ne doth to folke no ſuch offence
                  There nys no wyne byreueth me my myght
                  Of honde, of foote, ne of myne eye ſyght
                  And for diſpyte he dronke mochel more
                  An hundred tymes then he dyd before
                  And ryght anone, thys curſed yrouſe wretch
                  Let thys knyghtes ſonne byforne him fetch
                  Cōmaūding him he ſhulde byforne him ſtōde
                  And ſodaynly he toke hys bowe in honde
                  And vp the ſtrynge he pulled to hys eere
                  And wyth an arowe he ſlough ye childe there
                  Now whether haue I a ſeker hōde or none
                  ꝙ he is al my myght and mynde agone?
                  Hath wyne byreued me myne eyen ſyght?
                  ¶what ſhulde I tel the anſwere of ye knyght
                  Hys ſōne was ſlayne, there is no more to ſay
                  Beware therfore, wyth lordes howe ye play
                  Synge Placebo, and I ſhal yf I can
                  But yf it be vnto a poore man
                  To a poore man, one ſhulde hys vyces tel
                  But not to a lorde, though he ſhuld go to hel.
                  Lo yrous Cirus, thylke Per
                        •
                     ien
                  Howe deſtroyed he the ryuer of Gyſen?
                  For that an horſe of hys was dreynt therin
                  when he went Babylon to wynne
                  He made that the ryuer was ſo ſmal
                  That men myght ryde and waden ouer al.
                  ¶Lo, what ſayd he, that ſo wel teche can
                  Ne be no felowe to none yrous man
                  Ne wyth no wode man walke by the way
                  Leſte thou repente, I wol no farther ſay.
                  ¶Now thomas leue brother, leaue thyn yre
                  Thou ſhalt me fynde as iuſte, as is a ſquyre
                  Hold not the dyuels knyfe aye in thyne herte
                  Thyne angre doth the al to ſore ſmerte
                  But ſhewe to me al thy confeſſion.
                  ¶Nay (ꝙ the ſycke man) by ſaynt Symon
                  I haue be ſhryue thys day of my curate
                  I haue tolde hym al myne eſtate
                  It nedeth nomore to ſpeke of it, ſayeth he
                  But yf me lyſt, of myne humilite.
                  yeue me thē of thy gold, to make our cloiſtre
                  ꝙ he, for many a muſkle & many an oyſtre
                  when other men haue ben ful wel at eſe
                  Hath ben our foode, our cloyſtre for to reſe
                  And yet god wote, vnneth the foundament
                  Parfourmed is, ne of our pauement
                  Is not a tyle yet wythin our wones
                  By god we owe fourty pounde for ſtones
                  Now helpe thomas, for him ye harowed hell
                  For els mote we our bokes ſell
                  And yf you lacke our predication
                  Then goeth thys worlde al to dyſtruction
                  For who ſo wol fro thys worlde vs byreue
                  So god me ſaue, Thomas by your leue
                  He wolde byreue out of this world the ſonne
                  For who can techen & worchen, as we conne
                  And that is not of lytel tyme (ꝙ he)
                  But ſyth Helye was, or Helyſe
                  Han freres ben, that fynde I of recorde
                  In charite, ythanked be our lorde
                  Now Thomas, for ſaynt charite
                  And downe anone he ſytteth on hys kne
                  ¶Thys ſycke mā woxe nye woode for yre
                  He wolde the frere had ben a fyre
                  wyth hys falſe dyſſimulation
                  Suche thynges as ben in my poſſeſſyon
                  (ꝙ he) that may I yeue, and none other
                  Ye ſayn me thus, howe yt I am your brother
                  Ye certes (ꝙ thys frere) truſteth me wele
                  I toke our dame our lettre and our ſele.
                  ¶Nowe (ꝙ he) wel, & ſomwhat ſhal I yeue
                  Vnto your holy couent whyle I lyue
                  
                     And in thyne honde, thou ſhal it haue anone
                  On thys condicion, and other none
                  That thou departe it ſo, my leue brother
                  That euery frere, haue as moche as other
                  Thys ſhalt thou ſwere on thy profeſſion
                  wythout fraude or cauelacion.
                  ¶I ſwere it (ꝙ the trere) by my faythe
                  And therwithal hys hande in hys he laythe
                  Lo here my faythe, in me ſhalbe no lacke.
                  ¶Then put thyne hāde downe by my backe
                  Sayd thys man, and grope well behynde
                  Byneth my buttocke, there thou ſhalt fynde
                  A thynge, that I haue hydde in priuyte
                  Ah, thought the frere, that ſhal go with me
                  Adowne he ſhofth hys honde to the clyſte
                  In hope to fynde there ſome good gyfte
                  And when thys ſycke man felte thys frere
                  Aboute hys towel, gropynge here and there
                  Amyd hys honde, he let the frere & farte
                  There nys no capel, drawynge in a carte
                  That myght haue let a farte of ſuch a ſoun.
                  ¶The frere vp ſtarte, as doth a wode lyon
                  A falſe churle (ꝙ the frere) for goddes bones
                  Thys haſt thou in dyſpyte do, for the nones
                  Thou ſhalte abye thys farte, yf I may
                  Hys meyny, that herde of thys afraye
                  Came leapyng in, and chaſed out the frere
                  And forth he goeth, wyth a ful angry chere
                  And fette hys felowe, there as laye his ſtore
                  He loked as he were a wylde bore
                  He grynted hys teth, ſo was he wrothe
                  A ſturdy pace, downe to the court he gothe
                  where as there wōned a mā of great honour
                  To whom that he was alway confeſſour
                  This worthy man was lorde of that vylage
                  Thys frere came, as he were in a rage
                  where as thys lorde ſate catyng at his borde
                  Vnnethes myght the frere ſpeke o worde
                  Tyl at the laſte he ſayd, god you ſe.
                  ¶Thys lorde gan loke, and ſayd benedicite
                  what frere Ihō, what maner a world is this
                  I ſe wel that ſomthynge is amys
                  Ye loke as though ye wod were ful of theues
                  Syt downe, and tel me what your grefe is
                  And it ſhalbe amended, yf that I may.
                  ¶I haue (ꝙ he) had a dyſpyte to day
                  God yelde it you, adowne in your village
                  That in this world, is none ſo poore a page
                  That he nolde haue abhominacioun
                  Of that I haue receaued in your toun
                  And yet me greueth nothynge ſo ſore
                  As that the olde churle, wyth lockes hore
                  Blaſphemed hath our holy couent eke.
                  ¶Now mayſter (ꝙ thys lorde) I you beſeke
                  No mayſter ſyr (ꝙ he) but ſeruitour
                  Though I hauē had in ſchole that honour
                  God lyketh not, that men vs Raby calle
                  Neyther in market, ne in your large halle
                  No force (ꝙ he) but tel me of your grefe
                  ¶Syr (ꝙ thys frere) an odious myſchefe
                  Thys day is betyde, to myne ordre, & to me
                  And ſo per conſequens to eche degre
                  Of holy churche, god amende it ſone.
                  Syr (ꝙ the lorde) ye wote what is to done
                  Dyſtempre you not, ye ben my confeſſour
                  Ye ben the ſalte of the earth, and the ſauour
                  For goddes loue your pacience nowe holde
                  Telleth me your grefe: & he anone him tolde
                  As ye han herde before, ye wote well what
                  The lady of the houſe, aye ſtyll ſatte
                  Tyl ſhe had herde what the frere ſayde
                  Eye goddes mother (ꝙ ſhe) & blyſful mayde
                  Is there nought els, tel me faythfully
                  Madame (ꝙ he) howe thynketh ye therby
                  Howe that me thynketh: ſo god me ſpede
                  I ſaye a churle hath done a churles dede
                  what ſhulde I ſaye, god let hym neuer the
                  Hys ſycke heed is ful of vanite
                  I ho
                        •
                     de hym in a maner of freneſye.
                  Madame (ꝙ he) by god I ſhal not lye
                  But I in any wyſe may ben on hym awreke
                  I ſhal ſlaunder him ouer al, where I ſpeke
                  That falſe blaſphemour, that charged me
                  To parte it, that myght not departed be
                  To euery man ylyche, wyth myſchaunce
                  The lorde ſate ſtyl, as he were in a traū
                     
                        ••
                     
                  
                  And in hys herte he rolled vp and doun
                  Howe that thys churle had ymaginacioun
                  To ſhewe ſuche a probleme to the frere
                  Neuer erſt or now ne herde I ſuch a matere
                  I trowe the dyuel put it in hys mynde
                  In al Arſmetryke, there ſhal no man fynde
                  Byforne thys daye, of ſuche a queſtion
                  who ſhulde make a demonſtracion?
                  That euery man ſhulde ilyke haue his parte
                  Of a ſowne or ſauoure of a farte
                  O nyce proude churle, I ſhrewe thy face
                  Lo ſyrs (ꝙ the lorde) with harde grace
                  Who euer hearde of ſuch a thynge or nowe?
                  To euery man ylyke tell me howe?
                  It is an impoſſyble, it may not be
                  E
                        •
                     y nyce churle, gyd let hym neuer the
                  The rumblyge of a farte, and euery ſonne
                  Nys but of eyre reuerberacyoune
                  
                     And euer it waſteth lytle and lytle away
                  There is no man can demen, by my fay
                  Yf that it were departed equally
                  what? lo my churle: lo, yet how ſhreudly
                  Vnto my confeſſour to day he ſpake
                  I holde hym certayne a demoniake.
                  Now eteth your meat, & let ye churle go play
                  Let hym go hongen hym ſelfe a deuel way.
                  Now ſtode the lordes ſquyer at the borde
                  That carfe his meate, & herd word by worde
                  Of al thynge of whych I haue you ſayde
                  My lorde (ꝙ he) be not euel apayde
                  I couth tel for a gowne cloth
                  To you ſyr frere, ſo that ye ben not wroth
                  Howe that thys farte ſhulde euen ydeled be
                  Amonges your couent, yf it lyketh the.
                  Tel on (ꝙ ye lorde) & thou ſhalt haue anon
                  A gowne clothe, by god and by ſaynt Ihon
                  My lorde (ꝙ he) when yt the weder is fayre
                  wythouten wynde, or perturbynge of ayre
                  Let brynge a carte whele here into thys hall
                  But loke he haue hys ſpokes all
                  Twelue ſpokes hath a carte whele cōmenly
                  And brynge me thē .xij. freres, wote ye why?
                  For thyrtene is a couent as I geſſe
                  your confeſſour here, for hys worthyneſſe
                  Shal perfourme vp the nombre of his couēt
                  Thē ſhullē they knelen adowne by one aſſēt
                  And to euery ſpokes ende, in thys manere
                  Ful ſadly lay hys noſe ſhal a frere
                  Your noble confeſſour there, god him ſaue
                  Shal holde hys noſe vpryght vnder ye naue
                  Then ſhal this churle, wt bely ſtyffe & tought
                  As any tabour, hyther ben ybrought
                  And ſet him on the whele, right of this carte
                  Vpon the naue, & make hym let a farte
                  And ye ſhullen ſe, vp peryl of my lyfe
                  By prefe, whych is demonſtratyfe
                  That equally the ſowne of it wyl wende
                  And eke the ſtynke, vnto the ſpokes ende
                  Saue yt thys worthy man your confeſſour
                  (Bycauſe he is a man of great honour)
                  Shal haue the fyrſt frutes, as reſon is
                  The noble vſage of freres yet is thys.
                  The wortheſt mā of hem ſhul fyrſt be ſerued
                  And certaynly, he hath it wel deſerued
                  He hath to day taught vs ſo moch good
                  wyth prechynge in the pulpet there he ſtood
                  That I may vouchſafe, I ſaye for me
                  He had the fyrſt ſmel of fartes thre
                  And ſo wolde al hys brethren hardely
                  He beareth hym ſo fayre and holyly.
                  ¶The lord, ye lady, & eche man, ſaue ye frere
                  Sayd that Iankyn ſpake in thys matere
                  As wel as Ouyde dyd or Ptholome
                  Touchynge the churles ſayd ſubtylte
                  And hye wytte made hym ſpeke as he ſpake
                  He nys no foole, ne no demoniake
                  And Iankyn hath ywonne a newe gowne
                  My tale is done, we ben almoſte at towne.
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Sompners tale, and here foloweth the clerke of Oxenfordes prologue.
               
                  SIr clerke of Oxforde, our hooſt ſayde
               Ye ryde as ſtil and coye, as doth a mayde
               were newe ſpouſed, ſyttynge at the borde
               This day ne herd I of your mouth a worde
               I trowe that ye ſtudye about ſome ſophyme
               But Salomon ſayeth, al thynge hath tyme
               For goddes ſake, bethe of better chere
               It is no tyme now to ſtudye here
               Tel vs ſome mery tale by your faye
               For what man is entred into a playe
               He nedes mote vnto that playe aſſent
               But precheth not, as freres done in lent
               To make vs for our olde ſynnes to wepe
               Ne that thy tale make vs not to ſlepe
               Tel vs ſome mery thynge of auentures
               Your termes, your fygures, & your coloures
               Kepe hem in ſtore, tyl ſo be that ye endyte
               Hyghe ſtyle, as when men to kynges wryte
               Speketh ſo playne at thys tyme, I you pray
               That we may vnderſtande what ye ſay.
               ¶Thys worthy clerke benyngly anſwerde
               Hoſte (ꝙ he) I am vnder your yerde
               Ye haue of vs as nowe the gouernaunce
               And therfore wol I do you obeyſaunce
               As farre as reaſon aſketh hardely
               I wol you tel a tale, whych that I
               Lerned at Padowe, of a worthy clerke
               As preued is by hys wordes and hys werke
               He is now deed, and nayled in hys cheſte
               I praye to God ſende hys ſoule good reſte.
               Fraunces Petrarke, the laureat poete
               Hyght thys clerke, whoſe rhetoryke ſwete
               Enlumined al I tayle of poetrye
               As Lyuian dyd of Philoſophye
               
                  Or lawe, or other arte perticulere
               But death ye wol not ſuffre vs dwellen here
               But as it were the twynklynge of an eye
               Hem bothe hath ſlayne, and al we ſhal dye.
               ¶But for to tellen of this worthy man
               That taught me this tale, as I fyrſt began
               I ſay that he fyrſt with hye ſtyle endyteth
               (Or he the body of hys tale writeth)
               A proheme, in whiche diſcriueth he
               Piemount, and of Saluce the countre
               And ſpeketh of Apenniny the hylles hye
               That ben the boundes of weſt Lumbardye
               And of mount Veſulus in ſpecial
               where as the Poo, out of a wel ſmal
               Taketh hys fyrſt ſpring and hys ſours
               That eſtwarde euer increſeth in his cours
               To Emelle warde, to Ferare, and to Venyſe
               The whiche a longe tyme were to deuyſe
               And truly, as to my iugement
               Me thynketh it a thyng inpartinent
               Saue that hym lyſte conuey hys matere
               But this is his tale as ye ſhullen here.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the prologue of the clerke of Oxenforde, and here foloweth hys tale.

               
               
                  
                     
                        THere is, in the weſt ſyde of Itayle
                     Down at the rote of Veſulus the colde
                     A luſty playne, habundaunt of vitayle
                     wher many a town & tour thou maiſt behold
                     That founded were, in tyme of fathers olde
                     And many a nother delectable ſyght
                     And Saluces, this noble countre hight
                  
                  
                     A Markes whylom was in that londe
                     As were his worthy elders hym byfore
                     And obeyſaunt aye redy to hys honde
                     were al hys lieges, bothe leſſe and more
                     Thus in delyte he lyued, and hath done yore
                     Beloued & drad, through fauour of fortune
                     Bothe of his lordes and of hys commune
                  
                  
                     Therwith he was, as to ſpeke of lynage
                     The gentyleſt yborne of al Lomberdy
                     A fayre perſon, & ſtronge, and yong of age
                     And ful of honour and curteſye
                     Diſcrete ynowe, his countre for to gye
                     Saue in ſome thynges he was to blame
                     And walter was this yonge lordes name
                  
                  
                     I blame him thus, that he conſydred nou
                           ••
                        
                     
                     In tyme cōmyng, what hym might betyde
                     But on his luſt preſent was al his thought
                     And for to hauke and hunt on eueryſyde
                     welny al other cures lette he ſlyde
                     And eke he ne wolde, that was worſt of al
                     wedde no wife, for ought that myght befal
                  
                  
                     
                     Onely that poynt hys people bare ſo ſore
                     That flockmele on a day to hym they went
                     And one of hem, that wiſeſt was of lore
                     (Or els that the lorde wolde beſt aſſent
                     That he ſhulde tel him what his people mēt
                     Or els coude he ſhewe ſuche matere)
                     He to the Markes ſayd, as ye ſhullen here.
                  
                  
                     ¶O noble Marques, your humanyte
                     Aſſureth vs, and yeueth vs hardyneſſe
                     As ofte tyme as is neceſſyte
                     That we may to you tel our heuyneſſe
                     Accepteth lorde of your gentylneſſe
                     That we to you with pitous hert playne
                     And lette your eares nat my voice diſdayne
                  
                  
                     Al haue I nat to done in this matere
                     More than another hath in this place
                     Yet for as moche, as ye my lorde ſo dere
                     Haue alway ſhewed me fauour and grace
                     I dare the better aſke of you a ſpace
                     Of audience, to ſhewen our requeſte
                     And ye my lorde to done right as you leſte
                  
                  
                     For certes lorde: ſo wel vs lyketh you
                     And al your werkes, & euer haue don, ye we
                     Ne coulde our owne ſelfe deuyſen howe
                     we myght more lyuen in felycite
                     Saue one thyng lorde, yf it your wyl be
                     That for to be a wedded man, you leſt
                     Thā were your people in ſouerayn hertes
                  
                  
                     Boweth your necke vnder the bliſful yoke
                     Of ſoueraynte, and not of ſeruyſe
                     whiche men clepen ſpouſayle or wedloke
                     And thīketh lord, amōg your thoughtes wiſe
                     Howe that our dayes paſſen in ſundrie wyſe
                     For though we ſlepe or wake, ronne, or ryde
                     
                        
                           •
                        ye 
                           •
                        leeth the tyme, it wol no man abyde
                  
                  
                     And though your grene youthe floure, as yet
                     In crepeth age alway as ſtyl as ſtone
                     And dethe manaſeth euery age, and ſmyte
                     In eche eſtate, for there eſcapeth none
                     And alſo certayn, as we knowen echone
                     That we ſhul dye, & vncertayne we al
                     Ben of that day, that dethe ſhal on vs fal
                  
                  
                     Accepteth than of vs the trewe entent
                     That neuer yet refuſed your heſte
                     And we wol al lorde, yf ye wol aſſent
                     Chefe you a wyfe in ſhorte tyme, at the leſt
                     Borne of the gentilleſt and of the meſte
                     Of al this londe, ſo that it aught ſeme
                     Honour to god & you, as nere as we cā deme
                  
                  
                     Delyuer vs out of al this buſy drede
                     And take a wyfe, for hye goddes ſake
                     For yf it ſo befel, as god forbede
                     That thorowe dethe, your linage ſhuld ſlake
                     And that a ſtraunge ſucceſſour ſhulde take
                     Your heritage, O, wo were vs on lyue
                     wherfore we pray you haſtely to wyue.
                  
                  
                     ¶Her meke prayere and her pytouſe chere
                     Made the Maikes for to haue pyte
                     wol ye (ꝙ he) myne owne people dere
                     To that I neuer erſt thought, conſtrayne me
                     I me reioyced of my lyberte
                     That ſelden tyme is founde in mariage
                     There I was free, I mote ben in ſeruage
                  
                  
                     But natheles, I ſe your true entente
                     And truſt vpon your wytte, & haue done aye
                     wherfore of my fre wyl I wol aſſente
                     To wedden me, as ſone as euer I may
                     But there, as ye haue profred me to day
                     To cheſe me a wyfe, I you releſe
                     That choyce, and pray you of that profer ceſe
                  
                  
                     For god it wote, that children ofte been
                     Vnlyke her worthy elders, hem before
                     Bounte cometh al of god, & nat of the ſtreen
                     Of whiche they ben engendred and ibore
                     I truſt in goddes bounte, and therfore
                     My mariage, myne eſtate, and reſt
                     I hym be take, he may don as hym leſt
                  
                  
                     Lette me alone in cheſynge of my wyfe
                     That charge vpon my backe I wol endure
                     But I you pray, and charge vpon your lyfe
                     That what wyfe I take, ye me enſure
                     To worſhip her, whiles her lyfe may dure
                     In worde and werke, here, and els where
                     As ſhe an Emperours doughter were
                  
                  
                     And furthermore, thus ſhal ye ſwere, yt ye
                     Ayenſt my choyce ſhal neuer grutch ne ſtryue
                     For ſythe I ſhal for go my lyberte
                     At your requeſt, as euer mote I thryue
                     There as myn hert is ſet, there wol I wyue
                     And but ye wol aſſent, in ſuche manere
                     I pray you ſpeketh no more in this matere
                  
                  
                     
                     With herty wyl they ſworen and aſſent
                     To al this thyng, there ſayd no wight nay
                     Beſechyng hym of grace er they went
                     That he wolde hem graunt a certayn day
                     Of his ſpouſaile, as ſoone as euer he may
                     For yet alway the people ſomwhat dredde
                     Leſt this Markes wolde no wyfe wedde
                  
                  
                     He graunted hem a day, ſuche as him leſt
                     On whiche he wolde be wedded ſekerly
                     And ſayd he dyd al this at her requeſt
                     And they with humble entent ful buxomly
                     Knelyng vpon her knees ful reuerently
                     Hym thonked al, and thus they han an ende
                     Of her entent, and home ayen they wende
                  
                  
                     And here vpon he toke his offycers
                     Commaundyng for the feeſt to puruay
                     And to his priuy knyghtes and ſquyers
                     Suche charge yaue, as he lyſt on hem lay
                     And they to his cōmaundement obey
                     And eche of hem dothe hys dilygence
                     To done to the feeſt reuerence.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Explicit pars prima: et incipit pars ſecunda.
                  
                     
                        NOught ferre fro thylke place honorable
                     where as this Markes ſhope hys mariage
                     There ſtode a thrope, of ſyght ful delectable
                     In whiche poore folke of that village
                     Hadden her beeſtes and her
                           •
                        ygage
                     And of her labour toke her ſuſtenaunce
                     After that the erthe yaue hem habundaunce
                  
                  
                     Amōge this poore folke, ther dwelled a mā
                     
                     which that was holden pooreſt of hem all
                     But hye god ſomtyme ſende can
                     His grace vnto a lytel oxe ſtall
                     Ianycola, men of that thrope hym cal
                     A doughter had he, fayre ynough
                           •
                         to ſyght
                     And Griſylde this yonge mayden hyght
                  
                  
                     But for to ſpeke of vertuous beaute
                     Than was ſhe one the fayreſt vnder ſonne
                     And ful poorely yfoſtred was ſhe
                     No lykerouſe luſt was in her herte ironne
                     wel ofter of the wel than of the tonne
                     She dronke, and for ſhe wolde vertue pleſe
                     She knewe wel laboure, but not ydel eſe
                  
                  
                     But though this mayde were tender of age
                     Yet in the breſt of her virginite
                     There was encloſed, ſadde and rype corage
                     And in great reuerence and charyte
                     Her olde poore father foſtred ſhe
                     A fewe ſhepe ſpynnyng on the felde ſhe kept
                     She wolde not ben idel tyl ſhe ſlept
                  
                  
                     And whā ſhe homward came, ſhe wold bring
                     wortes and herbes, tymes ful ofte
                     which ſhe ſhradde & ſethe for her lyuyng
                     And made her bedde ful hard, & nothing ſofte
                     And aye ſhe kepte her fathers lyfe on lofte
                     with euery obeyſaunce and dilygence
                     That childe might do to the fathers reuerēce
                  
                  
                     ¶Vpon Griſylde the poore creature
                     wel ofte hath the Markes ſette his eye
                     As he an huntyng rode parauenture
                     And whan it fel, that he myght her aſpye
                     He (not with wanton lokyng of ſolye)
                     His eyen caſte vpon her, but in ſadde wyſe
                     Vpon her chere, he wolde him ofte auyſe
                  
                  
                     Commending in his herte her womāhode
                     And eke her vertue, paſſyng euery wyght
                     Of ſo yonge age, as wel in chere as in dede
                     For though the people haue no great inſyght
                     In vertue 
                           •
                        he conſydred ful ryght
                     Her bounte, and diſpoſed that he wolde
                     Her wedde, yf he euer wedde ſhulde.
                  
                  
                     The day of weddyng com, but no wight cā
                     
                     Tel, what woman it ſhulde be
                     For whiche maruaile, wondred many a man
                     And ſayden, whan they were in her priuete
                     wol not our lorde yet leaue his vanyte
                     wol he not wedde, alas alas the whyle
                     why wol he thus him ſelfe and vs begyle
                  
                  
                     But natheleſſe this Markes hath do make
                     Of gemmes, ſet in golde and in aſure
                     Broches and rynges, for Griſyldes ſake
                     And of her clothyng, toke he the meſure
                     Of a mayden lyke to her ſtatute
                     And eke of other ornamentes al
                     That to ſuche a weddyng ſhulde fal
                  
                  
                     The tyme of vndren, in the ſame day
                     Approched, that the weddyng ſhulde be
                     
                        And al the paleys put was in array
                     Bothe halle and chambre, eche in his degre
                     Houſes of offyces ſtuffed with great plente
                     There mayſte thou ſe of daynteous vitayle
                     That may be founde, as fer as laſteth Itayle
                  
                  
                     This royal Markes, rychely arayde
                     Lordes and ladyes in his companye
                     The which that to the feeſt were prayde
                     And of his retinue the bachelery
                     with many a ſowne of ſondrie melodye
                     Vnto the village, of which I tolde
                     In this aray, the right way hath holde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Griſylde (god wotte of this ful innocent
                     That for her was ſhape al this array)
                     To fetche water at a wel went
                     And cometh home as ſone as euer ſhe may
                     For wel ſhe herde ſay, that ylke day
                     That ye Markes ſhuld wedde, & if ſhe might
                     She wolde fayne ſeen ſome of that ſyght
                  
                  
                     She thought: I wold wt other maydens ſtōde
                     That ben my felowes in our d
                           •
                        re and ſe
                     The Markes, and therto wol I fonde
                     To done at home, as ſone as it may be
                     The labour, which that longeth to me
                     And than may I at leyſer it beholde
                     If ſhe the way to the caſtel holde
                  
                  
                     And as ſhe wolde ouer the threſholde gon
                     The Markes came, and gan her for to call
                     And ſhe ſette downe her water potte anon
                     Beſyde the threſholde of the ore ſtal
                     And downe vpon her knees ſhe gan to fal
                     And with ſadde countenaunce kneled ſtyl
                     Tyl ſhe had herde what was the lordes wyl
                  
                  
                     This thoughtful Markes ſpake to ye mayd
                     wel ſoberly, and ſayd in this manere
                     where is your father Griſylde, he ſayd?
                     And ſhe with reuerence and meke chere
                     Anſwerde, lorde he is al redy here
                     And in ſhe gothe, without lenger lette
                     And to the Markes ſhe her father fette
                  
                  
                     He by the honde than toke this olde man
                     And ſayd thus, whan he had hym aſyde
                     Ianycola, I neyther may ne can
                     Lenger the pleaſaunce of myne herte hyde
                     If that thou vouchſafe, what ſo euer betyde
                     Thy doughter wol I take, or that I wende
                     As for my wyfe, to my lyues ende
                  
                  
                     Thou loueſt me, I wotte wel certayne
                     And arte my faythful liege man ybore
                     And al that lyketh me, I dare wel ſayne
                     It lyketh the, and ſpecially therfore
                     Tel me that poynte, that I haue ſaid before
                     If that thou wolt to this purpoſe drawe?
                     To take me for thy ſonne in lawe
                  
                  
                     ¶This ſodayne caſe, the man aſtoned ſo
                     That reed he wext abaſhed, & al quakyng
                     He ſtode, ne vnneth ſayd he wordes mo
                     But onely thus (ꝙ he) lorde my wyllyng
                     Is as ye wol, ne ayenſt your lykyng
                     I wol nothyng, ye be my lorde ſo dere
                     Right as you lyſte, gouerne this matere
                  
                  
                     Than wol I thus (ꝙ this Markes) ſothly
                     That in thy chambre, I, you, and ſhe
                     Haue a collation, and woſt thou why?
                     For I wol aſke her, yf her wyl be
                     To be my wyfe, and rule her after me
                     And al this ſhal ſhe done in thy preſence
                     I wol not ſpeke out of thyn audyence
                  
                  
                     And in the chambre, while they were about
                     The treties, whiche ye ſhal after here
                     The people came into the houſe without
                     And wondred hem, in how honeſt manere
                     So tentifly ſhe kept her father dere
                     But vtterly Griſylde wonder myght
                     For neuer erſte ſawe ſhe ſuche a ſyght
                  
                  
                     No wonder is though ſhe be aſtoned
                     To ſe ſo great a geſt come into that place
                     She was neuer to ſuche geſtes woned
                     For which ſhe loked with ful pale face
                     But ſhortly fro this mater for to pace
                     Theſe weren the wordes yt the Markes ſayd
                     To this benygne and very faythful mayde
                  
                  
                     ¶Griſylde he ſaid, ye ſhal wel vnderſtonde
                     It lyketh vnto your father and me
                     That I you wedde, and eke it may ſo ſtonde
                     As I ſuppoſe, that ye wol that it ſo be
                     But theſe demaundes I aſke fyrſt (ꝙ he)
                     That ſythen it ſhal be done in haſty wyſe
                     wol ye therto aſſent, or els you auyſe
                  
                  
                     I ſay thus, be ye redy with good herte
                     To al my luſte, and that I frely may
                     
                        As me beſt liketh, though ye laugh or ſmerte
                     And neuer ye to grutche, nyght ne day
                     whan I ſay ye, that ye ſay not ones nay
                     Neyther in word, ne by frowning coūtenāce
                     Swere this, & here I ſwere our aliaunce
                  
                  
                     ¶Wōdryng vpō theſe wordes, quakyng for drede
                     She ſaid: lorde, indigne & vnworthy
                     Am I, to thylke honour that ye me bede
                     But right as ye wol, ſo wol I
                     And here I ſwere, that neuer wyllyngly
                     In word, werke, ne thouȝt, I nil you diſobey
                     For to be deed, though me were loth to dey.
                  
                  
                     ¶This is ynough Griſylde myne (ꝙ he)
                     And forthe he gothe with a ſobre chere
                     Out at the dore, and after came ſhe
                     And to the people, he ſaid in this manere
                     This is my wyfe (ꝙ he) that ſtondeth here
                     Honoureth her, & loueth her, I you pray
                     who ſo me loueth, there nys no more to ſay
                  
                  
                     And for that no thyng of her olde gere
                     She ſhulde bring in to his houſe, he badde
                     That women ſhulde diſpoyle her right there
                     Of which theſe ladyes were nothing gladde
                     To hādle her clothes, in which ſhe was clad
                     But natheleſſe, thys mayden bright of hewe
                     Fro foote to heed they clothed han al newe
                  
                  
                     Her heer han they kembed, yt laye vntreſſed
                     Ful rudely, and with her fyngres ſmale
                     A crowne on her heed they han idreſſed
                     And ſet it ful of ouches great and ſmale
                     Of her array, what ſhulde I make a tale
                     Vnneth the people her knew for her fairneſſe
                     whan ſhe tranſfourmed was in ſuch richeſſe
                  
                  
                     ¶This Markes hath her ſpouſed wt a ringe
                     Bought for the ſame cauſe, & than her ſet
                     Vpon an horſe ſnowe white, wel amblynge
                     And to his paleys, or he lenger let
                     with ioyful people, that her ladde and met
                     Conueyed her, & thus the day they ſpende
                     In reuel, tyl the ſonne gan diſcende
                  
                  
                     And ſhortly forthe this tale for to chace
                     I ſaye, that to this newe Markeſſeſſe
                     God hath yſent ſuche fauour of hys grace
                     That it ſemed not, as by her lykelyneſſe
                     That ſhe was borne and fedde in rudeneſſe
                     As in a cote, or in an oxe ſtal
                     But noriſhed in an emperoures hal
                  
                  
                     To euery wight, ſhe woxen is ſo dere
                     And worſhip ful, ye folke ther as ſhe was bore
                     And fro her byrthe, knewe her yere by yere
                     Vnneth trowed they, but durſt haue ſwore
                     That to Ianycola, of whiche I ſpake before
                     She doughter nas, for as by coniecture
                     Hem thought ſhe was a nother creature
                  
                  
                     For though that euer vertuous was ſhe
                     She was encreaſed in ſuche excellence
                     Of thewes good, ſet in hye bounte
                     And ſo diſcrete, and fayre of eloquence
                     So benygne, and digne of reuerence
                     And coulde the peoples hertes ſo enbrace
                     That eche her loued that loked in her face
                  
                  
                     Not onely of Saluce in the town
                     Publyſhed was the bountie of her name
                     But eke beſyde, in many a regioun
                     If one ſayd wel, an other ſayd the ſame
                     So ſpradde of her bountie the ſame
                     That men & women, bothe yonge and olde
                     Gone to Saluces her to beholde.
                  
                  
                     ¶This walter lowly, and ful royally
                     Wedded hath wyth fortunate honeſte
                     In goddes peace: lyueth ful eaſely
                     At whom, & outwarde grace ynough had he
                     And for he ſawe that vnder lowe degre
                     was honeſt vertue hyd, the people him helde
                     A prudent man, and that is ſene wel ſelde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Not only this Griſylde, through her wyt
                     Couthe al the feate of wyfely humbleſſe
                     But eke, whan the caſe required it
                     The comen profyte coulde ſhe redreſſe
                     There nas diſcorde, rancour, ne heuyneſſe
                     In al the londe, that ſhe ne couthe apeſe
                     And bring hem al wyſely in reſt and eſe
                  
                  
                     Though her huſbond abſent were or none
                     If gentylmen, or other of her countre
                     were wrothe, ſhe wolde bring hem at one
                     So wyſe and rype wordes had ſhe
                     And iugement of ſo great equite
                     That ſhe fro heuen ſent was, as men wende
                     People to ſaue, & euery wronge to amende.
                  
                  
                     ¶Not longe tyme after this Griſylde
                     Was wedded, ſhe a doughter had ybore
                     
                        Al had ſhe leuer haue borne a man chylde
                     Glad was ye Markes and his folke therfore
                     For though a mayde chylde came al before
                     She may to a man chylde attayne
                     By lykelyhode, ſythens ſhe is not barayne.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Explicit pars ſecunda: et incipit pars tertia.
                  
                     
                        THere fel, as it befalleth oft tymes mo
                     Whā that this childe had ſucked but a throwe
                     This Markes in his herte lō
                        ged ſo
                     To tempte hys wyfe, her ſadneſſe to knowe
                     That he ne myght out of hys herte throwe
                     This marueylous deſyre, hys wyfe to aſſaye
                     Nedeleſſe god wot, he thought her to affray
                  
                  
                     He had aſſayed her ynoughe before
                     And fonde her euer good, what nedeth it
                     Her for to tempte & alway more and more
                     Though ſome man praiſe it for a ſubtyl wyt
                     But as for me, I ſay ful yuel it ſyt
                     To aſſay a wyfe, whan that it is no nede
                     And put her in anguyſhe and in drede
                  
                  
                     For which this Markes wrouȝt in this manere
                     He came alone a nyght there as ſhe lay
                     with ſterne face, and right vgly chere
                     And ſayd thus: Griſylde (ꝙ he) that day
                     That I the toke out of thy poore aray
                     And put the in eſtate of hye nobleſſe
                     Thou haſt not that forgoten, as I geſſe
                  
                  
                     I ſay Griſylde, the preſent dignyte
                     In whiche I haue put the, as I trowe
                     Maketh not the foryetful for to be
                     That I the toke in poore aſtate ful lowe
                     For any wele, thou muſt thy ſelfe knowe
                     Take hede of euery worde what I ſey
                     There is no wight that hereth but we twey
                  
                  
                     Thou wotteſt thy ſelf, how yt thou came here
                     In to this houſe, it is not longe ago
                     And though to me thou be both lefe and dere
                     Vnto my gentyls thou art nothyng ſo
                     They ſay, to hem it is great ſhame and wo
                     For to ben ſubiette and ben in ſeruage
                     To the, that borne arte in ſo ſmal a village
                  
                  
                     And namely ſyth thy doughter was ybore
                     Theſe wordes haue they ſpoken doutles
                     But I deſyre, as I haue done byfore
                     To lyue my lyfe with hem, in reſt and pees
                     I may not in this caſe be recheles
                     I mote done with thy doughter, for the beſt
                     Not as I wolde, but as my gentyls leſt
                  
                  
                     And yet god wote, this is ful lothe to me
                     But natheleſſe without thy wetyng
                     I wol naught do, but thus I wol (ꝙ he)
                     That thou to me aſſent, as in thys thyng
                     Shewe nowe thy pacience, in thy werkyng
                     That thou me hight & ſwore in our village
                     That day that maked was our mariage
                  
                  
                     ¶whā ſhe had herde al this, ſhe not ameued
                     Neyther in word, in chere, ne in coūtenaunce
                     For as it ſemed, ſhe was not agreued
                     She ſayd lorde, al lyeth in your pleſaunce
                     My childe and I, with hertely obeyſaunce
                     Ben yours al, and ye may ſaue or ſpyl
                     with your owne, worketh your owne wyll
                  
                  
                     There may nothyng, ſo god my ſoule ſaue
                     Lykyng to you, that may diſpleſe me
                     Ne I deſyre nothyng for to haue
                     Ne drede for to leſe, ſaue onely ye
                     This wil is in my herte, and aye ſhal be
                     No length of tyme, or deth it may deface
                     Neyther chāge my corage into another place
                  
                  
                     ¶Glad was the Markes of her anſwering
                     But yet he fayned as he were not ſo
                     Al drery was his chere, and his lokyng
                     whan that he ſhulde out of the chambre go
                     Sone after thys, a forlonge way or two
                     He priuely had tolde al his entent
                     Vnto a man, and to his wyfe him ſent
                  
                  
                     In maner of a ſergeāt was this priuy mā
                     
                     The which he faithful ofte founde had
                     In thynges great, & eke ſuche folke wel can
                     Done execucyon of thynges badde
                     The lorde knewe wel, he him loued & dradde
                     And whan this ſergeant wyſt his lordes wil
                     In to the chambre he ſtalked hym ful ſtyl
                  
                  
                     ¶Madame he ſayd, ye mote foryeue it me
                     
                        Though I do thing, which I am cōſtrayned
                     Ye be ful wyſe, and ful wel knowe ye
                     That lordes heſtes may not be fayned
                     They may wel bewayled and complayned
                     But men muſte nedes vnto her luſte obey
                     And ſo wol I, there nis no more to ſey
                  
                  
                     This childe I am cōmaunded to take
                     And ſpake no more, but vp the chylde he hent
                     Diſpitouſly, and gan a chere to make
                     As though he wolde haue ſlayne it or he wēt
                     Griſylde muſt al ſuffre, and conſent
                     And as a lambe, ſhe ſytteth meke and ſtyl
                     And let this cruel ſergeaunt do his wyl
                  
                  
                     ¶Suſpecte was the fame of this man
                     Suſpecte his face, ſuſpecte hys worde alſo
                     Suſpecte the tyme in whiche he this began
                     Alas her doughter, that ſhe loued ſo
                     She wende he wold haue ſlayne it right tho
                     But natheleſſe, ſhe neyther wepte ne ſyked
                     Confyrmyng her to that the Markes lyked
                  
                  
                     But at the laſte to ſpeke ſhe began
                     And mekely ſhe the ſergeaunt prayde
                     (So as he was a worthy gentilman)
                     That ſhe might kyſſe her chylde er yt it deyde
                     And in her barme, this lytel chylde ſhe leyde
                     with ful ſadde face, and gan the chylde blyſſe
                     And lulled it, and after gan it kyſſe
                  
                  
                     And thus ſhe ſayd in her benygne voyce
                     Farwel my chylde, I ſhal the neuer ſe
                     But ſythen I haue marked yu with the croyce
                     Of thylke father ybleſſed mote thou be
                     That for vs dyed vpon the rode tree
                     Thy ſoule lytel chylde, I him betake
                     For this nyght ſhalte thou dyen for my ſake
                  
                  
                     ¶I trowe that to a norice in thys caas
                     It had ben harde, this routhe for to ſe
                     Wel might a mother than crye alas
                     But natheleſſe, ſo ſadde and ſtedfaſt was ſhe
                     That ſhe endured al her aduerſyte
                     And to the ſergeaunt mekely ſhe ſayde
                     Haue here ayen your lytel yonge mayde
                  
                  
                     And goth now (ꝙ ſhe) & doth my lordes heſt
                     And o thing wolde I pray you of your grace
                     But yf my lorde forbyd it you at the leſte
                     Buryeth this lytel body in ſome place
                     That no beeſtes ne byrdes it do race
                     But he no worde to that purpoſe wolde ſay
                     But toke the childe, and went anon his way.
                  
                  
                     This ſergeaunt came to the lorde agayne
                     And of Griſyldes wordes, and of her chere
                     He tolde him worde by word, ſhort & playne
                     And him preſented with his doughter dere
                     Somwhat this lord had routh ī his manere
                     But natheleſſe, his purpoſe helde he ſtyl
                     As lordes done, whā they wol haue her wyl
                  
                  
                     And badde the ſergeaunt that ful priuely
                     He ſhuld this child wel ſoft wynd & wrappe
                     with al the circumſtaunce tenderly
                     And cary it in a cofre, or in a lappe
                     But on payne of hys heed of to ſwappe
                     That no man ſhulde knowe of his entent
                     Ne whence he came, ne whyther he went
                  
                  
                     But at Boleyne▪ to his ſuſter dere
                     That thilke tyme of Pauye was counteſſe
                     He ſhulde it take, and ſhewe her this matere
                     Beſechyng her to done her buſyneſſe
                     This childe to foſtre in al gentylneſſe
                     And whoſe chylde yt it was, he bade her hyde
                     From euery wight, for ought ye might betyde
                  
                  
                     This ſergeaunt gothe, and hathe fulfylled thys thyng
                     But to thys Markes nowe retourne we
                     For nowe gothe he ful ofte ymaginyng
                     If by his wyues chere, he myght ſe
                     Or by her wordes, perceyue that ſhe
                     were chaunged, but he neuer coulde fynde
                     But euer in one ilyke ſadde and kynde
                  
                  
                     As glad, as humble, as buſy in ſeruyſe
                     And eke in loue, as ſhe was wont to be
                     was ſhe to hym, in euery maner wyſe
                     Ne of her doughter one worde ſpake ſhe
                     None accident, for none aduerſyte
                     Was ſene in her, ne neuer her doghters name
                     Nempned ſhe, for erneſt ne for game.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Explicit tertia pars: et incipit pars quarta.
                  
                     
                        IN thys eſtate, paſſed ben foure yere
                     Er ſhe wyth chylde was, but as god wolde
                     A man chylde ſhe bare by this waltere
                     
                        wel gracious, and fayre to beholde
                     And when folke it to the father tolde
                     Not onely he, but al the countre merye
                     was for the chyld, & god they thonke & herye
                  
                  
                     when it was two yere olde, & from the breſt
                     Departed from hys noryce on a daye
                     Thys Markes caught yet another leſt
                     To tempten hys wyfe efte ſones, yf he maye
                     Onedeleſſe was ſhe tēpted, I dare wel ſaye
                     But wedded men ne conne no meſure
                     when they fynde a pacient creature
                  
                  
                     wyfe (ꝙ this Markes) ye haue herd or this
                     My people heuely bareth our mariage
                     And namely ſythen my ſonne borne is
                     Now is it worſe then euer in our age
                     The murmure ſleeth my herte & my corage
                     For to myne eeres cometh ye voyce ſo ſmerte
                     That it wel nye deſtroyed hath my herte.
                  
                  
                     Now ſay they thus, whē walter is agone
                     Then ſhal the bloode of Iamcula ſuccede
                     And ben our lorde, for other haue we none
                     Suche wordes ſay my people, it is no drede
                     wel ought I of ſuche murmure take hede
                     For certaynly I drede ſuche ſentence
                     Though they not playnly ſpeke ī my audiēce
                  
                  
                     I wolde lyue in peace, yf that I myght
                     wherfore I am dyſpoſed vtterly
                     As I hys ſyſter ſerued by nyght
                     Ryght ſo I thynke to ſerue hym priuely
                     Thus warne I you, that ye not ſodeynly
                     Out of your ſelfe, for no wo ſhulde outraye
                     Beth pacient, and therof I you praye.
                  
                  
                     I haue (ꝙ ſhe) ſayd, and euer ſhal
                     I wol 
                           •
                        yl nothynge certayne
                     But as you lyſt: Nought greueth me at al
                     Though yt my doughter & my ſōne be ſlayne
                     At your cōmaundement: thys is to ſayne
                     I haue had no parte of chyldren twayne
                     But fyrſt ſyckneſſe, & after wo and payne.
                  
                  
                     Ye ben our lord, doth wt your owne thyng
                     Ryght as you lyſte, and taketh no rede of me
                     For as I lefte at home my clothyng
                     when I came fyrſt to you, ryght ſo (ꝙ ſhe)
                     Lefte I my wyll, and al my lyberte
                     And toke your clothing: wherfor I you pray
                     Do your wyl, I wol to it obey
                  
                  
                     And certes, yf I had preſcience
                     Your wyl to knowe, er ye your luſt me tolde
                     I wolde it done, wythout negligence
                     But now I wote your luſt, & what ye wolde
                     Al your pleſaunce, fyrme & ſtable I holde
                     For wyſte I yt my death wolde done you eſe
                     Gladly wolde I ſuffre it you to pleaſe.
                  
                  
                     Death may make no compariſoun
                     Vnto your loue: And whē thys Markes ſay
                     The conſtaūce of hys wyfe, he caſt adoun
                     Hys eyen two: and wondred how ſhe may
                     In ſuche pacience, ſuffreth al thys array
                     And forth he goeth, wyth drery countenaūce
                     But to hys herte, it was ful great pleaſaūce.
                  
                  
                     Thys eygre ſergeant, in the ſame wyſe
                     That he her doughter caught, ryght ſo he
                     Or worſe, yf he coulde werſe deuyſe
                     Hath hente her ſonne, yt was ful of beaute
                     And euer in one ſo pacient was ſhe
                     That ſhe no chere made of heuyneſſe
                     But kyſſeth her chylde, & after gan him bleſſe
                  
                  
                     Saue thys ſhe prayd him, yf that he might
                     Her lytel ſonne he wolde in erth graue
                     Hys tendre lymmes, delycate to ſyght
                     Fro foules and fro beaſtes to ſaue
                     But ſhe none anſwere of hym myght haue
                     He went hys waye as he nothynge rought
                     But to Boleyne he tenderly it brought.
                  
                  
                     This Markes wōdred euer lēger ye more
                     Vpon her pacience, and yf that he
                     Ne had ſothely knowen there before
                     That parfytly her chyldren loued ſhe
                     He wolde haue wende, yt for ſome ſubtelte
                     And of malyce, or cruel corage
                     That ſhe had ſuffred thys wt ſadde vyſage.
                  
                  
                     But he knewe wel, yt next hym ſelfe certayne
                     She loued her chyldren beſt, in euery wyſe
                     But now of women wolde I aſke fayne
                     Yf theſe aſſayes mayght not ſuffyſe
                     what coulde a ſturdy huſbonde more deuyſe
                     To preue her wyfehode, & her ſtedfaſtneſſe
                     But be contynuynge euer in ſturdyneſſe
                  
                  
                     But there be folke of ſuche condicion
                     That whē they han a certayne purpoſe take
                     They couth not ſtynte of her entencion
                     But as they were bounden to a ſtake
                     
                        They wol not of that purpoſe ſlake
                     Ryght ſo thys Markes, hath fully purpoſed
                     To tēpte hys wyfe, as he was fyrſt dyſpoſed
                  
                  
                     He wayteth, yf by wordes or coūtenaunce
                     She were to hym chaunged of corage
                     But neuer coulde he fynde variaunce
                     She was aye in one herte and vyſage
                     And euer the further that ſhe was in age
                     The more truer (yf it were poſſible)
                     She was to hym in loue, and more penyble.
                  
                  
                     For whych it ſemeth thus, that of hem two
                     There nas but one wyl: for as walter leſt
                     The ſame luſt was her pleaſaunce alſo
                     And god be thanked, al fel for the beſte
                     She ſhewed wel, for no worldly vnreſte
                     A wyfe, as for her ſelfe, nothynge ſholde
                     wyllen in effecte, but as her huſbonde wolde
                  
                  
                     The ſclaūder of walter, wōder wyde ſprad
                     That of cruel herte, ful wretchedly
                     (For he a poore woman wedded had)
                     Hath murdred both hys chyldren priuely
                     which murmure was amonge hem comenly
                     No wonder was: for to the peoples ere
                     Ther cāe no word, but yt they murdred were
                  
                  
                     For whych, there as hys people ther before
                     had loued him wel, diſclaūdred of his defame
                     Made hem, that they hated hym therfore
                     To ben a murtherer is an hateful name
                     But natheleſſe, for erneſt ne for game
                     He of hys cruel purpoſe wolde not ſtent
                     To tempt hys wyfe, was al hys entent.
                  
                  
                     when yt hys doughter .xii. yere was of age
                     He to the court of Rome, in ſubtel wyſe
                     (Enfourmed of hys wyl) ſent hys meſſage
                     Cōmaundyng hem, ſuche bylles to deuyſe
                     As to hys cruel purpoſe may ſuffyſe
                     Howe that the pope, for hys peoples reſte
                     Bade hym wedde another, yf that hym leſte.
                  
                  
                     I ſaye he bade, they ſhulde countrefete
                     The popes bulle, makynge mencion
                     That he hath leue, hys fyrſt wyfe to lete
                     As by the popes dyſpenſacion
                     To ſtynte rancoure and dyſcencion
                     Betwyxt hys people & him, thus ſpake yt bul
                     The whych they han publyſhed at the full
                     The rude people, as no wonder nys
                     wenden ful wel it had ben ryght ſo
                     But when theſe tydynges come to Griſyldes
                     I deme, that her herte was ful wo
                     But ſhe was lyche ſadde euermo
                     Dyſpoſed was thys humble creature
                     The aduerſite of fortune to endure
                  
                  
                     Abydynge euer hys luſte & hys pleaſaūte
                     To whome ſhe was yeuen, herte and all
                     As to her worldly ſuffyſaunce
                     But certaynly, yf I thys ſtorie tel ſhal
                     Thys Markes ywritten hath in ſpecial
                     A letter, in whych he ſhewed hys entent
                     And priuely, he it to Boloyne ſent
                  
                  
                     To the erle of Pauy, whych that had the
                     wedded hys ſyſter: he prayde ſpecially
                     To bryngen him ayen hys chyldren two
                     In honorable eſtate al openly
                     But one thynge he hym prayde al vtterly
                     that he to no wight, though mēwold enquire
                     Shulde tellen whoſe chyldren they were.
                  
                  
                     But ſay yt the mayden ſhulde wedded be
                     Vnto the Markes of Saluce anone
                     And as the erle was prayde, ſo dyd he
                     For at a daye yſette, he on hys way is gone
                     Towarde Saluce, and lordes many one
                     In ryche aray, thys mayden for to gyde
                     Her yonge brother rydynge by her ſyde.
                  
                  
                     Arayed was towarde her mariage
                     Thys mayden freſhe, ful of gemmes clere
                     And her brother, that ſeuen yere was of age
                     Arayed was eke freſhely in hys manere
                     And thus in great nobleſſe and glad chere
                     Towarde Saluce, ſhapen her iournay
                     Fro day to day, rydynge forth her way.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Explicit quarta pars: Et ſequitur pars quinta.
                  
                     Amonge al thys, after hys wycked vſage
                     Thys Markes hys wyfe yet to tempte more
                     To the vttereſt profe of her corage
                     Fully to haue experience and lore
                     Yf that ſhe were as ſtedfaſt (as before)
                     He on a daye in open audience
                     Ful boyſtouſly hath ſayd her thys ſentence.
                  
                  
                     
                     Certes Griſylde, I had ynough of pleſaūce
                     To han you to my wyfe, for your goodneſſe
                     And for your trouth, and your obeyſaunce
                     Not for your lynage, ne for your rycheſſe
                     But I nowe knowe in very ſothfaſtneſſe
                     That in great lordſhyp, yf I me wel aduyſe
                     There is great ſeruitude in ſondry wyſe
                  
                  
                     I may not done, as euery ploughmā maye
                     My people me conſtrayneth for to take
                     Another wyfe, and cryen daye by daye
                     And eke the pope, thys rancoure for to ſlake
                     Conſenteth it, that dare I vndertake
                     And truely, thus moche I wol you ſaye
                     My newe wyfe is comynge by the waye.
                  
                  
                     Be ſtrōge of herte, & voyde anone her place
                     And thylke dowry that ye brought to me
                     Take it ayen, I graunt it of my grace
                     Retourneth to your fathers houſe (ꝙ he)
                     No man may alwaye haue proſperite
                     wyth euen herte, I rede you to endure
                     The ſtroke of fortune, or of auenture.
                  
                  
                     And ſhe ayen anſwerde in pacience:
                     My lorde (ꝙ ſhe) I wote and wyſt alwaye
                     Howe that bytwyxte your magnificence
                     And my pouert, no man can ne maye
                     Maken no compariſon, it is no naye
                     I helde me neuer dygne in no manere
                     To ben your wyfe, ne yet your chamberere
                  
                  
                     And in thys houſe, there ye me lady made
                     (The hye god take I, as for my wytneſſe
                     And alſo wyſely, as he my ſoule glade)
                     I helde me neyther lady ne mayſtreſſe
                     But humble ſeruaunt to your worthyneſſe
                     And euer ſhal, whyle my lyfe may endure
                     Abouen euery worldly creature.
                  
                  
                     That ye ſo longe of your benignite
                     Haue holde me in honour and nobley
                     (where I was not worthy for to be)
                     That thanke I god & you, to whom I prey
                     So yelde it you, there is no more to ſey
                     Vnto my father gladly wolde I wende
                     And wyth hym dwel to my lyues ende.
                  
                  
                     There I was foſtred of a chylde ful ſmale
                     Tyl I be deed, my lyfe there wol I lede
                     A wydowe clene in herte, body and al
                     For ſythen I yaue to you my maydenhede
                     And am your trewe wyfe, it is no drede
                     God ſhylde ſuche a lordes wyfe to take
                     Another man, to huſbonde or to make.
                  
                  
                     And of your newe wyfe, god of hys grace
                     So graunt you welth and hygh proſperite
                     For I wol gladly yeue her my place
                     In whych I was blyſful wonte to be
                     For ſythen it lyketh you my lorde (ꝙ ſhe)
                     (That whylom weren al my hertes reſte)
                     That I ſhal gone: I ſhal go when you leſte.
                  
                  
                     But there as ye me profred ſuch dowayre
                     As I fyrſt brought, it is wel in my mynde
                     It were my wretched clothes, nothing fayre
                     The which to me now wer ful hard to finde
                     Oh, good god: howe gentel & how kynde?
                     Ye ſemed by your ſpeche and your vyſage
                     The daye that maked was our mariage?
                  
                  
                     But ſoth is ſayd, algate I fynde it trewe
                     For in effecte it is proued nowe on me
                     Loue is not olde, as when it is newe
                     For certes lorde, for none aduerſite
                     To dyen in thys caſe, it ſhal neuer be
                     That euer in worde or worke I ſhal repent
                     That I you yaue myne herte in good entent
                  
                  
                     My lorde ye wote, that in my fathers place
                     Ye dyd me ſtrype out of my poore wede
                     And rychely ye cladde me of your grace
                     To you brought I nought els out of drede
                     But fayth, nakedneſſe, and maydenhede
                     But here ayen your clothynge I reſtore
                     And eke my weddynge rynge for euermore
                  
                  
                     The remenaunt of your iewels redy be
                     wythin your chambre, dare I ſafely ſayne
                     Naked out of my fathers houſe (ꝙ ſhe)
                     I came: and naked I mote turne agayne
                     Al your pleaſaunce wolde I folowe fayne
                     But yet I hope it be not your entent
                     That I ſmockleſſe out of your paleys went
                  
                  
                     Ye coulde not do ſo dyſhoneſt a thynge
                     That ylke wōbe, in whych your chyldrē lay
                     Shulde before the people, in my walkinge
                     Be ſene al bare: wherfore I you pray
                     Let me not lyke a worme go by the way
                     Remembreth you myne owne lorde ſo dere
                     I was your wife, though I vnworthy were
                  
                  
                     
                     Wherfore in rewarde of my maydenhede
                     Which I to you brought, & not ayen bere
                     As voucheſafe to yeue me to my mede
                     But ſuche a ſmocke as I was wonte to were
                     That I therwith may wrie ye wombe of here
                     That was your wyfe: & here I take my leue
                     Of you, myne owne lorde, leſt I you greue
                  
                  
                     ¶The ſmock (ꝙ he) yt thou haſt on thy bake
                     Let it be ſtyl, and bere it forthe with the
                     But wel vnneth that worde he ſpake
                     But went his way, for routhe and pyte
                     Before the folke her ſelfe ſtrypeth ſhe
                     And in her ſmocke, with foote & heed al bare
                     Towarde her fathers houſe forth is ſhe fare
                  
                  
                     The folke folowed wepyng in her wey
                     And fortune euer they curſed as they gone
                     But ſhe fro wepyng kept her eyen drey
                     Ne in this tyme, worde ſpake ſhe none
                     Her father, that this tydinges herde anone
                     Curſed the day and tyme that nature
                     Shope him to ben a lyues creature
                  
                  
                     For out of doute, this olde poore man
                     Was euer ſuſpecte of her maryage
                     For euer he demed, ſythen it began
                     That whan the lorde ifylled had his corage
                     Hym wolde thynke it was a diſparage
                     To his eſtate, ſo lowe for to alyght
                     And voyden her, as ſone as euer he might.
                  
                  
                     ¶Ayenſt his doughter haſtely gothe he
                     (For he by ye noyſe of folk knew her cōming)
                     And with her olde cote, as it might be
                     He couered her, ful ſore wepyng
                     But on her body might he it not bring
                     For rude was the clothe, & ſhe more of age
                     By dayes fele than was her mariage.
                  
                  
                     ¶Thus with her father, for a certayne ſpace
                     Dwelleth this floure of wyſely pacience
                     That neuer by her wordes, ne by her face
                     Byfore the folke, ne eke in abſence
                     Ne ſhewed ſhe, that her was done offence
                     Ne of her hye eſtate no remembraunce
                     Ne had ſhe, as by her countenaunce
                  
                  
                     No wonder is, for in her great eſtate
                     Her goſte was euer in playne humylite
                     No tender mouthe, ne herte delycate
                     Ne pompe, ne ſemblaunce of royalte
                     But ful of pacience and benygnyte
                     Diſcrete, and prideleſſe, and aye honorable
                     And to her huſbonde euer meke and ſtable
                  
                  
                     ¶Men ſpeke of Iob, & moſt of his hūbleſſe
                     As clerkes (whan hem lyſte) can wel endyte
                     Namely of men: but in ſothfaſtneſſe
                     Though clerkes prayſe women but a lyte
                     There can no man in humbleſſe hem aquyte
                     As women can: ne be halfe ſo trewe
                     As women ben, but it befal of newe.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Explicit quinta pars: et ſequitur pars ſexta.
                  
                     
                        FRo Boloyne is the erle of Pauy come
                     Of whiche the fame ſpronge to more and leſſe
                     And to the peoples eeres, al and ſome
                     was couthe eke, howe a newe Marqueſeſſe
                     He wt him brought, in pompe & ſuche richeſſe
                     That was neuer ſene with mannes eye
                     So noble aray, in weſt Lumbardye▪
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The Markes, that ſhope a knewe al this
                     Er yt this erle was come, ſent hys meſſage
                     To thylke poore and ſely Griſyldis
                     And ſhe with humble herte, & glad vyſage
                     Not with ſwellyng herte in her corage
                     Came at his heſte, & on her knees her ſette
                     And reuerently and wyſely ſhe hym grette.
                  
                  
                     ¶Griſylde (ꝙ he) my wyl is vtterly
                     This mayde, that wedded ſhal be vnto me
                     Receyued be to morowe al ſo royally
                     As it is poſſyble in my houſe to be
                     And eke that euery wyght in his degre
                     Haue his eſtate in ſyttyng and ſeruyſe
                     And alſo pleſaunt, as ye can beſte deuyſe
                  
                  
                     I haue no woman ſuffycient certayne
                     The chambres for to araye in ordynaunce
                     After my luſte: and therfore wolde I fayne
                     That thyne were al ſuche gouernaunce
                     Thou knoweſt eke of olde al my pleſaunce
                     Though thyn aray be badde, & yuel beſey
                     Do thou thy deuer at the leſte wey.
                  
                  
                     ¶Not onely lorde that I am glad (ꝙ ſhe)
                     To done your luſte, but I deſyre alſo
                     You for to pleaſe, and ſerue in my degre
                     withouten faynyng, and ſhal euer mo
                     
                        Ne neuer for no wele, ne for no wo
                     Ne ſhal the goſte wythin my herte ſtent
                     To loue you beſt, wyth all my true entent
                  
                  
                     And with yt word, ſhe gan ye houſe to dyght
                     And tables to ſette, and beddes to make
                     And payned her to done al that ſhe myght
                     Prayenge the chamberers for goddes ſake
                     To haſten hem, and faſt ſwepe and ſhake
                     And ſhe the moſte ſeruiſable of hem al
                     Hath euery chambre arayed, and hys hal.
                  
                  
                     Abouten vndren gan thys erle alyght
                     That wt hī brought theſe noble childrē twey
                     For whych the people ranne to ſe that ſyght
                     Of her araye, ſo rychely beſey
                     And then at erſte amonges hem they ſey
                     That walter was no foole, though hym leſt
                     To chaunge hys wyfe: for it was for ye beſt.
                  
                  
                     For ſhe is fayrer, as they demen al
                     Then is Griſylde, and more tender of age
                     And fayrer frute bytwene hem ſhal fal
                     And more pleaſaunce, for her hye lynage
                     Her brother eke, ſo fayre was of hys age
                     That hi to ſene ye people had cauȝt pleſaūce
                     Comendyng now the Markes gouernaūce
                  
                  
                     O ſterne people, vnſad and vntrewe
                     Aye vndiſcrete, and chaungynge as a fane
                     Delytynge euer in rumer that is newe
                     For lyke the moone euer waxe ye & wane
                     Euer ful of clappynge, dere ynough a iane
                     Your dome is falſe, your cōſtāce euel preueth
                     A ful great foole is he that on you leueth
                  
                  
                     Thus ſayden ſad folke in that cyte
                     when that the people gaſed vp and downe
                     For they were glad, ryght wyth the nouelte
                     To haue a newe lady of her toun
                     Nomore of thys make I nowe mencioun
                     But to Griſylde ayen wol I me dreſſe
                     And tellen her conſtaūce, and her buſyneſſe
                  
                  
                     Wel buſy was Griſylde on euery thyng
                     That to the feeſt was appertinent
                     Right nauȝt was ſhe abaſhed of her clothing
                     Though they were rude, & ſomwhat to rent
                     But wyth glad chere, to the yate is went
                     wyth other folke, to greten the Marqueſeſſe
                     And after doth ſhe forth her buſyneſſe
                  
                  
                     wyth ryght glad chere, ye geſtes ſhe receiueth
                     And buromly, euerych in hys degre
                     That no man defaute there perceyueth
                     But euer they wondren, what ſhe myght be
                     That in ſo poore araye was for to ſe
                     And coulde ſuche honour, and reuerence
                     And worthely they prayſen her prudence
                  
                  
                     In al the meane whyle ſhe ne ſtente
                     Thys mayden and eke her brother to cōmēde
                     wyth al her herte, and benygne entente
                     So wel, that no man coude her pryſe amēde
                     But at the laſte, when theſe lordes wende
                     To ſytten adowne to meate, he gan to cal
                     Griſylde, as ſhe was buſy in the hal.
                  
                  
                     Griſylde (ꝙ he) as it were in hys play
                     Howe lyketh the my wyfe, and her beaute
                     Ryght wel my lorde (ꝙ ſhe) for in good fay
                     A fayrer ſawe I neuer none then ſhe
                     I praye to god ſo yeue you proſperite
                     And ſo hope I, that he wol to you ſende
                     Pleſaunce ynough, vnto your lyues ende.
                  
                  
                     But one thynge I beſech, and warne alſo
                     That ye prycke wyth no turmentynge
                     Thys tender mayden, as ye han do mo
                     For ſhe is foſtred in her noryſhynge
                     More tenderly, in my ſuppoſynge
                     She coulde not aduerſite endure
                     As coulde a poore foſtred creature.
                  
                  
                     And when thys walter ſawe her pacience
                     Her glad chere, and no malyce at al
                     And he ſo ofte hath done her offence
                     And ſhe aye conſtante, & ſtable as a wal
                     Contynuyng euer her innocence ouer al
                     Thys ſturdy Markes, gan hys herte dreſſe
                     To rewe vpon her wyfely ſtedfaſtneſſe
                  
                  
                     Thys is ynough, Griſylde myne (ꝙ he)
                     Be no more agaſte, ne yuel apayde
                     I haue thy fayth, and thy benignite
                     As wel as euer woman was aſſayde
                     In great eſtate, or poorely arrayde
                     Nowe knowe I dere wyfe thy ſtedfaſtneſſe
                     And her in armes toke, and gan to keſſe
                  
                  
                     And ſhe for wonder, toke therof no kepe
                     She herde not what thynge he to her ſayde
                     She fared as ſhe had ſterte out of her ſlepe
                     Tyl ſhe out of her maſedneſſe abrayde
                     
                        Griſylde (ꝙ he) by god that for vs deyde
                     Thou arte my wyfe, and none other I haue
                     Ne neuer had, as god my ſoule ſaue.
                  
                  
                     Thys is thy doghter, which yu haſt ſuppoſed
                     To ben my wyfe, and none other faythfully
                     And this ſhal bē myn heyre, as I haue dyſpoſed
                     Thou bare hem in thy body truely
                     At Boleyne haue I kepte hem ſekerly
                     Take hem ayen, for now mayſt thou not ſay
                     That yu haſt lorne any of thy chyldren tway
                  
                  
                     And folke, that other wyſe han ſayd of me
                     I warne hem wel, yt I haue done thys dede
                     For no malyce, ne for no cruelte
                     But for to aſſaye in the thy womanhede
                     And not for to ſlee my chyldren, god forbede
                     But for to kepen hem priuely and ſtyl
                     Tyl I thy purpoſe knewe, and al thy wyl
                  
                  
                     whē ſhe this herd, a ſowne down ſhe falleth
                     For pytous ioye, and after her ſownynge
                     She both her yonge chyldren to her calleth
                     And in her armes, pytouſly wepynge
                     Enbraſed hem both, tenderly kyſſynge
                     Ful lyke a mother, wyth her ſalte teeres
                     She bathed both her vyſage and her heeres
                  
                  
                     O whych a pytous thynge it was to ſe
                     Her ſownynge, & her pytous voyce to here
                     Graūt mercy lorde, god thanke it you (ꝙ ſhe)
                     That ye haue ſailed me my chyldren dere
                     Nowe recke I neuer to be deed ryght here
                     Sythē I ſtāde in your loue, & in your grace
                     No force of deth, ne when my ſpirite pace
                  
                  
                     O tendre, O dere, O yonge chyldrē myne
                     Your woful mother wende ſtedfaſtly
                     That cruel hoūdes, or ſome foule vermyne
                     Had eaten you, but god of hys mercy
                     And your benigne father, ſo tenderly
                     Hath done you kepe: & in that ſame ſtounde
                     Al ſodainly ſhe ſwapte downe to the groūde
                  
                  
                     And in her ſwounyng, ſo ſadly holdeth ſhe
                     Her chyldrē two, when ſhe gan hem enbrace
                     That wyth great ſleyght and dyfficulte
                     The chyldrē frō her armes they gan to race
                     O many a tere, on many a pytous face
                     Downe ran, of hem that ſtoden there beſyde
                     Vnneth aboute her myght no man abyde.
                     walter her gladdeth, & her ſorowe ſlaketh
                  
                  
                     She ryſeth vp al abaſhed from her traunce
                     And euery wyght her ioye and feeſt maketh
                     Tyl ſhe hath caught ayen her countinaunce
                     walter her doth ſo faythfully pleſaunce
                     That it was deynty to ſene the chere
                     Betwyxt hem two, whē they were met yfere
                  
                  
                     Theſe ladyes, when they her tyme ſey
                     Han taken her, and into chambre gon
                     And ſtrypen her out of her rude arrey
                     And in a cloth of golde, that bryght ſhone
                     wyth a crowne of many a ryche ſtone
                     Vpon her heed, they her into hal brought
                     And there ſhe was honoured as ſhe ought
                  
                  
                     Thus hath this pytous day a blyſful ende
                     For euery man & woman doth hys myght
                     Thys daye in myrth and reuel to dyſpende
                     Tyl on the welken ſhone the ſterres bryght
                     For more ſolempne in euery mannes ſyght
                     Thys feeſt was, and greater of coſtage
                     Then was the reuel of her mariage
                  
                  
                     wel many a yere, in hye proſperite
                     Lyuen theſe two, in concorde and in reſt
                     And rychely hys doughter maried he
                     Vnto a lorde, one of the worthyeſt
                     Of al Itayle, and then in peace and reſt
                     Hys wyues father in hys courte he kepte
                     Tyl that hys ſoule out of hys body crepte
                  
                  
                     Hys ſonne ſuccedeth in hys heritage
                     In reſte and peace, after hys fathers day
                     And fortunate was eke in mariage
                     Al put he not hys wyfe in great aſſaye
                     Thys worlde is not ſo ſtronge, it is no naye
                     As it hath ben in olde tymes yore
                     And herkneth what thautour ſayth therfore
                  
                  
                     
                        THis ſtory is ſaid, not for ye wiues ſholde
                     Felowē Griſyld, in al humilite
                     For it were importable, tho they wolde
                     But that euery wyght in hys degre
                     Sulde be conſtante, in al aduerſite
                     As was Griſild, wherfore Petrarke writeth
                     This ſtory, whych wt hye ſtyle he endyteth.
                  
                  
                     For ſythe a woman was ſo pacient
                     Vnto a mortal man, wel more we ought
                     Receyue al in gree that God vs ſent
                     For great ſkyll he preueth that he wrought
                     But he ne tempteth no man that he bought
                     
                        As ſayeth ſaynt Iame, yf ye hys pyſtel rede
                     He preueth folke but a daye, it is no drede
                  
                  
                     And ſuffreth vs as for our exercyſe
                     wyth ſharpe ſcourges of aduerſyte
                     wel ofte to be beaten, in ſondry wyſe
                     Not for to knowe our wyl, for certes he
                     Or we were borne, knewe al our frelte
                     And for our beſt, is al hys gouernaunce
                     Let vs lyue then in vertuous ſuffraunce▪
                     
                  
                  
                     But one word herkneth lordynges or ye go
                     It were ful harde to fynde now a dayes
                     In al a countre Griſyldes thre or two
                     For yf they were put to ſuche aſſayes
                     The golde of hem hath ſo bad a layes
                     wyth braſſe, for though it be fayre at eye
                     It wolde rather braſte a two then plye
                  
                  
                     For which here, for ye wyues loue of Bathe
                     whoſe lyfe and ſecte, myghty god mayntene
                     In hygh mayſtry, or els were it ſkathe
                     I wyl wyth luſty herte, freſhe and grene
                     Saye you a ſonge, to glade you I wene
                     And let vs ſtynte of erneſt matere
                     Herkeneth my ſonge, yt ſayth in thys manere
                  
               
               
                  ¶Lenuoye de Chaucer a les mariz de noſtre temps.
                  
                     
                        GRiſylde is deed, & eke her pacience
                     And both at ones buryed in Itayle
                     For which I crye in open audience
                     No wedded man be ſo hardy to aſſayle
                     Hys wyues pacience, in truſte to fynde
                     Griſyldes, for in certayne he ſhal fayle.
                  
                  
                     ¶O noble wyues, ful of hye prudence
                     Let no humilite your tonge nayle
                     Ne let no clerke haue cauſe ne deligence
                     To wryte of you a ſtorye of ſuche maruayle
                     As of Griſylde, pacient and kynde
                     Leſt Chechiface ſwalow you in her entraile
                  
                  
                     ¶Foloweth Ecco, that holdeth no ſylence
                     But euer anſwereth at the countre tayle
                     Beth not adaffed for your innocence
                     But ſharpely taketh on you the gouernayle
                     Enprinteth wel thys leſſon in your mynde
                     For cōmen profyte, ſythneſſe it maye auayle
                  
                  
                     Ne dredeth hem not, doth hem no reuerēce
                     For though thyn huſbād armed be in mayle
                     The arrowes of thy crabbed eloquence
                     Shal perce hys breſt, & eke hys aduentayle
                     In ielouſye eke, loke thou hym bynde
                     And yt ſhal make him couch as doth a quayle
                  
                  
                     Yf yu be fayre, there folke bene in preſence
                     Shewe thou thy vyſage, & thyne apparayle
                     Yf thou be foule, be fre of thy dyſpence
                     To get the frendes aye do thy trauayle
                     Be aye of chere, as lyght as lefe on lynde
                     And let hym care, wepe, wrynge, and wayle
                  
                  
                     Ye archwyues, ſtōdeth aye at your defence
                     Syth ye be ſtronge, as is a great camayle
                     Ne ſuffreth not, that men do you offence
                     And ye ſklendre wyues, feble as in batayle
                     Beth eygre as any tygre is in Inde
                     Aye clappeth as a myl, I you counſayle.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶Here endech the clerkes tale of Oxforde, and here foloweth the wordes of our hooſt.
               This worthy clerk, whē ended was his tale
               Our hooſt ſayd and ſwore by cockes bones
               Me were leuer then a barel of ale
               My wyfe at home had herd this legēde ones
               Thys is a gentle tale for the nones
               As to my purpoſe, wyſte ye my wyl
               But thynge that wol not be, let it be ſtyl.
            
            
               ¶Here ende the wordes of our hoſte, and here foloweth the Frankeleyns prologue.
               
                  THeſe old gētyll Britons in her dayes
               Of dyuers auentures maden layes
               Rymed fyrſt in her mother tonge
               which layes, wt her inſtrumentes they ſonge
               Or els reden hem for her pleaſaunce
               And one of hem haue I in remembraunce
               whyche I ſhal ſaye, as wyllinge as I can
               But ſyrs, bycauſe I am a borel man
               At my begynnynge fyrſt I you beſeche
               Haue me excuſed of my rude ſpeche
               I lerned neuer rethorike certayne
               Thynge that I ſpeke, mote be bare & playne
               I ſlepte neuer on the mounte of Pernaſo
               Ne lerned neuer Marcus Tullius Cicero
               Coloures ne knowe I none, withoutē drede
               But ſuche coloures as growen in the mede
               Or els ſuche as men dyen or paynte
               Coloures of rhetoryke, ben to me quaynte
               My ſpirite feleth not of ſuche matere
               Thys is my tale, yf ye wol it here.
               ¶Here endeth the Frankeleyns prologue.
            
            
               
               
                  
¶Here begynneth the Frankeleyns tale.
               
                  IN Armorike, ye called is britain
               There was a knyght, that loued and dyd hys payne
               To ſerue ladyes in hys beſt wyſe
               And many a labour, & many a great empryſe
               He for hys lady wrought, er ſhe were wonne
               For ſhe was one the fayreſt vnder ſonne
               And eke therto cōmen of hye kynrede
               That wel vnneth durſt thys knyȝt for drede
               Tel her hys wo, hys payne, and his dyſtreſſe
               But at the laſte, ſhe of her worthyneſſe
               And namely for hys meke obeyſaunce
               Hath ſuche a pyte caught of hys penaunce
               That priuely ſhe fyl of hys accorde
               To take hym for her huſbonde & her lorde
               Of ſuch lordſhip, as mē haue ouer her wiues
               And for to lede in the more blyſſe her lyues
               Of hys fre wyl, he ſwore her as a knyght
               That neuer in al her lyfe, daye ne nyght
               Ne ſhulde he take vpon hym no mayſtry
               Agayne her wyl, ne kythe her ielouſye
               But her obeye, and folowe her wyl in al
               As any louer to hys lady ſhal
               Saue that the name of ſoueraynte
               That wolde he haue, for ſhame of his degre.
               She thāked him, & with ful great humbleſſe
               She ſayd: ſyr, ſyth of your gentylneſſe
               Ye profred me to haue ſo large a rayne
               Ne wolde god neuer betwyxte vs twayne
               As in my gylt, were it eyther warre or ſtryfe
               Syr, I wol be your trewe humble wyfe
               Haue here my trouth, tyl that my herte breſte
               Thus ben they both in quiete and in reſte.
               For one thynge ſyrs, ſafely dare I ſeyne
               That frendes, eueryche other muſt obeyne
               Yf they wol longe holden companye
               Loue wol not be conſtrayned by mayſtry
               when mayſtry cōmeth, the god of loue anone
               Beateth hys wynges, & farewel he is gone
               Loue is a thynge, as any ſpirite free
               women of kynde deſyren lyberte
               And not to be conſtrayned as a thral
               And ſo done men, yf I ſothe ſay ſhal
               Loke who that moſte pacient is in loue
               He is at hys auauntage al aboue
               Pacience is an hye vertue certayne
               For it vaynquyſheth, as theſe clerkes ſayne
               Thynges that rygour ſhal neuer attayne
               For euery word mē may not chyde or playne
               Lerneth to ſuffre, or els ſo mote I gone
               Ye ſhal it lerne, whether ye wol or none
               For in thys world certayn 
                     •
                  o wyght ther is
               That he ne doth or ſayeth ſomtyme amys
               Ire, ſyckneſſe, or conſtellacion
               wyne, wo, or chaungynge of complection
               Cauſeth ful often to done amyſſe or ſpeken
               On euery wronge, a mā may not be wreken
               After the tyme muſt be temperaunce
               
                  To euery wight that can of gouernaunce
               And therfore, hath this worthy wyſe knight
               To lyue in eaſe, ſuffraunce her hight
               And ſhe to hym ful wyſely gan ſwere
               That neuer ſhulde there be defaut in here
               Here may men ſe, humble and wyſe accorde
               Thus hath ſhe take her ſeruant & her lorde
               Seruaunt in loue, and lorde in mariage
               Than was he bothe in lordſhip and ſeruage
               Seruage: nay, but in lordſhyp aboue
               Sythen he hath both his lady and his loue
               His lady certes, and his wyfe alſo
               The which that lawe of londe accordeth to
               And whan he was in this proſperite
               Home with his wife he goth, in to his coūtre
               Nat fer fro Dēmarke, ther his dwelling was
               where as he lyueth in ioye and in ſolas
               who coude tel, but he had wedded be
               The ioye, the eaſe, and the proſperite
               That is bitwixt an huſbande & his wyfe
               Euermore laſted this blyſful lyfe
               Tyl that this knyght, of which I ſpeke thus
               That of Caere Iuda, was cleped Arueragus
               Shope him to dwel, a yere or twayne
               In Englande, that cleped was Britayne
               To ſeken in armes worſhip and honour
               For al his luſt he ſette in ſuche labour
               And dwelt there two yere, the boke ſaith thus
               ¶Nowe wol I ſtynt of this Arueragus
               And ſpeke I wol of Dor
                     •
                  gen his wyfe
               That loueth her huſbonde as her hertes lyfe
               For his abſence, wepeth ſhe and ſyketh
               As don theſe noble wyues whan hem lyketh
               She mourneth, wayleth, faſteth, & playneth
               Deſyre of his preſence, her ſo conſtrayneth
               That al this wyde worlde ſet ſhe at nought
               Her frendes, whiche knewe her heuy thouȝt
               Conforten her, in al that euer they may
               They prechen her, and tellen her night & day
               That cauſeles ſhe ſlewe her ſelfe, alas
               And euery comfort poſſyble in this caas
               They don to her, with al her buſyneſſe
               And al for to maken her leue her heuyneſſe.
               ¶By proceſſe, as ye knowē euerychone
               Men mowen ſo longe grauen in a ſtone
               Tyl ſome fygure therin printed be
               So longe han they comforted her tyl, ſhe
               Receyued hath by hope and by reſon
               The enprintyng of her conſtellacion
               Through which her great ſorow gā aſwage
               She may not alway induren ſuche a rage
               And eke Aruyragus in al this care
               Hath ſent his letters home of his welfare
               And that he wol come haſtely agayne
               Or els had this ſorowe her herte ſlayne.
               Her frendes ſawe her ſorowe gan to ſlake
               And prayden her on knees, for goddes ſake
               To come and romen in her companye
               Away to driuen her derke fantaſye
               And fynally ſhe graunted that requeſte
               For wel ſhe ſawe it was for the beſte.
               ¶Nowe ſtode her caſtel faſte by the ſee
               And ofte with her frendes walked ſhe
               Her to diſporte on the bankes hey
               where as ſhe may ſhyppes and barges ſey
               Salyng her courſe, where hem lyſt go
               But yet was that a parcel of her wo
               For to her ſelfe ful ofte alas ſayd ſhe
               Is there no ſhyppe, of ſo many as I ſe
               wol bring home my lorde▪ thā were my herte
               wariſhed of theſe bytter paynes ſmerte.
               ¶Another tyme, wolde ſhe ſytte and thynke
               And caſte her eyen downward fro the brinke
               But whan ſhe ſawe the gryſly rockes blake
               For very feare, ſo wolde her herte quake
               That on her fete ſhe myght not her ſuſtene
               Than wolde ſhe ſytte adown vpon the grene
               And pitouſly in to the ſee beholde
               And ſay right thus, with ſorouful ſykes colde
               ¶Eterne god, that through thy purueyaūce
               Ledeſt this worlde, by certayne gouernaūce
               In ydle as mē ſayn, doſte thou nothing make
               But lorde, theſe griſly fendely rockes blake
               That ſemen rather a foule confuſyon
               Of werke, than a fayre creacion
               Of ſuche a parfyte god, wyſe and ful ſtable
               why haue ye wrouȝt this werke vnreſonable
               For by this werke, northe, ſouth, weſt, ne eſte
               There nys foſtred, man, byrde, ne beſte
               It dothe no good, but anoyeth
               Se ye not lorde, howe mākinde it diſtroyeth
               An hundred thouſande bodyes of mankynde
               Haue rockes iſſayn, al be they not in mynde
               Sin mākind is ſo fayre aparte of thy werke
               That thou it madeſt like thyn owne werke
               Than ſemed it ye had a great cherte
               Towarde mākynde, but how thā may it be
               That ye ſuche menes maken it to diſtroyen?
               which menes don no good, but euer anoyen.
               ¶I wote wel clerkes wol ſayne as hem leſt
               By argumentes, that al is for the beſt
               Though I ne can not the cauſes wel knowe
               But thilke god, yt made the wynde to blowe
               As kepe my lorde, this is my concluſyon
               
                  To clerkes let I al thys dyſputacion
               And wolde God that al theſe rockes blake
               were ſonken in to hel for hys ſake.
               Theſe rockes ſlee myne herte for feare
               Thus wolde ſhe ſay wt many a pytous teare
               Her frendes ſawe it was for her no dyſport
               To romen by the ſee, but dyſcomfort
               And ſhapen hem to playen ſomwhere elles
               They leden her by ryuers and by welles
               And eke in other places delytables
               They dauncen and they playen at the tables
               So on a daye, ryght in the morowe tyde
               Vnto a gardeyne, that was there beſyde
               In which that they had made her ordinaūce
               Of vytayles, and other purueyaunce
               They gone and playen hem al the longe day
               And thys was in the ſyxte morowe of May
               which May hath paited wt his ſofte ſhoures
               Thys gardayne ful of leues and of floures
               And crafte of mannes hande ſo curiouſly
               Arayed had thys garden truely
               That neuer nas there garden of ſuch pryſe
               But yf it were the very paradyſe
               The odour of floures, and the freſhe ſyght
               wolde haue made any herte lyght
               That euer was borne, but yf to gret ſickneſſe
               Or to great ſorowe helde it in dyſtreſſe
               So was it ful of beautye, wyth pleaſaunce.
               And after dyner gone they daunce
               And ſynge alſo, ſaue Dorigene alone
               That yet vnto her ſelfe made her mone
               For ſhe ne ſey hym on the daunce go
               That was her huſbande, and her loue alſo
               But nathelaſſe, ſhe muſte her tyme abyde
               And wyth good hope, let her ſorowe ſlyde.
               ¶Vpon thys daunce, amonge other men
               Daunced a ſquyer before Dorigen
               That freſher was, and iolyer of aray
               As to my dome, then is the moneth of May
               He ſyngeth & daunſeth, paſſynge euery man
               That is or was, ſythen the worlde began
               And therwythal, & men ſhulde hym dyſcriue
               One of the beſt farynge men on lyue
               Yonge, ſtronge, vertuouſe, ryche, and wyſe
               And welbeloued, and holden of great pryſe
               And ſhortly, yf I the ſoth tel ſhal
               Vnwetynge of thys Dorigene at al
               Thys luſty ſquyer, ſeruaunt to Venus
               whych yclypped was Aurelius
               Had loued her beſte of any creature
               Two yere and more, as was hys auenture
               But neuer durſt he tel her hys greuaunce
               wythouten cuppe he dronke al hys penaunce
               He was dyſpayred, nothynge durſt he ſay
               Saue in hys ſōges, ſomwhat wold he wray
               Hys wo, as in general complayninge
               He ſaid he loued, and was beloued nothinge
               Of whych matter made he many layes
               Songes, complayntes, roundels, verilayes
               Howe that he durſte not hys ſorowe tel
               But languyſhe, as doth a fury in hel
               And dye he muſte (he ſayd) as dyd Ecco
               For Narciſſus, that durſt not tel hys wo
               ¶In other maner then ye herde me ſay
               Ne durſt not he to her hys wo bewray
               Saue perauenture ſomtyme at daunces
               There yonge folke kepen her obſeruaunces
               It maye wel be, he loked on her face
               In ſuche a wyſe, as men that aſken grace
               But nothynge wyſt ſhe of hys entent
               Natheleſſe it happed, er they thence went
               Bycauſe that he was her neyghbour
               And was a man of worſhyppe and honour
               And had knowen hym of tymes yore
               They fel in ſpeche, & ſo forth more & more
               Vnto hys purpoſe then drowe Aurelius
               And when he ſawe hys tyme he ſayd thus.
               ¶Madame (ꝙ he) by god yt this world made
               So yt I wyſte, yt I myght your herte glade
               I wolde that day, that your Aruyragus
               went ouer the ſee, that I Aurelius
               Had went ther yt I ſhuld neuer come agayne
               For wel I wote my ſeruyce is in vayne
               My guerdon nys but breſting of myne herte
               Madame rueth vpon my paynes ſmerte
               For with one worde ye may me ſlee or ſaue
               Here at your foote god wold yt I were graue
               I ne haue as nowe no leyſer more to ſey
               Haue mercy ſwete, or ye wol do me dey.
               ¶She gan to loke vpon Aurelius
               Is thys your wyl (ꝙ ſhe) and ſaye ye thus?
               Neuer erſte (ꝙ ſhe) ne wyſt I what ye mente
               But nowe I knowe Aurelius your entente
               By thylke god, that yaue me ſoule and lyfe
               Ne ſhal I neuer be vntrewe wyfe
               In word ne ī w
                     •
                  rke, as ferre as I haue wyt
               I wol be hys to whom I am knyt
               Take thys for a fynal anſwere of me
               But after thys in play thus ſayd ſhe.
               ¶Aurelius (ꝙ ſhe) by god aboue
               Yet wol I graunt you to ben your loue
               (Sythen I ſe you ſo pytouſly complayne)
               Loke what daye that endelonge Britayne
               Ye remeue al the rockes, ſtone by ſtone
               
                  That they ne let ſhyppe ne bote to gone
               I ſay whē ye haue made theſe coſtes ſo clene
               Of rockes, that there nys no ſtone yſene
               Then wol I loue you beſt of any man
               Her
                     •
                   haue my trouth, in al that euer I can.
               Is there none other grace in you (ꝙ he?)
               ¶No by that lorde (ꝙ ſhe) that maked me
               For wel I wote that it ſhal neuer betyde
               Let ſuche foly out of your herte glyde
               what deyntye ſhulde a man haue in hys lyfe
               For to go loue another mannes wyfe?
               That hath her body whē ſo that hym lyketh
               ¶Aurelius ful ofte ſore ſyketh
               Wo was Aurely, when he thys herde
               And wt a ſorowful chere he thus anſwerde.
               ¶Madame (ꝙ he) thys were impoſſible
               Then mote I dye on ſodayne death horrible
               And wyth that worde he turned hym anone.
               ¶Tho come her other frendes euerychone
               And in the aleyes romeden vp and doun
               And nothynge wyſt of thys concluſioun
               But ſodeynly began to reuel newe
               Tyl that the bryght ſonne loſte hys hewe
               For the orizont hath re
                     •
                  te the ſonne his light
               Thys is as much to ſaye, as it was nyght
               And home they gone in ioye and in ſolas
               Saue onely wretched Aurelius, alas
               He to hys houſe is gone with ſorowful harte
               He ſayd he myght not from hys death aſtarte
               Hym ſemed, that he felte hys herte colde
               Vp to heuen hys handes gan he holde
               And on hys knees bare, he ſet hym adoun
               And in hys rauynge ſayd thys oriſoun
               For very wo out of hys wytte he brayde
               He ne wyſt what he ſpake, but thus he ſayde
               with pitous hert hath his cōplaynt begonne
               Vnto the goddes, and fyrſt vnto the ſonne
               He ſayd: God Appollo and gouernour
               Of euery plante, herbe, tre, and flour
               That yeueſt after thy declinacion
               To ylke of hem hys tyme and ceſon
               As thyne herberowe chaungeth lowe & hye
               Lorde Phebus, caſte thy merciable eye
               On wretched Aurelius, whych am but lorne
               Lo lorde, my lady hath my death yſworne
               wythout gylte, but thy benignite
               Vpon my deadly herte haue ſome pyte
               For wel I wote lorde Phebus, yf ye leſte
               Ye maye me helpe ſaue my lady beſte
               Nowe vouche ye ſaue, that I you deuyſe
               Howe that I may be holpen & in what wyſe
               ¶Your blyſful ſuſter Lucina the ſhene
               That of the ſee is goddeſſe and quene
               Though Neptunus hath deite in the ſee
               Yet empreſſe abouen hym is ſhe
               Ye knowen wel lorde, ryght as her deſyre
               Is to be quyckened and lyghted of your fyre
               For whych that ſhe foloweth you ful beſely
               Ryght ſo the ſee deſyreth naturally
               To folowen her that is goddeſſe
               Both of the ſee, and ryuers more and leſſe
               wherfore lorde Phebus, thys is my requeſt
               Do thys myracle, or do myne herte breſt
               That nowe nexte at thys oppoſicion
               which in ſygne ſhalbe the lyon
               As prayeth her ſo great a floode to brynge
               That fyue fadome at the leſt, it ouer ſprynge
               The hyeſt rocke in Armoryke Britayne
               And let thys floode dure yeares twayne
               Then rertes to my lady may I ſaye
               Holdeth your heſte, the rockes ben awaye
               Thys thynge may ye lyghtly done for me
               Pray her to gone no faſter courſe then ye
               I ſay thus, prayeth your ſ
                     •
                  ſter that ſhe go
               No faſter courſe then ye in yeres two
               Then ſhal ſhe be at the ful alway
               And ſpryng floode laſtyng both nyght & day
               And but ſhe vouchſafe in ſuche manere
               To graunt me my ſouerayne lady dere
               Pray her to ſynken euery rocke adoun
               In to her owne darke regioun
               Vnder the grounde, there pluto dwelleth in
               Or neuer more ſhal I my lady wyn
               Thy tēple in Delphos, wol I barefote ſeke
               O lorde Phebus, ſe the teres on my cheke
               And on my payne haue ſome compaſſioun
               And wyth ye worde, in ſwoune he fel adoun
               And longe tyme he lay in a traunce
               His brother, which yt knew of his penaūce
               Vp caught hym, and to bed hym brought
               Dyſpayred in thys turmēt & this thought
               Lette I thys woful creature lye
               Cheſe he whether he wol lyue or dye.
               ¶Aruyragus wyth heale and great honour
               (As he that was of chyualry the floure)
               Is comen home, and other worthy men
               O blyſful arte thou nowe Dorigen
               That haſt thy luſty huſbōde in thyne armes
               That freſhe knight, ye worthy man of armes
               Thot loueth the, as hys owne hertes lyfe
               Nothynge lyſt hym to be ymaginatyfe
               Yf any wyght had ſpokē (while he was out)
               To her of loue, therof had he no dout
               He entendeth not to ſuche matere
               
                  But dāceth, luſteth, & maketh her good chere
               And thus in ioye & blyſſe let hym dwel
               And of woful Aurelius wol I tel
               ¶In langour and in tourment dyſpitous
               Two yere and more, lay wretched Aurelius
               Er any fote on erth he myght gone
               Ne comforte in thys tyme had he none
               Saue of hys brother whych was a clerke
               He knewe of al thys wo and al thys werke
               For to none other creature certayne
               Of thys mater durſt he no worde ſayne
               Vnder hys breſt he bare it more ſecre
               Then euer dyd Pamphilus for Galathe
               Hys breſt was hole wythout for to ſene
               But in hys herte aye, was the arowe kene
               And wel ye knowen that of a ſurſanure
               In ſurgery, is perlous the cure
               But mē myght touch ye arow or come therby
               Hys brother wepeth and wayleth priuely
               Tyl at the laſt hym fel in remembraunce
               That whyle he was at Orliaūce in Fraūce
               (As theſe clerkes yonge that ben lykerous)
               To reden artes they ben curiouſe
               Seken in euery halke and in euery herne
               Perticuler ſcience for to lerne
               He hym remembred that vpon a dey
               At Orliaunce in ſtudye a boke he ſey
               Of magyke naturel, whych hys felawe
               That was in that tyme a bacheler of lawe
               Al were he there to lerne another crafte
               Had priuely vpon hys dere ylafte
               whych booke ſpake of mochel aperacions
               Touchynge the .xxiiij. manſions
               That longen to the moone, and ſuch folye
               As in our dayes is not worth a flye
               For holy church ſayeth in our byleue
               Ne ſuſtreth none illuſyon vs to greue
               And when thys boke was in his remēbraūce
               Anone for ioye hys hyrte gan daunce
               And to hym ſelfe he ſayd priuely
               My brother ſhalbe waryſhed ſykerly
               For I am ſyker that there be ſciences
               By whych men maken dyuers aparences
               Suche as theſe ſubtel tregetores play
               For ofte at feeſtes haue I wel herde ſay
               That tragetors, wythin an hal large
               Haue made come in water and a barge
               And in the hall rowen vp and doun
               Somtyme hath ſemed a grym lyoun
               And ſomtyme floures ſprynge as in a meede
               Somtyme a vyne, and grapes whyte & rede
               Somtyme a caſtel of lyme and ſtone
               And when hym lyked, voyden hem anone
               Thus ſemed it to euery mannes ſyght.
               ¶Now then conclude I thus, yf yt I myght
               At Orliaunce ſome olde felowe fynde
               That had this moones manſions in mynde
               Or other magyke naturel aboue
               He ſhuld wel make my brother haue his loue
               For wyth an apparaunce a clerke may make
               To mannes ſyght, that al the rockes blake
               Of Britayne, were yuoyded euerychone
               And ſhyppes by the brynke to comen & gone
               And in ſuch forme enduren a yere or two
               Then were my brother waryſhed of hys wo
               Then muſte ſhe nedes holde her beheſt
               Or els he ſhal ſhame her at the leſt.
               ¶what ſhuld I make a lenger tale of thys
               Vnto hys brothers bedde he comen is
               And ſuche comforte he yaue hym for to gone
               To Orliaunce, that he vp ſterte anone
               And on hys way then is he forth yfare
               In hope to ben leſſed of hys care.
               ¶when they were comen almoſte to ye cyte
               (But yf it were a two furlonge or thre)
               A yonge clerke roming by him ſelfe they met
               whych that in latyn thryftely hem gret
               And afterwarde he ſayd a wonder thynge
               I knowe the cauſe of your cōmynge
               And er they farther any foote wente
               He tolde hem al that was in her entente.
               ¶Thys Breton clerke aſked him of felowes
               The whych he had knowen in olde dayes
               He anſwered hym, that they deed were
               For whych he wept ofte ful many a tere
               ¶Downe of his horſe Aurelius light anone
               And wyth this magicien forth is he gone
               Home to hys houſe, & made hym wel at eſe
               Hem lacked no vytaile that hem might pleſe
               So wel arayed an houſe as there was one
               Aurelius in hys lyfe ſawe neuer none.
               ¶He ſhewed hym, or he went to ſuppere
               Foreſtes and parkes, ful of wylde dere
               He ſawe there hertes, wyth her hornes hye
               The greateſt that euer were ſene wyth eye
               He ſe of hem an hundred ſlaine with hoūdes
               And ſome of arowes bled wt bytter woūdes
               He ſawe, when voyded were the wylde dere
               Theſe fauconers, vpon a fayre ryuere
               That wyth the haukes han the heron ſlayne
               Tho ſaw he knightes iuſtyng in a playne
               And after thys he dyd hym ſuche pleaſaunce
               That he hym ſhewed hys lady in a daunce
               On which him ſelfe daūced as hym thought
               
                  And whā this maiſter, yt this magike wrouȝt
               Sawe it was tyme, he clapped his hōdes to
               And farwel our reuel, al was ago
               And remeued neuer out of his houſe
               whyle they ſawe al this ſyght merueylouſe
               But in his ſtudye there his bokes be
               They ſaten ſtyl, no wight but they thre
               ¶To him this maiſter called his ſquyer
               And ſayd hym thus, is redy our ſupper
               Almoſt an hour it is, I vndertake
               Sythen I you bade our ſupper redy make
               whan that theſe worthy men went with me
               Into my ſtudye, there as my bokes be
               ¶Sir (ꝙ the ſquier) whan it lyketh you
               It is al redy, though ye wol right nowe.
               ¶Go we ſuppe than (ꝙ he) for the beſt
               Theſe amerous folke ſōtyme mote haue reſt
               And after ſupper fel they in trete
               what ſomme ſhuld this maiſters guerdon be
               To remeue al the rockes of Britayne
               And eke frō Gironde to the mouth of ſayne
               ¶He made it ſtrāge, & ſwore ſo god him ſaue
               Laſſe thā a thouſād poūde wold he not haue
               Ne gladly for that ſomme nolde he it don.
               ¶Aurelyus with blyſful herte anon
               Anſwerde thus: Fye on a thouſande poūde
               This wyde worlde, which men ſay is roūde
               I wolde it yeue, yf I were ſorde of it
               This bargayne is ful driue, for we be knyt
               Ye ſhal be payde truely by my trouthe
               But loke nowe for no negligence or ſlouthe
               Ye taryen vs here no lenger than to morowe
               Nay (ꝙ this clerke) here my trouth to borow
               ¶To bedde is gon Aurelius whan him leſte
               And wel nye alnight he had his reſte
               what for his labour, and his hope of blyſſe
               His woful herte of penaunce had a lyſſe▪
               
               ¶Vpon the morowe whan that it was day
               To Britayne toke they the right way
               Aurelius, and this magicyen him beſyde
               And ben diſcended there they wolde abyde
               And this was, as the boke dothe remembre
               In the colde froſty ceſon of Decembre.
               ¶Phebus waxed olde, & hewed ilyke laton
               That afore in his hote declynacion
               Shone as ye brēning golde wt ſtremes bright
               But nowe in Capricorne adowne he lyght
               where as he ſhone ful pale, I dare wel ſayne
               The bytter froſte, with the ſlidder rayne
               Diſtroyed hath the grene in euery yerde
               Ianus ſyt by the fyre with double berde
               And drinketh of his bugle horne the wyne
               Biforn him ſtont braune of the tuſked ſwyne
               And nowel cryeth euery luſty man.
               ¶Aurelius, in al that euer he can
               Dothe to this maiſter chere and reuerence
               And prayeth him to don his dyligence
               To bryngen him out of his paynes ſmerte
               Or with a ſwerde that he wold ſlyt his herte
               This clerke ſuche routhe hath on this mā
               
               That night & day he ſpedeth him that he can
               To wayte a tyme of hys concluſyon
               This is to ſay, to make illuſyon
               Or ſuche an apparence or iogelrye
               I ne can no termes of aſtrologye
               That ſhe and euery wight ſhulde wene & ſay
               That of Britayne the rockes were away
               Or els they were ſonken vnder the grounde
               Tyl at the laſte he hath his tyme yfounde
               To make his iapes and his wretchydneſſe
               Of ſuche ſuperſtycious curſydneſſe
               His tollytan tables he forthe brought
               Ful wel corrected, hym lacked nought
               Neyther his collecte, ne his expans yeres
               Ne his rootes, ne his other geres
               As byn his centrys, and his argumentes
               And his proporcionel conuenyences
               For his equacions in euery thyng
               And by his eyght ſperes in his werkyng
               He knew ful wel howe far alnath was ſhoue
               Fro the heed of thylke ſyxe Aries aboue
               That in the nynthe ſpere conſydred is
               Ful ſubtelly he had calked al this
               And whan he had founde hys fyrſt manſyon
               He knewe the remenaunt by proporcion
               And knewe the ryſyng of the moone wele
               And in ſuche face, the terme and euery dele
               And knewe alſo his other obſeruaunces
               For ſuche illuſyons and ſuche miſchaunces
               As hethen folke vſed in thylke dayes
               For whiche ne maked he no lenger delayes
               But through his magike, for a weke or tway
               It ſemed that al the rockes were away.
               ¶Aurelius, whiche that diſpayred is
               whether he ſhal haue his loue, or fare amys
               Awayteth night and day on thys myracle
               And whan he knewe there was non obſtacle
               But yt voyded were theſe rockes euerychon
               Downe to the maiſters fete he fel anon
               And ſayd, I woful wretche Aurelius
               Thanke you lorde and lady myne Venus
               That me hath holpen fro my cares colde
               And to ye temple his way forth hath he holde
               where as he knewe he ſhulde his lady ſe
               
                  And whan he ſawe his tyme, anon right he
               with dredful herte, & with humble chere
               Salued hath his ſouerayne lady dere.
               ¶My rightful lady (ꝙ this woful man)
               whom I ſerue and loue, as I beſt can
               And lotheſt were of al this worlde diſpleſe
               Nere it that I for you haue ſuche diſeſe
               That I muſt dye here at your fete anon
               Nought wold I tel you how wome is begō
               
               But certes eyther muſte I dye or playne
               Ye ſlee me gyltleſſe for very payne
               But of my dethe though ye haue no routhe
               Auyſen you, er that ye breken your trouthe
               Repenteth you, for that ylke god aboue
               For ye ſlee me, bycauſe that I you loue
               For madame, wel ye wote that ye haue hight
               Not that I chalenge any thyng of right
               Of you my ſouerayn lady, but of your grace
               But in a garden yonde in ſuche a place
               Ye wotte right wel what ye heyght me
               And in myn honde your trouth plyght ye
               To loue me beſt, god wotte ye ſayd ſo?
               Al be it I am vnworthy therto
               Madame I ſpeke it for the honour of you
               More than for to ſaue myn hertes lyfe nowe
               I haue done right as ye commaunded me
               And yf ye vouchſafe, ye may go ſe
               Doth as you liſt, haueth your heſte in mynde
               For quicke or deed, right ther ye ſhal me fynde
               In you lythe al to do me lyue or deye
               But wel I wote the rockes ben aweye
               He toke his leue, and ſhe aſtonyed ſtode
               In al her face there nas a droppe of bloode
               She wende neuer han come in ſuch a trappe
               ¶Alas (ꝙ ſhe) that euer this ſhulde happe
               For wende I neuer by poſſibylite
               That ſuch a miſter or meruayle might be
               It is ayenſt the proceſſe of nature
               And home ſhe gothe a ſorouful creature
               For very feare vnnethes may ſhe go
               She wepeth and wayleth a day or two
               And ſwonneth, that it was routhe to ſe
               But why it was to no wight tolde ſhe
               For out of towne was gon Arueragus
               But to her ſelfe ſhe ſpake, and ſayd thus
               In her complaynt, as ye ſhal after here
               with face pale, & with ſorouful chere.
               Alas (ꝙ ſhe) on the fortune I playne
               That vnware haſt wrapped me ī thy chayne
               Fro whiche to eſcape, wot I no ſocoure
               Saue onely dethe, or els diſhonoure
               One of theſe two behoueth me to cheſe
               But natheleſſe, yet had I leuer to leſe
               My lyfe, than of my body to haue a ſhame
               Or knowe my ſelfe falſe, or leſe my name
               And with my dethe, I may be quyt iwys
               Hath there not many a wyfe er this
               And many a mayd, iſlayn her ſelfe alas
               Rather than with her body done treſpas
               And certes lo, theſe ſtories beren wytneſſe
               whan thurty tyrantes, ful of curſydneſſe
               Had ſtayne Phidon, in Athenes at the feeſt
               They commaunded his doughters to areſte
               And bringen hem byforne hem in diſpyte
               Al naked, to fulfyl her foule delyte
               And in her fathers bloode, he dyd hem daūce
               Vpon the pauemēt, god yeue him miſchaunce
               For which theſe woful maydens ful of drede
               Rather thē they wold leſen her maydenhede
               They priuely ben ſterte in to a wel
               And drenched hem ſelfe, as bokes tell.
               They of Meſſene let enquire and ſeke
               Of Lacidomony fyfty maydens eke
               On which they wolde haue don her lechery
               But there was none of al that company
               That ſhe nas ſlayne, and with a glad enten
                     •
                  
               
               Cheſe rather for to dyen, than for to aſſent
               To ben oppreſſed of her maydenhede
               why ſhulde I than to dye ben in drede?
               Lo eke the tyraunt Ariſtoclides
               That loued a mayde, yt hight Symphalydes
               whan that her father ſlayne was on a nyght
               Vnto Dyanes temple gothe ſhe anon ryght
               And hente the ymage, with her armes two
               Fro whiche ymage wolde ſhe neuer go
               No wight might fro it her hondes race
               Tyl ſhe was ſlayne, right in the ſelfe place.
               Now ſythnes yt maydens had ſuch diſpyte
               To ben defouled with mannes foule delyte
               wel ought a wyfe rather her ſelfe ſlee
               Than be defouled, as thynketh me.
               What ſhal I ſay of Haſdruballes wyfe?
               That at Cartage byrafte her ſelfe her lyfe
               For whā ſhe ſawe ye romanes wan the town
               She toke her chyldren al, and lepte adown
               Into the fyre, and cheſe rather to dye
               Than any roman dyd her villanye.
               Hath not Lucrece iſlayne her ſelfe, alas
               At Rome, there ſhe oppreſſed was
               Of Tarquyne, for her thought it was ſhame
               To lyue, whan that ſhe had loſt her name.
               The eyght maydens of Meleſye alſo
               Han ſlayn hem ſelue for very drede and wo
               Rather than folke of Gaule ſhuld hē oppreſſe
               
                  Mo than a thouſande ſtories, as I geſſe
               Couthe I nowe tel, as touchyng this matere
               ¶whan Abradas was ſlayn, his wife ſo dere
               Her ſelfe ſlowe, and let her bloode to glyde
               In Abradas woundes, brode and wyde
               And ſayd, my body at the leſte way
               There ſhal no wight defoule yf I may.
               ¶What ſhulde I mo enſamples herof ſayn?
               Sythens that ſo many han hem ſelfe ſlayn
               Wel rather than they wolde defouled be
               I wol conclude that it is beſt for me
               Wel rather ſlee my ſelfe in ſome manere
               As dyd demo
                     •
                  tious doughter dere
               Bycauſe that ſhe nolde not defouled be.
               ¶O Sedaſus, it is ful great pyte
               To reden howe thy doughters dyden, alas?
               That ſlowen hem ſelfe for ſuch a maner caas
               As great a pyte was it or wel more
               The Theban mayden, that for Nychanore
               For one of Macedone had her oppreſſed
               with her dethe her maydenhede ſhe redreſſed
               ¶What ſhal I ſayne of Nycerates wyfe
               That for ſuche caſe birafte her ſelfe her lyfe?
               ¶Howe trewe was eke to Alcibyades
               His loue, that for to dyen rather thees
               Than for to ſuffren his body vnburyed be
               ¶Lo whiche a wyfe was Alceſte (ꝙ ſhe)
               what ſaythe Homere of good Penelope?
               Al Grece knoweth of her chaſtyte.
               ¶Parde of Laodomia is written thus
               That whā at Troy was ſlayn Protheſelaus
               No lenger nolde ſhe lyue after his day.
               ¶The ſame of noble Portia tel I may
               withouten Brutus couthe ſhe not lyue
               To whom ſhe had al her herte igyue.
               ¶The parfyte wyfehode of Artemiſy
               Honoured is, throughout al Barbary
               ¶Oh Thenta quene, thy wifely chaſtyte
               To al wyues may a myrrour be.
               The ſame thyng I ſaye of Bil
                     •
                  a
               Of Rodogone, and eke Valeria.
               ¶Thus playned Dorigene a day or twey
               Purpoſyng euer that ſhe wolde dey
               But natheleſſe vpon the thyrde nyght
               Home came Arueragus, the worthy knight
               And aſked her why ſhe wepte ſo ſore
               And ſhe gan wepen euer lenger the more
               ¶Alas (ꝙ ſhe) that euer was I borne
               Thus haue I ſaid (ꝙ ſhe) thus haue I ſworn
               And tolde him al, as ye haue herde before
               It nedeth not to reherce it no more.
               ¶This huſbōde wt glad chere in ſōdrie wyſe
               Anſwerde and ſayd, as I ſhal you deuyſe
               Is there aught els Dorigene but this.
               ¶Nay nay (ꝙ ſhe) god helpe me ſo as wys
               This is to moche, and it were goddes wyl.
               ¶Ye wyfe (ꝙ he) let ſlepe that is ſtyl
               It may be wel yet parauenture to day
               Ye ſhal your trouthe holde by my fay
               For god ſo wyſly haue mercy on me
               I had wel leuer ſtycked for to be
               For very loue, whiche that I to you haue
               But yf ye ſhulde your trouthe ſaue
               Trouth is the hyeſt thyng that mē may kepe
               But with that worde he braſt anon to wepe
               And ſaid, I you forbyd on payne of dethe
               That neuer whiles you laſteth lyfe or brethe
               To no wight tel of this miſauenture
               As I may beſte I wol my wo endure
               Ne make no countenaunce of heuyneſſe
               That folke of you may deme harme ne geſſe
               And forthe he cleped a ſquier and a mayde
               Gothe forthe anon with Dorigene he ſayde
               And bringeth her in ſuche a place anone
               They toke her leue, & on her way they gone
               But they ne wyſte why ſhe thyder went
               She nolde no wight tel her entent.
               ¶This ſquier, whiche that hyght Aurelius
               On Dorigen, whiche that was ſo amerous
               Of auenture happed her to mete
               Amydde the towne, right in the hye ſtrete
               As ſhe wolde haue gon the way forthe right
               Towarde the garden, there as ſhe had hyght
               And he was to the garden warde alſo
               For wel he ſpyed whan ſhe wolde go
               Out of her houſe, to any maner place
               But thus they met of auenture or of grace
               And he ſalueth her with glad entent
               And aſked of her whyther that ſhe went.
               ¶And ſhe anſwerde halfe as ſhe were madde
               Vnto the garden as my huſbonde badde
               My trouthe for to holde, alas alas.
               Aurelius gan wondren of this caas
               And in his hert had great compaſſyon
               Of her chere, and of her lamentation
               And of Aruyragus the worthy knyght
               That bade her holde al that ſhe had hyght
               So loth he was yt ſhe ſhuld breke her trouth
               And in hys herte he caught of it great routh
               Conſydryng the beſte on euery ſyde
               That fro his luſte were him better abyde
               Than do ſo hye a churliſhe wretchydneſſe
               Ayenſt fraunchiſe, & ayenſt al gentylneſſe
               For whiche in fewe wordes ſaid he thus
               
                  Madame, ſaythe to your lorde Aruiragus
               That ſythen I ſe this great gentylneſſe
               Of hym, and eke I ſe wel your diſtreſſe
               That ye to me thus ſhuld holde your trouthe
               Certes me thynketh it were great routhe
               I haue wel leuer euer to ſuffre wo
               Than departe the loue bytwyxt you two
               I you releſe madame into your honde
               Quyte euery ſurement and euery bonde
               That ye haue made to me, as here byforne
               Sythens thylke tyme that ye were borne
               my trouth I plight, I ſhal you neuer repreue
               Of no beheſte, and here I take my leue
               As of the treweſt and the beſte wyfe
               That euer yet I knewe in al my lyfe
               But euery wight beware of her byheſte
               On Dorigene remembreth at the leſte
               Thus can a ſquyer done a gently dede
               As wel as can a knyght, withouten drede.
               ¶She thonked hym vpon her knees al bare
               And home vnto her huſbonde is ſhe fare
               And tolde him al, as ye han herde me ſayde
               And be ye ſyker, he was ſo wel apayde
               That it were vnpoſſible me to write
               What ſhulde I lenger of this caſe endyte?
               Arueragus, and Dorigen his wyfe
               In ſouerayne blyſſe leden forthe her lyfe
               Neuer after was there anger hem bytwene
               He cheriſhed her, as though ſhe were a quene
               And ſhe was to him trewe for euermore
               Of theſe two folkes ye get of me nomore.
               Aurelius, that his coſte hath al forlorne
               Curſeth the tyme that euer he was borne
               Alas (ꝙ he) alas that euer I beheyght
               Of pured golde a thouſand poūde of wright
               Vnto this philoſopher, howe ſhal I do?
               I ſe no more, but that I am for do
               Myne heritage more I nedes ſel
               And ben a begger, here may I no lēger dwel
               And ſhame al my kynrede in this place
               But I of hym may get better grace
               But natheleſſe I wol of hym aſſay
               At certayne dayes, yere by yere to pay
               And thonke hym of hys great curteſye
               My trouthe wol I kepe, I wol not lye.
               With herte 
                     •
                  ore, he gothe vnto his cofer
               And brought golde vnto this phyloſopher
               The value of fyne hundred poūde as I geſſe
               And hym beſecheth of hys gentylneſſe
               To graunt him dayes of the remenaunt
               And ſayd: mayſter I dare wel make auaunt
               I fayled neuer of my trouthe as yet
               For ſykerly my hette ſhal be quyt
               Towardes you, howe that euer I fare
               To gon a beggyng in my kyrtel bare
               But wolde ye voucheſafe vpon ſuerte
               Two yere or thre for to reſpyte me
               Than were I wel, for els mot I ſel
               Myne heritage, there is no more to tel.
               This philoſopher ſoberly anſwerde
               And ſayd thus, whan he this worde herde
               Haue I not holde couenaunt vnto the?
               Yes certes, wel and truely (ꝙ he)
               Haſte thou not had thy lady as the lyketh?
               No no (ꝙ he) and ſorily he ſyketh
               what was the cauſe, tel me yf that thou can.
               Aurelius anon his tale began
               And tolde hym al as ye han herde byfore
               It nedeth not to reherce it any more.
               He ſayd Arueragus of gentylneſſe
               Had leuer dye in ſorowe and in diſtreſſe
               Than his wyfe were of her trouthe fals
               The ſorowe of Dorigene he tolde hym als
               Howe lothe ſhe was to ben a wycked wyfe
               And that ſhe had leuer haue loſte her lyfe
               And yt her trouth ſhe ſwore throug innocēce
               She neuer erſte herde ſpeke of apparence
               That made me haue of her ſo great pyte
               And right as frely as he ſent her to me
               As frely ſent I her to hym agayne
               This is al & ſome, there nys no more to ſame.
               The philoſopher anſwerde, leue brother
               Eueriche of you dyd gentilly to other
               Thou arte a ſquier, and he is a knyght
               But god forbyd, for his bliſful myght
               But yf a clerke coulde done a gentyl dede
               As wel as any of you, it is do drede.
               Syr I releſe the thy thouſande pounde
               As now thou were crope out of the grounde
               Ne neuer er nowe haddeſt thou knowen me
               For ſyr, I wol not taken a peny of the
               For al my crafte, ne nought for my trauayle
               Thou haſte 
                     •
                  payed right wel for my vitayle
               It is ynough, and farwel & haue good day
               And toke his horſe, & rode forthe on his way.
               Lordynges this queſtion wold I aſke now
               whiche was the moſte fre, as thynketh you?
               Nowe telleth me, er that I ferther wende
               I can no more, my tale is at an ende.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Frankeleyns tale, and begynneth the ſeconde nonnes prologue.
               
                  
                  
                     THe myniſtre & the norice vnto vyces
                  Which that men clepen in engliſhe idleneſſe
                  That is porter of the yate of delyces
                  To eſchue, & by her contrarie her oppreſſe
                  That is to ſayne, by leful beſyneſſe
                  wel ought we to don your entent
                  Leſte that the fende through idleneſſe vs hēt
               
               
                  For he that with his thouſande cordes ſlye
                  Contynually vs wayteth to be clappe
                  whan he may man in ydleneſſe eſpye
                  He can ſo lightly catche him in his trappe
                  Tyl that a man be hente, right by the lappe
                  He nis not ware the fende hath him in honde
                  wel ought vs werche, & ydleneſſe witſtonde
               
               
                  And though men dredden neuer for to dye
                  Yet ſe men wel by reſon doutles
                  That ydleneſſe is rote of ſlogardye
                  Of which there cometh neuer no good encres
                  And ſythnes that ſlouth holdeth hē in a lees
                  Only to ſlepe, and for to eate and drynke
                  And to deuouren al that other ſwynke
               
               
                  And for to put vs from ſuche ydelneſſe
                  That cauſe is of ſo great confuſyon
                  I haue here done my faythful beſyneſſe
                  After the legende in tranſlacion
                  Right of thy glorious lyfe and paſſyon
                  Thou wt thy garlōde, wrought wt roſe & lely
                  The mene I, mayd and marter ſeynt Cecely
               
               
                  ¶And thou that arte floure of virgins all
                  Of whom that Bernarde lyſt ſo wel to write
                  To the at my begynnyng fyrſt I cal
                  Thou comforte of vs wretches, do me endyte
                  Thy maydēs deth, yt wan thorow her merite
                  The eternal lyfe, and of the fende victorie
                  As men may after rede in her ſtorie
               
               
                  Thou maydē & mother, doughter of thy ſōne
                  Thou wel of mercy, ſynful ſoules cure
                  In whom that god of boūte cheſe for to wōne
                  Thou humble and hye ouer euery ceature
                  Thou nobleſt, ſo farre ouer nature
                  That no diſdayne the maker had of kynde
                  His ſōne in bloode & fleſhe to clothe & wynde
               
               
                  Whiche in the cloyſtre of thy bliſful ſydis
                  Toke mannes ſhappe, the eterne loue & pees
                  That of the true compas, lorde & gyde is
                  whom heuen, erthe, and ſee, withouten les
                  Aye heryen, and thou virgyne wemles
                  Bare of thy body, & dweldeſt mayden pure
                  The creatour of euery creature
               
               
                  Aſſembled is in the magnifycence
                  with mercy, goodneſſe, and with ſuche pyt
                  That thou arte the ſonne of excellence
                  Not onely that helpeſt hem that prayenth
                  But often tyme of thy benignyte
                  Ful frely, or that men thyne helpe beſeche
                  Thou goeſt beforne, and arte her lyues leche.
               
               
                  Now helpe thou bliſful, & meke fayre mayde
                  Me flemed wretche, in this deſerte of gal
                  Thynke on the woman of Canane, that ſayd
                  That whelpes eaten ſome of ye crōmes ſmal
                  That from her lordes table ben iſal
                  And though yt I vnworthy doughter of Eue
                  Be ſynful, yet accepteth my beleue
               
               
                  And for ye fayth is deed withouten werkis
                  So for to werche, yeue me wytte and ſpace
                  That I be quyt from ye place yt moſt derke is
                  O thou that arte ſo fayre and ful of grace
                  Be myne aduocate in that hye place
                  There as without ende is ſonge Oſanna
                  Thou Chriſtes mother, & doughter of Anna
               
               
                  And of thy light, my ſoule in priſon lyght
                  That troubled is by the contagyon
                  Of my body, and alſo by the wyght
                  Of erthly luſte, and alſo falſe affection
                  O hauen, O refute, O ſaluacion
                  Of hem that ben in ſorowe and diſtreſſe
                  Now helpe, for to my werke I wol me dreſſe
               
               
                  Yet I pray you that reden that I write
                  Foryeueth me, that I do no dyligence
                  This ylke ſtorie ſubtelly to endyte
                  For bothe haue I the wordes & the ſentence
                  Of hym that at the ſayntes reuerence
                  The ſtorie wrote, and folowen her legende
                  And pray you that ye wol my werke amende
               
               
                  ¶Fyrſt wol I you the name of ſeynt Cecily
                  Expowne, as men may in her ſtorie ſe
                  It is to ſay in engliſhe, heuens lylly
                  For pure chaſtneſſe of virgynite
                  Or for ſhe wytneſſe had of honeſte
                  
                     And grene of conſcience, and of good fame
                  The ſote ſauoure lylye was her name
               
               
                  Or Cecily is to ſay, the way to blynde
                  For ſhe enſample was by good techyng
                  Or els Cecily, as I written fynde
                  Is ioyned by a maner conioynyng
                  Of heuen and Lya, in her fyguring
                  The heuen is ſet for thought of holyneſſe
                  And lya, for her laſtyng beſyneſſe
               
               
                  Cecily may eke be ſayd in this manere
                  wantyng of blyndneſſe, for her great lyght
                  Of ſapience, and for her thewes clere
                  Or els Lo, this maydens name bright
                  Of heuen & Leos cometh, of whiche by ryght
                  Men might the heuen of people her cal
                  Enſample of good and wyſe werkes al
               
               
                  For Leos people, in Engliſhe is to ſay
                  And right as men may in the heuen ſe
                  The ſunne, and moone, & ſterres euery way
                  Right ſo men goſtly, in this mayden fre
                  Sawen of faythe, the great magnanymite
                  And eke the clereneſſe hole of ſapience
                  And ſondrie werkes, bright of excellence
               
               
                  And right ſo as theſe philoſophers write
                  That heuen is ſwyfte, rounde, & eke brēnyng
                  Right ſo was fayre Cecily the whyte
                  Ful ſwyfte and beſy in euery good workynge
                  And rounde and hole in good perſeuerynge
                  And brennyng euer in charyte ful bright
                  Nowe haue I declared you what ſhe hight.
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the ſeconde nonnes Prologue, and begynneth her tale.

               
               
                  
                     THis mayden bright Cecile, as her lyfe ſayth
                  was comen of Romanes, and of noble kynde
                  And ſo forthe foſtred vp in the fayth
                  Of Chriſt & bare his goſpel in her mynde
                  She neuer ceſſed, as I written fynde
                  Of her prayere, and god to loue and drede
                  Beſechyng hym to kepe her maydenhede
               
               
                  And whan this mayde ſhulde vnto a man
                  I wedded be, that ful yonge of age
                  whiche that yeleped was Valeryan
                  And daye was come of her maryage
                  She ful deuoute and humble in her corage
                  Vnder her robe of golde, ye ſate ful fayre
                  Had next her fleſhe yclad her in an heyre
               
               
                  And whyles that the organs made melodye
                  To god alone thus in herte ſonge ſhe
                  O lorde, my ſoule and eke my body gye
                  Vnwemmed, leſte I counfounded be
                  
                     And for hi
                        •
                      loue that dyed vpon a tre
                  Euery ſeconde or thirde day ſhe faſte
                  Aye byddyng in her oriſons ful faſte.
               
               
                  ¶The night came, & to bedde muſt ſhe gone
                  with her huſbonde, as often is the manere
                  And priuely ſhe ſayd vnto hym anon
                  O ſwete and wel byloued ſpouſe dere
                  There is a counſayle, and ye wol it here
                  Which that right fayne I wold to you ſayne
                  So that ye me enſure, it not to bewrayne.
               
               
                  ¶Valeryan gan faſte vnto her ſwere
                  That for no caſe, ne thyng that myght be
                  He ſhulde neuer to none bewrayen here
                  And than at erſte, thus to hym ſayd ſhe
                  I haue an angel, whiche that loueth me
                  That wt gret loue, where ſo I wake or ſlepe
                  Is redy aye, my body for to kepe
               
               
                  And yf that he may felen out of drede
                  That ye me touche or loue in vylonye
                  He right anon wyl ſlee you with the dede
                  And in your youthe thus ſhal ye dye
                  And yf that ye in clene loue me gye
                  He wol you loue as me, for your clenneſſe
                  And ſhewe you of hys ioye and brightneſſe.
               
               
                  ¶This Valeryan, corrected as god wolde
                  Anſwerde ayen, yf I ſhal truſt the
                  Let me that aungel ſe, and hym beholde
                  And yf that it a very aungel be
                  Than wol I done as thou haſte prayde me
                  And yf thou loue another man forſothe
                  Right wt this ſworde thā wol I ſle you both
               
               
                  ¶Cecyle anſwerde anon in this wyſe
                  If that ye luſte, that angel ſhul ye ſe
                  So that ye trowe on Chriſt and you baptyſe
                  Gothe forthe to V
                        •
                     a apia (ꝙ ſhe)
                  That from this town ne ſtāt but myles thre
                  And to the poore folke that there dwel
                  Say hem right thus, as I ſhal you tel
               
               
                  Tel hem that I Cecyle, you to hem ſende
                  To ſhewen you the good Vrban the olde
                  For ſecret nedes, and for good entent
                  And whan that ye ſaynt Vrban han beholde
                  Tel hym the wordes, that I to you tolde
                  And whā that he hath purged you fro ſynne
                  Than ſhal ye ſe that aungel er ye twynne.
               
               
                  Valeryan is to that place ygon
                  And right as him was taught by his lerning
                  He founde this holy Vrban anon
                  Amonge theſe ſayntes buryals loutyng
                  And he anon, without taryeng
                  Dyd his meſſage, and whan he had it tolde
                  Vrban for ioy, gan his hondes vp holde
               
               
                  The teres from his eyen let he fall
                  Almighty god, O Ieſu chriſt (ꝙ he)
                  Sower of chaſte counſayle, hierde of vs al
                  The frute of thilke ſede of chaſtyte
                  That thou haſte ſowe in Cecyle, take to the
                  Lo lyke a beſy bee, withouten gyle
                  The ſerueth aye thyne owne thral Cecyle
               
               
                  For thylke ſpouſe, that ſhe toke but newe
                  Ful lyke a fierſe lyon, ſhe ſendeth here
                  As meke as any lambe was to ewe
                  And with that worde, anon there gan apere
                  An olde man, cladde in whyte clothes clere
                  That had a boke with letters of gold in hōde
                  And gan byforne Valeryan for to ſtonde.
               
               
                  ¶Valeryan as deed fel downe for drede
                  whan he this olde man ſawe ſtandyng ſo
                  whiche forwith anon he herde him rede
                  O lorde, O faythe, O god withouten mo
                  Of chriſtendom, and father of al alſo
                  Abouen al, and ouer al euery where
                  Theſe wordes al with golde written were
               
               
                  whā this was radde, thā ſayd this olde mā
                  
                  Leueſt thou this thyng or none, ſay ye or nay
                  I leue al this thyng (ꝙ Valeryan)
                  Vnder the heuen no wight ne thynke may
                  Sother thyng than this, I dare wel ſay
                  Tho vanyſhed the olde man, he nyſt where
                  And pope Vrban hym chriſtened right there
               
               
                  ¶Valeryan gothe home, & fyndeth Cecilye
                  within his chambre, with an aungel ſtonde
                  This aungel had of roſe and of lyllye
                  Crownes two, the whiche he bare in honde
                  And fyrſt to Cecyle, as I vnderſtonde
                  He yaue that one, and after gan he take
                  That other to Valeryan her make
               
               
                  with body clene, & wt vnwemmed thought
                  Kepeth aye wel theſe crownes (ꝙ he)
                  From paradyſe to you I haue hem brought
                  Ne neuer more ſhullen rotten be
                  
                     Ne leſe her ſwete ſauour, truſteth me
                  Ne neuer wight ſhal ſene hem with eye
                  But he be chaſte, and hate vilonye
               
               
                  And thou Valeryan, for thou ſo ſone
                  Aſſenteddeſt to good counſayle alſo
                  Say what yu lyſt, & thou ſhalt haue thy bone
                  I haue a brother (ꝙ Valeryan tho)
                  That in this world I loue no man ſo
                  I pray you that my brother may haue grace
                  To knowe the trouthe, as I do in this place.
               
               
                  The angel anſwerd, god lyketh your requeſt
                  And bothe with the palme of martyrdome
                  Shal ye come vnto the bliſful feeſt
                  And with ye word Tyburce his brother come
                  And whan that he the ſauoure vndernome
                  whiche that the roſes and the lylyes caſte
                  within his herte he gan to wonder faſte
               
               
                  ¶And ſayd: I wōder this tyme of the yere
                  whence that this ſote ſauoure cometh ſo
                  Of roſes and lylyes, that I ſmel here
                  For though I had hem in myne hondes two
                  The ſauour might in me no deper go
                  The ſwete ſmel, that in my herte I fynde
                  Hath chaunged me al in another kynde.
               
               
                  ¶Valeryan ſayd, two crownes haue we
                  Snowe whyte & roſe reed, that ſhyneth clere
                  which that thyne eyen han no might to ſe
                  And as thou ſmelleſt hem thrugh my prayere
                  So ſhalt thou ſeen hem my leue brother dere
                  If it ſo be that thou wylte without ſlouthe
                  Byleue a right, and knowe the very trouthe.
               
               
                  ¶Tyburce anſwerd, ſayeſt thou this to me
                  In ſothneſſe, or in dreme herken I this?
                  In dremes (ꝙ Valerian) han we be
                  Vnto this tyme, brother myne iwys
                  But nowe at erſt, our dwellyng in trouthe is
                  Howe woſt thou (quod Tyburce) & in what wyſe
                  Quod Valeryan, that I ſhal the deuyſe.
               
               
                  The angel of god hath me ye trouth itaught
                  which thou ſhalt ſeen, & thou wilt reney
                  The ydols, and be clene, and els naught
                  And of the myracles of theſe crownes twey
                  Saynt Ambroſe in his preface luſte to ſey
                  Solempnly this noble doctour dere
                  Cōmendeth it, and ſaythe in this manere.
               
               
                  ¶The palme of martyrdom for to receyue
                  Seynt Cecile, fulfylled of goddes yefte
                  The world & eke her chambre gan ſhe weyu
                        •
                     
                  
                  witneſſe Tyburce, and Cecyles ſhrifte
                  To which god of his bounte wolde ſhyfte
                  Crownes two, of floures wel ſmellyng
                  And made the angel hē tho Crownes bryng
               
               
                  The mayde hath brought hem to bliſſe aboue
                  The world hath wiſt what it is worth certal
                  Deuotion and chaſtyte wel for to loue
                  Tho ſhewed him Cecyle al open and playn
                  That al ydolles ben but thynges in vayne
                  For they ben dombe, & therto they ben defe
                  And charged hym hys ydoles for to lefe
               
               
                  Who that troweth not this, a beeſt he is
                  (Quod this Tyburce) yf that I ſhal not lye
                  She kyſſed his breſt whan ſhe herde this
                  And was ful glad he couthe trouthe eſpye
                  This day take I the for myne allye
                  Sayd this bliſful mayden fayre and dere
                  For after that ſhe ſayd as ye may here.
               
               
                  ¶Lo right ſo as the loue of Chriſt (ꝙ ſhe)
                  Made me thy brothers wyfe, right in yt wyſe
                  Anon for myn alye here take I the
                  Sythēs that thou wolte thyn ydoles diſpyſe
                  Go with thy brother nowe, & the baptyſe
                  And make the clene, ſo yt thou mayſt beholde
                  The angels face, of whiche thy brother tolde.
               
               
                  Tyburce anſwerd, and ſaid: brother dere
                  Fyrſt tel me whyther I ſhal, & to what ma
                        •
                     
                  
                  To whom he ſayd, come forth wt good chere
                  I wol the lede vnto the pope Vrban
                  To Vrban brother myne Valeryan
                  (ꝙ this Tyburce) wylt thou me thyder lede?
                  Me thynketh that it were a wonder dede
               
               
                  Ne meneſt thou Not Vrban (ꝙ he tho)
                  That is ſo ofte dampned to be deed
                  And wonneth in halkes to and fro
                  And dare not ones put forthe his heed
                  Men ſhulde him brenne in a fyre ſo reed
                  If he were founde, and men might hym ſpye
                  And we alſo, that bere him companye
               
               
                  And whyles we ſeken thylke diuinite
                  That is yhidde in heuen priuely
                  Algate ybrent in this worlde ſhulde we be
                  To whom Cecile anſwerde boldely
                  
                     Men might drede wel and ſkylfully
                  This lyfe to leſe, myne owne dere brother
                  If this were lyuing only and non other
               
               
                  But there is better lyuyng in other place
                  That neuer ſhal be loſte, ne drede the nought
                  which goddes ſōne vs told through his grace
                  That fathers ſonne hath al thyng wrought
                  And al ye wrought is with a ſkilful thought
                  The goſte that from the father gan procede
                  Hath ſouled hym without any drede
               
               
                  By worde and by myracle, lo goddes ſoune
                  whan he was in this worlde, declared here
                  That there is other lyfe ther men may wōne
                  To whom anſwerde Tyburce: O ſuſter dere
                  Ne ſaydeſt thou right nowe in this manere
                  There nas but one god lord in ſothfaſtneſſe
                  And nowe of thre howe may yu bere witneſſe
               
               
                  ¶That ſhal I tel (ꝙ ſhe) or that I go
                  Right as a man hath ſapyences thre
                  Memorye, engyne, and intellecte alſo
                  So in ſuche beyng of diuinite
                  Thre perſons may there right wel be
                  Tho gan ſhe there ful beſily hym preche
                  Of Chriſtes ſonne, and of his paynes teche
               
               
                  And many poyntes of his paſſyon
                  Howe goddes ſonne in thys worlde was witholde
                  To do mankynde playne remyſſyon
                  That was bounde in ſynnes & cares colde
                  Al theſe thynges ſhe vnto Tyburce tolde
                  And after this Tyburce in good entent
                  with Valeryan to pope Vrban went
               
               
                  That thonked god, & with glad hert & light
                  He chriſtned him, and made him in that place
                  Perfyte in his lernyng goddes knyght
                  And after this Tiburce gate ſuche grace
                  That euery day he ſawe in tyme and ſpace
                  The aungel of god, and euery maner boone
                  That he god aſked, it was ſped ful ſoone
               
               
                  ¶It were ful harde by order for to ſayne
                  How many wonders Ieſu for him wrought
                  But at the laſte, to tel ſhorte and playne
                  The ſergeaunt of the towne hem ſought
                  And hem byfore Almache ye preuoſt brought
                  whiche hem apoſed, & knewe al her entent
                  And to the ymage of Iupiter hem ſent
               
               
                  And ſayd, who ſo wol do no ſacrifyce
                  Swappe of his heed, this is my ſentēce here
                  Anon theſe martyrs, that I you deuyſe
                  One Maximus that was an officere
                  Of the prefectes, and his councelere
                  Hem hent, & whā he forth the ſayntes ladde
                  Hym ſelfe he wept for pyte that he had
               
               
                  whan Maximus had herde this ſayntes lore
                  He gate hem of the turmentours leue
                  And had hem to hys houſe withouten more
                  And with her prechyng, er that it were eue
                  They gonne from the turmentour reue
                  And from Maximus, & from hys folke echon
                  The falſe faythe, to trowen in god alone
               
               
                  ¶Cecyle came, whan it was woxen nyght
                  with preeſtes, that hem chriſtened al in fere
                  And afterward, whan day was woxen light
                  Cecile hem ſayd with a ſober chere
                  Nowe Chriſtes owne knyghtes leue & dere
                  Caſteth al away the werkes of derkneſſe
                  And armeth you in armoure of brightneſſe
               
               
                  Ye han for ſothe ydone a great batayle
                  Your cours is don, your fayth hath you conſerued
                  Gothe to ye crowne of life that may not fayle
                  The rightful iudge, which ye han ſerued
                  Shal yeue it you as ye it deſerued
                  And whan this thing was ſayd, as I deuyſe
                  Men ladde hem forth to done the ſacrifyſe
               
               
                  But whā they were vnto the place ibrought
                  To tel ſhortly the concluſyoun
                  They nold enſence ne ſacrifyce right nought
                  But on her knees, they ſaten hem adoun
                  with humble herte and ſadde deuocioun
                  And loſten bothe her heedes in the place
                  Her ſoules went to the kyng of grace.
               
               
                  ¶This Maximus, yt ſaw this thyng betyde
                  with pytouſe teres tolde it anon right
                  That he her ſoules ſawe to heuen glyde
                  with aungels ful of clereneſſe and of lyght
                  And with his word cōuerted many a wight
                  For which Almachius dyd hym ſo to bete
                  with whyppes of leede, tyl he his lyfe gā lete
               
               
                  Cecyle hym toke, and buryed hym anone
                  By Tyburce and Valeryan ſothly
                  within her buryeng place vnder a ſtone
                  
                     And after this Almachius haſtely
                  Bad hys myniſters fetchen openly
                  Cecily, ſo that ſhe might in his preſence
                  Do ſacrifyce, and Iupyter encence
               
               
                  But they conuerted at her wyſe lore
                  wepten ful ſore, and yaue ful credence
                  Vnto her worde, and cryden more and more
                  Chriſt goddes ſonne, without difference
                  Is very god, this is all our ſentence
                  That hath a ſeruaunt ſo good him to ſerue
                  Thus wt o voyce we trow though we ſterue
               
               
                  ¶Almachius, that herde al this doyng
                  Bad fetche Cecily, that he might her ſe
                  And alderfyrſt this was his aſkyng
                  what maner woman arte thou (ꝙ he)
                  I am a gentylwoman borne (ꝙ ſhe)
                  I aſke of the (ꝙ he) thought it the greue
                  Of thy relygion and of thy byleue?
               
               
                  ¶Ye haue bygon your queſtion foliſhly
                  (ꝙ ſhe) that wolde two anſwers conclude
                  In one demaunde, ye aſken leudly
                  Almachius anſwerde to that ſymilitude
                  Of whence cōmeth thyn anſwere ſo rude
                  Of whence (ꝙ ſhe) whā that ſhe was frayned
                  Of conſcience, and of good fayth vnfayned.
               
               
                  ¶Almachius ſayd, ne takeſt thou none hede
                  Of my power: and ſhe hym anſwerde thys
                  Your might (ꝙ ſhe) ful lytel is to drede
                  For euery mortal mannes power nys
                  But ilyke a bladder ful of wynde iwys
                  For with a nedels poynte, whan it is yblowe
                  May al the boſ
                        •
                     e of it be layde ful lowe
               
               
                  Ful wrongfully beganſte thou (ꝙ he)
                  And yet in wronge is thy perſeueraunce
                  woſte thou not howe our mighty princes fre
                  Haue thus cōmaunded & made ordinaunce?
                  That euery chriſten wight ſhal haue penaūce
                  But yf that he his criſtendome withſey
                  And gon al quyte, yf he wol it reney.
               
               
                  ¶Your princes erren, as your nobles dothe
                  Quod tho Cecile, in a wode ſentence
                  Ye make vs gilty, and it is not ſothe
                  For ye that knowen wel our innocence
                  For as moche as we done a reuerence
                  To Chriſte, and for we bere a chriſten name
                  Ye put on vs a cryme and eke a blame
               
               
                  But we that knowen thilke name ſo
                  For vertuous, we may is not withſey.
                  Almachius anſwerd, cheſe one of theſe two
                  Do ſacrifyce, or chriſtendom reney
                  That thou may ſcapen by that wey
                  At which worde the holy bliſful mayde
                  Gan for to laught, & to the iuge ſhe ſayde.
               
               
                  ¶O iugge confuſed in thy nycete
                  Wolte thou that I renye innocence
                  To make me a wycked wight (ꝙ ſhe)
                  Lo he diſſymuleth here in audience
                  He ſtareth and wodeth in his aduertence
                  To whom Almachius ſayd: O ſely wretch
                  Thou woſt not how far me miȝt may ſtretch
               
               
                  Hath not our mightye princes yeuen
                  To me, bothe power and eke auctorite
                  To make folke to dyen or to lyuen?
                  why ſpekeſt thou ſo proudely than to me?
                  I ne ſpeke it not but ſtedfaſtly (ꝙ ſhe)
                  Not proudly, for I ſay as for my ſyde
                  I hate deedly thilke vyce of pryde
               
               
                  And yf thou drede not a ſothe for to here
                  Than wol I ſhewen al openly by right
                  That thou haſt made a ful great leſyng here
                  Thou ſayſte thy princes han yeue the might
                  Bothe to ſlee and eke to quicke a wight
                  Thou ne mayeſt but only lyfe byreue
                  Thou haſte non other power ne leue
               
               
                  But thou mayſt ſay, thy princes hā ye make
                        •
                     
                  
                  Myniſtre of dethe, for yf thou ſpeke of mo
                  Thou lyeſt, for thy power is ful naked
                  Doway thy boldneſſe, ſayd Almachius th
                        •
                     
                  
                  And do ſacrifyce to our goddes er thou go
                  I recke not what wronge thou me profice
                  For I can ſuffre, as can a philoſopher
               
               
                  But thilke wronges may I not endure
                  That thou ſpekeſt of our goddes here (ꝙ he)
                  Cecile anſwerde, O nyce creature
                  Thou ſaydeſt no worde ſythens thou ſpakeſt to me
                  That I ne knewe therwith thy nycite
                  And that thou were in euery maner wyſe
                  A leude offycer, and a vayne iuſtyce
               
               
                  The lacketh nothyng to thyne vtter eyen
                  That thou nart blynd, for thing yt we ſeen al
                  That is a ſtone, that men may wel eſpyen
                  
                     That ylke ſtone, a god thou wolte it cal
                  I rede the let thyn honde vpon it fal
                  And taſte it wel, & ſtone thou ſhalte it fynde
                  Sens that thou ſeeſt not wt thyn eyen blynde
               
               
                  It is a ſhame that the people ſhal
                  So ſcorne the, and laugh at thy folye
                  For comenly men wotte it wel ouer al
                  That mighty god is in his heuens hye
                  And theſe ymages, wel mayſte thou aſpye
                  To the ne to hem ſelfe may they not profyte
                  For in her effecte, they be not worthe a myte
               
               
                  ¶Thus and ſuche other wordes ſayde ſhe
                  And he woxe wrothe, & bad ſhe ſhulde be lede
                  Home to her houſe, and in her houſe (ꝙ he)
                  Brenne her in a bathe, with flames rede
                  And as he bade, right ſo was done the dede
                  For in a bathe they gan her faſte ſheten
                  And nyght & day great fyre vnder they beten
               
               
                  Al the longe night, and eke the day alſo
                  For al the fyre, and eke the bathes hete
                  She ſate al colde, and felte of it no wo
                  It made her not a droppe for to ſwete
                  But in that bathe her lyfe ſhe mote lete
                  For Almachie, with a ful wicked entent
                  To ſleen her in the bathe, hys ſonde ſente
               
               
                  Thre ſtrokes in the necke he ſmote her tho
                  The turmentour, but for no maner chaunce
                  He might not ſmyte al her necke a two
                  And for there was that tyme an ordynaunce
                  That no mā ſhuld do no perſon ſuch penaūce
                  The fourth ſtroke to ſmyte, ſofte or ſore
                  This turmentour durſte ſmyte no more
               
               
                  But halfe deed, with her necke ycoruē there
                  He lette her lye, and on his way he went
                  The chriſten folke that aboute her were
                  with ſhetes home ful fayre her hente
                  Thre dayes lyued ſhe in this turmente
                  And neuer ceſed ſhe the faythe to teche
                  That ſhe had foſtred hem, ſhe gan to preche
               
               
                  And hem ſhe yaue her mouables & her thyng
                  And to the pope Vrban bytoke hem tho
                  And ſayd, I aſked this of the heuen kyng
                  To haue reſpyte thre dayes and no mo
                  To recōmaunde to you, er that I go
                  Theſe ſoules, and that I might ſo werche
                  Here of myne houſe perpetuellyche a cherche
               
               
                  Saynt Vrban, with his dekens priuely
                  The body fette, and buryed it by night
                  Amonge his other ſayntes honeſtly
                  Her houſe the churche of ſaynt Cecile hyght
                  Saynte Vrban halowed it, as he wel might
                  In which vnto this day in noble wyſe
                  Men don to Chriſt & to his ſayntes ſeruyce.
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the ſeconde nonnes tale, and here begynneth the Prologue of the chanons yeman.
               
                  WHā ended was the lyfe of ſaynt Cecyle
               Er we fully had rydden fyue myle
               At Boughton vnder the blee, vs gan a take
               A man, that clothed was in clothes blake
               And vnder that he had a whyte ſurplyſe
               His hakeney, that was al pomely gryſe
               So ſwette, that it wonder was to ſe
               It ſemed that he had pricked myles thre
               The horſe eke that his yoman rode vpon
               So ſwette, that vnneth might he gon
               Aboute the paytrel ſtode the fome ful hye
               He was of fome as flecked as a pye
               A male twyfolde on his croper lay
               It ſemed that he caryed lytel aray
               Al lyght for ſommer rode this worthy man
               And in my herte wondren I began
               what that he was, tyl I vnderſtode
               Howe that his cloke was ſewed to his hode
               For which, whan I had longe auyſed me
               I demyd him ſome chanon for to be
               His hatte hynge at his backe by alace
               For he had rydden more than trot or pace
               He rode aye prickyng as he were wode
               A clote lefe he had layde vnder hys hode
               For ſwette, and for to kepe his heed fro hete
               But it was inye for to ſe hym ſwete
               His forheed dropped, as a ſtyllatorie
               were ful of plantayne or of peritorie
               And whan he was come, he gan crye
               God ſaue (ꝙ he) this ioly companye
               Faſte haue I pricked (ꝙ he) for your ſake
               Bycauſe that I wolde you ouertake
               To ryden in this mery company
               ¶His yoman was eke ful of curteſye
               And ſayd ſyrs, nowe in the morowe tyde
               
                  Out of your hoſtery I ſawe you ryde
               And warned here my lorde and ſouerayne
               whiche that to ryden with you is ful fayne
               For his diſporte, he loueth dalyaunce.
               Frēde for thy warnīg god yeue ye good chāce
               Than ſayd our hoſt, certayne it wolde ſeme
               Thy lorde were wyſe, & ſo I may wel deme
               He is ful ſoconde alſo dare I lay
               Can he ought tel a mery tale or tway
               with which he glade may this companye.
               ¶Who ſyr my lorde? ye without lye
               He can of myrthe and eke of iolyte
               Not but ynough alſo ſyr truſteth me
               And ye hym knewe alſo wel as do I
               Ye wolde wonder howe wel and thriftely
               He couthe werke, and that in ſondrie wyſe
               He hath taken on him many a great empriſe
               which were ful harde, for any that is here
               To bring aboute, but they of him it lere
               As homely as he rydeth amonge you
               If ye him knewe, it wold ben for your prowe
               Ye nolde not forgon his aquayntaunce
               For mochel good I dare lay in balaunce
               Al that I haue in my poſſeſſyon
               He is a man of hye diſcreſſyon
               I warne you wel he is a paſſyng wyſe man.
               ¶Wel (ꝙ our hoſte) I pray the tel me than
               Is he a clerke or non tel what he is.
               ¶A clerke, nay he is greter thā a clerke iwys
               Sayd the yoman, and in wordes fewe
               Hoſte of his crafte ſomwhat wol I ſhewe
               I ſay my lorde can ſuche a ſubtelte
               But al his crafte ye may not wete of me
               And ſomwhat helpe I yet to his worchyng
               That al the grounde that we be on rydyng
               Tyl we come to Caunterbury towne
               He coulde al clene turne vp and downe
               And paue it al of ſyluer and of golde.
               ¶And whan this yoman had thus ytolde
               Vnto our hoſte: he ſayd benedicite
               This thyng is wonder meruaylous to me
               Sens that thy lorde is of ſo hye prudence
               (Bycauſe of which, men ſhuld hym reuerēce)
               That of his worſhyp recketh he ſo lyte
               His ouereſt ſloppe is not worthe a my
                     •
                  e
               As in effecte to hym, ſo more I go
               It is al bandy and to tore alſo
               why is thy lorde ſo ſlotlyche I the pray
               And is of power better clothes to bey?
               If that his dede acorde with thy ſpeche
               Tel me that, and that I the beſeche.
               ¶Why (ꝙ this yeman) wherto aſke ye me?
               God helpe me ſo, for he ſhal neuer ythe
               But I wol not auowe that I ſaye
               And therfore kepe it ſecret I you praye
               He is to wyſe in fay, as I beleue
               That is ouerdone nyl not preue
               And right as clerkes ſayne, it is a vyce
               wherfore I holde hym in that, leude & ny
                     ••
                  
               
               For whan a man hath ouer great a wytte
               Ful ofte it happeth hym to miſuſen it
               So dothe my lorde, and that me greueth ſore
               God amende it, I can ſay you no more.
               ¶Therof no force good yeman (ꝙ our hoſt)
               Sens of the connyng of thy lorde thou woſt
               Tel howe he dothe, I pray the hertely
               Sens that he is ſo crafty and ſo ſly
               where dwellen ye, yf it to tel be?
               ¶In the ſubbarbes of a towne (ꝙ he)
               Lurkyng in corners and in lanes blinde
               where theſe robbers, and theues by kynde
               Holden her priuy fearful reſydence
               As they that dare not ſhewen her preſence
               So fare we, yf that I ſhal ſay the ſoth.
               ¶Yet (ꝙ our hoſte) let me talke tothe
               why arte thou ſo diſcoloured in thy face?
               ¶Peter (ꝙ he) god yeue it harde grace
               I am ſo vſed in the hotte fyre to blowe
               That it hath chaūged my colour as I trowe
               I am not wonte in no myrrour to prie
               But ſwynke ſore, and lerne to multiplye
               we blondren euer, and pooren in the fyre
               And for al that, we faylen of our deſyre
               For euer we lacken our concluſyon
               To moche folke we do illuſyon
               And borowe golde, be it a pounde or two
               Or ten or twelue, or many ſommes mo
               And make hem wene at the leſte way
               That of a pounde we coulde make tway
               Yet is it falſe, and aye han we good hope
               It for to done, and after it we grope
               But that ſcience is ſo ferre vs byforne
               we mowe not, al though we had it ſworne
               It ouertake, it ſlytte away ſo faſt
               It wol vs make beggers at the laſte.
               ¶whiles this yeman was thus ī his talkyng
               This chanon drewe him nere, & herd al thing
               which this yeman ſpake, for ſuſpection
               Of mennes ſpeche euer had this chanon
               For Cato ſaythe, he that gyltye is
               Demeth al thing be ſpoke of hym iwys
               Bycauſe of that, ge gan ſo nyghe to drawe
               To his yeman, to herken al his ſawe
               And thus he ſayd vnto his yeman tho
               
                  Holde now thy peace, & ſpeke no wordes mo
               For yf thou do, thou ſhalt it ſore abye
               Thou ſlaūdreſt me here in thys companye
               And eke dyſcouereſt yt thou ſhuldeſt hyde.
               ¶Ye (ꝙ our hoſt) tel on what ſo euer betyde.
               Of al hys threatyng, recke the not a myte
               ¶In fayth (ꝙ he) no more do I but lyte
               And when thys chanon ſawe it wolde not be
               But hys yeman wolde tel hys priuite
               He fled away for very ſorowe and ſhame
               A (ꝙ the yeman) here ſhal ryſe a game
               Al that I can, anone wol I you tel
               Sens he is gone, the foule fende hym quel
               For neuer here after wol I wyth hym mete
               For peny ne for pounde, I you behete
               He that me brought fyrſt vnto that game
               Er that he dye, ſorowe haue he and ſhame
               For it is erneſt to me by my fayth
               That fele I wel, what ſo any man ſayeth
               And yet for al my ſmerte and al my grefe
               For al my ſorowe, laboure and myſchefe
               I couth neuer leaue it in no wyſe
               Nowe wolde god my wytte myght ſuffyce
               To tellen al that longeth to that arte
               But natheleſſe, yet wol I tel you a parte
               Sens that my lord is gone, I wol not ſpare
               Suche thynge as I knowe I wol declare.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the prologue of the chanons yeman, and here foloweth hys tale.

               
               
                  
                     WIth thys chanon I dwelt ſeuen yere
                  And of hys ſcience am I neuer the nere
                  All that I had, I haue loſt therby
                  And god wote, ſo hath many mo then I
                  There I was wonte to be ryght freſh & gay
                  Of clothynge, and eke of other good aray
                  Nowe may I weare an hoſe vpon my heed
                  And wher my colour was both freſhe & reed
                  Nowe it is wanne, and of a leeden hewe
                  who ſo it vſeth, ſore ſhal hym rewe
                  And of my ſwynke, yet blered is myne eye
                  Lo whych auauntage it is to multiplye
                  That ſlydynge ſcience hath me made ſo bare
                  That I haue no good, where yt euer I fare
                  And yet I am endetted ſo therby
                  Of golde, that I haue borowed trewly
                  That whyle I lyue, I ſhal it quyte neuer
                  Let euery man beware by me euer
                  what maner man that caſteth hym therto
                  Yf he continue, I holde hys thryfte ydo
                  So helpe me god therby ſhal he neuer wyn
                  But empte his purſe, & make his wittes thyn
                  
                     And when he thorow hys madneſſe and foly
                  Hath loſt hys owne good, through ieopardy
                  Then he excyteth other men therto
                  To leſe her good, as hym ſelfe hath do
                  For vnto ſhrewes, ioye it is and eſe
                  To haue her felowes in payne and dyſeſe
                  For thus was I ones lerned of a clerke
                  Of yt no charge, I wol ſpeake of our werke
                  ¶when we be there, as we ſhal exercyſe
                  Our eluyſh crafte, we ſemen wonder wyſe
                  Our termes ben ſo clergial and ſo quaynte
                  I blowe the fyre tyl myne herte faynte.
                  ¶what ſhulde I tel eche proporcion
                  Of thynges, whych we werchen vpon?
                  As on fyue or ſyxe vnces, maye wel be
                  Of ſyluer, or of ſome other quantite
                  And beſye me to tellen you the names
                  Of orpyment, brent bones, yron ſquames
                  That into poudre grounden ben ful ſmall
                  And in an erthen potte, howe put is all
                  And ſalt yput in, and alſo papere
                  Byfore theſe poudres that I ſpeake of here
                  And wel ycouered wyth a lampe of glas
                  And of moche other thynge that there was
                  And of the pottes and glas englutynge
                  That of the ayre myght paſſe out no thynge
                  And of the eſy fyre and ſmerte alſo
                  whych that was made, and of the care & wo
                  That we had in our matters ſublymynge
                  And in amalgamyng, and calſenynge
                  Of quycſyluer, yclypped Mercurye crude
                  For al our ſleyght, we conne not conclude
                  Our orpyment, and ſublymed Mercurye
                  Our grounde lytarge eke on the porphirye
                  Of eche of theſe, vnces a certayne
                  Not helpeth vs, our labour is in vayne
                  Ne eke our ſpirites aſſencioun
                  Ne yet our matters, that lyen al ſyre adoun
                  Mowe in our werkynge nothynge auayle
                  For loſte is al our laboure & our trauayle
                  And al the coſte, a twenty dyuel waye
                  Is loſte alſo, whych we vpon it laye.
                  ¶There is alſo ful many an other thynge
                  That is to our crafte apertaynynge
                  Though I by ordre hem ne reherce can
                  Bycauſe that I am a leude man
                  Yet wol I tellen hem, as they come to minde
                  Though I ne can ſette hem in her kynde
                  As bole Armonyake, verdegrece, boras
                  And ſondry veſſels made of erth and glas
                  Our vrinals, and our dyſcenſories
                  Vyols, croſſelettes, and ſublymatoryes
                  Concurbytes, and alembykes eke
                  And other ſuche, dere ynough a leke
                  It nedeth not to reherce hem al
                  waters rubyfyeng, and boles gal
                  Arſneke, ſal armoniake, and brymſtone
                  And herbes coulde I tel eke many one
                  As Egrimonye, valerian, and lunarye
                  And other ſuche, yf that me lyſt to tarye
                  Our lampes brennyng both nyght and daye
                  To bryngē aboute our craft, yf that we maye
                  Our fournyce eke of calcinacion
                  And of waters albifycation
                  Vnſleked lyme, chalke, and gleyre of an eye
                  Poudres dyuers, aſhes, donge, pyſſe, & cley
                  Sered pokettes, ſalt peter, and vytriole
                  And dyuers fyres, made of woode and cole
                  Sal tartre, alcaly, and ſal preparate
                  And combuſt maters, and coagulate
                  Cley made wt horſe dūge, mans heere, & oyle
                  Of tartre al
                        •
                     n, glas, berme, worte, & argo
                        ••
                     
                  
                  Reſalgor, and other maters enbybynge
                  And eke of our maters encorporynge
                  And of our ſyluer cytrination
                  Our ſementynge, and eke fermentacion
                  Our Ingottes teſtes, and many mo
                  I wol you tel as was me taught alſo
                  The foure ſpirites, and the bodyes ſeuen
                  By order, as ofte I herde my lorde nemene.
                  ¶The fyrſt ſpirite quycke ſyluer cleped is
                  The ſeconde orpyment, the thyrde ywys
                  Sal armonyake, the fourth brymſtone
                  ¶The bodyes ſeuen eke, lo here hem anone
                  Sol golde is, and Luna ſyluer we threpe
                  Mars yron, Mercurye quyckſyluer we clepe
                  Saturnus leede, and Iupiter is tynne
                  And Venus coper, by my father kynne
                  ¶Thys curſed crafte, who ſo wol exercyſe
                  He ſhal no good haue that may hym ſuffyſe
                  For al the good he ſpendeth theraboute
                  He leſe ſhal, therof haue I no doute
                  who ſo that lyſten to vtter hys folye
                  Let hym come forth & lerne to multiplye
                  And euery man that hath aught in hys cofer
                  Let hym apere, and were a philoſopher
                  Aſkaunce that crafte is ſo lyght for to lere
                  Nay nay god wote, al be he monke or frere
                  Preeſt or chanon, or any other wyght
                  Though he ſyt at his boke both day & nyght
                  In lernynge of thys eluyſhe nyce lore
                  Al is in vayne, and parde moche more
                  Is to lere a leude man thys ſubtelte
                  Fye ſpeake not therof, it wol not be
                  
                     Al coulde he lettrure, or coulde he none
                  As in effecte, he ſhal fynde it al one
                  For both two, by my ſaluacion
                  Concluden in multiplicacion
                  I lyche wel, when they haue al ydo
                  Thys is to ſayne, they faylen both two.
                  ¶Yet forgate I moche reherſayle
                  Of waters coroſyfe, and of lymayle
                  And of bodyes mollifycacion
                  And alſo of her induracion
                  Oyles, ablucions, metal fuſyble
                  To tellen you al, wolde paſſe any byble
                  That o where is, wherfore as for the beſte
                  Of al theſe names nowe wol I reſte
                  For as I trowe, I haue you tolde ynowe
                  To reyſe a fende, al loke he neuer ſo rowe.
                  ¶A nay let be the phyloſophers ſtone
                  Alixer cleped, we ſeken faſte echeone
                  For had we him, thē were we ſyker ynowe
                  But vnto god of heuen I make auowe
                  For al our crafte, when that we han al ydo
                  And al our ſleyght, he wol not come vs to
                  He hath made vs ſpende moche good
                  For ſorow of which, almoſt we waxē wood
                  But that good hope crepeth in our herte
                  Suppoſynge euer, though we ſore ſmerte
                  To ben releued by hym afterwarde
                  Suppoſynge and hope is ſharpe and harde
                  I warne you wel it is to ſyken euer
                  That future temps hath made men dyſceuer
                  In truſt therof, all that euer they had
                  Yet of that arte, they coulde not waxe ſad
                  For vnto hym it is a bytter ſwete
                  So ſemed it, for ne had they but a ſhete
                  Which yt they myght wrappē thē in anyght
                  And a bratte to walken in the daye lyght
                  They wolden hem ſel, & ſpēde it on this craft
                  They conne not ſtynte tyl nothynge be laft
                  And euer more, where that euer they gone
                  Men may hem ken by ſmel of brymſtone
                  For al the worlde they ſtynken as a gote
                  Her ſauour is ſo rammyſh & ſo hote
                  That though a man a myle from hem be
                  The ſauour wol enfecte hym truſteth me
                  Lo, thus by ſmellyng, & by thred bare aray
                  Yf that men lyſt, thys folke knowe they may
                  And yf a man wol aſke hem priuely
                  why they be clothed ſo vnthryftely
                  Ryght anone they wol rowne in hys ere
                  And ſayne, yf that they aſpyed were
                  Men wolde hem ſlee, bycauſe of her ſcience
                  Lo thus theſe folke bytrayen innocence
                  Paſſe ouer thys, I go my tale vnto.
                  ¶Er that the potte be on the fyre ydo
                  Of metalles, wyth a certayne quantyte
                  My lorde hem tempreth, & no man but he
                  Nowe he is gone, I dare ſaye boldely
                  For as men ſayne, he can do craftely
                  Algate I wotte wel he hath ſuche a name
                  And yet ful ofte he renneth in the blame
                  And wote ye howe, ful ofte it happeth ſo
                  The potte to breketh, and farewel al is go
                  Theſe metalles ben of ſo great violence
                  Our walles may not make hem reſyſtence
                  But yf they were wrought of lime and ſtone
                  They percen ſo, & through the wal they gone
                  And ſome of hem ſynken in to the grounde
                  Thus haue we loſt by tymes many a poūde
                  And ſome are ſcatered al the floore aboute
                  Some lepen into the rofe wythouten doute
                  Tho yt the fende not in our ſyght hym ſhewe
                  I trowe that he with vs be, that ylke ſhrewe
                  In hel where that he is lorde and ſyre
                  Ne is there no more wo, ne angre ne yre
                  when that our potte is broke, as I haue ſayd
                  Euery man chyte, & holte hym yuel apayde
                  Some ſayd it was longe of the fyre makyng
                  Some ſayd nay, it was on the blowyng
                  Then was I ferde, for that was myn offyce
                  ¶Strawe (ꝙ the thyrde) ye ben leude & nyce
                  It was not tempred as it ought to be
                  ¶Nay (ꝙ the fourth) ſtynte & herken me
                  Bycauſe our fyre was not made of beche
                  That is the cauſe, and none other ſo theche
                  I can not tel wheron it is alonge
                  But wel I wote great ſtryfe is vs amonge.
                  what (ꝙ my lord) ther nys no more to done
                  Of theſe perylles I wol beware efte ſone
                  I am ryght ſyker, that the potte was craſed
                  Be as be maye, be ye not amaſed
                  As vſage is, let ſwepe the floore as ſwythe
                  Plucke vp your hert, and be glad and blythe.
                  The mullocke on an heape yſwepte was
                  And on the floore caſte a canuas
                  And al thys mulloke in a ſyue ythrowe
                  And yſyfted and aplucked many a throwe.
                  Parde (ꝙ one) ſomwhat of our metall
                  Yet is there here, though we haue not all
                  And tho this thyng miſhapped hath as now
                  An other tyme it may ben wel ynow
                  we more put our good in auenture
                  A marchaunt parde, maye not aye endure
                  Truſteth me wel in hys proſperite
                  Somtyme hys good is drowned in the ſee
                  
                     And ſomtyme it cometh ſafe vnto the londe
                  Peace (ꝙ my lord) ye next tyme I wol fonde
                  To brynge our crafte al in an other plyte
                  And but I do ſyrs, let me haue the wyte
                  There was defaute in ſomwhat wel I wote
                  ¶An other ſayd, the fyre was ouer hote
                  But be it hote or colde, I dare ſaye this
                  That we concluden euer more amys
                  we faylen of that whych we wolde haue
                  And in our madneſſe euer more we raue
                  And when we be together euerychon
                  Euery man ſemeth as wyſe as Salomon
                  But al thyng, whych that ſhyneth as ye golde
                  Is not golde, as I haue herde tolde
                  Ne euery appel that is fayre at eye
                  Nys not good, what ſo men clappe or crye.
                  ¶Ryght ſo it fareth amonge vs
                  He that ſemeth the wyſeſt by Ieſus
                  Is mooſt foole, when it cometh to the prefe
                  And he that ſemeth trueſt is a thefe
                  That ſhal ye know, er that I from you wēde
                  By that I of my tale haue made an ende.
                  ¶There was a chanon of religioun
                  Amonges vs, wolde enfecte al a toun
                  Though it as great were as Niniue
                  Rome, Alyſaundre, Troye, and other thre
                  Hys ſleyght and hys infinite falſneſſe
                  There couth no man wryten as I geſſe
                  Though that he might lyue a thouſand yere
                  In al thys worlde of falſneſſe nys hys pere
                  For in hys termes he wol hym ſo wynde
                  And ſpeake hys wordes in ſo ſlye a kynde
                  when he comen ſhal wyth any wyght
                  That he wol make hym dote anone ryght
                  But it a fende be as hym ſelfe is
                  Ful many a man hath he begyled er thys
                  And mo wol, yf that he may lyue a whyle
                  And yet men ryden & gone ful many a myle
                  Hym for to ſeke, and haue aquayntaunce
                  Not knowynge of hys falſe gouernaunce
                  And yf ye luſt to gyue me audience
                  I wol it tellen here in your preſence.
                  ¶But worſhypful chanons religiouſe
                  Ne demeth not that I ſclaunder your houſe
                  Al though my tale of a chanon be
                  Of euery ordre ſome ſhrewe is parde
                  And god forbyd that al a companye
                  Shulde rue a ſyngler mannes folye
                  To ſlaunder you is not myne entente
                  But to correcte that myſſe is mente
                  Thys tale was not only tolde for you
                  But eke for other mo, ye wote wel howe
                  That amonge Chriſtes apoſtles twelue
                  Ther was no traytour but Iudas hym ſelue
                  Then why ſhulde the remnaūt haue blame
                  That gyltleſſe were, by you I ſaye the ſame
                  Saue only thys, yf ye wol herken me
                  Yf any Iudas in your couent be
                  Remeueth hym betyme, I you rede
                  Yf ſhame or loſſe may cauſen any drede
                  And be nothynge dyſpleaſed I you praye
                  But in thys caſe herkeneth what I ſaye.
               
               
                  In Londen was a preeſt annuellere
                  That therin had dwelt many a yere
                  whych was ſo pleaſaunt and ſo ſeruyſable
                  Vnto the wyfe, where he was at table
                  That ſhe wolde ſuffre hym nothynge to pay
                  For borde ne clothyng, went he neuer ſo gay
                  And ſpendynge ſyluer had he ryght ynowe
                  Therof no force, I wol procede as nowe
                  And tel forth my tale of the chanon
                  That brought thys preeſt to confuſyon.
                  ¶Thys falſe chanon came vpon a daye
                  Vnto thys preeſtes chambre, where he laye
                  Beſechynge hym to leue hym a certayne
                  Of golde, and he wolde quyte hym ayen
                  Leueth me a marke (ꝙ he) but dayes thre
                  And at my daye I wol quyte it the
                  And yf it ſo be, chat thou fynde me falſe
                  Another daye hange me by the halfe
                  This preſt toke him a marke & that ſwyth
                  And thys chanon hym thanked ofte ſyth
                  And toke hys leaue, and went forth hys wey
                  And at thyrde daye brought hys money
                  And to thys preeſt he toke thys golde acyen
                  wherof thys preeſt was glad and fayn
                  ¶Certes (ꝙ he) nothynge anoyeth me
                  To leue a man a noble, two or thre
                  Or what thynge were in my poſſeſſion
                  when he ſo trewe is of condicion
                  That in no wyſe he breke wol hys daye
                  To ſuche a man I can neuer ſaye naye.
                  what ꝙ this chanon, ſhulde I be vntrewe
                  Nay, that were thynge fallen of newe
                  Trouth is a thynge that I wol euer kepe
                  Vnto the daye, in whych I ſhal crepe
                  Into my graue, or els god forbede
                  Beleueth thys as ſyker as your crede
                  God thanke I, & in good tyme be it ſayde
                  That there nas neuer man yet yuel apayde
                  For golde ne ſyluer that he to me lent
                  Ne neuer falſhede in myne herte I ment.
                  And ſyr (ꝙ he) nowe of my priuete
                  
                     Sens ye ſo goodlyche haue ben to me
                  And kythe to me ſo great gentylneſſe
                  Somwhat to quyte with your kyndeneſſe
                  I wol you ſhewe, yf ye wol it lere
                  (I ſhal it ſhewe to you anon right here)
                  Howe I can werche in philoſophye
                  Taketh good hede, ye ſhal it ſe with your eye
                  That I wol done a maiſtrye or I go.
                  ¶Ye ſyr (ꝙ the preeſt) and wol ye ſo
                  Marye therof I pray you hertely.
                  ¶At your cōmaundement ſer truely
                  (ꝙ the chanon) and els god forbede
                  Lo howe this thefe couthe his ſeruyce bede
                  Ful ſothe is that ſuche profered ſeruyſe
                  Stynketh, as wytneſſeth the olde wyſe
                  And that ful ſone I wol it verifye
                  In this chanon, rote of al trecherie
                  That euermore delyte hath and gladneſſe
                  Such fendely thoughtes in his hert empreſſe
                  How chriſtes people he may to miſchefe bring
                  God kepe vs from his falſe diſſymulyng.
                  ¶what wyſt thys preeſt wt whom yt he delte
                  Ne of hys harme cōmyng nothyng he felte
                  O ſely preeſt, O ſely innocente
                  with couetyſe anon thou ſhalte be blente
                  O graceleſſe, ful blynde is thy conceyte
                  Nothyng arte thou ware of hys diſceyte
                  Which that this foxe hath ſhapen to the
                  His wylye wrenches thou mayſte not fle
                  Wherfore to go to the concluſyon
                  That referreth to thy confuſyon
                  Vnhappy man, anon I wol me hye
                  To tel thyne vnwytte ne thy folye
                  And eke the falſneſſe of that other wretche
                  As ferforthe as my connyng wol ſtretche
                  ¶This chanon was my lord ye wolde wene
                  Syr hoſt in faythe, and by the heuen quene
                  It was another chanon, and not he?
                  That can an hundred folde more ſubtelte
                  He hath betrayed folke many a tyme
                  Of his falſneſſe it doleth me to ryme
                  Euer whan I ſpeke of hys falſeheed
                  For ſhame of hym, my chekes waxen reed
                  Algates they begynnen for to glowe
                  For redneſſe haue I non, right wel I knowe
                  In my viſage, for ſumes dyuerce
                  Of metals, whiche ye haue herde me reherce
                  Conſumed and waſted hath my redneſſe
                  Nowe take hede of this chanons curſydneſſe.
                  Syr (ꝙ he) to the preeſt, let your man gon
                  For quick ſyluer, that we it had anon
                  And let hym brynge vnces two or thre
                  And whan he cōmeth, as faſte ſhul ye ſe
                  A wonder thyng, which ye ſaw neuer er this
                  Syr (ꝙ the preeſt) it ſhal be done iwys
                  He badde his ſeruaunt fetch him this thyng
                  And he al redy was at hys byddyng
                  And went him forth, and came anon agayne
                  with this quickſyluer, ſhortly for to ſayne
                  And toke theſe vnces thre to the chanoun
                  And he hem layde wel and fayre adoun
                  And bade the ſeruaunt coles for to bryng
                  That he anon might go to hys werkyng
                  ¶The coles right anon were yfet
                  And this chanon toke out a croſſelet
                  Of his boſome, and ſhewed it to the preeſt
                  This inſtrument (ꝙ he) which that thou ſeeſt
                  Take in thy honde, and put thy ſelfe therin
                  Of this quickſyluer an vnce and begyn
                  In the name of Chriſt to wexe a philoſopher
                  There be ful fewe, whiche I wolde it profer
                  To ſhewe hem this moche of my ſcience
                  For here ſhul ye ſe by experience
                  That this quickſyluer I wol mortifye
                  Right in your ſyght anon withouten lye
                  And make it as good ſyluer and as fyne
                  As there is any in your purſe or myne
                  Or els where, and make it malliable
                  And els holde me falſe and vnſtable
                  Amonges folke euer to appere.
                  ¶I haue a poudre, that coſte me dere
                  Shal make al good, for it is cauſe of al
                  My connyng, whiche I you ſhewe ſhal
                  Voydeth your man, and let him be therout
                  And ſhette the dore, whyles we ben aboute
                  Our priuetie, that no man vs eſpye
                  whyles that we werken in our philoſophye
                  Al as he bade, fulfylled was in dede
                  This ylke ſeruaunt anon out yede
                  And hys maiſter ſhette the dore anon
                  And to her labour ſpedily they gon
                  This preeſt at this curſed chanons byddyng
                  Vpon the fyre anon ſet this thyng
                  And blewe the fyre, & beſyed hym ful faſte
                  And this chanon into this croſlet caſte
                  A pouder, I not wherof it was
                  Ymade, eyther of chalke, erthe, or glaſſe
                  Or ſomwhat els, was not worthe a flye
                  To blynde with this preeſt, & badde hym hye
                  Theſe coles for to couchen al aboue
                  The croſſelet, for in token that I the loue
                  (Quod this chanon) thyne hondes two
                  Shal werke al thyng that here ſhal be do.
                  Graunt mercy, ꝙ the preeſt, & was ful glad
                  
                     And couched coles, as the chanon bad
                  And whyle he buſy was, thys fēdely wretch
                  Thys falſe chanon, the foule fende him fetch
                  Out of hys boſome toke a bechen cole
                  In whych ful ſubtelly was made an hole
                  And therin was put of ſyluer limayle
                  An vnce, and ſtopped was wythout fayle
                  The hole wyth waxe, to kepe the limayle in
                  And vnderſtandeth that thys falſe gyn
                  was not made there, but it was made before
                  And other thynges that I ſhal you tel more
                  Hereafter, whych that he wyth him brought
                  Er he came there, to begyle hym he thought
                  And ſo he dyd, er they wente a twynne
                  Tyl he had turned hym, could he not blynne
                  It dulleth me, when that I of hym ſpeke
                  On hys falſhede, fayne wolde I me wreke
                  Yf I wyſt howe, but he is here and there
                  He is ſo variaunt, he hydeth no where
                  ¶But taketh hede ſyrs now for goddes loue
                  He toke hys cole, of whych I ſpake aboue
                  And in hys hande he bare it priuely
                  And whyles the preeſt couched beſely
                  The coles, as I tolde you er thys
                  Thys chanon ſayd, frende ye doue amys
                  Thys is not couched as it ought to be
                  But ſone I ſhal amende it (ꝙ he)
                  Nowe let me medle therwyth but a whyle
                  For of you haue I pyte by ſaynt Gyle
                  Ye ben ryght hotte, I ſe wel howe ye ſwete
                  Haue here a cloth and wype awaye the wete
                  And whyle the preeſt hym wyped hace
                  This chanon toke the cole, I ſhrewe his face
                  And layde it abouen vpon the mydwarde
                  Of the croſlet, and blewe well afterwarde
                  Tyl that the coles gonne faſte brenne
                  ¶Nowe yeue vs drynke, ꝙ thys chanō then
                  As ſwyth al ſhall be wel I vndertake
                  Sytte we downe, and let vs mery make
                  And when thys chanons bechen cole
                  was brent al, the limayle out of the hole
                  Into the croſſelette anone fel adoun
                  And ſo it muſte nedes by reſoun
                  Sens it ſo euen aboue couched was
                  But therof wyſt the preeſt nothynge, alas
                  He demed al the coles lyche goode
                  For of the ſleyght, nothynge he vnderſtode.
                  And whē thys alkamyſtre ſawe his tyme
                  Ryſeth vp ſyr preeſt (ꝙ he) & ſtandeth by me
                  And for I wote wel yngot haue I none
                  Goth walketh forth, & brynge a chalke ſtone
                  For I wol make it of the ſame ſhappe
                  That an yngot is, yf I maye haue happe
                  And brynge eke wyth you a bolle or a panne
                  Ful of water, and ye ſhal ſe thanne
                  Howe that our buſyneſſe ſhal happe & preue
                  And yet for ye ſhal haue no myſbeleue
                  Ne wronge conceyte of me in your abſence
                  I wol not ben out of your preſence
                  But go wyth you, & come wyth you agayne
                  The chambre dore, ſhortly to ſayne
                  They opened & ſhette, & went forth her wey
                  And forth wyth hem they caryed the key
                  And comen ayen wythouten any delaye
                  what ſhulde I tarye al the longe daye
                  He toke the chalke, and ſhope it in the wyſe
                  Of an yngot, as I ſhal you deuyſe
                  I ſaye he toke out of hys owne ſleue
                  A teyne of ſyluer, yuel mote he cheue
                  whych that was but an vnce of weyght
                  And taketh hede nowe of hys curſed ſleyght
                  He ſhope hys yngot, in lenght and in brede
                  Of the teyne, wythouten any drede
                  So ſlyly that the preeſt it not aſpyde
                  And in hys ſleue agayne he gan it hyde
                  And from the fyre toke vp hys matere
                  And in to the yngot it put wyth mery chere
                  And into the water veſſel he it caſte
                  when that hym lyſt, & bad the preeſt as faſte
                  Loke what ther is, put in thyn hāde & grope
                  Thou ſhalt fynde there ſyluer as I hope
                  what dyuel of hel ſhulde it els be
                  Shauynge of ſyluer, ſyluer is parde.
                  He put in hys hande, and toke vp a reyne
                  Of ſyluer fyne, and glade in euery vayne
                  was thys preeſt, when he ſawe it was ſo
                  Goddes blyſſynge and hys mothers alſo
                  And al hallowes, haue ye ſyr chanon
                  Sayd thys preeſt, and I her malyſon
                  But and ye vouchſafe to teche me
                  Thys noble crafte and thys ſubtelte
                  I wol be yours, in al that euer I may
                  ꝙ the Chanon, yet wol I make aſſay
                  The ſeconde tyme, that ye mowe take hede
                  And ben expert of thys, and in your nede
                  Another daye aſſay in myne abſence
                  Thys dyſciplyne, and thys crafty ſcience
                  Lette take another ounce (ꝙ he) tho
                  Of quycke ſyluer, wythouten wordes mo
                  And done therwyth, as I haue done er thys
                  wyth that other, whych that nowe ſyluer is.
                  ¶Thys preeſt hym beſyeth in al that he can
                  To done as thys Chanon, thys curſed man
                  Commaunded hym, and faſte blewe the fyre
                  
                     For to come to the effecte of his deſyre
                  And this chanon, right in the mean while
                  Al redy was, this preeſt efte to begyle
                  And for a countynaunce in his honde bare
                  An holowe ſticke, take kepe and beware
                  In thende of which an vnce and no more
                  Of ſyluer lymaile putte was al before
                  was in his cole, and ſtopped with wexe wele
                  For to kepen in his lymaile euery dele
                  And whiles this peeſt was in his beſyneſſe
                  This chanon with his ſticke gan him dreſſe
                  To hym anon, and his pouder caſt in
                  As he dyd erſt, the deuyl out of hys ſkyn
                  Him torne, I praye to god for his falſhede
                  For he was euer falſe in thought and dede
                  And with his ſticke, aboue the croſſelette
                  That was ordayned with that falſe iette
                  He ſtyrreth the coles, tyl al relent gan
                  The waxe agayne the fyre, as euery man
                  But he a fole be, wot wel it mote nede
                  And al that in the hole was, out yede
                  And into the croſſelet haſtely it fel
                  The preeſt ſuppoſed nothynge but wel
                  But beſyed hym faſte, & was wonder fayne
                  Suppoſyng nought but trouth, ſoth to ſayn
                  He was ſo glad, that I can nat expreſſe
                  In no manere hys myrthe and his gladneſſe
                  And to the chanon he profered efte ſone
                  Body and good: ye (ꝙ the chanon) anone
                  Tho I be poore, crafty thou ſhalt me fynde
                  I warne the yet is there more behynde
                  Is there any coper here within ſayd he?
                  ¶Ye ſyr (ꝙ the preeſt) I trowe there by.
                  Els go bye ſome, and that aſwythe
                  Nowe good ſyr go forth thy way & hythe.
                  ¶He went his way, & with ye coper he came
                  And this Chanon in his honde it name
                  And of that coper wayed out but an vnce
                  Al to ſymple is my tonge to pronounce
                  As to minyſtre of my wytte the doubleneſſe
                  Of this chanon, rote of al curſydneſſe
                  He ſemed frēdly, to hem yt knew him nought
                  But he was fendly, both in werke & thought
                  It weryeth me to tel of hys falſeneſſe
                  And natheleſſe, yet wol I it expreſſe
                  To the entent that men may beware therby
                  And for none other cauſe truely.
                  ¶He put this vnce of coper into the croſſelet
                  And on the fyre as ſwythe he hath it ſette
                  And caſt in pouder, & made ye preeſt to blowe
                  And in his workyng for to ſtoupe lowe
                  As he dyd erſte, and al nas but a iape
                  Ryght as hym lyſt, ye preeſt he made hys ape
                  And afterwarde in the yngot he it caſte
                  And in the panne put it at the laſte
                  Of water, and in he put hys owne honde
                  And in hys ſleue, as ye beforehonde
                  Herde me tel, he had a ſyluer teyne
                  He ſlily toke it out, thys curſed heyne
                  Vnwetynge thys preeſt of hys falſe crafte
                  And in the pannes botome he hath it lafte
                  And in the water rombleth to and fro
                  And wonder priuely toke vp alſo
                  The coper teyne, not knowynge thys preeſt
                  And hyd it, and hent hym by the breſt
                  And to hym ſpake, & thus ſayd in hys game
                  Stoupeth adowne, by god ye be to blame
                  Helpeth me nowe, as I dyd you wylere
                  Put in your honde, and loketh what is there
                  ¶This preeſt toke vp this ſyluer teyne anon
                  And then ſayd the chanon, let vs gon
                  with theſe thre teines, which we han wrouȝt
                  To ſome goldſmyth, and wete yf it be ought
                  For by my fayth, I nolde for my hoode
                  But yf it were ſyluer fyne and good
                  And that as ſwyth proued ſhalbe.
                  ¶Vnto ye goldſmyth, with theſe teynes thre
                  They went, and put them in aſſaye
                  So fyre and hāmer, might no man ſay naye
                  But they were as them ought for to be.
                  This ſotted preſt, who was gladder thē he
                  was neuer byrde gladder ayenſt the day
                  Ne nyghtyngale, ayenſt the ceſon of May
                  was neuer none, that lyſte better to ſynge
                  Ne lady luſtyer in carollynge
                  And for to ſpeake of loue and womanhede
                  Ne knyght in armes, to don a hardy dede
                  To ſtanden in grace of hys lady dere
                  Then had thys preeſt, thys crafte to lere
                  And to the chanon, thus he ſpake, and ſayd
                  For the loue of God, that for vs al deyd
                  And as I may deſerue it vnto you
                  what ſhal this receit coſt, telleth me nowe?
                  ¶By our lady (ꝙ thys chanon) it is dere
                  I warne you wel, ſaue I and a frere
                  In Englande, there can no man it make.
                  No force (ꝙ he) nowe ſyr for goddes ſake
                  what ſhall I paye, tel me I you praye.
                  I wys (ꝙ he) it is ful dere I ſaye
                  Syr at one worde yf that ye lyſt it haue
                  Ye ſhal pay fourty pounde, ſo god me ſaue
                  And nere the frendſhyp that ye dyd er thys
                  To me, ye ſhulde paye more ywys.
                  ¶This preeſt ye ſūme of fourty poūde anone
                  
                     Of nobles fette, and tolde hem euerychone
                  To thys chanon, for thys ylke receyte
                  Al hys worchynge was fraude and dyſceyte
                  Sir preſt he ſaid, I kepe for to haue no loos
                  Of my crafte, for I wolde it were kept cloos
                  And as ye loue me, kepeth it ſecre
                  For and men knowe al my ſubtelte
                  By god men wolde haue ſo great enuye
                  To me, bycauſe of my philoſophye
                  I ſhulde be deed, there were none other way
                  ¶God it forbyd (ꝙ the preeſt) what ye ſay
                  Yet had I leuer ſpende al the good
                  whych that I haue, and els waxe I wood
                  Then that ye ſhulde fallen in ſuche myſchefe
                  For your good wyl haue ye ryght good prefe
                  (ꝙ the chanon) and farewel graunt mercy
                  He went hys way, & neuer the preeſt hym ſey
                  After that day: & when that thys preſt ſholde
                  Maken aſſay, at ſuch tyme as he wolde
                  Of thys receyte, farewel it nolde not be
                  Lo thus be iaped and begyled was he
                  Thus maketh he hys introduction
                  To brynge folke to her deſtruction.
                  Conſydereth ſyrs, howe in eche eſtate
                  Betwyxt men and golde is debate
                  So ferforth, that vnnethes there is none
                  Thys moultiplyenge blyndeth ſo many one
                  That in good fayth, I trowe that it be
                  The greateſt cauſe of ſuche ſcarſite
                  Theſe phyloſophers ſpeaken ſo myſtely
                  In this craft, that men can not come therby
                  For any wytte that men haue now a dayes
                  They may wel chattre & iāgle as do ye iayes
                  And in her termes, ſet her luſte and payne
                  But to her purpoſe ſhul they neuer attayne
                  A man may lyghtly lerne, yf he haue ought
                  To multiplye, & brynge hys good to nought
                  Lo, ſuche a lucre is in thys luſty game
                  A mans myrth it wol turne al to grame
                  And empten alſo great and heuy purſes
                  And maken folke to purchaſe curſes
                  Of hem that han alſo her good ylente
                  O fye for ſhame, they that han be brente
                  Alas, can not they flye the fyres hete
                  Ye that it vſen, I rede that ye it lete
                  Leſt yt ye leſen al, for better thē neuer is late
                  Neuer to thryue, were to longe a date
                  Though yt ye prolle aye, ye ſhal it neuer fynd
                  Ye ben as bolde as is bayarde the blynd
                  That blōdereth forth, & peryl caſteth he none
                  He is as bolde to renne ayenſt a ſtone
                  As for to go beſyde in the waye
                  So faren ye, that multiplyen I ſaye
                  Yf that your eyen can not ſene aryght
                  Loketh that your mynde lacke not his ſyght
                  For though ye loke neuer ſo brode & ſtare
                  Ye ſhal not wynne a myte in that chaffare
                  But waſt al that ye may repe and renne
                  wythdrawe the fyre, leſte it to faſt brenne
                  Medleth wyth that arte no more I mene
                  For yf ye done, your thryfte is gone ful clene
                  And ryght as ſwyth I wol you tellen here
                  what yt the philoſophers ſayn in this matere
                  ¶Lo thus ſayeth Arnolde of the new toun
                  As hys roſarye maketh mencioun
                  He ſayeth ryght thus, wythouten any lye
                  There may no man Mercurye mortifye
                  But yf it be wyth hys brothers knowlegyng
                  Lo howe yt he, whych fyrſt ſayde thys thyng
                  Of philoſophers father was, Hermes
                  He ſayeth howe the dragon doutles
                  Ne dyeth not, but yf he be ſlayne
                  wyth hys brother: And thys is for to ſayne
                  By the dragon Mercurye, and none other
                  He vnderſtode yt brimſtone was his brother
                  That out of Sol and Luna were ydrawe
                  And therfore ſayd he, take hede to my ſawe
                  Let no mā buſye hym this arte for to ſeche
                  But he that the entencion and ſpeche
                  Of philoſophers vnderſtande can
                  And yf he do, he is a lende man
                  For thys ſcience, and thys connyng (ꝙ he)
                  Is of the ſecre of the ſecres parde.
                  ¶Alſo there was a dyſciple of Plato
                  That on a tyme ſayd hys mayſter to
                  As hys boke Semor wol bere wytneſſe
                  And thys was hys demaūde in ſothfaſtneſſe
                  Tel me the name of the preuy ſtone
                  ¶And Plato anſwered vnto hym anone
                  Take the ſtone that Tytanos men name.
                  ¶whych is ye (ꝙ he) Magnatia is the ſame
                  Sayd Plato: yea ſyr and is it thus?
                  Thys is ignotum per ignotius
                  what is Magnatia, good ſyr I you pray.
                  ¶It is a water that is made I ſay
                  Of elementes foure (quod Plato)
                  ¶Tel me the roche good ſyr (ꝙ he tho)
                  Of that water, yf it be your wyl.
                  Nay nay (ꝙ Plato) certayne that I nyll
                  The philoſophers were yſworne echone
                  That they ſhulde dyſcouer it vnto none
                  Ne in no boke it wryte in no manere
                  For vnto Chriſt it is ſo lefe and dere
                  That he wol not that it dyſcouered be
                  
                     But where it lyketh to hys deite
                  Man to enſpyre and eke for to defende
                  when that hym lyketh, lo thys is his ende
                  ¶Then conclude I thus, ſens ye god of heuē
                  
                  Ne wyl not that the phyloſophers nemen
                  Howe that a mā ſhal come vnto thys ſtone
                  I rede as for the beſt, let it gone
                  For who ſo maketh god hys aduerſarye
                  As for to werch any thynge in contrarye
                  Vnto hys wyl, certes neuer ſhal he thriue
                  Though that he multiplye terme of his lyue
                  And there a poynte, for ended is my tale
                  God ſende euery true man bote of hys bale.
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the tale of the chanons yeman, a no here foloweth the doctour of phiſykes prologue.
               When thys yeman hys tale ended had
               Of thys falſe chanon, whych was ſo bad
               Our hoſte gan ſaye, truely and certayne
               Thys preeſt was begyled, ſothe for to ſayne
               He wenynge for to be a philoſopher
               Tyl he ryght no golde lefte in hys cofer
               And ſothly thys preeſt had alther iape
               Thys curſed chanon put in hys hode an ape
               But al thys paſſe I ouer as now
               Syr doctour of phiſyke, yet I pray you
               Tel vs a tale of ſome honeſte matere
               It ſhalbe done, yf that ye wol it here
               Sayd thys doctour, & hys tale began anone
               Now good mē (ꝙ he) herkeneth euerychone.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the doctour of phiſykes prologue, and here begynneth hys tale.

               
               
                  THere was, as telleth vs Tytus Liuius
               A knyght, that clypped was Virginius
               Fulfylled of honour and of worthyneſſe
               And ſtronge of frendes, and of rycheſſe
               A doughter he had by hys wyfe
               And neuer had he mo in al hys lyfe
               Fayre was thys mayde in excellent beaute
               Abouen euery wyght that man may ſe
               For nature hath, wyth ſouerayne diligence
               Formed her in ſo great excellence
               As though ſhe wolde ſay, lo I nature
               Thus can I forme and paynt a creature
               when that me lyſte, who can me counterfete
               Pigmaliō not, though he alway forge & bete
               Or graue or paynte, for I dare wel ſayne
               Appelles, or zeuſis, ſhulde werche in vayne
               To graue or paynte, or forge or bete
               Yf they preſumed me to counterfete
               For he that is the former principall
               Hath made me hys vycar generall
               
                  To fourme and paynte erthely creaturis
               Right as me lyſte, for al thyng in my cure is
               Vnder the moone, that may wane and waxe
               And for my werke, nothyng wol I axe
               My lorde and I ben fully of a corde
               I made her to the worſhyp of my lorde
               So do I al myne other creatures
               Of what coloure they be, or of what fygures
               Thus ſemeth me that nature wolde ſay.
               This mayd was of age twelue yere & tway
               In which that nature hath ſuche delyte
               For right as ſhe can paynte a lyllye whyte
               And rody as roſe, right with ſuche paynture
               She paynted hath this noble creature
               Er ſhe was borne, vpon her lymmes fre
               Were als bright as ſuche colours ſhulde be
               And Phebus died had her treſſes grete
               Lyke to the ſtremes of his burned hete
               And yf that excellent were her beaute
               A thouſande folde more vertuous was ſhe
               In her ne lacketh no conditioun
               That is to preyſe, as by diſcretioun
               As wel in body as in goſt, chaſte was ſhe
               For whiche ſhe floured in virginite
               with al humylyte and abſtynence
               With al attemperaunce and pacience
               with meſure eke, and beryng of array
               Diſcrete ſhe was in anſweryng alway
               Tho ſhe were wyſe as Pallas, dare I ſayn
               (Her faconde eke, ful womanly and playn)
               No counterfayted termes had ſhe
               To ſeme wyſe: but after her degree
               She ſpake, and al her wordes more & leſſe
               Sownyng in vertue and in gentylleſſe
               Shamfaſt ſhe was, ī maydēs ſhamfaſtneſſe
               Conſtant in hert, and euer in buſyneſſe
               To dryue her out of al ſlogardry
               Bacchus had of her mouthe no maiſtry
               For wyne and youth done Venus encrece
               As men in fyre wol caſten oyle or grece
               And of her owne vertue vnconſtrayned
               She hath ful ofte her ſicke yfayned
               For that ſhe wolde ſlye the company
               Where lykely was to treten of foly
               As is at feeſtes, at reuels, and at daunces
               That ben occaſyons of dalyaunces
               Suche thynges maken chyldren for to be
               To ſone rype and bolde, as men may ſe
               whiche is ful perillous, and hath ben yore
               For al to ſone may ſhe lerne lore
               Of boldneſſe, whan ſhe is a wyfe.
               And ye maiſtreſſes in your olde lyfe
               That lordes doughters han in gouernaunce
               Ne taketh of my worde no dipleſaunce
               Thynke that ye ben ſet in gouernynges
               Of lordes doughters, onely for two thynges
               Eyther for ye han kepte your honeſte
               Eyther ye han fal in freelte
               And knowen wel ynough the olde daunce
               And conne forſake fully miſchaunce
               For euermore, therfore for Chriſtes ſake
               Kepeth wel tho that ye vndertake.
               ¶A thefe of venyſon that hath forlafte
               His lykerouſneſſe, and al his theues crafte
               Can kepe a foreſt beſt of any man
               Nowe kepeth hem wel, for & ye wol ye can
               Loketh wel, to no vice that ye aſſent
               Leſt ye be dampned for your yuel entent
               For who ſo dothe, a traytour is certayn
               And taketh kepe of that I ſhal you ſayn
               Of al treyſon ſouerayne peſtilence
               Is, whan a wight betrayeth innocence
               Ye fathers, and eke ye mothers alſo
               Though ye han chyldren, be it one or mo
               Yours is the charge of al her ſufferaunce
               whiles they ben in your gouernaunce
               Beth ware, that by enſample of your lyueng
               Eyther by your neglygence in chaſtiſynge
               That they ne periſhe: for I dare wel ſay
               If that they don, ye ſhal ful ſore obey
               Vnder a ſhepeherde ſofte and neglygent
               The wolf hath many a ſhepe & lambe to rent
               Suffyſeth one enſample nowe as here
               For I mote turne ayen to my matere.
               ¶This maid, of which I tel my tale expreſſe
               She kepte her ſelue, ſhe neded no maiſtreſſe
               For in her lyueng maydens myght rede
               As in a boke, euery good worke and dede
               That longeth to a mayde vertuous
               She was ſo prudent and ſo bountuous
               For whiche out ſpronge on euery ſyde
               Bothe of her beaute and of her bounte wyde
               That thorowe ye lōde they preyſed her echon
               That loued vertue, ſaue enuy alone
               That ſorye is of other mennes wele
               And gladde is of her ſorowe, and vnhele
               The doctour maketh this diſcriptioun
               This mayde went on a day into the toun
               Towarde the temple, with her mother dere
               As is of yonge maydens the manere.
               ¶Nowe was there a Iuſtice in the toun
               That gouernour was of that regioun
               And ſo befyl, this Iuſtice his eyen caſt
               Vpon this mayde, auiſyng her ful faſt
               
                  As ſhe came foreby, there as the Iuge ſtode
               Anone hys herte chaungeth and hys mode
               So was he caught wt beaute of this mayde
               And to hymſelfe ful priuely he ſayde
               Thys mayde ſhalbe myne for any man
               Anone the fende into hys herte can
               And taught hym ſodeynly, by what ſleyght
               The mayde to his purpoſe wynne he myght
               For certes, by no force, ne by no mede
               Hym thought he was not able for to ſpede
               For ſhe was ſtronge of frendes, and eke ſhe
               Confyrmed was in ſuch ſouerayne beaute
               That wel he wyſt he myght her neuer wyn
               As for to make her wyth her body ſynne
               For whych wyth great delyberatioun
               He ſent after a clyent into the toun
               The whych he knew ful ſubtyl & full bolde
               This iuge vnto thys cliēt his tale hath tolde
               In ſecrete wyſe, and made hym to enſure
               He ſhulde 
                     〈◊〉
                   it vnto no creature
               And yf he 
                     •
                  yd, he ſhulde leſe hys hede
               when aſſented was thys curſed rede
               Glad was the iuge, and made good chere
               And yaue hym gyftes precious and dere
               ¶when ſhapen was al thys conſpiracie
               Fro poynt to poynt, howe that hys lecherie
               Parfourmed ſhulde be ful ſubtelly
               As ye ſhullen after here openly
               Home goeth thys clyent ye hyght Claudius
               Thys falſe iuge, that hyght Appius
               So was hys name, for it is no fable
               But knowe for an hyſtorial thynge notable
               The ſentence of it ſothe is out of doute
               Thys falſe iuge goeth nowe faſt aboute
               To haſten hys delyte, al that he maye
               And ſo byfell, that ſone after on a daye
               Thys falſe iuge, as telleth vs the ſtorie
               As he was wonte, ſate in hys conſyſtorie
               And yaue hys domes vpon ſondry caas
               Thys falſe client came forth a ful gret paas
               And ſayd lorde, yf it be your wyll
               As doth me ryght vpon thys pytous byll
               In whych I playne vpon Virginius
               And yf he wol ſay it is not thus
               I wol proue it, and fynde good wytneſſe
               That ſoth is that my byl wol expreſſe
               The iuge anſwerde, of thys in hys abſence
               I maye not yeue diffynite ſentence
               Let do hym cal, and I wol gladly here
               Thou ſhalt haue ryght, and no wronge here
               Virginius came to wete the iuges wyl
               And ryght anone was radde thys curſed byl
               The ſentence of it, was as ye ſhal here.
               ¶To you my lorde Appius ſo dere
               Sheweth your poore ſeruaunt claudius
               Howe that a knyght called Virginius
               Ayenſt the lawe, and ayenſt al equite
               Holdeth expreſſe ayenſt the wyl of me
               My ſeruaunt, whych yt is my thrale by right
               whych frō myne houſe was ſtolē on a night
               whyles he was ful yonge, I wol it preue
               By wytneſſe lorde, ſo that ye you not greue
               She is not hys doughter, what ſo he ſaye
               wherfore my lorde iuſtyce I you praye
               Yelde me my thrale, yf it be your wyll
               Lo thys was al the ſentence of that byll.
               ¶Virginius gan vpon the clyent beholde
               But haſtely, er he hys tale tolde
               He wolde haue defēded it, as ſhulde a knight
               And by wytneſſe of many a trewe wyght
               That al was falſe, that ſayd hys aduerſarye
               Thys curſed iuge wolde no lenger tarye
               Ne here a worde more of Virginius
               But yaue hys iudgement, and ſayd thus.
               ¶I deme anone this client his ſeruaūt haue
               Thou ſhalt no lēger her in thyne houſe ſaue
               Go brynge her forth, & put her in our warde
               This cliēt ſhal haue his thral, thus I award
               ¶And whē thys worthy knyght Virginius
               Through the aſſent of the iudge Appius
               Muſte by force hys dere doughter yeuen
               Vnto the iudge, in lechery to lyuen
               He goeth hym home, and ſet hym in hys hall
               And let anone hys dere doughter call
               And wyth face deed as aſhen colde
               Vpon her humble face he gan beholde
               with fathers pyte, ſtickyng through his hert
               Al wolde he not from hys purpoſe conuert.
               ¶Doughter (ꝙ he) Virginia by thy name
               There ben two wayes, eyther deth or ſhame
               That thou muſte ſuffre, alas yt I was borne
               For neuer thou deſeruedeſt wherforne
               To dyen, wyth a ſworde or wyth a knyfe
               Oh dere doughter, comforte of my lyfe
               whych I haue foſtred vp wyth ſuch pleſaūce
               That thou ne were out of my remembraūce
               O doughter, whych that arte my laſt wo
               And in my lyfe my laſt ioye alſo
               O iemme of chaſtite, in pacience
               Take thou thy death, thys is my ſentence
               For loue, and not for hate thou muſt be deed
               My pytous hande mote ſmyte of thyne heed
               Alas that euer Appius the ſey
               Thus hath he falſly iudged the to dey
               
                  And tolde her al the caſe, as ye before
               Han herde, it nedeth not to tel it more
               ¶O mercy dere father (ꝙ thys mayde)
               And wyth that worde, both her armes layde
               About hys necke, as ſhe was wont to do
               The teeres braſte out of her eyen two
               And ſayd, O good father ſhal I dye
               Is there no grace? is there no remedye?
               ¶No certes dere doughter myne (ꝙ he)
               Then yeue me leaue father myne (ꝙ ſhe)
               My death to complayne a lytel ſpace
               For parde, Iepte yaue hys doughter grace
               For to complayne, er he her ſlough, alas
               And god it wote, nothynge was her treſpas
               But that ſhe ranne her father fyrſt to ſe
               To welcome hym wyth great ſolempnyte
               And with that word ſhe fel a ſwoune anone
               And after, whon her ſwounynge was gone
               She ryſeth vp, and to her father ſayd
               Blyſſed be god that I ſhal dye a mayde
               Yeue me my death, er that I haue a ſhame
               Doth wt your child your wil a goddes name
               And wyth ye worde, ſhe prayeth hym ful ofte
               That wt his ſwerd he ſhould ſmitte her ſofte
               And with that word, a ſwoune down ſhe fel
               Her father, wyth ſorowfull herte and fell
               Her heed of ſmote, and by the toppe it hente
               And to the iudge he it yaue in preſente
               As he ſate in dome in conſyſtorye.
               when the iudge it ſawe as ſayth the ſtorye
               He bade take hym, and hange hym alſo faſte
               But ryght anone al the people in thraſt
               To ſaue the knyght, for routh and for pytie
               For knowen was the iudges iniquitie
               The people anone had ſuſpect in this thing
               By maner of thys clyentes chalengynge
               That it was by the aſſent of Appius
               They wyſte wel that he was lecherous
               For whych vnto Appius they gone
               And caſten hym in priſon ryght anone
               where as he ſlowe hym ſelfe, and Claudius
               That ſeruaunt was vnto thys Appius
               was demed for to be hanged vpon a tre
               But Virginius, of hys great pyte
               So prayed for hym, that he was exiled
               And els certes he had ben begyled
               The remnaunt were hanged, more and leſſe
               That conſented were to thys curſydneſſe
               Here may men ſe how ſyn hath hys meryte
               Beware, for no mā wot how god wyl ſmyte
               In no degre, ne in no maner wyſe
               The worme of conſcience wol aryſe
               Of wycked lyfe, though it ſo priuy be
               That no man wote of it but god and he
               whether he be leude man or lered
               He not howe ſone he may be affered
               Therfore I rede you thys counſayle take
               Forſake ſynne, or ſynne you forſake
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the doctour of Phiſykes tale, and foloweth the wordes of the hooſt.
               
                  OVr hoſte gan ſwere as he were woode
               Harowe (ꝙ he) by nayles and by bloode
               Thys was a falſe thefe, and a curſed iuſtyce
               As ſhameful death, as herte may deuyſe
               Come to the iuſtyce and her adu
                     •
                  cas
               Algate thys ſely mayden is ſlayne, alas
               Alas to dere bought ſhe her beaute
               wherfore I ſaye, that al men maye ſe
               That yeftes of fortune, or of nature
               Ben cauſe of death of many a creature
               Her beaute was her death, I dare wel ſayne
               Alas ſo pytouſly as ſhe was ſlayne
               But here of wol I not procede as nowe
               Men haue ful ofte more harme then prowe
               But truely myne owne mayſter dere
               Thys is a pytous tale for to here
               But natheleſſe, paſſe ouer is no force
               I pray to god to ſaue thy gentel cors
               And thy vrinalles, and thy iordanes
               Thyne ypocras, and eke thy galyanes
               And euery boxe ful of letuarye
               God bleſſe hem and our lady ſaynt Marye
               So mote I the, thou arte a propre man
               And ylyke a prelate, by ſaynt Runian
               Saue that I can not ſpeake wel in terme
               But wel I wote, yu doeſt myn herte to yerne
               That I haue almoſt ycaught a cardyacle
               By corpus domini, but I haue tryacle
               Or els a draught of moyſte corny ale
               Or but I here anone an other mery tale
               My herte is loſte, for pyte of thys mayde
               Thou belamy, thou Iohan pardoner he ſaid
               Tel vs ſome mery tale, or iape, ryght anone.
               It ſhalbe done (ꝙ he) by ſaynt Runyon
               But fyrſt (ꝙ he) here at thys ale ſtake
               I wol both drynke, and eate of a cake
               But ryght anone, theſe gentyls gan to crye
               
                  Nay, let hym tel vs of no rebaudrye
               Tel vs ſome moral thing, that we mow lere
               Some wytte, and than wol we gladly here
               I graunt (ꝙ he) twys, but I mote thynke
               On ſome honeſt thyng, whyles yt I drynke.
            
            
               ¶Here ende the wordes of the hoſt, and here foloweth the prologue of the Pardoner.
               
                  LOrdynges (ꝙ he) in chyrche whan I preche
               I payne me to haue an hauteyn ſpeche
               And ring it out, as rounde as dothe a bel
               For I can al be roote, that I tel
               My teme is alwaye, and euer was
               (Radix omnium malorum eſt cupiditas)
               Fyrſt I pronounce fro whens I come
               And than my bylles I ſhewe al and ſome
               Our 
                     ••
                  ege lorde ſeale on my patent
               That ſhewe I fyrſt, my body to warent
               That no man be ſo bolde, preeſt ne clerke
               M
                     •
                   to diſtourbe, of Chriſtes holy werke
               And after that, tel I forthe my tales
               Bulles of Popes, and of Cardynales
               Of Patriarkes, and of Byſhoppes I ſhewe
               And in latyn I ſpeke wordes a fewe
               To ſauer with my predication
               And for to ſteere men to deuotion
               Than ſhewe I forth my long chriſtal ſtones
               Ycrammed ful of cloutes and of bones
               Relykes they ben, as wene they echone
               Than haue I in laton a ſholderbone
               whiche that was of an holy iewes ſhepe
               Good men ſaye I, take of my wordes kepe
               If that this bone be waſhen in any wel
               If cowe or calfe, ſhepe, or oxe ſwel
               That any worme hath eeten, or hem ſtonge
               Take water of this wel, and waſhe his tong
               And it is hole anon: and farthermore
               Of pockes, and of ſcabbes, and euery ſore
               Shal ſhepe be hole, that of this wel
               Drinketh a draught, take kepe of that I tel
               ¶If the good man that the beeſtes oweth
               wol euery day, er the cocke croweth
               Faſtyng drynke of this wel a draught
               As thilke holy iewe our elders taught
               His beeſtes and his ſtore ſhal multiplye
               And ſyrs, alſo it healeth ielouſye
               For though a man be fal in ielous rage
               Let make with this water his potage
               And neuer ſhal he more his wyfe miſtryſt
               Though he in ſothe the defaute by her wyſt
               Al had ſhe take preeſtes two or thre.
               ¶Here is a myttayne eke, that ye may ſe
               He that his honde wol put in thys mittayne
               He ſhal haue multiplyeng of his grayne
               whan he hath ſowen, be it whete or otes
               So that he offer good pens or grotes
               And men & women, o thyng I warne you
               If any wight ben in this churche nowe
               That hath done ſynne horrible, that he
               Dare not for ſhame of it ſhriuen be
               Or any woman, be ſhe yonge or olde
               That hath made her huſbonde coke wolde
               Suche folke ſhul haue no powre ne no grace
               To offre to my relykes in this place
               And who ſo fyndeth hym out of ſuche blame
               Commeth vp and offre in goddes name
               And I aſſoyle hym by the auctorite
               Suche as by bulle was graunted to me.
               ¶By this gaude haue I wonne euery yere
               An hundred marke, ſythen I was pardonere
               I ſtonde lyke a clerke in my pulpet
               And the leude people byn downe yſet
               I preche ſo as ye haue lered here before
               And tel an hundred iapes more
               Than payn I me to ſtretche forth my necke
               And eſte and weſt, vpon the people I becke
               As dothe a doue, ſyttyng vpon a berne
               My hondes and my tonge gon ful yerne
               That it is ioy to ſe my beſyneſſe
               Of auarice, and of ſuche curſydneſſe
               Al my prechyng is for to maken hem fre
               To yeuen her pens, and namely vnto me
               For myne entent is not but for to wynne
               And nothyng for correction of ſynne
               I recke neuer, whan that they ben beryed
               Thoughe her ſoules gon a blacburyed
               For certes many a predycation
               Cometh oft tyme of yuel entencion.
               ¶Some for pleaſaunce of folke, & for flatery
               To ben auaunced by hipocryſy
               And ſome for veyne glorie, and ſome for hate
               For whan I dare not other wayes debate
               Than wol I ſting hem with my tōge ſmerte
               In prechyng, ſo that he ſhal not aſterte
               To ben diffamed falſly, yf that he
               Hath treſpaſed to my bretherne or to me
               
                  For though I tel not his propre name
               Men ſhal wel knowe that it is the ſame
               By ſignes, or by other circunſtaunces
               Thus quyte I folke, yt dothe vs diſpleſaūces
               Thus put I out my venym vnder hewe
               Of holyneſſe, to ſemen holy and trewe
               But ſhortly myne entent I wol deuyſe
               I preche of nothyng but of couetyſe
               Therfore my teme is yet, and euer was
               Radix omnium malorum eſt cupiditas.
               ¶Thus can I preache ayenſt the ſame vyce
               Whiche that I vſe, and that is auarice
               But though my ſelfe be gilty in that ſynne
               Yet can I maken other folke to twynne
               From auarice, and ſore hem to repent
               But that is not my principal entent
               I preche nothyng but for couetyſe
               Of this matere, it ought ynough ſuffyſe.
               Than tel I hem enſamples many one
               Of olde ſtories, longe tyme agone
               For leude people louen tales olde
               which thynges they can wel reporte & holde
               What trow ye? whiles that I may preche
               And wynne golde and ſyluer for to teche
               That I wol lyue in pouert wilfully?
               Nay nay, I thought it neuer trewly
               For I wol preche and begge in ſōdrie londes
               I wol not do no labour with myn hondes
               Ne make baſkettes, and lyue therby
               Bycauſe I wol not begge idelly
               I wol none of the apoſtels counterfete
               I wol haue money, mault, cheſe, & whete
               Al were it yeuen of the pooreſt page
               Or of the pooreſt wydowe in a village
               Though her children ſhuld ſterue for famy
                     •
                  
               
               Nay, I wol drinke the lycoure of the wyne
               And haue a ioly wenche in euery toun
               But herkeneth lordynges my concluſyoun
               Your lykyng is that I ſhulde tel a tale
               Nowe I haue drōken a draught of corny ale
               By god I hope I ſhal tel you a thynge
               That ſhal by reſon ben at your lykynge
               For though my ſelfe be a ful vycious man
               A morall tale yet I you tel can
               whiche I am wonte to preche, for to wynne
               Nowe holdeth your peace, my tale I woll begyn.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Pardoners prologue, and here foloweth his tale.

               
               
                  
                  
                     IN Flaunders whilō ther was a company
                  Of yonge folke, that haū
                     ted foly
                  As haſarde, ryotte, Stewes, & tauernes
                  Where as wyth harpes Lutes, and Geternes
                  They dauncen & playen at dyce nyght & day
                  And eeten alſo, ouer that her might may
                  Through which they don the dyuel ſacrifyce
                  within the dyuels temple, in curſed wyſe
                  By ſuperfluite abhominable
                  Her othes ben ſo great and ſo damnable
                  That it is griſly for to here hem ſwere
                  Our bliſſed lordes body they al to tere
                  Hem thought iewes rent him not ynough
                  And eche of hem at others ſynne lough.
                  And right anon comen in tombleſteres
                  Fetys and ſmale and yonge froytereres
                  Syngers wilh harpes, bandes, & waferers
                  whiche that ben verely the dyuels offycers
                  To kyndlen and blowe the fyre of lechery
                  That is anexed vnto glotony
                  The holy writte take I to my wytneſſe
                  That lechery is in wyne and dronkeneſſe.
                  ¶Lo howe that dronken Lothe vnkyndly
                  Lay by his doughters two on wetyngly
                  So dronke he was, he niſt what he wrought
                  And therfore ſore repent hym ought
                  Herodes, who ſo wol the ſtories ſeche
                  There may ye lerne, & by enſample teche
                  whan he of wyne was replete at his feſte
                  Right at his owne table, yaue his heſte
                  To ſleen Iohan the Baptiſte ful giltleſſe
                  Seneke ſaythe eke good wordes doutleſſe
                  He ſaythe he can no difference fynde
                  Betwixt a man that is out of his mynde
                  And a man that is dronklewe
                  But woodneſſe that is fallen in a ſhrewe
                  Perſeuereth lenger than dothe dronkneſſe
                  O gloteny, ful of curſydneſſe
                  O cauſe fyrſt of our confuſyon
                  O original of our dampnacion
                  Tyl Chriſt had bouȝt vs wt his blode agayn
                  Lo howe dere, ſhortly for to ſayn
                  Bought was fyrſt this curſed vilanye
                  Corrupt was al this world through glotony
                  Adam our forn father, and his wyfe alſo
                  Fro Paradyce, to labour and to wo
                  Were driuen for that vyce, it is no drede
                  For whyles that Adam faſted, as I rede
                  He was in paradyce, and whan that he
                  Ete of the frute, defended on the tre
                  Anon he was out caſte to wo and payne
                  O gloteny, on the wel ought vs to playne.
                  ¶Oh, wyſte a man howe many maladyes
                  Foloweth of exceſſe and of glotenyes
                  He wolde ben the more meſurable
                  Of his dyete, ſyttyng at his table
                  Alas the ſhorte throte, the tender mouthe
                  Maketh that eſte, & weſt, northe, and ſouthe,
                  In erthe, in eyre, in water, man to ſwynke
                  To getten a gloton dayntye mete and drinke
                  Of this mater, o Poule wel canſte thou trete
                  Mete vnto wombe, & wombe eke vnto mete
                  Shal god diſtroy bothe as Poule ſaythe
                  Alas, a ſoule thyng it is by my faythe
                  To ſay this worde, and fouler is the dede
                  whan men ſo drinketh of the whyte & rede
                  That of his trothe he maketh his priue
                  Through thilke curſed ſuperfluite.
                  ¶The apoſtle ſayth, wepyng ful pitouſly
                  There walken many, of which tolde haue I
                  I ſay it nowe wepyng with pitous voyce
                  There ben enemyes Of Chriſtes croyſe
                  Of which ye ende is deth, wombe is her god
                  O bely, O wombe, O ſtynkyng cod
                  Fulfylled of donge and of corrupcioun
                  At eyther ende of the ſoule is the ſoun
                  Howe great coſte and laboure is to fynde
                  Theſe cokes? how they ſtāpe, ſtrain, & grinde
                  And turne ſubſtaunce in to accident
                  To fulfyl al thy lykerous talent
                  Out of the harde bones knocken they
                  The mary, for they caſte it not awey
                  That may go through the gullet ſafe & ſote
                  Of ſpycerie, of leues, barke, and rote
                  Shal ben his ſauce ymade by delyte
                  To maken hym haue a newer apetyte
                  But certes he that haunteth ſuche delytes
                  Is deed, whiles that he lyueth in the vyces
                  ¶A lecherouſe thyng is wyne and drōkneſſe
                  It is ful of ſtryuyng and of wretchydneſſe
                  Oh dronken man, diſfygured in thy face
                  Sower is thy breth, foul art thou to enbrace
                  And through thy drōkē noſe ſowneth ye ſoun
                  As tho thou ſaydeſt aye, Sampſon Sāpſon
                  And yet god wote Sāpſon drōk neuer wyne
                  Thou falleſt, as it were a ſtycked ſwyne
                  Thy tonge is loſt, and al thyne honeſt cure
                  For drynkenneſſe is very ſepulture
                  Of mannes wytte, and his diſcretion
                  In whom that drinke hath domynation
                  
                     He can no counſayle kepe, it is no drede
                  Nowe kepe you fro the whyte and fro ye rede
                  Namely fro the white wyne of Lepe
                  That is to ſel in Fiſhe ſtrete and in Chepe
                  This wyne of Spayne crepeth ſubtelly
                  In other wynes growyng faſt by
                  Of whiche riſeth ſuche fumoſyte
                  That whan a mā hath drōck draughtes thre
                  And weneth that he be at home in Chepe
                  He is in Spayne, right at the towne of Lepe
                  Nought at Rochel, ne at Burdeaux toun
                  And than wol he ſay, Sampſoun Sāpſoun
                  But herkeneth lordiges o word, I you pray
                  That al the ſouerayne actes, dare I ſay
                  Of victories in the olde Teſtament
                  That thorowe very god, that is omnipotent
                  Were don in abſtinence and in prayere
                  Loketh the Byble, and there ye mow it lere.
                  Loketh Attyla, the great conquerour
                  Deyd in his ſlepe, with ſhame and diſhonour
                  Bledyng aye at his noſe in dronkneſſe
                  A capitayne ſhulde lyue in ſoberneſſe.
                  And ouer al this, auyſe you right wel
                  what was cōmaunded vnto Lamuel?
                  Nat Samuel: but Lamuel ſaye I
                  Redeth the Byble, and fyndeth it expreſly
                  Of wyne yeuyng to hem that haue iuſtyce
                  No more of this, for it may ynoughe ſuffyce.
               
               
                  And nowe that I haue ſpoke of glotenye
                  Nowe wol I defende you haſardrie
                  Haſarde is very mother of leſynges
                  And of diſceyte, and curſed for ſwerynges
                  Blaſpheme of chriſt, māſlauȝter, & waſt alſo
                  Of batayle ofte tyme, and of other mo
                  It is reprefe, and contrarye to honour
                  For to be holden a cōmen haſardour
                  And euer the hyer that he is of eſtate
                  The more he is holden deſolate
                  If that a prince vſe haſardrie
                  In al gouernaunce and policie
                  He is as by comen opinyon
                  Holde the leſſe in reputacion.
                  ¶Styllebon, that was holde a wyſe ambaſſadour
                  was ſent in to Corinthe wt ful great honour
                  Fro Calydone, to maken hem alyaunce
                  And whan he came, happed this chaunce
                  That al the greateſt that were of that londe
                  Playeng at haſarde he hem fonde
                  For whiche, as ſone as it might be
                  He ſtale hym home ayen to his countre
                  And ſayd, there wol I not leſe my name
                  I nyl not take on me ſo great defame
                  For to alye you to none haſardours
                  Sendeth other wyſer enbaſſadours
                  For by my trouthe, me were leuer dye
                  Than I ſhulde you to haſardours alye
                  For ye that ben ſo gloriouſe in honours
                  Shal not alye you with haſardours
                  As by my wyl, ne by my tretie
                  This wyſe philoſopher, thus ſayd he.
                  ¶Loke eke howe to kyng Demetrius
                  The kyng of Parthes, as the boke ſaythe vs
                  Sent hym a payre of dyce of golde in ſcorne
                  For he had vſed haſardrie there byforne
                  For which he helde his glorie & his renoun
                  At no value or reputacioun
                  Lordes might fynde other maner play
                  Honeſt ynough to driue the day away.
               
               
                  Nowe wol I ſpeke of othes falſe & great
                  A worde or two, as other bokes entreat
                  Great ſweryng is thyng abhomynable
                  And falſe ſweryng is yet more reprouable
                  The hye god forbade ſweryng at all
                  wytneſſe of Mathew, but in ſpecyall
                  Of ſweryng, ſaythe the holy Ieromye
                  Thou ſhalte ſwere ſoth thyn othes, & not lye
                  And ſwere in dome and eke in rightwyſneſſe
                  But ydle ſweryng is a curſydneſſe.
                  ¶Beholde and ſe that in the fyrſt table
                  Of hye goddes heſtes honorable
                  Howe that the ſeconde heſte of hym is this
                  Take not my name in ydelneſſe amys
                  Lo, he rather forbyddeth ſuch ſweryng
                  Than homicide, or any other curſed thyng
                  I ſay as thus, by order it ſtondeth
                  This knoweth they yt his heſtes vnderſtondeth
                  Howe that the ſeconde heſte of god is that
                  And further more, I wol the tel al plat
                  That vengeaūce ſhal not parte fro his hou
                        •
                     
                  
                  That of hys othes is to outragyous
                  By goddes preciouſe herte, and his bones
                  And by the blode of Chriſt, ſhed for vs ones
                  Seuen is my chaunce, and thyn fyue & thre
                  By goddes armes, yf thou falſly play me
                  This daggar ſhal thorowe thyn herte go
                  This frute cometh of thylke bones two
                  For ſwering, ire, falſneſſe, and homicyde
                  Now for yt loue of Chriſt, that for vs dyde
                  Leaueth your othes, bothe great and ſmale
                  For I ſhal tel you a meruaylous tale.
                  ¶Theſe ryottours thre, of which I tel
                  Longe erſte or prime ronge any bel
                  
                     were ſet hem in a tauerne to drinke
                  And as they ſate, they herde a bel clynke
                  Byforne a cors, yt was caryed to his graue
                  That one of hem gan cal to his knaue
                  Go bette (ꝙ he) and aſke redely
                  what cors is this, that paſſeth forthe by
                  And loke that thou reporte his name wele.
                  ¶Syr (ꝙ he) it nedeth neuer a dele
                  It was me told er ye came here two houres
                  He was parde an olde felowe of yours
                  Al ſodaynly was he ſlayne to nyght
                  For dronke as he ſate on his benche vpright
                  There came a priuy thefe, men clepen dethe
                  That in this countrey al the people ſlethe
                  And with his ſpeare he ſmote his hert a two
                  And went his way, withouten wordes mo
                  He hath a thouſande ſlayne, this peſtilence
                  And mayſter, er ye come in his preſence
                  Me thynketh that it were neceſſarye
                  For to beware of ſuche an aduerſarye
                  Bethe redy for to meten hym euer more
                  Thus taught me my dame, I ſay no more.
                  ¶By ſaynt Mary, ſayd this tauernere
                  the chylde ſayth ſothe, for he hath this yere
                  Hence ouer a myle, ſlayne in a great village
                  Bothe man and woman, chylde and page
                  I nowe his habytacioun be there
                  To ben auyſed, great wyſedome it were
                  Er that he dyd a man diſhonour.
                  ¶Yea goddes armes (ꝙ this ryottour)
                  Is it ſuche peril with him for to mete?
                  I ſhal hym ſeche by ſtyle & eke by ſtrete
                  I make a vowe, by goddes digne bones
                  Herkeneth felowes, we thre ben al ones
                  Let eche of vs holde vp his honde to other
                  And eche of vs become others brother
                  And we wol ſlee this falſe traytour dethe
                  He ſhal be ſlayne, that ſo many ſlethe
                  By goddes dignite, er that it be nyght
                  ¶To gider hā theſe thre her trouthes plight
                  To lyue and dye eche of hym with other
                  As though he were his owne brother
                  And vp they ſterten al dronken in this rage
                  And forthe they gone, towarde that village
                  Of which the tauerner hath ſpoke before
                  And many a griſly othe han they ſwore
                  And Chriſtes bleſſed body they to rent
                  Dethe ſhal be deed, and we may hym hent.
                  ¶whan they han gone not fully a myle
                  Right as they wold haue troden ouer a ſtyle
                  An olde poore man with hem mette
                  This olde man ful mekely hem grette
                  And ſayd, nowe lordynges god you ſe.
                  ¶The proudeſt of theſe ryottours thre
                  Anſwerde ayen, what chorle wt harde grace
                  why art thou al forwrapped ſaue thy face?
                  why lyueſt thou ſo longe in ſo great age?
                  ¶This olde man gan loken in hys viſage
                  And ſayd thus: for I can not fynde
                  A man, though I walked into Iude
                  Neyther in cyte, ne in no village
                  That wol chaunge his youthe for myne age
                  And therfore mote I haue myn age ſtyl
                  As longe tyme as it is goddes wyl.
                  Ne dethe alas, nyl not haue my lyfe
                  Thus walke I lyke a reſtleſſe caityfe
                  And on ye ground, which is my mothers gate
                  I knocke with my ſtaffe erlyche and late
                  And ſay, leue mother let me in
                  Lo howe I vanyſhe, fleſhe, bloode, & ſkyn
                  Alas, whan ſhal my bones ben at reſte
                  Mother with you wolde I chaūge my cheſte
                  That in my chamber longe tyme hath be
                  Ye for an heren cloute to wrappe in me
                  But yet to me ſhe wol not done that grace
                  For whiche ful welked is my face
                  But ſyrs, to you it is no curteſye
                  To ſpeken vnto an olde man villanye
                  But he treſpace in worde eyther in dede
                  In holy writte, ye may your ſelfe wel rede
                  Ayenſt an olde man, hoore vpon his heede
                  Ye ſhulde aryſe, therfore I you rede
                  Ne doth vnto an old man no harme as now
                  No more than ye wolde a man dyd you
                  In age, yf that I may ſo longe abyde
                  And god be with you, whether ye go or ryde
                  I mote go thyder as I haue to go
                  ¶Nay olde chorle, by god thou ſhalt not ſo
                  Sayd theſe other haſardours anon
                  Thou parteſt not ſo lightly by ſaynt Iohn
                  Thou ſpakeſt right now of thilk trayter deth
                  That in this countre al our frendes ſlethe
                  Haue here my trouthe thou arte his eſpye
                  Tel where he is, or els thou ſhalt dye
                  By god and by the holy ſacrament
                  For ſothely thou arte of hys aſſent
                  To ſlee vs yonge folke, thou falſe thefe.
                  ¶Nowe ſyrs, yf it be to you ſy lefe
                  To fynde dethe, turne vp this croked way
                  For in that groue I lefte hym by my fay
                  Vnder a tree, and there he wol abyde
                  Ne for your boſte he nyl hym nothyng hyde
                  Se ye yōder oke, right there ye ſhal hī fynde
                  God ſaue you, that bought ayen mankynde
                  
                     And you amende, thus ſayd thus olde man
                  ¶Than eueryche of theſe ryottours ran
                  Tyl they came to the tree, & there they foūde
                  Floreynes of golde fyne, ycoyned rounde
                  wel nye a ſeuen buſhels, as hem thought
                  No lenger than after dethe they ſought
                  But eche of hem ſo glad was of that ſyght
                  For that the Floreyns ſo fayre ben & bright
                  That downe they ſytte, by the precious hord
                  The worſt of hem ſpake the fyrſt word.
                  ¶Brethern (ꝙ he) take kepe what I ſay
                  My wytte is great, though I borde & play
                  This treſure hath fortune to vs yeuen
                  In myrthe and iolyte our lyfe to lyuen
                  And lightly as it cōmeth, ſo wol we ſpende
                  Hey, goddes precious herte: who wende
                  To day, that we ſhulde haue ſo fayr a grace?
                  But might thus gold be caryed fro this place
                  Home to my houſe, or els to yours
                  (For wel I wote that al this golde is ours)
                  Than were we in hye felycite
                  But trewly by day it may not be
                  Men wolde ſay, that we were theues ſtrōge
                  And for our owne treſoure than vs honge
                  This treſour muſte ycaried be by night
                  As wiſely and as 
                        ••
                     ily as it might
                  Wherfore I rede, let loke amonge vs al
                  To drawe, & let ſe where the cutte wol fal
                  He that hath yt ſhorteſt cutte, with hert blyth
                  Shal renne to towne, and that ful ſwythe
                  To bring vs breed & drinke ful priuely
                  And two of vs ſhal kepe ful ſubtelly
                  This treſour wel, and yf he wol not tarye
                  whan it is night, we wol this treſour carye
                  By one aſſent, where as vs lyſte beſt
                  That one of hem brought graſſe in his feſt
                  And bad hē draw, & loke on whō it wold fal
                  And it fel on the yongeſt of hem al
                  And forth towarde the towne he went anon
                  And al ſo ſone as he was gone
                  That one of hem ſpake vnto that other
                  Thou woſt wel, thou art my ſworn brother
                  Thy profyte wol I tel the right anone
                  Thou woſte wel that our felowe is gone
                  And here is golde, and that ful great plente
                  That ſhal departed be amonge vs thre
                  But n
                        •
                     theleſſe, yf that I can ſhape it ſo
                  That it departed were amonge vs two
                  Had I not done a frendly turne to the
                  That other anſwerd, I not how yt might be
                  I wol wel that the golde were ours two
                  what ſhulde we do, that it might be ſo?
                  ¶Shal it be coūſayle (ſaid the fyrſt ſhrewe)
                  And I ſhal tel the in wordes fewe
                  what we wol done, and bryng it wel aboute.
                  I graunt (ꝙ that other) out of doute
                  That by my trouth, I wol yt not bewrayne
                  ¶Now (ꝙ he) thou woſt wel we ben twayn
                  And twayne of vs ſhal ſtronger be than one
                  Loke whan he is ſette, and than anone
                  Aryſe, as though thou woldeſt wt hym play
                  And I ſhal ryuen him through ye ſydes tway
                  whyles yt thou ſtruggleſt wt hym as in game
                  And with thy dagger, loke thou do the ſame
                  And than ſhal al the golde departed be
                  My dere frende, betwixt the and me
                  Than may we bothe our luſtes fulfyl
                  And play at dyce, right at our owne wyl
                  And thus accorded ben theſe ſhrewes tway
                  To ſlee the thyrde, as ye herde me ſay
                  This yongeſt, which yt went to the towne
                  Ful often in his herte he rolled vp and down
                  The beautie of theſe floreyns fayre & bright
                  O lorde (ꝙ he) yf ſo were that I might
                  Haue al this treſour to my ſelfe alone
                  There nys no man, that lyueth vnder trone
                  Of god, that ſhulde lyue ſo mery as I
                  And at the laſte the feude our enemy
                  Put in his thought, that he ſhuld poyſon bey
                  with which he might ſleen his felowes twey
                  For why, the fende fonde hym in ſuch lyuing
                  That he had leue to ſorowe hym to bryng
                  For this was vtterly hys entente
                  To ſleen hem bothe, and neuer to repente.
                  ¶And forth he goth, no lenger wold he tary
                  In to the towne, vnto a potecary
                  And prayde hym that he wol hym ſel
                  Some poyſon, that he might his rattes quel
                  And eke there was a polkat in his hawe
                  That as he ſayd, his capons had yſlawe
                  And ſayd, he wold wreken hym if yt he might
                  Of vermyn, that diſtroyed hem by night.
                  ¶The potecary anſwerde, thou ſhalt haue
                  A thyng, as wiſely god my ſoule ſaue
                  In al this worlde there nys no creature
                  That eateth or drinketh of this confecture
                  Not but the moūtenaūce of a corne of whete
                  That he ne ſhal hys lyfe anon forlete
                  Yea ſterue he ſhal, and that in leſſe whyle
                  Thā thou woldeſt gon a pace, not but a myle
                  This poyſon is ſo harde and ſo violent
                  ¶This curſed man hath in his honde hent
                  This poyſon in a bore, and ſythe he ran
                  In to the next ſtrete vnto a man
                  
                     And borowed hym large botels thre
                  And in the two, the poyſon poured he
                  The thyrde he kept clene for his drinke
                  For al the night he ſhope hym for to ſwynke
                  In caryeng of the golde out of that place
                  And whan this riottour, with ſorie grace
                  Had fylde with hym hys great bottels thre
                  To his felowes ayen repayred he.
                  ¶what nedeth it therof to ſermon more?
                  For right as they had caſte his dethe before
                  Right ſo they han hym ſlayne, & that anone
                  And whan this was done, than ſpake ye one
                  Nowe let vs ſyt and drinke, & make vs mery
                  And afterwarde we wolne his body bury
                  And after that it happed hem per caas
                  The one toke the botel, therin yt poyſon was
                  And dronke, and yaue his felowe drinke alſo
                  Through which anon they ſterne both two.
                  ¶But certes I ſuppoſe that Auicenne
                  wrote neuer in no cannon, ne in no fenne
                  More wonder ſorowes of enpoyſonnyng
                  Than had theſe wretches two in her ending
                  Thus ended ben theſe homicides two
                  And eke the falſe enpoyſonner alſo.
                  O curſed ſynne, ful of al curſydneſſe
                  O traytours homicide, O wickydneſſe
                  O glotenye, luxure, and haſardye
                  Thou blaſphemour of Chriſt wyth vilanye
                  And othes great, of vſage and of pryde
                  Alas mankynde, howe may it betyde
                  That to thy creatoure, which yt the wrought
                  And with his precious bloode the bought
                  Thou arte ſo falſe and ſo vnkynde, alas?
                  Now good mē, godforyeue you your treſpas
                  And ware you fro the ſynne of auaryce
                  Myne holy pardon, may you al waryſhe
                  So that ye offre nobles or ſtarlynges
                  Other els ſyluer ſpones, broches, or rynges
                  Boweth your heed vnder this bulle
                  Cometh vp ye wyues, & offreth of your wol
                  Your names here I entre in my rolle anon
                  In to the bliſſe of heuen ſhul ye al gon
                  I you aſſoyle by myne high powere
                  Ye that offren, as clene and eke clere
                  As ye were borne. Lo ſyrs, thus I preche
                  And Ieſu Chriſt, that is our ſoules leche
                  So graunt you hys pardon to receyue
                  For that is beſte, I wol you not diſceyue
                  But ſirs, one worde for yate I in my tale
                  I haue relykes, and pardon in my male
                  As fayre as any man in Englonde
                  whiche were yeuen me by the popes honde
                  If any of you wol of deuocion
                  Offren, and haue myne abſolucion
                  Cometh forthe anon, and kneleth here adoun
                  That ye may haue parte of my pardoun
                  Or els taketh pardon as ye wende
                  Al newe and freſhe, at euery townes ende
                  So that ye offren alway newe and newe
                  Nobles or pens, whiche ben good and trew
                  It is great honour to eueryche that is here
                  That ye may haue a ſufficient pardonere
                  To aſſoyle you, in countre there ye ryde
                  For auentures, whiche that may betyde
                  For perauenture there may fal one or two
                  Downe of her horſe, & breke her necke a two
                  Loke whiche ſuertie it is to you al
                  That I am in your felowſhyp yfal
                  That maye aſſoyle you bothe more and laſſe
                  whan that the ſoule ſhal fro the body paſſe
                  I rede that oure hoſte ſhal begynne
                  For he is moſte enuelopte of ſynne
                  Cometh forthe ſir hoſte, and offre fyrſt anon
                  And thou ſhalte kyſſe the relykes euerychon
                  Yea for a grote, vnbokyl anon thy purſe.
                  ¶Nay nay (ꝙ he) than haue I chriſtes curſe
                  Let be (ꝙ he) it ſhal not be ſo theiche
                  Thou woldeſt make me kiſſe thyn old breche
                  And ſwere it were a relyke of a ſeynt
                  Though it were wt thy foundemēt depeynt
                  But by the croſſe, which ſeynt Helayne fonde
                  I wolde I had thy coylons in myne honde
                  In ſtede of relykes, or of ſanctuarye
                  Let cutte hem of, I wol helpe ye hem to cary
                  They ſhul be ſhrined in an hogges torde
                  This pardoner anſwerde not a worde
                  So wrothe he was, he wolde no worde ſay.
                  ¶Now (ꝙ oure hoſte) I wol no lenger play
                  with the, ne with non other angry man.
                  ¶But right anon the worthy knight began
                  whan that he ſawe that al the people loughe
                  Nomore of this, for it is right ynoughe
                  Sir pardoner, be mery and glad of chere
                  And ye ſir hoſte, that ben to me ſo dere
                  I praye you that ye kyſſe the pardoner
                  And pardoner, I pray the drawe the ner
                  And as we dyd, let vs laughe and play
                  Anon they kyſſed, and ryden forthe her way.
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the pardoners tale, & here begynneth the Shipmans Prologue
               
                  
                  NOwe frendes ſayd oure hoſte ſo dere
               How lyketh you by Iohn the Pardonere?
               He hathe vnbokeled wel the male
               He hath vs tolde right a thrifty tale
               As touchyng of hys myſgouernaunce
               I pray to god yeue hym good chaunce
               As ye han herde, of theſe ryottours thre
               Nowe gentyl mariner, hertely I pray the
               Tel vs a good tale, and that right anon
               It ſhal be done, by god & by ſaynt Iohn
               Sayd this maryner, as wel as euer I can
               And right anon his tale he thus began
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Shypmans Prologue, and here foloweth hys tale.

               
               
                  A Marchaunt, whilom dwelled at ſaīt Deniſe
               That ryche was, for which mē held hī wiſe
               A wyfe he had, of excellent beaute
               And cōpynable, & reuelous was ſhe
               Whyche is a thynge that cauſeth more diſpence
               Than worthe is al the chere and reuerence
               That men hem done, at feeſtes & at daunces
               Suche ſalutations and countynaunces
               Paſſeth, as dothe the ſhadowe on a wal
               But wo is hym that paye mote for al
               The ſely huſbonde algate he mote paye
               He mote vs bothe cloth and eke araye
               Al for his owne worſhippe, richely
               In whiche array we dauncen iolyly
               And yf that he may nat parauenture
               Or els luſt no ſuche ſpence endure
               But thynketh, that it is waſt and yloſt
               Than mote another paye for our coſte
               And lende vs golde, and that is perilous
               This noble Marchant held a noble hous
               For whiche he had al day great repayre
               For his largeſſe, and for hys wyfe was fayre
               That wonder is but herkeneth to my tale
               Amonge al his geſtes great and ſmale.
               There was a monke, a fayre man & a bolde
               I trowe thurty wynter he was olde
               
                  That euer in one, was drawing to that place
               This yonge monke, yt ſo fayre was of face
               Aquaynted was with this good man
               Sythens that he fyrſt knowlege began
               That in his houſe, as famylier was he
               As it is poſſyble any frende to be
               And for as moche, as this good man
               And eke this monke, of which I began
               Were bothe two borne in one village
               The monke hym claymed, as for coſynage
               And he agayne ſayd not ones nay
               But was as glad therof, as foule of day
               For to his herte it was a great pleaſaunce
               Thus ben they knytte wt eterne aliaunce
               And eche of hem gan other for to enſure
               Of brotherheed, whyles her lyfe may dure.
               ¶Fre was Dan Iohan, & namely of diſpēce
               As in that houſe, and ful of diligence
               To do pleaſaunce, and eke great coſtage
               He foryate not to yeue the leſte page
               In al that houſe, but after her degre
               He yaue the lorde, and ſythen hys meyne
               whan yt he came, ſome maner honeſt thyng
               For whiche they were as glad of his cōming
               As foule is fayne, whan the ſonne vp ryſeth
               No more herof as nowe, for it ſuffyſeth.
               ¶But ſo byfel, this marchaunt on a day
               Shepe hym to make redy hys aray
               Towarde the towne of Bruges for to fare
               
                  
                     ••
                  bye there a porcion of ware
               For whiche he hath ſent to parys anon
               A meſſanger, and prayde hath dan Iohn
               That he ſhuld come to ſaint Denys to playn
               with him, and with his wife, a day or twayn
               Or he to Bruges went, in al wyſe.
               ¶This noble monke, of which I you deuyſe
               Hath of his abbot, as hym lyſt lycence
               Bycauſe he was a man of hye prudence
               And eke an offycer, out for to ryde
               To ſeen her graunges, and her bernes wyde
               And vnto ſaynt Denys he cometh anon.
               who was ſo welcome, as my lord dan Iohn
               Our dere coſyn, ful of curteſye
               with him he brought a iubbe of malueſy
                     •
                  
               
               And eke another ful of fyne vernage
               And volatily, as was aye his vſage
               And thus I let hem both eate, drinke, & play
               This marchant & this monke, a day or tway
               ¶The thyrde day this marchaunt vp ryſeth
               And on his nede ſadly hym auyſeth
               And vp in to his countyng houſe gothe he
               To reken with hym ſelfe, as wel may be
               Of thilke yere, howe it with hym ſtoode
               And howe he ſpended had his goode
               And yf that he encreſed were or none
               His bokes and his bagges many one
               He laythe afore hym, on his counter borde
               Ful ryche was hys treſour and his horde
               For whiche ful faſte his counter dore he ſhet
               And eke he nolde no man ſhulde hym let
               Of hys accomptes, for the mene tyme
               And thus he ſate tyl it was paſſed prime.
               Dan Iohan was ryſen in the morow alſo
               And in the garden walked two and fro
               And hath hys thynges ſayd ful curteſly.
               ¶This good wyfe come walkyng priuely
               In to the garden, there he walked ſofte
               And hym ſalueth, as ſhe hath done ful ofte
               A mayden chylde came in her companye
               which as her luſte, ſhe may gouerne & gye
               For yet vnder the yerde was the mayde.
               ¶O dere coſyn dan Iohan, ſhe ſayde
               what eyleth you ſo rathe to a ryſe?
               ¶Nece (ꝙ he) it ought ynough ſuffyſe
               Fyue houres for to ſlepen on a night
               But it were for an olde palied wight
               As ben theſe old wedded men, that lye & dare
               As in a forme ſytteth a wery hare
               Al forſtraught, with houndes gret & ſmale
               But dere nece, why loke ye ſo pale?
               I trowe certes, that our good man
               Hath you laboured, ſythe this night began
               That you were nede to reſten haſtely
               And with that worde, he lough ful merily
               And with his owne thought he woxe al reed
               This fayre wyfe, gan to ſhake her heed
               And ſayd thus, yea god wote al (ꝙ ſhe)
               Nay coſyn myne, it ſtondeth not ſo with me
               For by that god that yaue me ſoule and lyfe
               In al the realme of Fraunce, is there no wife
               That leſſe luſte hath to that ſory play
               For I may ſyngen alas, and welaway
               That I was borne, but to no wight (ꝙ ſhe)
               Dare I not tel, howe it ſtonte with me
               Wherfore I think out of this world to wed
               Or els of my ſelfe ſone to make an ende
               So ful I am of drede and eke of care.
               ¶This mōke began vpon this wyfe to ſtare
               And ſayd alas, nay nece god forbede
               That ye for any ſorowe, or for any drede
               For do your ſelfe, but telleth me your grefe
               Perauenture I may in your miſchefe
               Counſayle or helpe, & therfore telleth me
               Al your anoye, for it ſhal ſecret be
               
                  For on my portouſe I make an othe
               That neuer in my lyfe, for lefe ne lothe
               Ne ſhal I not of no counſayle you bewray.
               The ſame ayen to you (ꝙ ſhe) I ſay
               By god and by this portouſe, I you ſwere
               Thoug men wolde me al in to peces tere
               Ne ſhal I neuer, for to go to hel
               Bewray o worde, of thyng that ye me tel
               Not for no coſynage, ne for alyaunce
               But verily for loue and affyaunce
               Thus ben they ſworne, and here vpon kyſte
               And ylke of hem tolde other what hem lyſte
               ¶Coſyn (ꝙ ſhe) yf I had a ſpace
               As I haue none, and namely in this place
               Than wolde I tel a legende of my lyfe
               That I ſuffred haue▪ ſythe I was a wyfe
               with myn huſbonde, though he be your coſyn
               Nay (ꝙ this mōke) by god & ſeynt Martyn
               He nis no more coſyn vnto me
               Than is this lefe, that hongeth on the tre
               I clepe him ſo, by ſaynte Denys of Fraunce
               To haue the more cauſe of aquayntaunce
               Of you, whom I haue loued ſpecially
               Abouen al other women ſykerly
               This ſwere I you on my profeſſyoun
               Telleth your grefe, leſte he come adoun
               And haſteth you, and goth your way anon.
               My dere loue (ꝙ ſhe) O my dan Iohn.
               Ful lefe me were this counſayle to hyde
               But out it mote, it may no lenger abyde
               My huſbonde is to me the worſte man
               That euer was, ſythe the worlde began
               But ſythen I am a wyfe, it ſytte not to me
               To tellen no wight of our priuyte
               Neyther in bedde, ne in none other place
               God ſhylde I ſhulde tel it for his grace
               A wyfe ne ſhulde not ſay of her huſbonde
               But al honoure, as I can vnderſtonde
               Saue vnto you, thus moche tel I ſhal
               As helpe me god, he is nought worthe at al
               In no degre, the value of a flye
               But yet me greueth moſte his nygardye
               And wel ye wote, that woman naturally
               Deſyren thynges ſyxe, as wel as I
               They wolden that her huſbondes ſhulde be
               Hardy, and wyſe, riche, and therto fre
               And buxom to his wyfe, and freſhe a bedde
               But by that ylke lorde that for vs bledde
               For hys honoure, my ſelfe to arraye
               A ſonday next, I mote nedes paye
               An hundred frankes, or els am I lorne
               Yet were me leuer that I were vnborne
               Than me were done a ſlaunder or a vilanye
               And yf myn huſbonde eke might it aſpye
               I nere but loſte, and therfore I you prey
               Lene me this ſomme, or els mote I dey
               Dan Iohn I ſay, lene me this hūdred frākes
               Parde I wol not fayle you my thankes
               If that ye lyſte to do that I you pray
               For at a certayne day I wol you pay
               And to done you what pleſaunce & ſeruyce
               That I may don, right as ye lyſte deuyſe
               And but I do, god take on me vengeaunce
               As foule as euer had genilion of Fraunce.
               ¶This gētil mōke anſwerd in this manere
               Nowe truly myne owne lady dere
               I haue (ꝙ he) on you ſo great routhe
               That I you ſwere, and plight my trouthe
               That whā your huſbōd is to Flaūders 
                     •
                  fare
               I wol delyuer you out of al this care
               I wol brynge you an hundred frankes
               And with that he caught her by the flankes
               And her enbraced herde, and kyſſed her ofte
               Go the nowe your way (ꝙ he) al ſtyl & ſofte
               And let vs dyne as ſone as euer ye may
               For by my kalender it is prime of the day
               Gothe nowe, & beth as true as I ſhal be.
               Nowe els god forbyd ſyr ſayd ſhe
               And forthe ſhe gothe, as ioly as a pye
               And bade the cokes that they ſhulde hem hye
               So that men might dyne, and that anone
               Vp to her huſbonde is this wyfe gone
               And knocked at his counter do
                     •
                  e boldely.
               Qui eſt la (ꝙ he) Peter it am I
               (Quod ſhe) howe longe wol ye faſt?
               Howe longe tyme wol ye recken and caſte
               Your ſommes, your bokes, & your thynges?
               The dyuel haue parte of al ſuch reckeninges
               Ye haue ynough (ꝙ ſhe) of goddes ſonde
               Come down to day, & let your bagges ſtonde
               Ne be ye not a ſhamed, that dan Iohn
               Shal faſtyng al this longe day gon?
               what let vs go here maſſe and go dyne.
               ¶Wyfe (ꝙ this mā) lytel canſt thou diuyne
               The curyous beſyneſſe that we haue
               For of chapmen, ſo god me ſaue
               And by that lorde that called is ſeynt Iue
               Scarſly amonge twenty, twelue ſhal thriue
               Contynually, laſtyng vnto theyr age
               We may wel make chere & good vyſage
               And driue forthe the worlde, as it may be
               And kepe our eſtate in priuyte
               Tyl we be deed, or els that we play
               A pylgrimage, or gone out of the way
               
                  And therfore haue I great neceſſyte
               Vpon this queynte worlde to auyſe me
               For euermore we mote ſtonde in drede
               Of happe and fortune, in our chapmanhede.
               To Flaūders wol I gone to morow at day
               And come ayene as ſone as euer I may
               For whiche my dere wyfe, I the beſeke
               As be to euery wight buxom and meke
               And for to kepe our good be curyouſe
               And honeſtly gouerne wel our houſe
               Thou haſte ynough, in euery maner wyſe
               That to a thrifty huſwyfe may ſuffyſe
               The lacketh none array, ne no vitayle
               Of ſyluer in thy purſe thou mayſt not fayle
               And with ye worde, his counter dore he ſhette
               And down he gothe, no lenger wold he lette
               And haſtely a maſſe was there iſayde
               And ſpedely the tables were ilayde
               And to dyner faſte they hem ſpedde
               And richly the chapman this monke fedde.
               And after dyner, dan Iohan ſoberly
               This chapman toke a parte al priuely
               And ſayd hym thus, coſyn it ſtondeth ſo
               T
                     •••
                   wel I ſe to Bruges ye wol go
               God and ſaynt Auſten ſpede you and gyde
               I pray you coſyn, wyſely that ye ryde
               Gouerneth you alſo wel of your dyete
               Al temperatly, and namely in this hete
               Betwixt vs two nedeth no ſtraunge fare
               Farwel coſyn, god ſhylde you fro care
               If any thyng there be by day or by night
               And it lye in my power or in my might
               That ye me wol cōmaunde in any wyſe
               It ſhal be done, right as ye wol deuyſe
               O thyng or that ye go, yf that it may be
               I wolde pray you for to leue me
               In hundred frankes, for a weke or twey
               For certayne beeſtes, that I mote nedes bey
               To ſtore with a place that is ours
               God helpe me ſo, I wolde it were yours
               I ſhal not fayle ſurely at my day
               Not for a thouſande frankes, a myle way
               But let this thyng be ſecret, I you pray
               For yet this night theſe beeſtes mote I bey
               And fare nowe wele, myne owne coſyn dere
               Graunt mercy of your coſte and your chere.
               ¶This noble marchaunt, gentilly anon
               Anſwerde and ſayd, O coſyn dan Iohn
               Nowe ſikerly, this is a ſmal requeſt
               My golde is yours, whan that you leſte
               And not only my golde, but my chaffare
               Take what ye lyſte, god ſhilde that ye ſpare
               But one thyng is, ye knowe it wel ynough
               Of chapmen, that her money is her plough
               we may creaunce, whyle we haue a name
               But goldleſſe for to be it is a ſhame
               Paye it ayen, whan it lythe at your eſe
               After my might, fayne wolde I you pleſe
               ¶Theſe hundred frankes, ſet he forthe anon
               And priuely he toke hem to dan Iohn
               No wight of this worlde, wyſt of thys lone
               Sauyng this marchaūt, & dan Iohan alone
               They drinke & ſpeke, & rome a while and pley
               Tyl that dan Iohan rydeth to his abbey.
               The morow came, & forth ryd this marchāt
               To Flaūders warde, his prētes brought him auāt
               Tyl he came to Bruges, wel & merily
               Nowe gothe this marchaunt, wel and beſily
               About his nedes, & byeth, and creaunſeth
               He neyther playeth at the dyce ne daunſeth
               But as a marchaunt, ſhortly to tel
               He ledde his lyfe, and there I let him dwel
               ¶The ſonday next, yt this marchāt was gon
               To ſaynt Denys is comen dan Iohn
               with crowne & berde al freſhe & newe iſhaue
               In al this houſe, there nas ſo lytel a knaue
               Ne no wight els, but he was ful fayne
               For yt my lorde dan Iohn was comen agayn
               And ſhortly to the poynte for to gon
               This fayre wyfe acordeth with dan Iohn
               That for theſe hundred frankes he ſhulde al night
               Haue her in his armes, bolte vpright
               And this acorde parformed was in dede
               In myrthe al nyght a beſy lyfe they lede
               Tyl it was day, yt dan Iohn yede his way
               And bade the meyne farwel & haue good day
               For none of hem, ne no wyght in the toun
               Had of Dan Iohan any ſuſpection
               And forthe he rydeth, home to his abbey
               Or where hym lyſte, no more of hym I ſey.
               ¶This marchaunt, whan ended was ye faire
               To ſaynte Denys he gan for to repaire
               And with his wyfe he maketh feeſt & chere
               And telleth her that the chaffare is ſo dere
               That nedes muſte he make a cheueſaunce
               For he was bounden in a reconiſaunce
               To pay twenty thouſande ſhildes anon
               For whiche this marchaunt is to Paris gon
               To borowe of certayne frendes that he had
               A certayne frankes, & ſome with hym he lad
               And whan he was comen in to the toun
               For chierte and great affection
               Vnto dan Iohn he fyrſt gothe hym to pley
               Nought for to borowe of hym no money
               
                  But for to wete and ſe of his welfare
               And for to tellen him of his chaffare
               As frendes done, whā they ben mette in fere
               Dan Iohan him maketh feeſt & mery chere
               And he him tolde ayen ful ſpecially
               Howe he had bought, ful wel and graciouſly
               Thonked be god, al hole hys marchaundyſe
               Saue that he muſte, in al maner wyſe
               Maken a cheueſaunce, as for his beſte
               And than ſhulde he be in ioye and reſte
               Dā Iohn anſwerd, certes I am right fayn
               That ye in heale be comen home agayne
               And yf I were riche, as haue I bliſſe
               Of twēty thouſand ſhildes ſhuld ye not miſſe
               For ye ſo kyndely, this other day
               Lent me golde, and as I can and may
               I thonke you, by god and by ſaynt Iame
               But natheleſſe, I toke it vnto our dame
               Your wyfe at home, the ſame golde agayne
               Vpon your benche, ſhe wote it wel certayne
               By certayne tokens, that I can her tel
               Nowe by your leue, I may no lenger dwel
               Our abbot wol out of this towne anon
               And in hys companye I mote gon
               Grete wel our dame, myne owne nece ſwete
               And farwele dere coſyn, tyl we mete.
               ¶This marchant that was ful ware & wyſe
               Creaunced hath, and eke payde in Parys
               To certayne lombardes, redy in her houdes
               This ſomme of gold, & gate of hem ye bondes
               And home he gothe, as mery as a popyngay
               For wel he knewe he ſtode in ſuche aray
               That nedes muſte he wyn by that viage
               A thouſande frankes, aboue al his coſtage.
               ¶His wyfe ful redy met hym at the yate
               As ſhe was wonte, of olde vſage algate
               And al that night in myrthe they be ſette
               For he was ryche, and clerely out of dette
               whā it was day, this marchāt gan enbrace
               His wyfe al newe, & kyſſed her in her face
               And vp he gothe, & made it wonder tough
               No more (ꝙ ſhe) by god ye haue ynough
               And wantonly ayen with hym ſhe playde
               Tyl at the laſte this marchant thus ſayde.
               By god (ꝙ he) I am a lytel wrothe
               With you my wyfe, al though it be me lothe
               And wot ye why: by god as I geſſe
               For ye haue made a maner of ſtraungeneſſe
               Betwixt me and my coſyn dan Iohn
               Ye ſhulde haue warned me, or I had gon
               That he had you an hundred frankes payde
               By redy token, & helde hym yuel apayde
               For that I to hym ſpake of cheueſaunce
               Me ſemed ſo, as by his countenaunce
               But natheleſſe, by god our heuen kyng
               I thought not to aſke of hym nothyng
               I pray the wyfe, ne do no more ſo
               Tel me alway er that I fro the go
               If any dettour, hath in myne abſence
               Ypayde the, leſte through thy neglygence
               I might hym aſke a thyng that he hath payd
               ¶This wyfe was not a ferde ne affrayde
               But boldely ſhe ſayd, and that anon
               Mary I defye that falſe monke dan Iohn
               I kepe not of hys tokens neuer a dele
               He toke me certayne golde, I wot it wele
               what yuel thedom on his monkes ſnoute
               For god it wotte, I wende without doute
               That he had yeue it me, bycauſe of you
               To don therwith myne honoure & my prow
               For coſynage, and eke for bellye chere
               That he hath had ful often tymes here
               But ſythe I ſe it ſtonte in ſuche diſioynte
               I wol anſwere you ſhortly to the poynte.
               Ye haue mo ſlacker dettours than am I
               For I wol pay you wel and redily
               Fro day to day, and yf ſo be I fayle
               I am your wyfe, ſcore it on my tayle
               Or els I ſhal pay it as ſone as euer I may
               For by my trouth, I haue on myne aray
               And not in waſte, beſtowed it euery dele
               And for I haue beſtowed it ſo wele
               To your honour, for goddes ſake I ſay
               As be not wrothe, but let vs laughe & play
               Ye ſhal my ioly body haue to wedde
               By god I nyl not pay you but a bedde
               Foryeue it me, myne owne ſpouſe dere
               Turneth hitherwarde, & make better chere.
               ¶This marchant ſawe ther was no remedy
               And for to chyde, it was but a folye
               Sythen that the thyng may not amended be
               Nowe wyfe he ſayd, and I foryeue it the
               But in thy lyfe, be no more ſo large
               Kepe bet my good, this yeue I the in charge
               Thus endeth nowe my tale, & god vs ſende
               Talynge ynough, vnto our lyues ende.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Shypmans tale, and here foloweth the wordes of our hoſt.
               
                  Wel ſayd by corpus domini (ꝙ our hoſte)
               Nowe longe mote thou ſayle by the coſte
               Thou gentyl mayſter, gentel marinere
               God gyue ye mōke a thouſand laſt quad yere
               I ha felowes, beware of ſuche a iape
               The mōke put in the marchātes hode an ape
               And in hys wyues eke, by ſaynt Auſtyn
               Draweth no mōkes more in to your Inne
               But nowe paſſe ouer, & let vs ſeke aboute
               who ſhal tell nowe fyrſt of all thys route
               An other tale, and wyth that worde he ſayde
               Is curteouſly, as it had bene a mayde.
               My lady prioreſſe, by your leue
               So that I wyſte that I ſhuld you not greue
               I wol deme, that ye tellen ſholde
               I tale nexte, yf ſo be that ye wolde
               Nowe wol yt vouchſafe my lady dere
               Gladly (ꝙ ſhe) and ſayd in thys manere.
            
            
               ¶Here ende the wordes of oure hoſte, & here begynneth the Prioreſſe prologue.
               
                  DOmine dominus noſter: quam admirabile eſt nomen tuum in vniuerſa terra,
               
               
                  
                     LOrde our Lorde, thy name how maruaylous
                  Is in thys wyde worlde yſprad (ꝙ ſhe)
                  For not only thy lande precious
                  Parfourmed is, by men of dygnite
                  But by the mouth of chyldren thy bounte
                  Parfourmed is, for on the breſt ſoukynge
                  Sometyme ſhewen they thyne heryenge
               
               
                  wherfore in laude, as I can beſt and may
                  Of the and of the whyte lylly floure
                  whych that the bare, & is a mayde alway
                  To tellen a ſtorye, I wol do my laboure
                  Nought that I may encreſe her honoure
                  For ſhe her ſelfe is honoure and rote
                  Of bountye, nexte her ſonne of ſoules bote
               
               
                  Mother mayden, O mayden & mother fre
                  O buſhe vnbrent, brennyng in Moſes ſyght
                  That rauyſhedeſt downe fro the deyte
                  Through thyn hūbleſſe, ye goſt yt in the light
                  Of whoſe vertue, whē he in thine hert pight
                  Conceyued was the fathers ſapience
                  Helpe me to tel it in thy preſence
               
               
                  Lady thy bounte, and thy magnifycence
                  Thy vertue and thy great humilite
                  There may no tonge expreſſe, in no ſcience
                  For ſomtyme lady, er men pray to the
                  Thou goeſt before, of thy benignyte
                  And getteſt vs ye lyght, through thy prayere
                  To gyden vs vnto thy ſonne ſo dere
               
               
                  My connyng is to weake, O blyſful quene
                  For to declare thy hygh worthyneſſe
                  That I ne may the weyght ſuſtene
                  But as a child of twelue moneth olde or leſſe
                  That can vnnethes any worde expreſſe
                  Ryght ſo fare I, and therfore I you praye
                  Gydeth my ſonge, that I ſhal of you ſay.
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Prioreſſes prologue, and here foloweth her tale.

                  
               
               
                  
                     THere was in Aſye, in a great cytie
                  Amonges Chriſten folkes a iewrye
                  Suſtayned by a lorde of that countre
                  For foule vſure, and lucre of villany
                  Hateful to Chriſt, and to hys company
                  And through ye ſtrete mē myght ryde & wēde
                  For it was free, and open at euery ende
               
               
                  A lytel ſchole of chriſten folke there ſtode
                  Downe at ye farther end, in which ther were
                  Chyldren an hepe, comen of chriſten blode
                  That lerned in that ſchole, yere by yere
                  Suche manere doctrine, as men vſen here
                  Thys is to ſaye, to ſynge and to rede
                  As ſmale chyldren done in her chyldhede
               
               
                  Amōges theſe childrē was a wedowes ſon
                  A lytel clergion, that .vij. yere was of age
                  That daye by daye to ſchole was hys won
                  And alſo eke, where he ſey the ymage
                  Of Chriſtes mother, had he in vſage
                  As hym was taught, to knele adowne & ſay
                  An Aue maria, as he goeth by the way
               
               
                  Thus hath this wedow, her litel child icauȝt
                  Our blyſſed lady, Chriſtes mother dere
                  To worſhyp aye, and he foryate it naught
                  For the ſely chylde, wolde al day ſoone lere
                  But aye, whē I remēbre me on thys matere
                  Saint Nicholas ſtādeth euer in my preſence
                  For he ſo yonge to Chriſt dyd reuerence
               
               
                  Thys lytel chylde hys lytel boke lernyng
                  As he ſate in the ſchole at hys prymere
                  He (Alma redemptoris mater) herde ſynge
                  As chyldren lered her antiphonere
                  And as he durſt, he drewe aye nere and nece
                  And herkened to the wordes and the note
                  Tyl he the fyrſt verſe couth al by rote
               
               
                  Nought wyſt he what this latin was to ſay
                  For he ſo yonge and tender was of age
                  But on a daye hys felowe gan he pray
                  To expoune hym the ſonge, in his langage
                  Or tellen him why thys ſonge was in vſage
                  Thys prayde he hym to conſtre and declare
                  Ful ofte tyme, vpon hys knees bare
               
               
                  Hys felowe, whych that elder was thē he
                  Anſwerd hym thus, thys ſong I haue herde ſay
                  was made of our bleſſed lady free
                  Her to ſalewe, and eke her for to prey
                  To ben our helpe & ſocoure when we dey
                  I can no more erpowne in thys mater
                  I lerne ſonge, I can but ſmal grammer
               
               
                  And is thys ſonge ymade in reuerence
                  Of Chriſtes mother, ſayd thys innocent?
                  Nowe certes I wol done my diligence
                  
                     To tonne it al er Chriſtmaſſe be went
                  Though that I for my primer ſhalbe ſhent
                  And ſhulde be beten thryſe in an houre
                  I wol it conne, our lady to honoure
               
               
                  Hys felowe taught him homewarde priuely
                  Fro daye to daye, tyl he couth it by rote
                  And then he ſonge it wel and boldely
                  Fro worde to worde, accordynge to the note
                  Twyſe a day it paſſeth through hys throte
                  To ſcholewarde, & homeward whē he went
                  On Chriſtes mother ſet was al hys entent
               
               
                  As I haue ſayd through out the iewrie
                  Thys lytel chylde as he came to and fro
                  Ful merely then wolde he ſynge and crye
                  O Alma redemptoris mater, euer mo
                  The ſwetneſſe hath hys herte perſed ſo
                  Of Chriſtes mother, that to her to praye
                  He can not ſtynte of ſyngynge by the waye
               
               
                  Our fyrſt foe, the ſerpent Sathanas
                  That in Iewes herte hys waſpes neſt
                  Vpſwale and ſayd, O 
                        •
                     brake people alas
                  Is thys a thynge to you that is honeſt
                  That ſuch a boy ſhal walke as hym leſt
                  In your dyſpyte, & ſyngen of ſuch ſentence
                  whych is ayenſt your lawes reuerence
               
               
                  ¶From thence forth, ye iewes han conſpyred
                  Thys innocent out of thys worlde to chaſe
                  An homicide therto han they hyred
                  That in an aley, had a priuy place
                  And as the chylde gan forby to pace
                  Thys curſed iewe hym hent, and helde faſt
                  And cutte hys throte, & in a pytte hym caſte
               
               
                  I ſay that in a wardrope they him threwe
                  where that the iewes purged her intrayle
                  O curſed folke, of heraudes al newe
                  what may your yuel entent you auayle
                  Murther wol out, certes it wol not fayle
                  And namely ther ye honour of god ſhalſprede
                  The bloode out cryeth on your curſed dede
               
               
                  ¶O Mater, ſowned vnto virginite
                  Now mayſt thou ſynge folowyng euer in on
                  The whyte lambe celeſtial (ꝙ he)
                  Of whiche the great euangelyſt ſaynt Iohn
                  In Pathmos wrot, whiche ſayth yt they gon
                  Before this lambe, & ſynge aſonge all newe
                  That neuer fleſſhly women they ne knewe.
               
               
                  ¶This poore wydowe, awayteh al yt nyght
                  After her lytel childe, and he came nought
                  For whiche as ſone as it was day lyght
                  with face pale, for drede and beſy thought
                  She hath at ſchole, & els where hym ſought
                  Tyl fynally, ſhe gan ſo farre aſpye
                  That he was laſte ſeyne in the iurye
               
               
                  wyth mothers pyte, in her breſte encloſed
                  She goth as ſhe were halfe out of her mynd
                  To euery place, where ſhe hath ſuppoſed
                  By lyklyhede her childe for to fynde
                  And euer on Chriſtes mother, meke & kynde
                  She cryed, and at the laſt thus ſhe wrought
                  Amonge the curſed iewes ſhe hym ſought
               
               
                  She freyneth and ſhe prayeth pytouſly
                  To euery iewe that dwelleth in thylke place
                  To tellen her, yf her chylde went there by
                  They ſayd nay, but Ieſu of hys grace
                  Yaue in her thought, wythin a lytel ſpace
                  That in that place, after her ſonne ſhe cryde
                  There he was caſt, in a pyt beſyde
               
               
                  O great god, that perfourmeſt thy laude
                  By mouth of innocence, lo here thy myght
                  Thys iemme of chaſtite, thys Emeraude
                  And eke of martyrdome the rubye bryght
                  There he wyth throte yeorne lay vpryght
                  He (Alma redemptoris) gan to ſynge
                  So loude that al the place gan to rynge
               
               
                  The chriſten folke, yt through ye ſtrete wēt
                  In comen, for to wonder on thys thynge
                  And haſtely they for the prouoſte ſent
                  He came anone, wythout taryenge
                  And heryeth Chriſt, that is of heuen kynge
                  And eke hys mother, honour of mankynde
                  And after that, the iewes let he bynde
               
               
                  Thys chylde wyth pytous lamentacion
                  was vptaken, ſyngyng his ſonge alway
                  And wyth honoure, and great proceſſyon
                  They caryen hym to the next abbey
                  Hys mother ſwounyng by the bere lay
                  Vnneth myght the people that were there
                  Thys newe Rachel bringe fro his bere
               
               
                  with turmēt & with ſhamful deth ilke one
                  Thys prouoſt doth theſe iewes for to ſterue
                  That of thys murder wyſte, & that anone
                  He nolde no ſuche curſedneſſe obſerue
                  
                     Yuel ſhal he haue, that yuel wol deſerue
                  Therfore wt wylde horſe he dyd hem drawe
                  And afterwarde he honge hem by the lawe
               
               
                  Vpon hys bere aye lyeth thys innocent
                  Beforne the chefe aulter, whyles ye maſſe laſt
                  And after that, the abbot wyth hys couent
                  Hem ſpedde, for to burye hym als faſt
                  And when they holy water on hym caſt
                  yet ſpake ye child, whē ſpreit was holy water
                  And ſonge, O Alma redemptoris mater.
               
               
                  Thys abbot, whych that was an holy man
                  As monkes ben, or els ought to be
                  This yonge chylde to couer he began
                  And ſayd: O dere chylde, I haylfe the
                  By vertue of the holy Trinite
                  Tel me what is thy cauſe for to ſynge
                  Sythens thy throte is cutte to my ſemynge.
               
               
                  My throte is cutte, vnto my necke bone
                  Sayd thys chylde, as by waye of kynde
                  I ſhulde haue deyde, ye longe tyme agone
                  But Ieſu Chriſt, as ye in bokes fynde
                  wol that hys glorye laſte and be in mynde
                  And for the worſhyp of hys mother dere
                  Yet may I ſynge (O Alma) loude and clere
               
               
                  This wel of mercy, Chriſtes mother ſwete
                  I loued alway, as after my connynge
                  And when that I my lyfe ſhulde forlete
                  To me ſhe came, and bad me for to ſynge
                  Thys antem verely in my dyenge
                  As ye han herde, & when that I had ſonge
                  Me thought ſhe layde a grayne vpō my tōge
               
               
                  wherfore I ſynge, and ſynge mote certayne
                  In honoure of the blyſfull mayden fre
                  Tyl fro my tonge, of taken is the grayne
                  And after that, thus ſhe ſayd to me
                  My lytell chylde, nowe wol I fetche the
                  when that the grayne is fro thy tonge ytake
                  Be not agaſte, I wol the not forſake.
               
               
                  Thys holy monke, thys abbot him mene I
                  Hys tonge out caught, & toke away ye graine
                  And he yaue vp the goſte ful ſoftly
                  And when thys abbot had thys wōder ſeyne
                  Hys ſalt teeres trykled downe as rayne
                  And grofe he fell al platte to the grounde
                  And ſtyll he laye, as he had ben ybounde
               
               
                  The couent lay eke vpon the pament
                  Wepyng and heryeng Chriſtes mother dere
                  And after that they ryſen, & forthe ben went
                  And toke away this martyr fro the bere
                  And in a tombe of marble ſtones clere
                  Encloſen they his lytel body ſwete
                  There he is nowe, god lene vs for to mete.
               
               
                  O yonge Hewe of Lyncoln ſlayne alſo
                  With curſed iewes, as it is notable
                  For it is but a lytel whyle ago
                  Pray eke for vs, we ſynful folke vnſtable
                  That of hys mercy, god be merciable
                  On vs, hys great mercy multiply
                  For the reuerence of his mother Mary.
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Prioreſſe tale, and here folowe the wordes of the Hoſt to Chaucer.
               
                  
                     WHan ſayde was thys myracle, euery man
                  As ſobre was, as wōder was to ſe
                  Tyll that oure hoſte to iapen began
                  And than at erſte, he loked vpon me
                  And ſayd thus: what man arte thou (ꝙ he)
                  Thou lokeſt, as thou woldeſt fynde an hare
                  For euer vpon the grounde I ſe the ſtare
               
               
                  Aproche nere, and loke vp merily
                  Now ware you ſyrs, & let this mā haue place
                  He in the waſt is ſhapen as wel as I
                  This were a popet in armes to enbrace
                  For any woman, ſmal and fayre of face
                  He ſemeth eluyſhe by his countenaunce
                  For vnto no wight dothe he dalyaunce
               
               
                  Say now ſōwhat, ſithēs other folke hā ſayd
                  Tel vs a tale of myrthe, and that anon
                  Hoſte (ꝙ he) ne be not yuel apayde
                  For other tale certes can I none
                  But of a ryme, I lerned yore agone
                  Yea that is good (ꝙ he) we ſhullen it here
                  Som daynte thing, me thinketh by thy chere
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the wordes of the hoſt, and here foloweth the ryme of ſyr Thopas.
               
                  
                  
                     LYſteneth lordinges in good intēt
                  And I wol tel verament
                  Of myrth and of ſolas
                  Al of a knight was fayre & gent
                  In batayle and in turnament
                  Hys name was ſyr Thopas
                  Iborne he was in farre countre
                  In Flaundres, al beyonde the ſee
                  At Poperynge in the place.
                  Hys father was a man ful fre
                  And a lorde he was of that countre
                  As it was goddes grace.
                  Syr Thopas was a doughty ſwayne
                  whyte was hys face as payne mayne
                  Hys lyppes reed as roſe
                  Hys rudde is lyke ſcarlet in grayne
                  And I you tell in good certayne
                  He had a ſemely noſe.
                  Hys heer, hys berde was lyke ſafroun
                  That to hys gyrdel raught adoun
                  Hys ſhone of cordewane
                  Of Bruges were hys hoſen broun
                  Hys robe was of chekelatoun
                  That coſte many a iane.
                  He couth hunte at the wylde dere
                  And ryde an haukynge forby the ryuere
                  wyth gray goſhauke on hande
                  Therto he was a good archere
                  Of wraſtlynge was there none hys pere
                  There any Ram ſhulde ſtande.
                  Full many a mayde bryght in houre
                  They mourne for hym paramoure
                  when hem were bet to ſlepe.
                  But he was chaſte and no lechoure
                  And ſwete as is the bramble floure
                  That beareth the reed hype
                  And ſo byfel vpon a daye
                  Forſoth, as I you tel maye
                  Syr Thopas wolde out ryde.
                  He worth vpon hys ſtede graye
                  And in hys honde a launce gaye
                  A longe ſworde by hys ſyde
                  He prycketh thorowe a fayre foreſte
                  Therin was many a wylde beeſt
                  Yea both bucke and hare.
                  And as he prycketh north and eſte
                  I tell you, hym had almeſte
                  Betydde a ſorye care.
                  There ſpryngen herbes great and ſmale
                  The lycores and the ſetuale
                  And many a clowe gelofer
                  And nutmygges to put in ale
                  whether it be newe or ſtale
                  Or for to lye in cofer.
                  The byrdes ſyngen, it is no naye
                  The ſperhauke and the popyngaye
                  That ioye it was to here.
                  The throſtell eke made hys lay
                  The wodcocke vpon the ſpray
                  She ſonge full loude and clere.
                  ¶Syr Thopas fyl in loue longynge
                  And when he herde the throſtel ſynge
                  He prycked as he were wode
                  Hys fayre ſtede in hys pryckynge
                  So ſwette, that men myght hym wrynge
                  Hys ſydes were all blode.
                  ¶Syr Thopas eke ſo wery was
                  For prickynge on the ſofte gras
                  So fyers was hys corage
                  That downe he layde hym in that place
                  To maken hys ſtede ſome ſolace
                  And gaue him good forage.
                  ¶Oh, ſaynt Mary, benedicite
                  what ayleth thys loue at me
                  To blynde me ſo ſore?
                  Me dremed al thys nyght parde
                  An elfe quene ſhal my lemman be
                  And ſlepe vnder my gore.
                  ¶An Elfe quene wol I loue ywys
                  For in thys worlde no woman is
                  worthy to be my make in towne
                  All other women I forſake
                  And to an Elfe quene I me betake
                  By dale and eke by downe.
                  ¶Into hys ſadell he clombe anone
                  And pricketh ouer ſtyle and ſtone
                  An Elfe quene for to eſpye
                  Tyll he ſo longe hath rydden and gone
                  That he fonde in a pryue wone
                  The countre of Fayrie. So wylde
                  For in that countre nas there none
                  Neyther wyfe ne chylde
                  Tyl hym there came a great Giaunt
                  Hys name was called ſyr Oliphaunt
                  A peryllous man of dede
                  He ſayd chylde, by Termagaunt
                  But yf thou prycke out of my haunt
                  Anone I ſlee thy ſteed wyth mace
                  Or euer I go out of thys place
                  ¶Here is the quene of Fayry
                  wyth harpe and pype, and ſymphony
                  Dwellynge in thys place.
                  The chylde ſayd, als ſo mote I the
                  To morowe wol I meten the
                  
                     Whan I haue myne armure.
                  And yet I hope par ma faye
                  That thou ſhalte with this launce gay
                  Abyen it ful ſore: Through thy mawe
                  Shal I perce, yf I maye
                  Or it be fully prime of the daye
                  For here thou ſhalt be ſlawe.
                  Sir Thopas drowe abacke ful faſte
                  This gyaunt at hym ſtones caſte
                  Out of a fel ſtaſte ſlynge
                  But fayre eſcaped ſir Thopace
                  And al was through goddes grace
                  And thorowe hys fayre beryng
                  ¶Yet lyſteneth lordynges to my tale
                  Meryer than the nyghtyngale
                  For nowe I wol ye rowne
                  Howe ſir Thopas, with ſydes ſmale
                  Prickyng ouer downe and dale
                  Is comen ayen to towne.
                  Hys mery man commaunded he
                  To maken hym bothe game and gle
                  For nedes muſte he fyght
                  with a gyaunt, with heedes thre
                  For paramoures and tolyte
                  Of one that ſhone ful bright.
                  Do come he ſayd my mynſtrales
                  And ieſtours, for to tellen vs tales
                  Anon in myne armyng
                  Of romaunces that ben royals
                  Of popes and of cardynals
                  And eke of loue longyng.
                  They fette hym fyrſt the ſwete wyne
                  And meede eke in a mazelyne
                  And royal ſpycerye
                  Of gynger breed that was ful fyne
                  Of lycores and eke comyne
                  wyth ſugre that is trye.
                  He dyd nexte hys whyte lere
                  Of clothe of lake fyne and clere
                  A breche and eke a ſherte.
                  And next his ſherte an ha
                        ••
                     ton
                  And ouer that an haberion
                  For percyng of hys herte.
                  And ouer that a fyne hauberke
                  was al ywrought of iewes werke
                  Ful ſtronge it was of plate
                  And ouer that hys core armoure
                  As whyte as is the lylly floure
                  In whiche he wolde debate.
                  His ſhylde was al of golde ſo reed
                  And therin was a bores heed
                  A carbocle by his ſyde.
                  And there he ſwore on ale and breed
                  Howe that the gyaunt ſhulde be deed
                  Betyde what betyde.
                  His tambeux were of cure buly
                  His ſwordes ſhethe of yuorie
                  His helme of laton bright
                  His ſadel was of ruel bone
                  His bridel as the ſunne ſhoue
                  Or as the moone light
                  His ſpere was of fyne ſypres
                  That byddeth warre, & nothyng pees
                  The heed ful ſharpe ygrounde
                  His ſtede was al dappel gray
                  He gothe an aumble by the way
                  Ful ſoftely and rounde in londe.
                  ¶Lo lordes myne, here is a fyt
                  If ye wol any more of it
                  To tellen it wol I fonde.
               
               
                  
                     NOwe holde your mouthe for cha
                        •
                     rite
                  Bothe knight and lady fre
                  And herkeneth to my ſpel
                  Of batayle and of cheualrye
                  And of ladyes loue diery
                  Anon I wol you tel.
                  Men ſp
                        •
                     ken of Romaunces of pris
                  Of Hornechilde, and of I potys
                  Of Beuys, and of ſyr Gye
                  Of ſyr Lybeaur, and Blayndamoure
                  But ſir Thopas, he bereth the floure
                  Of royal cheualrye.
                  His good ſtede he be ſtrode
                  And forthe vpon his way glode
                  As ſparke out of the bronde.
                  Vpon his creſte he bare a toure
                  And therin ſtycked a lilly floure
                  God ſhylde his cors fro ſhonde
                  And for he was a knyght auentrouſe
                  He nolde ſlepen in none houſe
                  But lygge in his hood.
                  His bright helme was hys wangre
                  And by hym fedde hys deſtper
                  Of herbes fyne and good
                  Hym ſelfe dronke water of the well
                  As dyd the knight ſir Perſyuel
                  So worthy vnder wede.
               
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the ryme of ſyr Thopas, and beginneth the wordes of oure Hoſte.
               
                  No more of thys for goddes dignite
               (ꝙ our hooſt) for thou makeſt me
               So wery of thy very leudeneſſe
               That alſo wyſly god my ſoule bleſſe
               Myne eares aken of thy drafty ſpeche
               Nowe ſuche a ryme, the dyuell I beteche
               Thys may wel be cleped ryme dogrel (ꝙ he)
               why ſo (ꝙ I) why wolt thou let me
               More of my tale, then any other man
               Sens that it is the beſt ryme I can?
               By God (ꝙ he) playnly at o worde
               Thy drafty rymynge is not worth a torde
               Thou doeſt nought els but ſpendeſt tyme
               Syr at one worde, thou ſhalt no lēger ryme
               Let ſe whether thou canſt tell ought in geſte
               Or tel in proſe ſomwhat at the leſte
               In which ther may be ſom myrth or doctrine
               Gladly (ꝙ I) by goddes ſwete pyne
               I woll you tell a lytell thynge in proſe
               That ought lyke you, as I ſuppoſe
               Or els ye be certes to daungerous
               It is a morall tale vertuous
               Albe it tolde ſomtyme in ſondry wyſe
               Of ſondrye folke, as I ſhall you deuyſe
               As thus, ye wote that euery euangelyſte
               That telleth vs the payne of Ieſu Chriſte
               Ne ſayth not al thynge as hys felowe doth
               But natheleſſe her ſentente is al ſoth
               And al accorden in her ſentence
               Al be there in her tellynge dyfference
               For ſome of hem ſayne more, and ſome leſſe
               when they hys pytouſe paſſion expreſſe
               I meane of Marke, Mathen, Luke, & Iohn
               But doutleſſe her ſentence is al one
               Therfore lordynges, I you beſeche
               Yf that ye thynke I vary in my ſpeche
               As thus, though I tell ſomwl, at more
               Of prouerbes, then ye han herde byfore
               Comprehended in thys lytel treatyſe here
               To enforcen wyth the effecte of my matere
               And though I not the ſame wordes ſaye
               As ye han herde, yet to all you I praye
               Blameth me not, for in my ſentence
               Sul ye not fynde mochel dyfference
               Fro the ſentence of thys treatyſe lyte
               After the whych, thys mery tale I wryte
               And therfore herkeneth, what I ſhall ſaye
               And let me tell my tale I you praye.
            
            
               ¶Here ende the wordes of our hoſt and here begynneth Chaucers tale of Melibeus.
               
                  A Yonge mā called Melibeus, myghtye and ryche, begat vpon hys wyfe that called was Prudence, a doughter which that called was Sophye.
               ¶Vpon a daye byfell that he for his dyſport is wente into the feldes hym to playe: Hys wyfe and eke hys doughter hath he left with in hys houſe, of whyche the dores were faſte yſhette. Foure of hys olde foes han it aſpyde, and ſettē ladders to the walles of hys houſe, and by the wyndowes ben entred, & bete his wyfe, and wounded hys doughter with fyue mortall woundes, in fyue ſondrye places: That is to ſaye, in her fete, in her handes, in her eeres, in her noſe, & in her mouth, & leften her for deed, and wente her waye.
               When Melibeus retourned was into hys houſe, and ſe all thys myſchefe, he lyke a madde mā rentyng hys clothes, gan to wepe and crye.
               Prudence hys wyfe, as ferforth as ſhe durſte beſought hym of hys wepynge for to ſtynte: But not for thy he gan to wepe & crye euer lenger the more.
               Thys noble wyfe Prudence remembred her vpon the ſentence of Ouyde, in hys boke that cleped is the remedye of loue, where as he ſayeth, he is a foole that dyſtourbeth the mother to wepe in the death of her chylde tyl ſhe haue wept her fyll, as for a certayne tyme and then ſhall a man done diligence wyth amiable wordes to recomforte and praye her of her wepynge for to ſtynte. For whych reaſon thys noble wyfe Prudence, ſuffred her huſbonde to wepe and crye, as for a certayne ſpace: and when ſhe ſawe her tyme, ſhe ſayd hym in thys wyſe. Alas my lorde (quoth ſhe) why make ye your ſelfe for to be like a foole? forſoth it apperteyneth not vnto a wyſe man to maken ſuche a ſorowe. Youre doughter wyth the grace of God, ſhall waryſhe and eſcape. And all were it ſo that ſhe ryght now were deed, ye ne oughte not as for her death

your ſelfe diſtroye. Seneke ſaythe, the wyſe man ſhal not take to gret diſcomforte for the dethe of hys children, but certes he ſhuld ſuffre it in paciēce, as wel as he abydeth ye deth of hys owne proper perſon.
               ¶Thys Mellebeus anſwerde anon and ſayd: what man (ꝙ he) ſhuld of hys wepynge ſtynt, that hath ſo great a cauſe for to wepe? Ieſus hym ſelfe our lorde, wepte for ye dethe of Lazarus hys frende. Prudence anſwerd, certes wel I wote a temperate wepynge is nothyng defended to hym that ſorouful is, amonge folke in ſorowe, but it is rather graū
                  ted hym to wepe. The apoſtel Poule vnto ye Romans writeth, men ſhuld reioyce with hē that maketh ioye, and wepe with ſuche folke as wepen. But though a temperate wepyng be graunted, certes outragyous wepynge is defended. Meſure of wepyng ſhulde be cōſydred after the lore that techeth vs Sencke. Whan that thy frende is deed (ꝙ he) let not thyne eyen to moiſt ben of teeres, ne to moch drie: although teeres comen to thyn eyen, let hem not fal. And whan thou haſt forgon thy frende, do diligence to gette a nother frende: and this is more wiſdom thā for to wepe for thy frende which thou haſt lorne, for therin is no bote. And therfor yf ye gouerne you by ſapience, put away ſorowe out of your herte. Remembreth you that Ieſus Sirake ſayth, a man that is ioyus and glad in herte, it him conſerueth ſtoriſhyng in hys age: but ſothely a ſorowful here maketh hys bones drie. He ſayth eke thus, that ſorowe in herte ſleeth ful manye a man. Salomon ſayth, that right as moughthes in the ſhepes ſleyſe anoyeth the clothes, and the ſmale wormes yt tree, ryght ſo anoyeth ſorowe the hert of man, wherfore vs ought as wel in the dethe of our children, as in the loſſe of our temporal goodes, haue pacience.
               Remembre you vpon pacient Iobe, whā he had loſte hys children and hys temporal ſubſtaunce, and in hys body endured and receyued ful many a greuous trybulacion, yet ſayde he thus: Oure lorde it ſent to me, oure lorde hath byrafte it me, right ſo as our lorde wold, right ſo it be done, ibleſſed be the name of our lorde.
               To theſe forſayd thinges Melibeus vnto hys wyfe Prudence anſwerd: Al thy wordes (ꝙ he) ben true, and therto profytable, but truely myn herte is troubled with this ſorow ſo greuouſly, that I not what to do. Let cal (ꝙ Prudence) youre true frendes al and thy lynage, which that ben wyſe, & telleth to hem your caſe, & herkeneth what they ſay in counſaylyng, and gouerne you after her ſentence. Salomon ſaythe, werke all thy thynges by counſayle, & thou ſhalte neuer rue. Than by coūſayle of his wife Prudēce, this Melibeus let caule a great congrygacion of people, as ſurgyens, phyſicions, olde folke and yong, & ſome of hys olde enemyes reconciled (as by her ſemblant) to hys loue and to hys grace: And therwithal ther came ſome of his neighbours, that dyd hym reuerēce more for drede thā for loue, as it happeth oft. There comen alſo ful many ſubtyl flaterers, & wyſe aduocates lerned in the law. And whā theſe folke togyders aſſembled were, this Melibeus in ſorowfull wyſe ſhewed hem his caſe, and by the maner of his ſpeche, it ſemed that in herte he bare a cruel yre, redy to don vengeaunce vpon hys foos, & ſodainly he deſyred yt we
                     •
                  e ſhulde begyn, but natheleſſe yet aſked he counſayle vpon this mater. A ſurgyen by lycence and aſſent of ſuche as were wyſe vp roſe, and vnto Melibeus ſayd as ye ſhal here.
               ¶Sir (ꝙ he) as to vs ſurgiens apertayneth that we do to euery wight the beſt that we can, where as we ben withholdē, & to our pacient that we don no damage: wherfore it happeth many tyme & ofte, that whan two men haue eueriche wounded other, one ſurgyen healeth hem both, wherfore vnto oure arte it is not pertinēt to noriſhe werre, ne parties to ſupporte. But certes as to the waryſſhyng of your doughter, al be it ſo that perilouſly ſhe be wounded, we ſhal do ſo tentyfe beſyneſſe fro day to night that with ye grace of god ſhe ſhal ben hole and ſounde, as ſont as is poſſible. Almoſt right in the ſame wyſe the phyſiciens anſwerd, ſaue that they ſayde a fewe wordes more: That ryght as maladies ben by her contraries cured, right ſo ſhal man wariſſhe werre by peace. Hys neyghbours full of enuye, hys fayned frendes that ſemed reconciled, and his flatterers, maden ſemblaūce of wepyng, & enpayred and agrutched moche of this mater, in prayſinge greatly Melibe of might, of power, of richeſſe and of frendes, diſpyſing the power of his aduerſaries: and ſayd vtterly, that he anon ſhulde

wreken hym on hys foos, and begyn warre.
               Vp roſe then an aduocat that was wyſe byleue and by counſayle of other that were wyſe, and ſayd: The nede for the whych we bene aſſembled in thys place, is a full heuye thynge, & a great mater bycauſe of ye wronge and of the wyckedneſſe that hath be done, & eke by reaſon of great damages that in tyme commynge ben poſſyble to fallen for ye ſame, and eke by reaſon of the great rycheſſe and power of the partyes both, for the whyche reaſons it were a full greate peryll to erren in thys matter. Wherfore Melibeus thys is oure ſentence, we counſayle you abouen all thynge, that ryghte anone thou do thy delygence in kepynge of thy proper perſone, in ſuche a wyſe that thou ne wante none eſpye ne watche, thy bodye for to ſaue: And after that we counſayle that in thyne houſe thou 
                     •
                  et ſuffyciēt garryſon, ſo as they may as well thy bodye as thy houſe defende: but certes to mouen warre, or to done ſodeynly vengeaūce we maye not deme in ſo lytel tyme yt it were profytable, wherfore we aſke leyſer & ſpace to haue delyberacion in thys caſe to deme, for the commen prouerbe ſayeth thus: He that ſone demeth ſone ſhall repente. And eke men ſayne, thylke iudge is wyſe that ſone vnderſtandeth a matter, and iugeth by leyſer: For all be it taryenge be noyfull, algate it is not to be reproued in yeuynge of iudgemente, ne in vengeaunce takynge, when it is ſufficyent and reſonable. And that ſhewed oure Lorde Ieſu Chriſte by enſample, for when the woman was takē in auoutry and was brought in hys preſens to knowen what ſhulde be done of her perſone, al be it that he wyſt wel hym ſelf what he wold anſwere, yet ne wold he not anſwere ſodeynly, but he wolde haue delyberacion, and in the grounde he wrote twyſe, and by thys cauſe we aſken delyberation: and we ſhall then by the grace of God coūſayle you yt thynge that ſhalbe profytable
               Vp ſterte then the yonge folke at ones, & ye moſte parte of that company haue ſcorned thys olde wyſe man, and begā to make noyſe and ſayde. Ryght ſo as whyles that yron is hote men ſhulde ſmyte, ryghte ſo men ſhulde wreken her wronges whyle that they bene freſhe and newe, and wyth loude voyce they tryed warre warre. Vp roſe tho one of ye old wyſe, & wyth hys hande made coūtenaunce that they ſhulde holdē hem ſtyl & yeuen hym audience. Lordynges (ꝙ he) ther is ful many a man that cryeth warre warre, ye wote full lyte what warre amounteth. Warre at hys begynnynge hath ſo great an entryng and ſo large, that euery wyght may entre whē hym liketh, & lightly fynd warre: but certes what ende therof ſhal fal, it is not lightly to know. When ye warre is ones bygon, there is full many a chylde vnborne of hys mother, yt ſhal ſterue yōge bycauſe of thilke warre, other els lyue in ſorowe, or dye in wretchedneſſe: And therfore or yt any warre be bygon, men muſte haue great counſayle & good delyberation. And when thys olde man wende to enforcen hys tale by reſon, well nye all at ones bygon for to ryſe for to breken hys tale, & byddē him ful ofte hys wordes for to abrege: For certes he yt precheth to hem that lyſt not to here his wordes, his ſermō hem anoyeth. For Ieſus Syrake ſayth, yt weping in muſyke is a noyous thynge. This is as moch to ſay, as moch auayleth it to ſpeake byforne folke to which his ſpeche anoyeth, as it is for to ſyngen byforne hem that wepe. And when thys wyſe man ſawe yt him wāted audiēce, al ſhamfaſte he ſet him adowne ayen. For Salomō ſayth. There as thou mayſt not haue audience, enforce the not to ſpeake. I ſe wel (ꝙ thys wyſe man) that the cōmen prouerbe is ſoth, yt good counſayle wanteth, when it is moſte nede.
               Yet had thys Melibeus in hys counſayle many folke, that priuely in hys eere counſayled hym certayne thynges, and counſayled hym the contrary in general audience. when Melibeus had herde that the greateſt parte of hys counſayle were accorded that he ſhuld make warre, anone he conſented to her coū
                  ſaylynge, and fully affyrmed her ſentence. Then dame Prudence, when that ſhe ſawe her huſbonde ſhope hym for to awreke hym on hys enemyes, & to begyn warre: ſhe in ful hūble wyſe, when ſhe ſawe her tyme ſayd to hym theſe wordes. My lord (ꝙ ſhe) I you be ſeche as hertely as I dare or can, ne haſt you not to faſt, and for all guerdons yeue me audiēce. For Peter Alphōs ſayth. Who ſo doth to the good or harme, haſt the not to quyte it for in thys wyſe thy frende woll abyde, and thyne enemye ſhall the lenger lyue in drede. The prouerbe ſayth, he haſteth wel yt wiſely can abyde: And in wycked haſt is no profyte.
               
                  Thys Melibe anſwered to hys wyfe prudence: I purpoſe not (quoth he) to werke by thy counſayle, for many cauſes and reaſons, for certes euery wyght wolde holde me then a foole. Thys is to ſaye, yf I for thy counſaylynge wolde chaunge thynges that bene ordayned and affyrmed by ſo many wyſe. Secondly, I ſaye that all women bene wycked, and none good of hem all. For of a thouſande men ſayeth Salomon, I founde one good man: but certes of all women foūde I neuer none. And alſo certes, yf I gouerned me by thy counſayle, it ſhulde ſeme that I had yeue the ouer me the mayſtrye: and God forbyd yt it ſo were. For Ieſus Syracke ſayeth, that yf the wyfe haue mayſtrye, ſhe is contrarious to her huſbande. And Salomon ſayeth. Neuer in thy lyfe to thy wyfe, ne to thy chylde, ne to thy frende, ne yeue no power ouer thy ſelfe, for better it were that thy chyldren aſke of thy thinges that hem nedeth then thy ſelfe to be in the handes of thy chyldren. And alſo yf I woll werche by thy coūſayle, certes my counſayle muſt be ſomtyme ſecret til it were tyme that it muſte be knowen: and thys ne maye not be, yf I ſhulde be counſayled by the. When dame Prudence full debonairly and with great paciēce, had herde al that her huſbonde lyked for to ſaye, then aſked ſhe of hym lycence for to ſpeake, and ſayd in thys wyſe. My lorde (quoth ſhe) as to youre fyrſte reaſon, it maye lyghtly ben anſwered. For I ſaye that it is no folye to chaunge counſayle, when the thynge is chaunged, or els when ye thynge ſemeth otherwyſe thē it ſemed afore. And more ouer I ſaye, thoughe that ye haue ſworne and behyght to performe youre empryſe, & by iuſte cauſe ye do it not: men ſhulde not ſaye therfore ye were a lyer & forſworne For the boke ſayeth, that the wyſe man maketh no leſynge, when he turneth hys corage for the better. And albeit that your empryſe be eſtablyſhed and ordeyned by great multytude of folke, yet dare you not accomplyſhe thylke ordynaunce but you lyketh: for the trouth of thynges and the profyte ben rather founden in fewe folke that ben wyſe and full of reaſon, then by greate multytude of folke, there euery man cryeth and clattereth what hym lyketh: ſothly ſuche multytude is not honeſt. And as to the ſeconde reaſon, where as ye ſaye, that all womē ben wycked: ſaue your grace. Certes ye dyſpyſe all women in thys wyſe, and he that all deſpyſeth, as ſayeth the boke, all dyſpleaſeth. And Senecke ſayeth, that who ſo woll haue ſapience, ſhal no man dyſprayſe, but he ſhall gladlye teache the ſcience that he can, wythout preſumption or pryde: and ſuche thynges as he nought ne can, he ſhall not ben aſhamed to lerne hem, & to enquyre of leſſe folke then hym ſelfe. And that there hath bene many a good woman, maye lyghtly be proued: For certes ſyr our Lorde Ieſu Chriſt nolde neuer haue deſcended to be borne of a woman, yf al womē had be wycked. And after that, for ye great bounte that is in womē, our lorde Ieſu Chriſt, whē he was ryſen fro death to lyfe, apered rather to a womā then to his apoſtles. And though that Salomon ſayde, he founde neuer women good, it foloweth not therfore that all women be wycked: for thoughe that he ne founde no good woman, certes many an other man hathe founde many a woman full good and trewe. Or els parauenture the entente of Salomon was thys, that in ſouerayne bountye he founde no woman, thys is to ſaye: that there is no wyght that hath parfyte bountye ſaue God alone, as he hym ſelfe recordeth in hys euangelye. For there nys no creature ſo good that hym ne wanteth ſomwhat of the perfection of God that is hys maker. Youre thyrde reaſon is thys, ye ſaye that yf that yt gouerne you by my counſayle it ſhulde ſeme that ye had yeue me the mayſtrye and the lordſhyppe of youre perſone. Syr ſaue youre grace it is not ſo, for yf ſo were that no man ſhulde be counſayled but onely of hem that han lordſhyppe and mayſtrye of hys perſone, men nolde not be counſayled ſo ofte. For ſothly thylke man that aſketh counſayle of a purpoſe, yet hathe he free wyl whether he woll do after that counſayle or none. And as to your fourth reaſon, there as ye ſayne that the ianglerye of women can hyde thinges that they wote not, as who ſayeth, that a woman can not hide that ſhe wote Syr, theſe wordes ben vnderſtande of women that ben ianglers and wycked, of which women men ſayne that thre thynges dryuen a mā out of hys houſe, that is to ſaye, ſmoke droppynge of rayne, and wycked wyues. And of ſuche women Salomon ſayeth, that a man were better dwell in deſerte, then

wyth a woman that is riottous. And ſyr by your leaue it am not I, for ye haue ful oft aſſayde my great ſylence and my greate pacience, and eke howe well that I can hyde and heale thynges that men oughten ſecretly to hyden. And ſothly as to youre fyfth reaſon, where as ye ſaye that in wycked counſayle women venquyſhe men: God wote that thylke reaſon ſtante here in no ſtede: for vnderſtandeth, nowe ye aſken counſayle for to do wyckedneſſe: And yf ye wolde werken wyckedneſſe, & your wyfe reſtrayneth thylke wycked purpoſe, and ouercome you by reaſon and by good counſayle, certes your wyfe oughte rather to be prayſed then blamed. Thus ſhuld ye vnderſtande the philoſopher that ſayeth, in wycked counſayle women venquyſhe her huſbandes. And there as ye blame all women and her reaſons, I ſhall ſhewe you by many enſamples that manye women haue be full good, and yet bene, and her counſayle holſome and profytable. Eke ſome men haue ſayde that the counſayle of women is eyther to dere, or to lytell worthe But all be it ſo that full many women bene badde, and her counſayle vyle and noughte worthe, yet han men foūde full many a good woman, and full dyſcrete and wyſe in counſaylynge. Lo Iacob through the counſayle of hys mother Rebecke, wanne the benyſon of hys father, and ye lordſhyp of all hys brethren. Iudith through her good counſayle, delyuered the cyte of Bethule, in whyche ſhe dwelt, out of the hāde of Holoferne that had it al beſeged, and wolde haue dyſtroyed it. Abigayle delyuered Naball her huſbande fro Dauid the kynge, that wold haue ſlayne him and apeaſed the yre of the kynge by her wyte and by her good counſayle. Heſter by her coū
                  ſell enhaunſed greatly ye people of god in the raygne of Aſſuerus the kynge. And the ſame bountye in good coūſaylyng of many a good woman may men rede and tell. And furthermore when that our lorde had created Adam oure former father, he ſayd in thys wyſe: It is not good a man to be alone: make we an helper to hym ſelfe ſemblable. Here maye ye ſe that yf that women were not good, and her counſayle good and profytable, our lorde god of heuen ne wolde neither han wrought hem, ne called hem the helper of man, but rather confuſyon to man.
               And there ſayde a clerke ones in two verſes. What is better thē gold? Iaſper. What is better then Iaſper? wyſedome. And what is better then wyſedome? womā. And what is better then a good woman? that is a good man. And what is better then a good man? nothynge. And ſyr, by many other reaſons maye ye ſene, that many women bene good, and eke her counſayle good and profytable. And therfore ſyr, yf that ye woll truſte to my counſayle, I ſhall reſtore you your doughter hole and ſounde, and eke that I woll do you ſo moche, that ye ſhall haue honoure in thys caſe.
               When Melibe had herde the wordes of hys wyfe prudence, he ſayd thus. I ſe well that wordes of Salomon be ſoth. For he ſayeth, the wordes that be ſpoken dyſcretlye by ordynaunce bene honycombes, for they yuen ſwetneſſe to the ſoule, and holſomneſſe to the bodye. And wyfe bycauſe of thy ſwete wordes, and eke for I haue proued and aſſayed thy greate ſapience and thy greate trouthe: I woll gouerne me by thy counſayle in all thynge.
               Nowe ſyr (quoth dame Prudence) and ſythens that ye vouchſafe to be gouerned by my counſayle, I woll enfourme you howe that ye ſhall gouerne youre ſelfe in choſynge of your counſaylours. Ye ſhall fyrſte in all youre werke mekelye beſechynge to the hye God that he wolde be your counſaylour, and ſhapeth you to ſuche entent that he yeue you counſayle and comforte, as taught Thobye hys ſonne. At all tymes thou ſhalte blyſſe God, and praye hym to dreſſe thy wayes, and loke eke that thy counſayles ben in hym euer more. Saynt Iames ſayeth, yf anye man of you haue nede of ſapience, aſke it of God. And afterwarde, then ſhullen ye take counſayle in youre ſelfe, and examyne well youre owne thoughtes, of ſuche thynges as you thynketh that ben beſt for youre profyte. And then ſhall ye dryue frō your herte thynges that be cōtrarious to good coūſayle: that is to ſaye, yre, couetous, and haſtyneſſe.
               Fyrſte he that aſketh counſayle of hym ſelfe, certes he muſte be wythouten yre and wrath in hym ſelf for many cauſes. The fyrſt is thys: He that hath greate yre and wrathe in him ſelfe, he weneth alwaye that he maye do the thynge yt he may not do. And ſecōdly,

he that is yrous and wrothfull, he maye not wel deme: And he that maye not wel deme, maye not well counſell. The thyrde is thys, he that is yrous & wroth, as ſayeth Seneke, maye not ſpeake but blamefull thynges, and wyth thylke vycious wordes he ſtyreth other folke to anger and to yre. And eke ſyr ye muſte dryue couetyſe out of your herte. For the Apoſtle ſayeth, that couetyſe is the roote of all harmes. And truſteth ryght wel that a couetous man ne can not deme ne thynke but only to fulfyll the ende of hys couetyſe: & certes that ne maye neuer be accomplyſhed, for euermore, the more aboūdaunce that he hath of rycheſſes, the more he deſyreth. And ſyr, ye muſte alſo dryue out of your herte haſtynes: For certes ye maye not deme for the beſt a ſo dayne thought that falleth in your herte, but ye muſte auyſe you on it full ofte: For as ye haue herde here byfore, the comē prouerbe is thys. He that ſone demeth, ſone repenteth.
               Syr, ye ne be not alwaye in lyke dyſpoſicion, for certes ſome thynge that ſemeth ſomtyme to you yt is good for to do, an other time it ſemeth to you the contrarye.
               And when ye han taken counſaile in your ſelfe, and han demed by good delyberacion ſuche thynge as you ſemeth beſte, then rede I you that ye kepe it ſecrete. Bewraye ye not your counſayl to no perſone, but yf ſo be that ye wene ſekerly that through youre bewrayeng, your cōdicion ſhalbe to you the more profytable. For Ieſus Syrack ſayeth: neyther to thy foe ne to thy frende dyſcouer not thy ſecrete, ne thy folye: for they wol yeue you audience and lokynge, & ſupportacion in youre preſence, and ſcorne you in your abſence. An other clerke ſayth, that ſcarſly ſhal you fynde any perſone that maye kepe coūſayle ſecretly The boke ſayeth, whyle that thou kepeſt thy counſayle in thyne herte, thou kepeſt it in thy pryſon: and when thou bewrayeſt thy counſayl to any wyght, he holdeth yt in hys ſnare And therfore you is better to hyde your coū
                  ſayle in your herte, then to pray hym to whō ye haue bewrayed your counſayle, yt he woll kepe it cloſe ſtyl. For Seneca ſayth: Yf ſo be yt thou mayſt not thyne owne counſayle hyde, howe darſte thou praye any other wight thy counſayle ſecrete to kepe. But natheleſſe yf thou wene ſykerly that the bewrayeng of thy counſayle to a perſone woll make thy condycion ſtonde in ye better plyght, then ſhalt thou tell hym thy counſayle in thys wyſe. Fyrſt thou ſhalte make no ſemblaunt whether the were leuer peace or warre, or thys or that, ne ſhewe hym not thy wyll ne thyne entent: for truſt well that comenly theſe coūſaylers ben flatterers, namely the counſaylers of greate lordes, for they enforce hem alway rather to ſpeake pleaſaunt wordes, enclynynge to the lordes luſte, then wordes that bene trewe or profytable, and therfore men ſaye yt the rych man hath ſelde good coūſayle, but yf he haue it of hym ſelfe. And after that thou ſhalt conſyder thy frendes and thyne enemyes. And as touchynge thy frendes, thou ſhalte conſyder whych of hem ben moſte faythful & moſt wyſe, and eldeſt, and moſte approued in coū
                  ſaylynge: and of hem ſhalt thou aſke thy coū
                  ſayle, as the caſe requyreth.
               I ſaye, that fyrſt ye ſhal call to your counſayle your frendes that ben trewe. For Salomon ſayeth: that ryght as the herte of a man delyteth in ſauoure that is ſote, ryght ſo the counſayle of trewe frendes yeueth ſwetneſſe to the ſoule. And he ſayeth alſo, there may no thynge be lykened to the trewe frēde: For certes golde ne ſyluer be not ſo moche worth as the good wyll of a trewe frende. And alſo he ſayeth that a trewe frende is a ſtronge defēce who ſo that it fyndeth hath a great treaſure. Then ſhall ye alſo conſyder yf that your true frendes be dyſcrete and wyſe: for the boke ſayeth, aſke alwaye thy counſayle of them that ben wyſe. And by thys ſame reaſon ſhall ye call to your counſayle your frendes that ben of age, ſuche as ſeme and ben experte in many thynges, and ben approued in coūſaylyng For the boke ſayeth, that in olde men is ſapience, and in longe tyme the prudence. And Tullius ſayeth, that great thynges bene not aye accomplyſhed by ſtrength ne by delyuerneſſe of body, but by coūſayle, by auctorite of perſones, and by ſcience: the whych thre thinges ne ben not feoble by age, but certes they enforce, and encreaſe daye by daye, and then ſhall ye kepe thys for a generall rule. Fyrſte ſhall ye call to your counſayle a fewe of your frendes that ben eſpecial. For Salomon ſayeth, many frendes haue thou, but amonge a thouſande choſe the one to be thy coūſaylour for al be it ſo that thou fyrſt ne tell thy counſayle but to a fewe, thou mayſte afterwarde

tel it to mo folke yf it be nede. But loke alway that thy counſaylers haue thoſe condicions that I haue ſayd before, that is to ſaye, that they be trewe, wyſe, and of olde experience. And werke not alway in euery nede by one counſayler alone: for ſomtyme behoueth it to be counſayled by many. For Salomon ſaythe, ſaluaciō of thynges is where as there be many counſaylers.
               ¶Nowe haue I tolde you of which folke ye ſhall be counſayled: Nowe wol I tel you whiche counſayle ye ought to eſchue. Fyrſte ye ſhall eſchue the counſaylynge of fooles. Salomon ſayth, take no counſayle of a foole for he wol counſayle but after his owne luſt and hys affection. The boke ſaythe, that the propertie of a foole is this: He troweth lightly harme of euery man, and lightly troweth al bountie in him ſelfe. Thou ſhalt eſchue the counſaylyng of al flatterers, which as enforcē hem rather to prayſe your perſone by ſlatterye, than for to tell you the ſothfaſtneſſe of thynges. Wherfore, Tullius ſaith, amonge al the peſtelencie that ben in frendſhyp, the greateſt is flaterye. And therfore it is more nede that thou eſchue and drede flaterers, thā any other people. The boke ſayth, thou ſhalt rather flee fro the ſwete wordes of flatering and prayſynge, than fro the eygre wordes of thy frendes that ſayth the ſothes. Salomon ſayth, that the wordes of a flaterer is a ſnare to catche innocence. He ſayth alſo, he that ſpeketh to his frende wordes of flatery & of pleſaunce, he ſetteth a nette beforne hys fete to catche hym. And therfore Tullius ſayth. Enclyne not thyne eares to flatterers. And Caton ſaythe. Auyſe the wel, and eſchue ye wordes of ſwetneſſe and of pleaſaunce. And eke thou ſhalt eſchue the counſaylynge of thyne olde enemyes that ben reconciled. The boke ſaythe, that no wight retourneth ſafely in to the grace of his olde enemy. And Eſope ſaith ne truſt not to hem, to whiche thou haſt ſomtyme had werre or enemyte, ne tell hem not thy counſayle. And Seneke telleth the cauſe why it may not be, for he ſaith, there as great fyre hath longe tyme endured, yt there dwelleth ſome vapoure of hete. And therfore ſaith Salomon, in thyn olde foe truſt thou neuer. For ſikerly though thy enemy be reconciled and make the ſygne of humilite, and lout to the with hys heed, truſte hym neuer: for certes he maketh thilke fayned humylite more for hys profyte than for any humilite, or for any loue of thy perſon, bycauſe yt he demeth to haue victorie ouer thy perſone, by ſuche fayned countynaunce, the whych vyctorie he myght not haue by ſtryfe or werre. And Petrus Alphons ſaith, make no felowſhip with thyne olde enemyes, for yf thou do hem bountye, they wollen peruerte it to wyckedneſſe. And eke thou muſt eſchue the counſaylynge of hem that ben thy ſeruauntes, and beren ye gret reuerence: for parauenture they ſayen it more for drede. than for loue. And therfore ſaythe a philoſopher in this wyſe. There is no wyght parfetly true to hym yt he dredeth And Tullius ſaith, there is no might ſo great of any emperour that longe may endure, but he haue loue of the people and drede. Ye ſhall eſchue alſo the counſaylyng of folke that ben dronklewe, for they ne can no coūſayle hyde. For Salomon ſaythe, there nys no priuyte ther as reygneth dronkneſſe, ye ſhal haue alſo in ſuſpecte the counſaylyng of ſuche folke as counſayle you one thynge priuely, and counſayle you the contrary openly. For Caſſidorie ſaith, that it is a maner ſleight to hynder his enemye whan he ſheweth to done a thynge openly, and werketh priuely the contrarye. Thou ſhalte haue alſo in ſuſpecte the counſaylyng of wycked folke, that be alway ful of fraude. And Dauid ſaythe, that bliſful is the man that hath not folowed the counſaylyng of ſhrewes.
               Thou ſhalte alſo eſchue the counſaylynge of yonge folke, for her counſaylynge is not rype, as Salomon ſaythe.
               ¶Nowe ſir, ſythens, I haue ſhewed you of ſuche folke as ye ſhal be counſayled of, and folowe it: nowe woll I teche you howe ye ſhal examyne your counſayle. After the doctryne of Tullius, in examenynge of youre counſayloures, ye ſhall conſydere manye thynges.
               Fyrſt thou ſhalt cōſyder thylke thyng that thou purpoſeſt, and vpon that thynge yt thou wolt haue counſayle, that very trouth be ſaid and cōſerued, this is to ſay, tel truely thy tale for he that ſayth falſe, may not well be counſayled in that caſe, of whiche he lyeth. After this thou ſhalte conſyder the thynges that acorden to that thou purpoſeſt for to do by thy coūſaylours, if reaſon accorde therto, and eke

yf thy might maye attayne therto, and if the more parte and the better parte of your counſaylours accorden therto or no. Than ſhalte Thou conſyder what thynge ſhal folowe of her coūſaylinge: As hate, peace, werre, grace profyte, or damage, and many other thinges: and in al thynges thou ſhalte choſe the beſte, and weyue al other thynges. Thā ſhalt thou conſyder of what rote is engendred the mater of thy counſayle, and what fruite it maye conceyue and engender. Thou ſhalt eke conſyder al thy cauſes, frome whence they be ſpronge. And whan thou haſt examyned thy counſayle, as I haue ſayd, and whiche party is the better and more profytable, and haſte approued it by many wyſe folke & olde, than thou ſhalt conſyder, yf thou mayſte performe it, & make of it a good ende. For certes reſon wol not that any mā ſhal begyn a thyng, but yf he myght performe it as hym ought, ne no wight ſhuld take vpon hym ſo heuy a charge but that he might beare it. For the prouerbe ſayth, he that to moch enbraceth diſtrayneth lytel. And Caton ſaythe, aſſay to do ſuch thinges as thou haſte power to done, leſte the charge oppreſſe the to ſore, that the behoueth weyue the thyng that thou haſte begon. And yf ſo be that thou be in dout, whether thou mayſt perfourme a thynge or none, choſe rather for to ſuffre than to begynne. And Peter Alphons ſaythe, yf thou haſte myght to do a thynge, of whiche thou muſte repente, it is better holde thy tonge ſtyl than for to ſpeke. Than mayſt thou vnderſtonde by ſtronger reſons, that yf thou haſte power to perfourme a werke, of which thou ſhalt repente the, than is it better thou ſuffre than begyn. Wel ſayne they that defenden euery wyght to aſſaye a thyng of which he is in doute whether he may performe it or none. And after whan ye haue examined your counſayle (as I haue ſayde before) and know wel, that ye maye performe your empriſe: conferme it thā ſadly tyl it be at an ende.
               ¶Nowe it is reaſon & tyme that I ſhewe you, whan & wherfore that ye maye chaunge your counſayle, wythouten reprofe. Sothly a man may chaunge hys purpoſe and hys counſayle, yf the cauſe ceaſeth, or whan a newe caſe betydeth. For the lawe ſayth, that vpon thinges that newly betyden, behoueth newe counſayle. And Seneke ſaythe, yf thy counſayle is come to the eeres of thyne enemyes, chaunge thy counſayle. Thou mayſte alſo chaunge thy coūſayle, yf ſo be thou fynde that by errour or by anye other cauſe, harme or damage may betyde. Alſo yf thy counſayle be dyſhoneſt, other els come of dyſhoneſt cauſe, chaunge thy counſayle. For the lawe ſaythe, that al beheſtes that be diſhoneſt, ne ben of no value: And eke, yf ſo be that it be vnpoſſyble or may not gladly be parformed or kepte.
               And take thys for a general rule, that euery counſayle that is enfourmed ſo ſtrongly, that it may not be chaunged for no condycion that may betyde, I ſay that ilke counſayle is wycked.
               
                  MElibeus, whan he hadde herde the doctryne of hys wife dame Prudēce anſwerde in thys wyſe. Dame (ꝙ he) as yet vnto this tyme ye han well taught me, as in gouernayle howe I ſhall gouerne me in the choſynge and in the wytholdynge of my counſayle: but nowe wolde I fayne yt ye wolde condiſcende in eſpecial, howe that ye ſemeth by our counſaylours that we haue choſe in this preſent nede.
               ¶My lorde (ꝙ ſhe) I beſeche you in all humbleſſe, that ye wol not wylfully replye ayenſt my reaſons, ne diſtemper youre herte though I ſpeke the thynge yt you diſpleſe, for god wote as in myne entent, I ſpeke it as for your beſte and for your honoure and profyte eke, and ſothly I hope that your benygnyte wol take it in pacience. And truſteth me wel that your counſayle in this caſe ne ſhuld not (as to ſpeke properly) be called a counſaylyng, but a mocion or a mouynge of folye, in which counſayle ye haue erred in many a ſondrie wyſe.
               Fyrſt ye haue erred in the aſſemblynge of your counſaylours: For fyrſt ye ſhulde haue cleped a fewe folke to your counſayle, and after ye might haue ſhewed it to mo, yf it had be nede. But ye haue cleped to your counſayl a great multytude of people, ful chargeous and ful noyous for to here. Alſo ye haue erred, for there as ye ſhulde haue onely cleped to your counſayle your trewe frendes, olde and wyſe, ye haue cleped ſtraunge folke, yonge folke, falſe flatterers, and enemyes reconcyled, and folke that done you reuerēce

withouten loue. And eke ye haue erred, for ye haue brought with you to your counſayle ire couetyſe, and haſtyneſſe, the which thre thynges ben contrary to euerye good counſayle, honeſt and profytable, the whiche thre thynges ye haue not diſtroyed neyther in youre ſelfe 
                     •
                  e in your counſaylours, as ye ought. Ye haue erred alſo for ye haue ſhewed to your counſaylours your talent and your affectiōs to make werre anon, & for to do vengeaunce, & they haue eſpyde by your wordes, to what thyng ye ben enclyned: & therfore haue they rather counſayled you to your talente, than to your profite. Ye han erred eke, for it ſemeth that you ſuffyſeth to haue be counſayled by theſe counſailours onely, and with lytel auyſement, where as in ſo hye and in ſo great a nede, it had ben neceſſary mo counſaylours, and more delyberacion to performe your empriſe. Ye hā erred alſo, for ye haue not examyned your counſayle in the forſayd maters, ne in dewe maner as the caſe requireth. Ye haue erred alſo, for ye made no diuiſion bytwene your true frendes & your fayned coūſaylours ne ye haue not knowē ye wil of your trew coū
                  ſaylours, & frendes, olde, & wyſe, but ye haue caſte al her wordes in an hochepot & encyned your herte to the more parte and to the gretter nombre of fooles than of wyſe men. And therfore the counſaylynges that ben at congregacions and multitudes of folke, there as men take more regarde to the nomber than to the ſapiēce of perſons, ye ſene wel, that in ſuch counſaylinges, fooles han the maiſtrye. Melibe anſwerde and ſayd ayen: I graunt wel that I haue erred, but there as thou haſt tolde me here byforne, yt he nys not to blame that chaungeth his coūſayle in certayne caſe and for certayne and iuſte cauſe, I am al redy to chaunge my counſaylours ryght as thou woldeſt deuyſe. The prouerbe ſaythe, for to done ſynne is mannyſſhe, but certes for to perceuer longe in ſynne, is a werke of the dyuell.
               To thys ſentence anſwereth anon dame Prudence and ſayd: Examyneth (ꝙ ſhe) wel your counſayle, and let vs ſe whyche of hem hath ſpoke moſte reſonably, and taught you beſte counſayle. And for as moche as the examinacion is neceſſarye, lette vs begyn at ſurgens and phyſiciens, that fyrſt ſpake of thys mater. I ſaye that phyſiciens and ſurgiens haue ſayd you in your counſayle diſcretly, as hem ought: and in her ſpeche ſayd ful wiſely, that to the office of hem apertayneth to done to euery wight honoure and profyte, and no wyght to anoye, and after her crafte to don great dyligence vnto the cure of hem, whych they haue in her gouernaunce. And ſir, right as they haue anſwerde wyſely and diſcretly, right ſo rede I that they ben hyely and ſoueraynly guerdoned for her noble ſpeche, & eke for they ſhul more done theyr ententyfe beſyneſſe in the curacion of your doughter: for al be it ſo they ben your frendes, therfore ſhullē ye not ſuffre, that they ſerue you for naught, but ye ought therafter guerdō hem, and pay hem her largeſſe. And as touchyng the propoſicion, whyche the phyſiciens entreteden in in this caſe, this is to ſayne, that in maladies is, that contrarie is wariſhed by an other cō
                  trarie: I wolde fayne knowe howe ye vnderſtonde thylke texte, & what is your ſentence? Certes (ꝙ Melibeus) I vnderſtonde it in thys wyſe. Right as they han do me a contrarye, ſo ſhulde I done hem an other, for ryght as they han venged hem vpon me, and done me wronge, ryght ſo woll I venge me vpon hem, and don hem wronge, and than haue I cured one contrarie by an other.
               Lo, lo (ꝙ dame Prudence) how lightly is euery man enclyned to hys owne deſyre and hys owne pleſaunce. Certes (ꝙ ſhe) the wordes of the phyſiciens ne ſhuld not ben vnderſtonde in that wyſe, for certes wyckedneſſe is not contrarie to wickedneſſe, ne vengeaunce is not contrarie to vengeaunce, ne wronge to wronge, but euery of hem encreſeth & engendreth other. But certes ye wordes of the phiſiciens ſhulde be vnderſtonde in thys wyſe, for good and wyckydneſſe ben two contraries: and peace and werre, vengeaunce and ſuffraunce, diſcorde and acorde, and many other thynges: But certes wyckidneſſe ſhalbe wariſhed with goodnes, diſcorde by acorde, werre by peace, and ſo forthe in other thynges. And therto acordeth ſaynt Poule the Apoſtel in many places: He ſaith, ne yeld not harme for harme, ne wicked ſpeche for wycked ſpeche, but do wel to hem that don to the harme, and bleſſe them that ſayd the harme. And in manye other places he amoniſſheth peace and acorde.
               But nowe wol I ſpeke of the counſayle,

whiche was lyeue vnto you by men of law, and the wyſe folke and olde folke, that ſaydē al by one accorde as ye herde byforne, that ouer al thynges ye ſhal done your beſyneſſe and dyligence to kepe youre perſon, and to warnſtore your houſe: And they ſayd alſo, yt in thys caſe ye ought to werchenfull wyſely and with great delyberacion. And ſyr, as to the fyrſte poynte, that toucheth the kepynge of your perſon: ye ſhall vnderſtonde that he that hath werre, ſhal euer deuoutely and mekely prayen, byforne all thynges, that Ieſu Chriſt of his mercy wol haue him in his protection, and to be his ſouerayne helper at his nede: For certes in this worlde there nys no wight that maye be counſayled and ykepte ſuffyciently without the kepynge of our lord Ieſu Chriſt. To thys ſentence acordeth the prophete Dauid that ſayth: If god ne kept the cyte, in ydel waketh he that it kepeth. Nowe ſir, than ſhulde he commytte the kepynge of your perſon to youre true frendes, that ben approued and yknowe, and of hem ſhul ye aſke helpe, your perſon to kepe. For Caton ſaith: If thou haue nede of helpe, aſke it of thy frendes, for there nys none ſo good a phyſicien as thy true frende. And after this than ſhal ye kepe you fro al ſtraunge folke, & fro lyers, and haue alway in ſuſpecte her cō
                  panye. For Peter Alphons ſaythe. Ne take no company by the way of no ſtraunge man, but yf ſo be that thou haſte knowen hym of lenger tyme: And yf ſo be that he fal in to thy companye, parauenture withouten thyn aſſent and good wyl, enquire than as ſubtelly as thou canſt of his conuerſacion, and of hys lyfe byforne, and fayne thy way, ſayeng thou woldeſt go thyder as thou wolte not go, and yf he beare a ſpere, hold the on the right ſyde of hym, and yf he beare a ſwerde, hold the on the lefte ſyde of hym. And than ſhal ye kepe you wyſely from all maner of ſuch people as I haue ſaid you here byfore, and hem and her counſayle eſchue. And after this than ſhal ye kepe you, in ſuche maner, that for anye preſumpſion of your bodely ſtrength, that ye diſpyſe not ne acounte not the might of your aduerſary ſo lyte, that ye lete the keping of your perſon for your preſumpcion, for euery wyſe mā dredeth his enemy. And Salomon ſaith: A very foole is he that of al hath drede: But certes he yt thorowe hardyneſſe of his herte, and through the hardyneſſe of him ſelf, hath to great preſumpcion, hym ſhall yuel betyde. Than ſhal ye euermore encountrewayte enbuſhementes, and all eſpyaile. For Seneke ſaythe: The wyſe man that dredeth harmes, eſcheweth harmes: He ne falleth in to no perylles, that peryll eſcheweth. And al be it ſo that thou ſeme, yt thou be in ſecret place, yet ſhalt thou alway don dyligence in kepyng of thy perſon, this is to ſay, ne be not neglygent to kepe thyne owne perſon, not onely for thy greateſt enemy, but alſo for thy leſte enemy. Seneke ſayth, a man that is wel aduyſed, he dredeth his leſte enemye. Ouyde ſaythe, that the lytel weſel wol ſlee the great bulle & th
                     •
                   wylde herte. And the prouerbe ſaythe, that a lytel thorne wol greue a kyng ful ſore, and a lytel hounde wol holde the wylde bore. But natheleſſe I ſay not thou ſhalt be ſo cowarde that thou doute where as is no drede. The boke ſaythe, that ſome men haue great luſte to diſceyue, but yet they drede to be diſceyued And kepe the fro the companye of ſkorners: for the boke ſayth, with ſkorners ne make no companye, but flye her wordes as venym
               ¶Nowe as to the ſeconde poynte, where as your wyſe counſaylours counſayled you to warne ſtore youre houſe with greate delygence, I wolde fayne knowe howe ye vnderſtōde thylke wordes, & what is your ſentēce.
               Melibeus anſwerd and ſayd, certes I vnderſtonde it in this wyſe, that I ſhal warne
                     •
                   ſtore myn houſe wyth toures, ſuche as haue caſtels & other maner edyfices, and armurye & archeries, bitwene which thynges I maye my perſon and my houſe ſo kepe and defende that myne enemyes ſhullen be in drede myne houſe to aproch. To this ſentence anſwerde anon Prudence. Warniſhyng (ꝙ ſhe) of hye toures & of hye edyfices, is with great coſtages and with great trauayle, and whan that they ben accōpliſhed, yet ben they not worth a ſtrawe, but yf they ben defended with trew frendes, that ben olde and wyſe. And vnderſtondeth wel, that ye greateſt and the ſtrōgeſt garnyſon that ryche men maye haue, as wel to kepen her parſone as her goodes is, yt they be byloued with her ſubiectes, and with her neyghbours. For thus ſaythe Tullius, that there is a maner garryſon, that no man may venquiſhe ne diſcomfyte, and that is a lorde to be byloued of his cytezyns, & of his people.
               
                  ¶Nowe ſir, as to the thyrde poynte, where as your olde and wyſe counſaylours ſayde, that ye ought not ſodainly ne haſtely procede in this nede▪ but that ye oughten puruayen and aparayle you in this caſe, with great dylygence and delyberacion. Verily I trowe yt they ſayde right trewly and ryght ſothe. For Tullius ſayth: In euery dede or thou begyn it, apparayle the with great dyligence. Than ſay I, in vengeaunce takyng, in werre, in batayle, and in warneſtoryng, or thou begyn I rede that thou apparayle the therto, and do it with great delyberaciō. For Tullius ſaith: The longe apparelynge to fore the batayle, maketh ſhorte victorie. And Caſſidorus ſaith The garryſon is ſtronger, whan it is longe tyme auyſed. But nowe let vs ſpeke of the counſayle that was acorded by your neyghbours, ſuche as don you reuerence withoutē loue, your olde enemyes reconciled, your flatterers, that counſayled you certayne thynges priuely, and openly counſayled you the contrarye. The yong folke alſo, that counſayled you to venge you, & to make werre anon. Certes ſyr, as I haue ſayde byfore, ye haue greatly erred to clepe ſuche maner of folke to youre counſayle, whiche counſaylours ben ynoughe reproued by the reſons a forſayd. But natheleſſe let vs nowe diſcende to the ſpecial. Ye ſhul fyrſte procede after the doctryne of Tullius. Certes the trouthe of thys mater or of thys counſayle, nedeth not dyligently to enquire, for it is wel wyſte, which they ben that han done you this treſpas and vilanye, and howe many treſpaſours, and in what maner they haue done al thys wronge to you, and al this vilanye. And after thys, than ſhul ye examyne the ſeconde condicion, whiche Tullius addeth in thys mater. For Tullius putteth a thyng, whiche that he clepeth conſentyng: this is to ſay, who ben they and whiche ben they, and howe manye, that cōſenten to thy counſayle in thy wylfulneſſe, to done haſty vengeaunce. And let vs conſyder alſo who ben they, and howe manye they ben that conſented to youre aduerſaries. As to the fyrſt poynt, it is wel knowen whiche folke they be, that cōſented to your haſty wylfulneſſe. For trewly al tho that counſayl you to maken ſodayne werre, ne be not your frendes. Let ſe nowe whiche ben they that ye holden ſo greatly your frēdes, as to your perſon For al be it ſo that ye be mighty & rich certes ye ben but alone: for trewly ye ne haue no chyld but a doughter, ne ye haue no brethern ne coſyns germayns, ne none other nye kynrede, wherfore your enemyes ſhuld ſtynte to plede with you, ne to diſtroye your perſon.
               Ye knowe alſo that youre rycheſſe mot be diſpended in dyuers parties. And whā that euery wight hath his parte, they wollen take but lytell regarde to venge your dethe. But thyne enemyes ben thre, & they haue manye brethern, children, coſyns, & other nye kynred & though ſo were, that thou haddeſt ſlayne of hem two or thre, yet dwelleth ther ynowe to auenge her dethe, and to ſlee thy perſon. And though ſo be that your kynrede be more ſtedfaſte and ſyker than the kyn of your aduerſaryes, yet neuer the leſſe your kynrede is but after kynrede, for they ben but lytel ſybbe to you, and the kynne of your enemyes ben nye ſybbe to hem. And certes as in that, her condicion is better than is yours. Than let vs conſyder alſo of the counſaylynge of hem that counſayled you to take ſodayne vengeaunce, whether it acorde to reſon or non: And certes ye know wel nay for as by ryght and reſon, there maye no man take vengeaunce of no wight, but the iuge that hath iuriſdiction of it, whan it is graunted hym to take vengeaunce haſtely or attemperatly, as the lawe requireth. And yet more ouer of thylke worde that Tullius clepeth cōſentynge, thou ſhalte cōſent, yf that thy might and thy power may conſente and ſuffyſe to thy wilfulneſſe, and to thy counſaylours: And certes thou mayſte wel ſaye naye, for ſykerly as for to ſpeke properly, we may do nothyng but ſuche thynge as we may done ryghtfully: and certes righfully ye may take no vengeaunce, as of your own propre auctorite. Than maye ye ſe that youre power ne conſenteth not ne accordeth not with your wylfulneſſe. Nowe let vs examyne the thyrde poynt, that Tullius clepeth conſequence. Thou ſhalte vnderſtonde that the vengeaunce yt thou purpoſeſt for to take is conſequent, and therof foloweth an other vengeaunce, peryl, and werre, and other damages withouten nombre, of whiche we be not ware, as at this tyme. And as touchynge the fourth poynte, yt Tullius clepeth engendring, thou ſhalte conſyder, that this wrong, whiche that is done to the, is engendred of ye
                  
hate of thyne enemyes, and of ye vengeaunce takyng vpon hem, that wolde engender a nother vengeaunce, and mochel ſorowe & waſtyng of rycheſſe, as I ſayde ere. Nowe ſir, as touchyng the fylte poynte, that Tully clepeth cauſes, whiche is the laſte poynte, thou ſhalte vnderſtonde, that the wronge that thou haſte receyued, hathe certayne cauſes, whiche that clerkes callen orien, and efficien, and cauſa longinqua, and cauſa propinqua, that is to ſaye, the ferre cauſe, and the nyghe cauſe. The ferre cauſe is almyghty God, that is cauſe of al thynges. The nere cauſe is the thre enemyes. The cauſe accidental was hate. The cauſe material, ben the fyue woundes of thy doughter. The cauſe formal, is the maner of theyr werkynge that brought ladders, and clambe in at thy wyndowes. The cauſe fynal was for to ſle thy doughter, it letted not in as moche as in them was. But for to ſpeke of yu ferre cauſe, as to what ende they ſhulde come, or fynally what ſhal betyde of them in thys caſe, ne canne I not deme, but by coniectynge and ſuppoſynge: for we ſhall ſuppoſe that they ſhall come to a wycked ende, bycauſe that the boke of decrees ſaythe. Selde or wyth greate payne, ben cauſes brought to a good ende, whan they ben badly begonne.
               Now ſir, yf men wolde aſke me why that god ſuffred men to do you this villanye, truly I can not wel anſwere, as for no ſothfaſtneſſe. For the Apoſtel ſaythe, that the ſcyences and the iugementes of our lorde God almighty ben ful depe, there may no man comprehende ne ſerche hem. Natheleſſe by certayne preſumpcyous and coniectynges, I holde and byleue, that God whyche that is ful of iuſtyce and of rightwiſneſſe, hathe ſuffred thys betyde, by iuſte cauſe reſonable.
               ¶Thy name is Melibee, this is to ſaye, a man that drinketh hony. Thou haſte dronke ſo moche hony of ſwete temporel rycheſſes, and delyces of honours of this worlde, that thou arte dronke, and haſte forgoten Ieſu Chriſt thy creatour: Thou ne haſte not done to hym ſuche honoure and reuerence as the ought, ne thou ne haſte not taken kepe to the wordes of Ouide, that ſayth. Vnder ye hony of the goodes of thy body, is hyd the venym that ſleeth thy ſoule.
               And Salomon ſayth: If it ſo he that thou haſt founde hony, eete of the ſame hony, that that ſuffyſeth: For yf ſo be that thou eete of ye ſame hony out of meſure, thou ſhalte ſpewe, and alſo be nedy and poore. And parauenture almyghty God Ieſu Chriſt, hath the in diſpyte, and hathe turned awaye fro the hys face, and his eeres of myſerycorde & mercye. And alſo he hath ſuffred & gyue lycence, that thou thus ſhuldeſt be puniſhed & chaſtiſed, in ye maner that thou haſte treſpaſed and offended. Thou haſt done ſynne agaynſt our lorde Chriſt, for certes the thre enemyes of mankynde, that is to ſay: the fleſhe, the fende, and the worlde, thou haſte ſuffred hem entre into thyne herte wylfully, by the wyndowes of thy body, and haſt not defended thy ſelfe ſuffyciently agaynſt their aſſautes & their temptacions, ſo that they haue wounded thy ſoule in fyue places, this is to ſhy: The deedly ſynnes, that ben entred in to thy hert by thy fyue wyttes. And in the ſame maner oure lorde Chriſt hathe wolde and ſuffred that thy thre enemyes bē entred in to thy houſe by ye wyndowes, and haue wounded thy doughter in the forſayd maner.
               Truely (ꝙ Melibee) I ſe well that ye enforce you moche by wordes to ouercome me, in ſuche maner that I ſhall not venge me on myn enemyes, ſhewynge me the perilles and the yuels that myght fal of this vengeaunce but who ſo wolde conſyder in al vengeaunces, the perils and yuels that myght ſ
                     •
                  e of vengeaunce takyng, a man wolde neuer take vengeaunce, and that were harme: For by ye vengeaunce takynge, ben the wycked men diſceuered from the good men. And they that haue wyll to do wickedneſſe, reſtrayn theyr wycked purpoſe, whan they ſe the poniſhyng and chaſtyſyng of ye treſpaſours: And yet ſay I more, that ryght as a ſynguler perſon ſynneth in takynge vengeaunce of a nother m
                     •
                  , ryght ſo ſynneth the iuge, yf he do no vengeaūce of hem that haue deſerued. For Seneke ſaythe thus: That mayſter he ſaythe is good that preueth ſhrewes. And as Caſſyodor ſaythe: A man dredeth to do outrages, whan he wote and knoweth, that it dyſpleaſeth to the iuges & ſoueraynes. And an other ſaythe: The iuge that dredeth to do ryght maketh men ſhrewes. And ſaynt Poule the Apoſtle ſaythe in hys Epyſtle, whan he wryteth vnto the Romayns, that the iuges beare not

the ſpeere wythout cauſe, but they beare it to punyſhe the ſhrewes & myſdoers, & for to defende the good men. ¶Yf ye woll then take vengeaunce of your enemies, ye ſhul returne and haue your recourſe to the iuge that hath the iuriſdyction vpon hem, and he ſhall punyſhe hem, as the lawe aſketh and requyreth
               A ha, ſayd Melibee, thys vēgeaūce lyketh me nothynge. I bethynke me nowe, and take hede howe that fortune hathe nouryſhed me fro my childhode, and hath holpe me to paſſe many a ſtronge paas: Nowe I woll aſſaye her, trowynge wyth goddes helpe, that ſhe ſhall helpe me my ſhame for to auenge.
               
                  TRuely ſaid Prudēce, yf ye wol werke by my counſayle, ye ſhal not aſſay for 
                     ••
                  ne by no waye: ne ye ſhall not lene or bowe vnto her, after the worde of Senek For thynges that bene foolyſhlye done, and that bene done in hope of fortune, ſhal neuer come to good ende. And as the ſame Seneke ſayeth: The more clere & the more ſhynynge that fortune is, the more brytel and the ſoner broke ſhe is. Truſteth not in her, for ſhe is not ſtedfaſt ne ſtable. For when thou troweſt to be moſte ſure and ſtedfaſte of her helpe, ſhe woll fayle and dyſceyue the. And where as ye ſaye, that fortune hath nouryſhed you fro youre chyldhode, I ſaye that in ſo moche ye ſhall the leſſe truſte in her, and in her wytte. For Seneke ſayeth: what man that is noryſhed by fortune, ſhe maketh him a great foole Nowe then ſyth ye deſyre and aſke vēgeaūce and the vengeaunce that is done after the lawe, and before the iuge, ne lyketh you not and the vengeaunce that is done in hope of fortune is peryllous & vncertaine, then haue ye none other remedye, but for to haue your recourſe vnto the ſoueraine iuge, that vēgeth all vylanyes and wronges. And he ſhal vēge you, after that hym ſelfe wytneſſeth, where as he ſayeth: Leaue the vengeaunce to me, and I ſhall do it.
               Melibee anſwered, yf I ne venge me of the villany that men haue done to me, I ſōmmō or warne hem, that haue done to me that vyllanye, and al other, to do me an other vyllanye. For it is wrytten: Yf thou take no vengeaūce of an olde vyllany, thou ſōmoneſt thyne aduerſaryes to do the a newe vyllany: And alſo for my ſuffraūce men wolde do me ſo moche vyllany, that I myght neither bere it ne ſuſtayne it, and ſo ſhulde I be put & holden ouer lowe. For men ſayne, in mykel ſufferyng ſhal many thynges fal vnto the, which thou ſhalt not mowe ſuffre.
               Certes (ꝙ Prudence) I graunt you, that ouer moch ſuffraunce is not good, but yet ne foloweth it not therof, that euery perſone, to whome men do vyllanye, ſhulde take of it vē
                  geaunce: for that appertayneth and longeth all only to iuges, for they ſhulde venge ye vyllanyes and iniuryes: And therfore thoſe two authorities that ye haue ſayd afore, bene only vnderſtande in the iuges: For when they ſuffre ouer moche the wrōges and vyllanyes to be done, wythout punyſhment, they ſommon not a man all only for to do newe wronges, but they cōmaunde it. Alſo a wyſe man ſayeth, that the iuge that correcteth not ye ſynner, cōmaundeth and byddeth hym do ſynne. And ye iuges and ſouerayns, myght in theyr lande ſo moch ſuffre of the ſhrewes & myſdoers, that they ſhulde by ſuch ſuffraūce, by proceſſe of tyme, wexe of ſuch power and myght that they ſhulde put out the iuges and the ſoueraynes frō theyr places, and at laſte, make hem leſe her lordſhyppes.
               But let vs now ſuppoſe, that ye haue leue to venge you: I ſaye ye be not of myght and power as nowe to venge you, for yf ye woll make comparyſon vnto the myghte of youre aduerſaryes, ye ſhulde fynde in many thynges that I haue ſhewed you er thys, yt theyr condicyon is better then yours, and therfore ſaye I, that it is good as nowe, that ye ſuffre and be pacient.
               Furthermore, ye knowe well that after the cōmen ſawe, it is a woodneſſe, a man to ſtryue wyth a ſtronger or a more mighty mā then he is hym ſelfe, and for to ſtryue wyth a man of euen ſtrength, that is to ſaye, wyth as ſtronge a man as he is, it is peryl: and for to ſtryue wyth a weaker man, it is folye, and therfore ſhulde a man ſlye ſtryuynge as mykel as he myght. For Salomon ſayeth: It is a great worſhyppe to a man to kepe hym fro noyſe & ſtryfe: and yf it ſo befal & happe that a man of greater myght & ſtrength then thou arte, do the greuaūce: ſtudy and beſye the rather to ſtyll the ſame greuaunce, then for to venge the. For Seneke ſayeth, that he putteth hym in great peryll, that ſtryueth wyth

a greater man than he is hem ſelfe. And Caton ſayth, yf a man of hygher aſtate or degre or more mighty than thou, do the anoye or greuaunce, ſuffre hym: for he that ones hath greued the, maye an other tyme releue the and helpe the. Yet ſette I caſe ye haue lycence for to venge you. I ſaye that there ben ful many thynges, that ſhal reſtrayne you of vengeaunce takyng, and make you for to enclyne to ſuffre, and for to haue pacience in the wronges that haue ben done to you. Fyrſt and formeſt yf ye wol conſyder the fautes that ben in your owne perſon, for whyche fautes god hath ſuffred you to haue this trybulacion, as I haue ſayd to you here before. For the poete ſaythe, that we ought paciently take the trybulacions that come to vs, whan that we thynke and conſyder that we haue deſerued to haue them. And ſaynt Gregorie ſaythe, that whan a man conſydereth wel the nombre of hys defautes and of hys ſynnes, the paynes and the trybulacions that he ſuffreth ſeme the leſſe vnto hym. And in as moche as him thynketh his ſynnes more heuy and greuous, in ſo moche ſemeth his payne the lighter and the eſyer vnto him. Alſo ye owe to enclyne and bowe your herte to take the pacience of our lorde Ieſu Chriſt, as ſayth ſaynt Peter in his epyſtles. Ieſu Chriſt he ſaythe hath ſuffred for vs, and yeuen enſample to euerye man to folowe and ſewe hym, for he dyd neuer ſynne, ne neuer came there a villaynous worde out of hys mouthe. Whan men curſed hym, he curſed hem not. And whan men bete hym, he manaced hem not. Alſo the great pacience, whyche ſayntes that ben in paradyſe haue had in tribulacyon that they haue ſuffred, wythout her deſerte or gylte, ought moche ſtyrre you to pacience. Ferthermore, ye ſhul enforce you to haue pacience, cō
                  ſydryng that the trybulacions of thys world but lytel whyle endure, and ſone paſſed ben and gon, and ye ioy that a man ſeketh to haue by pacience in tribulacions is perdurable, after that the Apoſtle ſaythe in his Epyſtle. The ioye of god he ſayth, is perdurable, that is to ſaye, euerlaſtyng. Alſo troweth and byleueth ſtedfaſtly that he is not wel nouriſhed and wel taught, that can not haue pacience, or wol not receyue pacyence. For Salomon ſaythe, that the doctryne and the wytte of a man is knowen by pacience. And in an other place he ſayth, that he that is pacient, gouerneth hym by great prudence.
               And the ſame Salomon ſaythe. The angry and wrathful man maketh noyſes, and the pacient mā attempreth and ſtylleth hem. He ſaythe alſo, it is more worth to be pacient than to be ryght ſtronge. And he that maye haue the lordeſhip of his owne herte is more to prayſe, thā he that by his force or ſtrength taketh great cyties. And therfore ſayth ſaynt Iame in hys epyſtle that pacyence is a great vertue of perfectyon.
               
                  CErtes (ꝙ Melibee) I graunt you dame Prudence, that pacience is a great vertue of perfection, but euerye man maye not haue the perfection that ye ſeke, ne I am not of the nō
                  bre of ryght perfyte men. For myn herte may neuer be in peace, vnto the tyme it be auenged. And al be it ſo that it was great peryl to myne enemyes to do me a villanye, in taking vengeaunce vpon me, yet toke they no hede of the peryl, but fulfylled her wycked wyll & her corage: And therfore me thynketh men ought not repreue me, though I put me in a lytel peryl, for to auenge me, & though I do a great exceſſe, that is to ſaye: that I venge one outrage by an other.
               ¶Ah (ꝙ dame) Prudence, ye ſay your wyl as you lyketh: But in no caſe of the worlde a man ſhulde not do outrage ne exceſſe for to venge him. For Caſſiodor ſayth, that as yuel dothe he that vengeth him by outrage, as he that dothe the outrage. And therfore ye ſhal venge you after the order of right, that is to ſaye, by the lawe, and not by exceſſe ne by outrage. And alſo yf you wol venge you of the outrage of your aduerſaries in other maner than right commaundeth, ye ſynne. And therfore ſaythe Seneke: that a man ſhal neuer venge ſhreudneſſe by ſhreudneſſe. And yf ye ſaye that right aſketh to defende violence by violence, and fightyng by fighting: certes ye ſaye ſoth, whan the defence is done without interual, or without taryeng or delay, for to defende hym, and not for to venge hym. And it behoueth that a man put ſuche attemperaūce in his defence, that mē haue no cauſe ne mater to repreue him yt defendeth hym of

outrage and exceſſe, for els were it agayne reſon. Parde ye knowe wel, that ye make no defence as nowe, for to defende you, but for to venge you: and ſo ſheweth it that ye haue no wyll to do your dede attemperatly, and therfore me thynketh that pacience is good. For Salomon ſayeth, that he that is not pacient ſhall haue great harme.
               
                  CErtes ſayd Melibee I graūt you, that when a mā is impacient & wroth of that that toucheth him not, and that appertaineth not vnto him, though it harme hym it is no wonder For the lawe ſayth, that he is culpable, that entremetleth or meteth wyth ſuche thynges as apertayneth not vnto hym. And Salomō ſayeth▪ that he that entremetleth of the noyſe or ſtryfe of another man, is lyke to hym that taketh a ſtraunge hounde by the ceres: For ryght as he, that taketh a ſtraūge hoūde by ye ceres, is other whyle byttē by ye honde, right ſo in the ſame wyſe it is reaſon that he haue harme that by hys impacience medleth hym of the noyſe of an other man, where as it appertayneth not vnto hym. But ye knowe wel that thys dede, that is to ſaye my grefe & my dyſeaſe, toucheth me ryght nyghe. And therfore though I be wrothe and impacient, it is no maruayle: and ſauynge youre grace I can not ſe yt it myght greatly harme me thoughe I toke vengeaunce, for I am rycher & more myghtye then myne enemyes be: And well knowe ye that by money & by hauynge great poſſeſſyons, ben all thynges of thys worlde gouerned. And Salomō ſayeth, al theſe thynges obey to money.
               When Prudence had herde her huſbande auaunt hym of hys rycheſſe and hys money, dyſprayſynge ye power of hys aduerſaryes, ſhe ſpake and ſayd in thys wyſe. Certes dere ſyr, I graunt you that ye be ryche & myghty, and that ye rycheſſe is good to hem that haue well gotten hem, and that well can vſe hem. For ryght as the body of a man may not lyue wythout the ſoule, no more may it lyue with out the temporel goodes, and by ryches may a man get hym great frendes. And therfore ſayeth Pamphillus: Yf a nerthes doughter he ſayth be riche, ſhe may chefe of a thouſand men, whyche ſhe woll take to her huſbande: for of a thouſande, one woll not forſake her ne refuſe her. And thys Pamphillus ſayeth alſo: Yf thou be ryght happy, that is to ſay, yf thou be ryche, thou ſhalte fynde a greate nombre of felowes & frendes. And yf thy fortune chaūge, farewel frendſhyp, & felowſhyp for thou ſhalte be alone wythout any cōpany but yf it be the companye of poore folke. And yet ſayeth thys Pamphillus more ouer that they that bene bonde and thrall of lynage, ſhall be made worthye and noble by the rycheſſes. And ryghte ſo as by the rycheſſes there come many goodneſſes, ryghte ſo by pouertie come there many harmes and yuels, for greate pouertie cōſtrayneth a man to do many yuels. And therfore calleth Caſſiodor pouertye the mother of ruyne, that is to ſaye, the mother of ouerthrowynge or of fallynge downe. And therfore ſayeth Peter Alfonce: One of the greateſt aduerſyties of thys worlde is when a free man by kynde or of byrth, is conſtrayned by pouerty to eat the almeſſe of hys enemye. And the ſame ſayeth Innocent, in one of hys bokes: He ſayeth, that ſorowfull and myſhappy is the condicion of a poore begger, for yf he aſke not hys meate, he dyeth for honger, and yf he aſke, he dyeth for ſhame: and algates neceſſite conſtrayneth hym to aſke. And therfore ſayeth Salomon, that better is to dye, then for to haue ſuche pouerte. And as the ſame Salomon ſayeth: Better it is to dye of bytter deth, then for to lyue in ſuche wyſe. By theſe reaſons that I haue ſaid vnto you, & by many other reaſons that I coulde ſay, I graunt you that rycheſſes ben good, to hem yt getten hem well, and to hem that wel vſen tho rycheſſes And therfore wol I ſhewe you howe ye ſhal behaue you in gatherynge of rycheſſes, and in what maner ye ſhullen vſe hem.
               Fyrſt ye ſhall get hem wythout great deſyre, by good leyſer, ſokynglye and not ouerhaſtelye, for a man that in to deſyrynge to get rycheſſe, habandoneth hym fyrſte to thefte and to all other yuels. And therfore ſayeth Salomon: He that haſteth hym to beſely to waxe ryche, he ſhall be none innocent. He ſayeth alſo, that the rycheſſe that haſtely cometh to a man, ſone and lyghtly goeth and paſſeth from a man, but that rycheſſe that cometh lytel & lytel, wexeth alwaye and multiplyeth. And ſyr, ye ſhall gette rycheſſe by your wyte

and by your trauayle, vnto your profyte, and that wythout wronge or harme doynge to any other perſone. For the lawe ſayeth, there maketh no mā him ſelfe riche, yf he do harme to an other wyght, thys is to ſay: that nature defendeth and forbyddeth by ryghte, that no man make hym ſelfe ryche vnto the harme of an other perſon. And Tullius ſayeth, that no ſorowe ne no drede of death, ne nothing that maye fall vnto a man, is ſo moche ayenſt nature, as a man to encreace hys owne profyte, to the harme of an other mā. And though the great & myghty mē get rycheſſes more lyghtly then thou, yet ſhalte thou not be ydell ne ſlowe to do thy profyte, for thou ſhalte in all wyſe flye ydelneſſe. For Salomon ſayeth, ye ydelneſſe teacheth a man to do many yuels. And the ſame Salomon ſayeth, that he that trauayleth and beſyeth hym to tylth his lāde ſhall eate breed: but he that is ydell & caſteth hym to no beſyneſſe ne occupacion, ſhal fal in to pouerte and dye for honger. And he that is ydell and ſlowe, can neuer fynde couenable tyme for to do hys profyte. For there is a verſyfyer ſayeth, that the ydel man excuſeth him in wynter, bycauſe of the greate colde, and in ſommer bycauſe of the heete. For theſe cauſes ſayeth Caton, waketh and enclyne you net ouer moche for to ſlepe, for ouer moche reſte nouryſheth and cauſeth many vyces. And therfore ſayeth ſaynt Ierom, do ſome good dedes, that the deuell whyche is our enemye, ne fynde you not vnoccupyed, for the dyuel ne taketh not lyghtly vnto his wer kynge ſuche as he fyndeth occupyed in good werkes.
               Then thus, in gettynge rycheſſes ye muſt flye ydelneſſe. And afterward ye ſhul vſe the rycheſſes, whyche ye haue gote by your wyte and by youre trauayle, in ſuche maner, that men holde you not to ſcarce ne to ſparyng, ne foole large, that is to ſay, ouer large a ſpēder For ryghte as men blame an auaricious mā bycauſe of hys ſcarcite and chynchery, in the ſame wyſe is he to blame that ſpendeth ouer largelye. And therfore ſayeth Caton: Vſe (ſayeth he) the rycheſſes that thou haſte gotten in ſuche maner, that men maye haue no mater ne cauſe to call the nother wretche ne chynche: For it is greate ſhame to a man to haue a poore herte and a ryche purſe. He ſayeth alſo, the goodes that thou haſte gote, vſe them by meaſure, that is to ſaye, ſpende meſurably, for they that foolyſhly waſte and dyſpende the goodes that they haue, when they haue no more propre of her owne, then they ſhape hem to take ye goodes of an other man. I ſaye then that ye ſhall flye auaryce, vſynge youre rycheſſe in ſuche maner, that men ſaye not that youre rycheſſes bene buryed, but that ye haue hem in your myghte and in youre weldynge. For a wyſe man repreueth the auaricyous man, and ſayeth thus in thys verſes two. Wherto and why buryeth a man hys goodes by hys great auaryce, and knoweth well that nedes he muſte dye, for death is the ende of euerye man▪ as in thys preſente lyfe? And for what cauſe or encheſon ioyneth he hym, or knytteth he hym ſo faſte vnto hys goodes, that all hys wyttes mowe not dyſceuer hym, ne departe hym fro hys goodes, and knoweth well, or ought to knowe, that when he is deade, he ſhall nothynge beare wyth hym out of thys worlde. And therfore ſayeth ſaynt Auguſtyne, that the auaricyous mā is lykened vnto hell, that the more it ſwaloweth, the more deſyre it hathe to ſwalowe and deuoure. And as well as ye wolde eſchewe to be called an auaricyous man or chynche, as well ſhulde ye kepe and gouerne you in ſuch a wyſe, that men call you not foole large. Therfore ſayeth Tullius. The goodes of thyne houſe ne ſhulde not be hydde ne kepte ſo cloſe, but that they myghte be opened by pyte and debonayrte, that is to ſaye, to yeue hem parte that haue greate nede. Ne thy goodes ſhulde not be ſo open, to be euerye mans goodes. Afterwarde in gettynge of youre rycheſſes and in vſynge hem, ye ſhall alwaye haue thre thynges in youre herte, that is to ſay, our Lorde God, conſcience, and good name. Fyrſt ye ſhall haue god in your herte, and for no ryches ye ſhuld do any thyng, whych may in any maner dyſpleaſe god your creatour & maker. For after the worde of Salomon, it is better to haue a lytell good with ye loue of god, then to haue moche good and treaſoure, and leſe the loue of his Lorde God. And the prophete ſayeth, that better it is to be a good man, and haue lytel good & treaſour, then to be holden a ſhrewe, and haue great rycheſſe. And yet I ſay furthermore, that ye ſhulde alwaye do your buſyneſſe to get you rycheſſes,

ſo that ye get hem with good conſcience. And the Apoſtle ſayeth, that there nys thynge in thys worlde, of whyche we ſhulde haue ſo great ioye, as when oure conſcience beareth vs good wytneſſe. And the wyſe man ſayeth: that the ſubſtaunce of a man is full good, when ſynne is not in mans conſcience. Afterwarde in gettyng of your rycheſſes and in vſynge of hem, ye muſte haue great beſyneſſe and great diligence, that your good name be alwaye kept and conſerued. For Salomon ſayeth, that better it is, and more it auayleth a man to haue a good name, then for to haue many rycheſſes: And therfore he ſayth in an other place. Do great diligence ſayeth Salomon, in kepynge of thy frendes & of thy good name, for it ſhall lenger abyde wyth the thē any treaſure, be it neuer ſo precious. And certes he ſhuld not be called a great gentylman, that after God and good conſcience, all thynges lefte, ne doth hys deligence & beſyneſſe to kepe hys good name. And Caſſyodor ſayeth, that it is a ſygne of a gentyll herte, when a mā loueth and deſyreth to haue a good name And therfore ſayeth ſaynte Auguſtyne, that there ben two thynges that ben ryght neceſſarye and alſo nedefull: and that is good conſcience, and good loſe, that is to ſaye: good cō
                  ſcience to thyne owne perſone inwarde, and good loſe for thy neyghbour outwarde. And he that truſteth hym ſo moch in hys good cō
                  ſcience, that he dyſpyſeth & ſetteth at nought his good name or looſe, & recketh not though he kepe not hys good name, nys but a cruell churle. Syr, nowe haue I ſhewed you howe ye ſhulde do in gettynge rycheſſes, and howe ye ſhulde vſe hem: and I ſe well for the truſt that ye haue in your rycheſſes, ye woll moue warre and batayle. I counſayle you that ye begyn no warre in truſte of youre rycheſſes, for they ne ſuffyſe not warres to maynteyne. And therfore ſayeth a philoſopher: That mā that deſyreth and wolde algates haue warre ſhall neuer haue ſuffyſaunce: for the rycher that he is, the greater dyſpēces muſt he make yf he woll haue worſhyppe and vyctorye. And Salomon ſayeth, that the greater rycheſſes yt a man hath, the more dyſpendours he hath. And therfore ſyr, all be it ſo that for youre ryches ye maye haue moche folke, yet behoueth it not, ne it is not good to begynne warre, where as ye maye in other maner haue peace, vnto youre worſhyppe and profyte: For the vyctorye of batayls that bene in thys worlde, lyeth not in great nombre or multytude of people, ne in the vertue of mā, but it lyeth in the wyll and in the hande of oure Lorde God almyghtye. And therfore Iudas Machabeus, whyche was goddes knyght, when he ſhulde fyght ayenſt hys aduerſarye, that hadde a greater nombre and a greater multytude of folke, and ſtrōger then was hys people of Machabee, yet he recomforted hys lytell company, and ſayd ryght in thys wyſe: Alſo lyghtly ſayd he, maye our Lorde God yeue vyctorye to a fewe folke, as to many folke, for the vyctorye of a batayle cometh not by the greate nombre of people, but it cōmeth from oure Lorde God of heauen. And dere ſyr, for as moche as there is no man certayne, yf it be worthye that God yeue hym vyctorye or not, after that Salomon ſayeth, therfore euery man ſhuld greatlye drede warres to begyn: and bycauſe that in batayles fall many peryls, and happeth other whyle, that as ſone is the greate man ſlayne as the lytel man. And as it is wrytten in the ſeconde boke of kynges: The dedes of batayles ben aduenturous and nothyng certayne, for as lyghtlye is one hurte wyth a ſpeere as an other: And for ther is great peryll in warre, therfore ſhulde a man ſlye and eſchue warre in as moch as a man may goodly. For Salomō ſayeth, he that loueth peryl, ſhall fall in peryll.
               After that dame Prudence had ſpoken in thys maner, Melibe anſwered and ſayd. I ſe well dame Prudence, that by your fayre wordes and your reſons that ye haue ſhewed me that the warre lyketh you nothynge, but I haue not yet herde youre counſayle howe I ſhall do in thys nede.
               Certes (ſaid ſhe) I coūſayle you that ye accorde wyth your aduerſaries, & that ye haue peace wyth hem. For ſaynt Iames ſayeth in hys Epyſtle: that by concorde and peace ſmall ryches waxe great: and by debate and dyſcorde ryches decaye. And ye knowe well, that one of the greateſt and moſte ſouerayne thyng that is in this worlde, is vnite & peace And therfore ſayeth oure lorde Ieſu Chriſte to hys apoſtles, in thys wyſe: wel happy ben they, that loue & purchace peace, for they be called the chyldren of god. Ah, ſayd Melibee,

now ſe I wel, that ye loue not myne honour ne my worſhyp. Ye knowe wel that myne aduerſaryes haue begon this debate & bryge by theyr outrage. And ye ſe well that they ne requyre ne praye me of peace, ne they aſke not to be reconſiled. Wol ye then that I go meke me, and obey me to them, & crye hem mercye? Forſoth yt were not my worſhyp. For ryghte as men ſaye, ouer great humbleneſſe engendreth dyſprayſynge, ſo fareth it by to great
                     •
                   humilite or mekeneſſe.
               Then began dame Prudence to make ſemblant of wrath, & ſayd: Certes ſyr, ſaue your grace. I loue your honour and profyte as I do myne owne, and euer haue do: ye ne none other neuer ſe the cōtrary. And yet, yf I had ſaid, that ye ſhulde haue purchaſed peace and reconſiliation, I ne had moche myſtake me, ne ſayd amyſſe. For the wyſe man ſayeth: the dyſcention begynneth by an other man, and the reconſylynge begynneth by thy ſelfe. And the prophete ſayeth: flye ſhreudneſſe, and do goodneſſe, ſeke peace & folowe it, in as moch as in the is. Yet ſaye I not, that ye ſhulde rather purſue to youre aduerſaries for peace, then they ſhulde to you: For I knowe well that ye bene ſo harde herted, that ye woll do nothynge for me. And Salomon ſayeth: He that hath ouer harde an herte, he at laſte ſhal myſhappe or myſbetyde.
               When Melibee had herde dame Prudence make ſemblaunt of wrathe, he ſayde in thys wyſe. Dame I praye you, that ye be not dyſpleaſed of ye thynge that I ſaye, for ye knowe well that I am angrye and wroth, & that is no wonder: and they that be wrothe wote not well what they do, ne what they ſaye. Therfore the prophete ſayeth: that troubled eyen haue no clere ſyght. But ſaye & coū
                  ſayle me as you lyketh, for I am ready to do ryght as ye wol deſyre: And yf ye reprefe me of my folye, I am the more holden to loue & prayſe you. For Salomō ſayeth, that he that repreueth hym that doth foly, he ſhall fynde greater grace then he that dyſceyueth him by ſwete wordes.
               Then ſayde dame Prudence, I make no ſemblaunt of wrath ne of anger, but for your great profyte. For Salomon ſayeth: He is more worth, that repreueth or chydeth a fole for hys folye, ſhewynge hym ſemblaunt of wrath, then he that ſupporteth him and prayſeth hym in hys myſdoynge, and laugheth a
                     •
                   hys folye. And thys ſame Salomon ſayeth afterwarde: That by the ſorowfull vyſage of a man, that is to ſaye, by the ſorye and heuy countenaunce of a man, the foole correcteth and amendeth hym ſelfe.
               Then ſayde Milibee, I ſhall not con anſwere vnto ſo many fayre reaſons as ye put to me and ſhewe: ſaye ſhortly your wyl and youre counſayle, and I am all readye to performe and fulfyll it. ¶Then dame prudence dyſcouered all her wyll vnto hym and ſayde. I counſayle you (ſayd ſhe) aboue al thynges, that ye make peace bytwene God and you, and be reconſyled vnto hym and to hys grace for as I haue ſayd you here before, god hath ſuffred you to haue thys tribulation and dyſeaſe for your ſynnes: and yf ye do as I ſaye you, God wyl ſende youre aduerſaryes vnto you, and make hem fall at your fete, ready to do youre wyll and your commaundement. For Salomon ſayeth, when the condicion of man is pleaſaūt and lykynge to god, he chaū
                  geth the hertes of the mans aduerſaries, and conſtrayneth hem to beſeche hym of peace & of grace. And I praye you let me ſpeke with your aduerſaryes priuelye, for they ſhal not knowe that it be of your wyll or your aſſent. And then when I knowe theyr wyll and theyr entente, I maye counſayle you the more ſurely.
               Dame ſayde Melibee, dothe youre wyll and your lykynge, for I put me holy in your dyſpoſicion and ordynaunce.
               Then dame Prudence, when ſhe ſawe the good wyll of her huſbonde, delybered & toke aduyſe in her ſelfe, thynkyng how ſhe myght brynge thys nede vnto a good concluſion and to a good ende: And when ſhe ſawe her tyme, ſhe ſente for theſe aduerſaries to come vnto her in a priue place. And ſhewed wiſely vnto hem ye great goodes that come of peace and the greate harmes and peryls that bene in warre, and ſayd to hem in a goodly maner howe that hem ought haue great repentaūce of the iniury and wronge, that they had done to Melibeus her lorde, and vnto her and to her doughter.
               And when they herde ye goodly wordes of dame Prudence, they were ſo ſuppryſed and rauyſhed, and had ſo great ioye of her, that wonder was to tel. ¶Ah, ladye (ſayde they)

ye haue ſhewed vnto vs the bleſſyng of ſwetneſſe after the ſayeng of Dauid the prophete, For the reconſyling which we be nat worthy to haue in no manere. But we ought require it with great cōtricion and humilite, that ye of your goodneſſe haue preſented vnto vs. Now ſe we wel, that the ſcience and cōnyng of Salomon is ful trewe, for he ſaith: That ſwete wordes multiply and encreace frendes, and maketh ſhrewes to be debonaire and meke.
               Certes (ſayd they) we put our dede and al our mater & cauſe, al holy in your goodwyl, and been redy to obey at the cōmaundement of oure lorde Melibeus. And therfore dere and benygne lady: we praye and beſeche you as mekely as we can and maye, that it lyke vnto your great goodneſſe, to fulfyll in dede, your goodly wordes. For we conſyder and knowe, that we haue offended and greued oure lorde Melibeus out of meaſure: ſo forforth, that we be nat of power to make hym amendes. And therfore we oblige and bynde vs and our frendes, for to do all at hys wyll and commaundement: but parauenture he hath ſuche heuyneſſe, and ſuche wrathe to vs warde, bycauſe of our offence, that he woll enioyn vs ſuche a payne, as we mowe nat beare ne ſuſtayne. And therfore noble lady, we beſech your womanly pyte, to take ſuche aduyſement in thys nede, that we ne our frē
                  des be nat diſherited ne diſtroyed, through our foly.
               Certes (ſayd Prudence) It is an harde thynge and ryght perilous, that a man put him al vtterly in arbytration and iugement, and in the might and power of hys enemye: For Salomon ſaythe: leueth me, and yeueth credence to that I ſhal ſaye: Ne yeueth neuer the power ne gouernaunce of thy goodes, to thy ſon, to thy wyfe, to thy frende, ne to thy brother: ne yeue thou neuer might ne maſtry ouer thy body while thou liueſt. Nowe, ſyth he defendeth that a man ſhulde nat yeue to his brother ne to his frende, the might of his body. By a ſtronger reaſon he defendeth and forbedeth a man to yeue hym ſelfe to his enemy. And natheleſſe I counſaile you that ye myſtruſt nat my lorde: for I wot wel and know verily, that he is debonair & meke, large, curteys, and nothynge deſirous ne couitous of goodes ne ryches. For there is nothynge in this worlde that he deſyreth, ſaue onely worſhyp and honoure. Ferthermore I knowe, and am ryght ſure, that he ſhal nothyng do in thys nede, without my coūſayle: and I ſhall ſo worke in thys caſe, that by the grace of our lorde god, ye ſhalbe reconſyled vnto vs.
               Than ſayd they with one voyce, worſhypful lady we put vs and oure goodes all fully in your wyl and diſpoſycion, and ben redy to come, what day that it lyketh vnto your nobleſſe to lymyte vs or aſſyne vs for to make our oblygacion & bonde as ſtronge as it lyketh vnto your goodnes, that we mowe fulfyl the wyl of you and of my lorde Melibe.
               Whan dame Prudence had herde the anſwere of theſe men, ſhe bad hem go ayen priuely, and ſhe returned to her lorde Melibe, & tolde hym howe ſhe founde hys aduerſaries ful repentaunt, knowlegynge ful lowly her ſynnes and treſpas, and how they were redy to ſuffre al payne, requiryng and prayīg him of mercy and pyte.
               Than ſayde Melibe, he is wel worthy to haue pardon and foryeueneſſe of hys ſynne, that excuſeth not hys ſynne, but knowlegeth and repenteth hym, aſkyng indulgynce. For Seneke ſayth, there is the remiſſion and for yeueneſſe, where as the confeſſyon is: for confeſſyon is neyghbour to innocence. And therfore I aſſent and confyrme me to haue peace, but it is good that we do nought wtout the aſſente and wyl of our frendes.
               Than was Prudence ryght gladde and ioyful, and ſayde: Certes ſir, ye haue wel and goodly anſwered: for ryght as by the counſayle, aſſent, and helpe of your frendes, ye haue be ſteered to venge you and make werre: Right ſo, without her counſayle ſhall ye not accorde you, ne haue peace with your aduerſaries. For the lawe ſayth: There is nothyng ſo good, by waye of kynde, as a thyng to be vnbounde by him that it was ybounde.
               Than dame Prudence, wythout delay or taryenge, ſent anone her meſſanger for her kynſfolke and her olde frendes, whyche that were trewe and wiſe: and told hem by order, in the preſence of Melibe, al the mater, as it is aboue expreſſed and declared. And prayed hem that they wolde ſaye theyr aduyſe and counſayle what beſt were to do in this nede. And whan Melibeus frendes had taken her

aduyſe and delyberacion of the forſayd mater, and had examyned it by great buſyneſſe and dilygence. They yaue ful counſaile for to haue peace and reſt, and that Melibee ſhulde receyue wyth good hert hys aduerſaris, to foryeueneſſe and mercy.
               And whan dame Prudence had herd thaſſent of her lorde Melibee, and the counſayle of hys frendes accorde with her wyl and her entencion, ſhe was wonderſly gladde in her hert, and ſayde. There is an olde prouerbe (ſayd ſhe) That ye goodneſſe that thou maiſt do this day, do it, and abyde it nat, ne delay it nat tyl the next daye. And therfore I counſayle, that ye ſende your meſſengers, ſuche as be diſcrete and wyſe, vnto your aduerſaries: tellyng hem on your behalf, that yf they wol treat of peace and accorde, that they ſhape hē wyth out delay or taryeng, to come vnto vs: whyche thyng performed was in dede. And whan theſe treſpaſours, and repentyng folke of her folies, that is to ſay, the aduerſaries of Melibeus, had herde what theſe meſſangers ſayd vnto hem, they were ryght gladde and ioyful, and anſwered ful mekely and benygnely, yeldyng grace and thankes to her lorde Melibe
                     •
                  , and to al hys companye: and ſhope hem without delaye to go wyth the meſſangers, and obeyed to the commaundement of her lorde Melibeus. And ryght anone they toke her way to the courte of Melibe, & toke with hem ſome of their true frēdes, to make faythe for hem, & for to be her borowes: And whā they were comen to the preſence of Melibee, he ſayd to hem theſe wordes. It ſtondeth thus, ſayde Melibee, and ſoth it is, that cauſeleſſe & without ſkyl and reſon, ye haue done great iniuries and wronges to me and my wyfe Prudence, and to my doughter alſo, for ye haue entred in to my houſe by violence and haue done ſuche outrage, that all men knowe wel that ye haue deſerued dethe. And therfore woll I knowe and wete of you, whether ye woll put the puniſhynge and the chaſtylyng and the vengeaunce of thys outrage, in the wyl of me and of my wyfe, or ye wol not.
               Than the wyſeſt of hem thre anſwerd for hem al, and ſayd. Sir (ſayd he) we know wel that we ben vnworthy to come to the courte of ſo great a lorde and ſo worthy as ye be, for we haue ſo gretly miſtaken vs, and haue offended and agylted in ſuch wyſe agayn your hygh lordſhyp, that truely we haile deſerued the dethe, but yet for the great goodneſſe and debonairte, that al the worlde wytneſſeth of your perſon, we ſubmytte vs to ye excellēcye and benygnytye of your gracious lordeſhyp, and ben redy to obey to al your commaundementes, beſechynge you, that of your mer
                     •
                  iable pyte ye wel conſyder oure great repentaunce, and lowe ſubmyſſyon, and graunt vs foryeueneſſe of our outragyous treſpace and offence: For wel we knowe, that your liberal grace and mercye ſtretcheth ferther in to the goodneſſe, than don oure outragious gyltes and treſpaces in to the wyckedneſſe. Al be it that curſedly and damnably we haue agilted agaynſt your hygh lordſhyp.
               
                  THan Melibee tooke hem vp fro the grounde ful benygnely, and receyued her oblygacions and her bondes by her othes vpon her pledges and borowes, and aſſyned hem a certayne day to retourne vnto hys courte, for to receyue and accept the ſentence and iugement that Melibeus wolde cō
                  maunde to be don on hem, by the cauſes aforſayd, which thynges ordayned, euery man returned to hys houſe.
               And whan dame Prudēce ſawe her tyme, ſhe fayned and aſked her lorde Melibe, what vengeaunce he thought to take on hys aduerſaries.
               To whyche Melibe anſwerde, and ſayde▪ Certes (ſayde he.) I thynke and purpoſe me fully to diſherit thē of al that euer they haue, and for to putte them in exile for euer.
               Certes ſayd dame Prudence, thys were a cruel ſentence, and moche ayenſt reaſon. For ye be rich ynough, and haue no nede of other mennes riches. And ye might lyghtly in this wyſe gete you a couetous name, whiche is a vicious thyng, and ought be eſchewed of euery good man. For after the ſayeng of the apoſtel: Couetiſe is rote of al harmes. And therfore it wer better to you to leſe ſo moch good of your owne, than for to take of theyr good in thys maner. For better it is to leſe good with worſhip, than to wyn good with vilanye and ſhame. And euerye man ought to do his dilygence and his buſyneſſe, to gette him a good name. And yet ſhal he not onely buſy

him in kepyng hys good name, but he ſhal al ſo enforce hym alwaye to do ſome thynge, by whiche he may renewe hys good name. For it is writtē, that the old good loſe of a mā or good name, is ſoone gone and paſt, whan it is not renewed. And as touchynge, that ye ſay that ye wol exile your aduerſaries: that thynketh me moche ayenſt reaſon, and out of meaſure, conſydringe the power that they haue yeue you vpon them ſelfe. And it is wrytten: that he is worthy to leſe hys pryuilege, that myſuſeth ye might and power that is gyuen hym. And I ſette caſe, ye might enioyne hem yt payne by right & lawe, whiche I trowe ye maye nat do: I ſaye, ye myghte not put it to execution, for parauenture than it were lyke to tourne to ye werre, as it was before. And therfore yf ye woll that men do you obeyſaunce, ye muſte demean you more curteiſly, that is to ſaye: ye muſte yeue more eaſy ſentences and iugement. For it is wrytten: he that moſt curteiſly commaundeth, to hym men mooſt obey. And therfore I praye you, that in thys neceſſyte and in thys nede, ye caſte you to ouercome youre hert. For as Senet ſayth: he that ouercometh hys herte, ouercometh twiſe. And Tully ſayth: there is nothyng ſo commendable in a great lorde, as whan he is debonaire and meke, and apeſeth hym lyghtly. And I praye you that ye woll nowe forbere to do vengeaunce, in ſuche a maner, that youre good name maye be kepte and conſerued, and that men may haue cauſe and mater to prayſe you of pyte and mercye: and that ye haue no cauſe to repent you of thynge that is done. For Senecke ſaythe: he ouercometh in an yuel manere, that repenteth hym of hys victorie. Wherfore I praye you, let mercy be in your hert, to theffecte and entent, that god almyghty
                     •
                   haue mercy vpō you in hys laſt iugement. For ſaynt Iames ſayth in hys Epiſtel: iugement without mercye ſhal be do to hym, that hath no mercy of another wight.
               
                  WHan Melibee had herde the great ſkylles and reaſons of dame Prudence, and her wyſe informations and techynges, hys herte gan enclyne to the wyl of hys wyfe: conſydryng her trew entent, confirmed hym anon and aſſented fully to worke after her counſayle: & thanked god, of whome procedeth all goodneſſe & vertue, that hym had ſent a wyfe of ſo great diſcretion. And whan the day came that his aduerſaries ſhulde appere in his prenſence, he ſpake to hem goodly, and ſayde in thys wyſe.
               Al be it ſo, that of your pryde and high preſumption and foly, and of your negligence & vnconnyng, ye haue miſborne you, and treſpaced vnto me, yet for as mikel as I ſe and beholde your great humilyte, and that ye be ſory and repentaūt of your gyltes, it cōſtrayneth me to do you grace and mercy: wherfore I receyue you to my grace, and forgyue you holy al the offences, iniuries, and wronges, that ye haue don agaynſt me and myne, to theffecte & ende, that god of his endleſſe mercy wol at the tyme of oure dyeng forgyue vs our gyltes, that we haue treſpaced to him in thys wreched worlde. For doutleſſe yf we be ſory and and repentaunt for the ſynnes and gyltes, whyche we haue treſpaced in ye ſyght of oure lord god: he is ſo fre and ſo merciable, that he woll forgyue vs oure gyltes, and brynge vs to the blyſſe that neuer ſhall haue ende. AMEN.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the tale of Chaucer and here foloweth the Monkes Prologue.
               
                  WHan ended was the tale of Malibee
               And of Prudence, and her benygnyte
               Our Hoſt ſayd, as I am faythfull man
               And by the precious corps Madrian
               I had leuer than a barel of ale
               That Goodlefe my wyfe had herd thys tale
               For ſhe nothyng is of ſuche pacience
               As was thys Melibeus wyfe Prudence
               By goddes bones, whā I bete my knaues
               She bringeth me the great clubbed ſtaues
               And crieth, ſlee the dogges euerichone
               And breke bothe backe and euery bone
               And yf that any neyghbour of myne
               Wol not in churche to my wyfe enclyne
               Or be ſo hardy, to her to treſpace
               whan ſhe cometh hom, ſhe rāpeth in my face
               And cryeth falſe cowarde wreke thy wyfe
               
                  By corpus domini, I wol haue thy knyfe
               And thou ſhalt haue my diſtaffe, & go ſpynne
               Fro day tyl nyght, ſhe wol thus begynne.
               ¶Alas ſhe ſaith, that euer ſhe was ſhape
               To wedde a mylkſop, a cowarde ape
               That wol be ouerleyde with euery wight
               Thou darſt not ſtonde by thy wyues right
               This is my lyfe, but yf that I wold fight
               And out at dore, anon I mote me dight
               And els I am loſt, but yf that I
               Be lyke a wylde lyon, fole hardy
               I wote wel ſhe wol do me ſlee ſome day
               Some neyghbour, and than go my way
               For I am perlous with knyfe in honde
               Al be it that I dare not her withſtonde
               For ſhe is bygge in armes be my faithe
               That ſhal he fynd, that her myſdoth or ſaith
               But lette vs paſſe away from this matere.
               ¶My lord he ſayd, ſir mōke: be mery of chere
               For ye ſhal tel vs a tale trewly
               Lo Rocheſter ſtondeth here faſt by
               Ride ſorth myne owne lorde, breke not oure game
               But by my trouthe I knowe not your name
               whether I ſhal cal you my lorde dan Iohn
               Or dan Thomas, dan Robert, or dan Albon
               Or of what houſe be ye, by your farther kyn
               I vowe to god, thou haſt a ful fayre chyn
               It is a gentyl paſture there thou goſt
               Thou arte not lyke a pynaunt or a ghoſt
               Vpon my faythe thou arte ſome officere
               Some worthy Sexten, or ſome Celerere
               For by my fathers ſoule, as to my dome
               Thou art a mayſter, whan thou art at home
               No poore cloyſterer, ne no poore nouyſe
               But a gouernoure ware and wyſe
               And therwith of brawne and of bones
               A wel faryng perſon for the nones
               I pray to god yeue him confuſyon
               That fyrſt the brought in to religyon
               Thou woldeſt be a trede foule a right
               Haddeſt thou as gret leue as thou haſt might
               To perfourme al thy luſt in engendrure
               Thou haddeſt begoten many a creature
               Alas, why wereſt thou ſo wyde a cope
               God yeue me ſorowe, and I were pope
               Not only thou, but euery mighty man
               Though he were ſhore hyghe vpon his pan
               Shuld haue a wyfe, for al this world is lorn
               Religyon hath take vp al the corne
               Of tredynge, and borel men ben ſhrimpes
               Of feble trees there cometh wretched impes
               This maketh that our heires be ſo ſlender
               And feble, that they maye not wel engender
               This maketh that our wyues wol aſſay
               Religious folke, for they may better pay
               Of Venus paymentes, than mowe we
               God wote no luſheburghs paye ye
               But be not wroth my lorde, though I playe
               Full ofte in game a ſothe haue I herde ſaye.
               This worthy monke toke al in pacience
               And ſayd, I wol do my dilygence
               As ferre as ſowneth in to honeſte
               To tel you a tale, ye two or thre
               And yf ye lyſt to herken hytherwarde
               I wol you ſayne, the lyfe of ſaynt Edwarde
               Or els tragedyes fyrſt I wol tel.
               Of whiche I haue an hundred in my cel.
               Tragedy is to tel a certayne ſtory
               As olde bokes maken memory
               Of hem that ſtode in great proſperyte
               And be fallen out of hye degre
               In to myſery, and ended wretchedly
               And they ben vercifyed comenly
               Of ſyxe fete, whiche men cal exametron
               In proſe eke ben endyted many on
               And in metre, many a ſondrye wyſe
               Lo, this ought ynough to ſuffyſe
               Nowe herkeneth, yf you lyſte for to here
               But fyrſt I beſeche you in this matere
               Though I by order tel nat theſe thynges
               Be it of Popes, Emperours, or Kynges
               After her ages, as men written fynde
               But tellen hem, ſome before & ſome behynde
               As it cometh nowe to my remembraunce
               Haue me excuſed of myne ignoraunce.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Monkes Prologue, and here begynneth hys tale.
               
                  
                  I Wyl bewayle, in maner of tragedy
               The harme of hem that ſtoden in hye degre
               And fyl, ſo that there nas no remedy
               To bryng hem out of her aduerſyte
               For certayn, whan that fortune lyſt to flye
               There may no mā of her the courſe withold
               Lette no man truſt on blynde proſperite
               Bethware by this enſample yonge and old
               
                  ¶Lucifer.
                  
                     AT Lucifer, though he an angel were
                  And nat a mā, at him wyl I begynne
                  For though fortune maye nat angel dere
                  Frō hye degre, yet fel he for his ſynne
                  Doun in to hel, where he is yet inne
                  O Lucifer, brighteſt of angels al
                  Now art thou Sathanas, yt maiſt nat twyn
                  Out of myſery, in whiche thou arte fal
               
               
                  ¶Adam.
                  ¶Lo Adam, in the felde of Damaſcene
                  With goddes own fynger wrought was he
                  And not begotten of mannes ſperm vnclene
                  And welte al paradiſe ſauyng o tree
                  Neuer worldly man had ſo hye degre
                  As Adam, tyl he for myſgouernaunce
                  Was dryuen out of hys hygh proſperite
                  To labour and to hel, and to myſchaunce.
               
               
                  ¶Sampſon.
                  
                     ¶Lo Samſon, which yt was annunciate
                     By the angel, longe or hys natiuite
                     And was to god almighty conſecrate
                     And ſtode in nobles, while he myght ſe
                     Was neuer ſuch another, as was he
                     To ſpeke of ſtrength, and therto hardyneſſe
                     But to his wyues tolde he his ſecre
                     Through which he ſlough him for wretchedneſſe
                  
                  
                     Sampſon, this noble & mighty champion
                     without wepen, ſaue his hondes twey
                     He ſlough and al to rent the lyon
                     Toward hys weddyng, walking by the wey
                     His falſe wyfe coulde hym ſo pſeſe & praye
                     Tyl ſhe his counſayle knewe, & ſhe vntrewe
                     Vnto his foes, his counſayle gan vewray
                     And hym forſoke, and toke another newe
                  
                  
                     An hundred foxes toke Sampſon for yre
                     And al her tayles he togyther bonde
                     And ſet the foxes tayles al on fyre
                     For he in euery tayle hath put a bronde
                     And they brent al the cornes in that londe
                     And her olyues, and her vynes eke
                     A thouſand men eke he ſlough with his hond
                     And had no wepen, but an aſſe cheke
                  
                  
                     whā they were ſlayne, ſo thriſted him yt he
                     was wel nye lorne, for which he gan to prey
                     That god wold of his payn, haue ſome pyte
                     And ſende him drinke, or els mote he dey
                     And of this aſſe cheke, that was ſo drey
                     Out of a wange tothe, ſprange anon a wel
                     Of whiche he dronke ynough, ſhortly to ſey
                     Thus holpe him god, as Iudicum can tel
                  
                  
                     By very force, at Gaſa on a nyght
                     Maugre the Philyſtens of that cyte
                     The gates of the towne, he hath vp plyght
                     And on hys backe, ycaried hem hath he
                     High on an hyl, where as men myght hem ſe
                     O noble mighty Sampſon, lefe and dere
                     Had thou nat tolde to women thy ſecre
                     In al this wrolde ne had be thy pere
                  
                  
                     This Sāpſon neither ſyder drāke ne wyne
                     Ne on his heed cam raſour none ne ſhere
                     By precepte of the meſſangere diuyne
                     For al hys ſtrength, in his heeres were
                     And fully twenty yere by yere
                     Of Iſrael, he had the gouernaunce
                     But after ſoon ſhal he wepe many a tere
                     For women ſhal bryng hym to myſchaunce.
                  
                  
                     Vnto his lemman Dalyda he tolde
                     That in his heeres, al his ſtrength lay
                     And falſely to hys foes ſhe hym ſolde
                     And ſlepyng in her barme vpon a day
                     She mad to clyppe or ſhere his heeres away
                     And made his fomen al his crafte eſpyen
                     And whan that they him fonde in ſuche aray
                     They bounde him faſte, and put out his eyen
                  
                  
                     But er hys heeres were clypped or iſhaue
                     There was no bonde that might him bynde
                     But nowe is he put in priſon in a caue
                     where as they made hym at ye querne grynde
                     O noble Sāpſon, ſtrongeſt of mankynde
                     O whylom iuge in glorie and rycheſſe
                     Now mayſt thou wepe wt thyn eyen blynde
                     Sith yu art from wele fal in to wretchidneſſe
                  
                  
                     The ende of this caytife was, as I ſhal ſey
                     
                        His fomen made a feeſt vpon a daye
                     And made him, as their foole byfore hē pley
                     And this was in a temple of great araye
                     But at laſt he made a foule afray
                     For he two pyllers ſhoke, & made hem fal
                     And downe fel the temple al, and there it lay
                     And ſloughe hym ſelfe, and eke his fomen all
                  
                  
                     This is to ſay, the princes euerychone
                     And eke thre thouſād bodyes were ther ſlayn
                     with fallyng of the great temple of ſtone
                     Of Sampſon wol I no more ſayne
                     Beth ware by this enſample olde and playne
                     That no men tel her counſayle to her wyues
                     Of ſuch thyng as they wold haue ſecret fayn
                     If that it touche her lymmes or her lyues.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Hercules.
                  
                     
                        OF Hercules, the ſouerayne conqueroure
                     Syngen hys werkes, laude, & hye renoun
                     For in hys tyme, of ſtrength he bare the floure
                     He ſlough and rafte the ſkyn of the lyoun
                     And of the Centaurs, layde the boſte adoun
                     He Harpias ſlewe, the cruel byrdes fel
                     He the golden appels rafte fro the dragon
                     He drewe out Cerberus, the hounde of hel
                  
                  
                     He ſlewe the cruel tyraunt Buſtrus
                     And made his horſe to frete him fleſh & bone
                     He ſlough the very ſerpent venemous
                     Of Achelous two hornes, brake he that one
                     And he ſlewe Cacus, in a caue of ſtone
                     He ſlough the gyaunt Antacus the ſtronge
                     He ſlough the griſly bore, and that anon
                     And bare his heed vpon his ſpere longe
                  
                  
                     was neuer wight, ſythe the worlde began
                     That ſlough ſo many monſters, as dyd he
                     Through the wyde worlde, his name ran
                     what for his ſtrenght and his bounte
                     And euery realme went he for to ſe
                     He was ſo ſtronge, yt no man might him let
                     And at bothe worldes endes, he Trophe
                     In ſtede of boundes, of braſſe a pyllour ſet.
                  
                  
                     ¶Alemman had this noble champyon
                     That hight De
                           •
                        anire, as freſhe as May
                     And as clerkes make mencion
                     She hath him ſent a ſhyrte freſhe and gay
                     Alas this ſhirte, alas and wel awaye
                     Enuenomed was ſubtelly with al
                     That er he had weared it halfe a daye
                     It made his fleſhe al fro hys bones fal.
                  
                  
                     But natheleſſe, ſome clerkes her excuſen
                     By one that hight Neſſus, that it maked
                     Be as be may, I wol her not accuſen
                     But on his body, the ſhyrte he ware al naked
                     Tyl the fleſhe was with the venym ſlaked
                     And whan he ſawe none other remedye
                     In hote coles, he hath him ſelfe iraked
                     For with no venym dayned he to dye
                  
                  
                     Thus ſterfe this worthy mighty Hercules
                     Lo, who may truſte in fortune any throwe
                     For him that foloweth al this world of prees
                     Or he be ware, is ofte layde ful lowe
                     Ful wyſe is he, that hym ſelfe can knowe
                     Beware, for whan that fortune lyſt to gloſe
                     Than wayteth ſhe, her mā downe to throwe
                     By ſuche a waye, as he wolde leſte ſuppoſe.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Nabugodonoſor.
                  
                     
                        THe mighty trone, the precious treſore
                     The glorious ſeptre, and royal mayeſte
                     That had the kynge Nabugodonoſore
                     with tonge vnneth may diſcryu
                           •
                        d be
                     He twyſe wanne Hieruſalem, that cyte
                     The veſſel of the temple he with him lad
                     At Babilon was his ſouerayne ſe
                     In whiche his glorie and his delyte he had.
                  
                  
                     The fayreſt children of the blode royal
                     Of Hieruſalem, he dyd do gelde anone
                     And made eche of hem to ben hys thral
                     Amonge al other Danyel was one
                     That was the wyſeſt of euerychone
                     For he the dre
                           ••
                        s of the kyng expowned
                     where as in Caldee clerkes were there non
                           •
                        
                     
                     That wyſt to what fyne his dreme ſowned
                  
                  
                     This proude kyng let make a ſtatu of gold
                     Sixty cubites longe, and ſeuen in brede
                     To whiche ymage, bothe yonge and olde
                     Commaunded he to loute, and haue in drede
                     Or in a furneys, ful of flames rede
                     He ſhulde be deed, that wolde not obey
                     But neuer wolde aſſent to that dede
                     Danyel, ne his yonge felowes twey
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Thys kynge of kynges, proude and elate
                     wende god, that ſytteth in maieſte
                     Ne myght hym not byreue of hys eſtate
                     But ſodeynly he loſt hys dygnite
                     And lyke a beeſt, hym ſemed for to be
                     And eate hey as an oxe, and laye therout
                     In rayne, wyth wylde beeſtes walked he
                     Tyll a certayne tyme was come aboute
                  
                  
                     And lyke an Egles fethers were hys heeres
                     And hys nayles lyke byrdes clawes were
                     God releued hym at certayne yeres
                     And yaue him wytte, & thē with many a tere
                     He thanked God, and all hys lyfe in fere
                     was he, to do amyſſe, or more treſpace
                     And er that he layde was on hys bere
                     He knewe yt god was full of myght & grace
                  
               
               
                  ¶Balthaſer.
                  
                     
                        HIs ſonne, whyche that hyght Balthaſare
                     That helde the reygne after hys fathers daye
                     He by hys father coulde not beware
                     For proude he was of herte, and of aray
                     And eke an ydolaſter was he aye
                     Hys hygh eſtate, aſſured hym in pryde
                     But fortune caſt hym downe, & there he laye
                     And ſodeynly hys raygne gan deuyde
                  
                  
                     A feeſt he made, vnto hys lordes al
                     Vpon a tyme, he made hem blyth be
                     And then hys offycers gan he call
                     Gothe brynge forth the veſſels (ꝙ he)
                     whych that my father in hys proſperite
                     Out of the temple of Hieruſalem byrafte
                     And to our goddes thanken we
                     Of honoure, that our elders with vs lafte
                  
                  
                     Hys wyfe, hys lordes, and hys cōcubynes
                     Aye dronken, whyles her appetytes laſte
                     Out of theſe noble veſſels, ſondrye wynes
                     And on a wall, thys kynge hys eyen caſte
                     And ſaw an hōde armeleſſe, that wrote faſte
                     For feare of whych he quoke, & ſyghed ſore
                     This honde ye Balthaſar made ſore agaſte
                     wrote (Mane techel phares) and no more
                  
                  
                     ¶In al that lande, magicien was ther none
                     That coude expowne what thys letter ment
                     But Daniel expowned it anone
                     And ſayd, kynge, god thy father ſent
                     Glorye and honoure, reygne, treaſour, & rent
                     And he was proude, & nothynge god he drad
                     And therfore great wrath god vpō him ſente
                     And hym byrafte the raygne that he had
                  
                  
                     He was out caſte of mannes companye
                     wyth aſſes was hys habitacion
                     And eate hey as a beeſt, in wete and drye
                     Tyl that he knewe, by grace and by reſon
                     That god of heauen hath domination
                     Ouer euery reygne, and euery creature
                     And then had God of hym compaſſyon
                     And hym reſtored his reygne and his fygure
                  
                  
                     ¶Eke thou ye art hys ſonne, arte proude alſo
                     And knoweſt all theſe thynges priuely
                     And arte rebell to god, and hys foe
                     Thou dranke eke of hys veſſels boldly
                     Thy wyfe eke, and thy wenches ſynfully
                     Dronke of the ſame veſſels ſondrye wynis
                     And heryed falſe goddes curſedly
                     Therfore to the ſhapen great payne is
                  
                  
                     This honde was ſent fro god, yt on the wall
                     wrote (Mane techel phares) truſte me
                     Thy reygne is done, thou woreſt not al
                     Deuyded is thy realme, and it ſhalbe
                     To Medes and to Perciens (quod he)
                     And that ſame nyght the kynge was ſlawe
                     And Darius occupyed hys dignite
                     Though he therto had nether ryght ne lawe
                  
                  
                     Lordynges, here emſample mowe ye take
                     Howe that in lordſhyp is no ſykerneſſe
                     For when that fortune wol a man forſake
                     She bereth away hys raygne, & hys rycheſſe
                     And eke hys frendes, both more and leſſe
                     And what man hath frēdes, through fortune
                     Myſhap wol make hym enemyes I geſſe
                     Thys prouerbe is ful ſoth, and ful comune
                  
               
               
                  ¶zenobia.
                  
                     
                        ZEnobia of Palmerye quene
                     (As wryteth perciēs of her nobleſſe)
                     So worthywas in armes, & ſo kene
                     yt no wight paſſed her in hardyneſſe
                     Ne ī linage, ne ī none other gētilnes
                     Of kynges blode of Perce ſhe is dyſcended
                     I ſay that ſhe had not moſte fayrneſſe
                     But of her ſhape ſhe myght not be amended
                  
                  
                     From her chylhode I fynde that ſhe fledde
                     Offyce of woman, and to woode ſhe went
                     And many a wylde hertes bloode ſhe ſhedde
                     
                        wyth arowes brode, that ſhe to hem ſent
                     She was ſo ſwyfte, that ſhe anone hem hent
                     And when that ſhe was elder, ſhe wolde kyll
                     Lyons, lybardes, and beeres al to rent
                     And in her armes welde hem at her wyll
                  
                  
                     She durſt wylde beeſtes dennes ſeke
                     And renne in the mounteyns al the nyght
                     And ſlepe vnder a buſhe, & ſhe coulde eke
                     wraſtell by very force, and by very myght
                     wyth any yōge mā, were he neuer ſo wyght
                     There myght no thynge in her armes ſtonde
                     She kept her maydenhede frō euery wyght
                     To no man dayned ſhe to be bonde
                  
                  
                     But at laſt, her frendes hath her maryed
                     To Odenat, a prince of that countre
                     Al were it ſo, that ſhe hem longe taryed
                     And ye ſhall vnderſtande, howe that he
                     Had ſuche fantaſyes as had ſhe
                     But natheleſſe, when they were knyt in fere
                     They lyued in ioye and in felicite
                     For eche of hem had other lefe and dere
                  
                  
                     Saue one thynge, ſhe nolde neuer aſſent
                     By no waye, that he ſhulde by her lye
                     But ones, for it was her playne entent
                     To haue a chylde, the worlde to multyplye
                     And alſo ſone as ſhe myght aſpye
                     That ſhe was not wt chylde wyth that dede
                     Then wolde ſhe ſuffer hym do hys fantaſye
                     Efte ſones, and not but ones out of drede
                  
                  
                     And yf ſhe were wyth chylde at that caſte
                     Nomore ſhulde he playe that game
                     Tyll fully fourty dayes were paſte
                     Then wolde ſhe ones ſuffre hym the ſame
                     All were thys Odenat wylde or tame
                     He gate nomore of her, for thus ſhe ſayd
                     It was to wyues lechery and ſhame
                     In other caſe, yf men wyth hem playde
                  
                  
                     ¶Two ſonnes by thys Odenat had ſhe
                     The whych ſhe kept in vertue and lettrure
                     But nowe vnto our tale turne we
                     I ſaye that ſo worſhypfull a creature
                     And wyſe therwyth, and large wyth meſure
                     So penyble in warre, and curteys eke
                     Ne more laboure myght in warre endure
                     was none, though al thys worlde mē wolde ſeke
                  
                  
                     Her ryche araye, ne myght not be tolde
                     As well in veſſell as in her clothynge
                     She was al clad in pierry and in golde
                     And eke ſhe lefte not for none huntynge
                     To haue of ſondry tonges folke knowynge
                     when that ſhe leyſer had for to entende
                     To lerne bokes was all her lykynge
                     Howe ſhe in vertue her lyfe myght dyſpende
                  
                  
                     And ſhortly of thys ſtorye for to treate
                     As doughty was her huſbonde as ſhe
                     So that they cōquered many reygnes gre
                           ••
                        
                     
                     In the Orient, wyth many a fayre cyte
                     Apperteynaunt vnto the maieſte
                     Of Rome, & wyth ſtrength helde them faſte
                     Ne neuer myght her for men do her ſlee
                     All the whyle that Odenates dayes laſte
                  
                  
                     Her batayles, who ſo lyſte hem for to rede
                     Agayne Sapor the kynge, and other mo
                     And howe all thys proces fyll in dede
                     why ſhe cōquered, & what title ſhe had therto
                     And after of her myſchefe and of her wo
                     Howe that ſhe was beſieged, and ytake
                     Let hym to my mayſter Petrarke go
                     That wryteth ynough of thys, I vndertake
                  
                  
                     ¶when Odenat was deed, ſhe myghtely
                     The realmes helde, & wyth her owne honde
                     Agaynſt her foes ſhe fought truely
                     That ther was no prince ne kynge, in al that londe
                     But were glad, yf they that grace fonde
                     That ſhe ne ſhulde vpon hys lande werrey
                     wyth her they made alyaunce by bonde
                     To be in peace, and let hem ryde and pley
                  
                  
                     The Emperour of Rome Claudius
                     Ne hym beforne, the romayne Galyen
                     Ne durſt neuer be ſo coragius
                     Ne none Armen, ne none Egypcien
                     Ne Surrien, ne none Arabien
                     wythin the felde, that durſt wyth her fyght
                     Leſt yt ſhe wolde hem wyth her hondes ſle
                           ••
                        
                     
                     Or wyth her meyne, put hem to flyght
                  
                  
                     In kynges habyte wente her ſonnes two
                     As the heyres of her realmes all
                     And Hermanno and Titamallo
                     Her names were, as perciens hem call
                     But aye fortune, hath in her hony gall
                     This myghty quene, may no whyle endure
                     Fortune out of her reygne made her to fal
                     To wretchedneſſe, and to myſauenture
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Aurelian, when that the gouernaunce
                     Of Rome came in hys hondes twey
                     He ſhope vpon thys quene to do vengeaunce
                     And wyth hys legions, he toke hys wey
                     Towarde zenobia, and ſhortly for to ſay
                     He made her flye, and at laſte her hent
                     And fettered her, and eke her chyldren tway
                     And wan the lōde, & home to Rome he went
                  
                  
                     Amonge other thynges that he wan
                     Her chare, yt of golde was wrought & pierre
                     Thys great Romayne, thys Aurelian
                     Hath wyth hym ladde, that for men ſhulde ſe
                     Beforne hys tryumphe walked ſhe
                     wyth golden chaynes on her necke hongyng
                     Crowned ſhe was, as after her degre
                     And full of pier
                           •
                        e charged her clothynge
                  
                  
                     ¶Alas fortune, ſhe that whylom was
                     Dredfull to kynges, and to emperoures
                     Nowe gaureth all the people on her, alas
                     And ſhe that helmed was in ſtarke ſtoures
                     And wan by force townes ſtronge, & toures
                     Shall on her heed nowe were autremyte
                     And ſhe that bare the ſeptre ful of floures
                     Shal beare a dyſtaffe, her coſte for to quyte
                  
               
               
                  ¶Nero.
                  
                     
                        ALthough that Nero were as vicious
                     As any fende, that lyeth full lowe adoun
                     Yet he, as telleth vs ſuetoniꝰ
                     Al this worlde had ī ſubiectiō
                     
                     Both eſte, and weſt, and Septentrion
                     Of Rubyes, ſaphers, and of perles whyte
                     were al hes clothes broudred vp and doun
                     For he in gemmes greatly gan delyte
                  
                  
                     More delycate, more pompous of aray
                     More proude, was neuer Emperour, thē he
                     That ylke cloth that he had wered o day
                     After that tyme, he nolde it neuer ſe
                     Nettes of golde threde had he great plente
                     To fyſhe in Tyber, when him lyſt to play
                     Hys luſtes were as lawe, in hys degre
                     For fortune as hys frende wolde hym obay
                  
                  
                     He Rome brent for hys delycacye
                     The Senatours he ſlewe vpon a day
                     To here how her wyues wolde wepe & crye
                     And ſlough hys brother, & by his ſyſter laye
                     Hys mother made he in a pytouſe aray
                     For her wombe let ſlytte, to beholde
                     where he conceyued was, ſo welaway
                     That he ſo lytell of hys mother tolde
                  
                  
                     No teeres out of hys eyen, for that ſyght
                     Ne came, but ſayd, a fayre womon was ſhe
                     Great wonder is, that he coude or myght
                     Be domyſman, of her deed beaute
                     The wyne to brynge hym, commaunded he
                     And dranke anone, none other wo he made
                     when myght is ioyned vnto cruelte
                     Alas, to depe wyl the venyme wade
                  
                  
                     In youth a mayſter had thys Emperoure
                     To teache hym lettrure, and curteſye
                     For of moralite he was the floure
                     As in hys tyme, but yf hys bokes lye
                     And whyles his mayſter had of him maſtrye
                     He made hym ſo connynge and ſo ſouple
                     That longe tyme it was or tyrannye
                     Or any vyce, durſte in hym vncouple
                  
                  
                     Senec his maiſter was, of which I deuyſe
                     Bycauſe Nero had of hym ſuche drede
                     For he for hys vyces wolde hym chaſtyſe
                     Dyſcretly as by worde, and not by dede
                     Syr he wolde ſaye, an emperour mote nede
                     Be vertuouſe, and hate tyrannye
                     For whych he made hym in a bath to blede
                     On both hys armes, tyll he muſte dye
                  
                  
                     Thys Nero had eke of a cuſtomaunce
                     In youth, ayenſt hys mayſter to ryſe
                     which afterward, him though gret greuaūce
                     Bycauſe he ofte wolde hym chaſtyſe
                     Therfore he made hym dye in thys wyſe
                     To choſe in a bath to dye in thys manere
                     Rather then to haue another turmentyſe
                     And thus hath Nero ſlayne hys maſter dere
                  
                  
                     ¶Nowe fell it ſo, that fortune lyſt no longer
                     The hygh pryde of Nero to cheryſhe
                     For tho he were ſtronge, yet was ſhe ſtrōger
                     She thought thus, by god I am to nyce
                     To ſet a man, that is fulfylled of vyce
                     In hye degre, and an emperour hym call
                     By God out of hys ſete I woll hym tryce
                     when he leſt weneth, ſoneſt ſhall he fall
                  
                  
                     The people roſe vpon hym on a nyght
                     For hys defaute, and when he it aſpyed
                     
                        Out of his dores anon he hath him dyght
                     Alone, and there he wende haue ben alyed
                     He knocked faſte, & aye the more he cryed
                     The faſter ſhette they the dores all
                     Tho wyſte he wel, he had him ſelfe begyled
                     And went his way, no lenger durſte he call
                  
                  
                     The people cryed & rombled vp and doun
                     That wt his eeres he herde howe they ſayde
                     Vhere is this falſe tyraunt, this Neroun
                     For feare ful nere of his wytte he brayde
                     And to his goddes, right pitouſly he prayde
                     For ſocoure, but it might not betyde
                     For drede of this, him thought that he deyde
                     And ranne in to a gardeyn, him to hyde
                  
                  
                     And in this gardayne, foūde he chorles twey
                     Syttyng by a fyre great and reed
                     And to the chorles two he gan to prey
                     To flee him, and to gyrde of his heed
                     That to his bodye, whan he were deed
                     were no diſpyte done, for his diffame
                     Him ſelfe he ſlough, he coulde no better rede
                     Of whiche fortune lough and had game.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Holofernes.
                  
                     
                        WAs neuer capitayne vnder a kyng
                     That reignes mo, put in ſubiectyō
                     
                     Neſtrōger was in feld, of al thing
                     As ī his tyme, ne greater ofrenoū
                     
                     Ne more pompous in hygh preſumpcioun
                     Than Holopherne, which fortune aye kyſte
                     And ſo lycorouſly ladde him vp and doun
                     Tyl that he deed was er that he wyſte
                  
                  
                     Not only that this world had of him awe
                     For leſyng of rycheſſe and lyberte
                     But he made euery man renye his lawe
                     Nabugodonoſor was lorde, ſayd he
                     None other god ſhulde honoured be
                     Ayenſt his heſt, there dare no wight treſpace
                     Saue in Bethulia, a ſtronge cyte
                     where Eliachym was preeſt of that place
                  
                  
                     ¶But take kepe of ye dethe of Holopherne
                     Amyd his hoſt, he dronke laye al nyght
                     within his tent, large as is a berne
                     And yet for al his pompe, & al his might
                     Iudith, a woman, as he lay vpright
                     Sleping, his heed of ſmote, and fro his tente
                     Ful priuely ſhe ſtale, from euery wight
                     And with his heed, vnto her towne ſhe wēte
                  
               
               
                  ¶Antiochus.
                  
                     
                        WHat nedeth it of Kynge Antiochus
                     To tell hys hyghe and royall maieſte?
                     Hys great pryde, hys werke venemus
                     For ſuche an other man nas neuer as he
                     Redeth what that he was in Machabe
                     And redeth the proude wordes that he ſayde
                     And why he fyl from his proſperyte
                     And in an hyl, howe wretchedly he deyde
                  
                  
                     Fortune him had enhaunſed ſo in pryde
                     That verily he wende he might attayne
                     Vnto the ſterres, vpon euery ſyde
                     And in a balaunce, to wey eche mountayne
                     And al the floodes of the ſee reſtrayne
                     And goddes people had he moſte in hate
                     Hem wolde he ſlee, in turment and in payne
                     wenyng that god ne might his pryde abate
                  
                  
                     And for that Nychanore and Tymothe
                     By iewes were venquiſhed mightyly
                     Vnto the iewes ſuche an hate had he
                     That he bad greythe his chare full haſtely
                     And ſwore and ſayd, ful diſpytouſly
                     Vnto Hieruſalem he wolde eftſone
                     To wreke his yre on it ful cruelly
                     But of his purpoſe was he let ful ſone
                  
                  
                     God for his manace him ſore ſmote
                     with inuyſible wounde, aye incurable
                     That in his guttes carfe ſo and bote
                     That hys paynes were importable
                     And certaynly the wreche was reſonable
                     For many a mannes guttes dyd he payne
                     But from his purpoſe, curſed & dampnable
                     For al his ſmerte, he nolde him not reſtrayne
                  
                  
                     But bade anon, aparayle his hoſte
                     And ſodainly, or he than was ware
                     God daunted al his pride, & al his boſte
                     For he ſo ſore fel out of his chare
                     That al his lymmes and his ſkyn to tare
                     So that he ne myght go ne ryde
                     But in a chayre, men aboute him bare
                     Al forbruſed bothe backe and ſyde
                  
                  
                     The wreche of god him ſmote ſo cruelly
                     That in his body wicked wormes crept
                     And therwith al he ſtanke ſo horribly
                     
                        That none of hys meyne, that hym kept
                     whether that he woke or els ſlept
                     Ne myght not of hym the ſtynke endure
                     And in hys myſchefe he wayled & eke wept
                     And knewe god, lorde of euery creature
                  
                  
                     To all hys hoſte, and to hym ſelfe alſo
                     Ful lothſome was the ſtynke of hys carayne
                     No man myght hym beate to ne fro
                     And in hys ſtynke, & in hys horrible payne
                     He ſterfe ful wretchedly on a mountayne
                     Thus hath thys robbour, & thys homicide
                     That many a man made to wepe and plaine
                     Suche gue
                           •
                        don, as belongeth to pryde.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Alexander.
                  
                     
                        THe ſtorye of Alexander is ſo commune
                     That euery wyght, that hath dyſcretion
                     Hath herde ſomwhat or al, of hys fortune
                     Thys wyde worlde, as in concluſyon
                     He wanne by ſtrength, and for hys renoun
                     They were glad for peace vnto hym ſende
                     The pryde of man, and boſt he layde adoun
                     where ſo he came, vnto the worldes ende
                  
                  
                     Compariſon myght yet neuer be maked
                     Betwyrre hym, and an other conqueroure
                     For al thys world, for dred of hi hath quaked
                     He was of knyghthode, & of fredome floure
                     Fortune hym made ye heyre of hygh honoure
                     Saue wyne & womē, nothīg might aſwage
                     Hys hygh entent in armes and laboure
                     So was he full of louynge corage.
                  
                  
                     what price were it to him, though I you told
                     Of Darius, & of a hundred thouſande mo
                     Of prynces, erles, and knyghtes bolde
                     whych he conquered, and brought to wo
                     I ſaye as ferre as a man may ryde or go
                     The world was his, what ſhuld I more deuiſe
                     For though I wrote & told you euer mo
                     Of hys knyghthode, it myght not ſuffyſe
                  
                  
                     Twelue yere he reigned, as I rede ī Machabe
                     Philippes ſonne of Macedone he was
                     That fyrſt was kyng of Grece, that countre
                     O worthy gentyl Alexander, alas
                     That euer ſhulde the fall ſuche a caas
                     Enpoyſoned of thy folke thou were
                     Thy ſyce, fortune hath tourned in to an ace
                     And yet for the ne wept ſhe neuer a tere
                  
                  
                     Who ſhal yeue men teares to complayne
                     The death of gentylneſſe, and of fraunchyſe
                     That all the worlde welded in hys demayne
                     And yet hym thought it myght not ſuffyſe
                     So ful was hys corage of hygh empryſe
                     Alas, who ſhall me helpe to endyte
                     Falſe fortune, and poyſon to dyſpyſe?
                     The whych of all thys wo I wyte.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Iulius Ceſar.
                  
                     
                        BY wyſdome, manhode, and hyghe laboure
                     From humble bedde to royal maieſte
                     Vp roſe he, Iulius the conqueroure
                     That al the occident, by londe and ſee
                     wan by ſtrength of honde, or els by trete
                     And vnto Rome made hem trybutary
                     And ſyth of Rome, emperour was he
                     Tyl that fortune wexte hys aduerſary
                  
                  
                     O myghty Ceſar, that in Theſſaly
                     Ayenſt Pompei, father thyne in lawe
                     That of the Orient had the chyualry
                     As ferre as that the daye begynneth to dawe
                     Them through knyghthod haſt take & ſlawe
                     Saue fewe folke, ye wyth Pompeius fledde
                     Through whych yu putteſt all ye oriēt in awe
                     Thanke fortune, that ſo wel the ſpedde
                  
                  
                     ¶But nowe a lytel whyle I wol bewayle
                     This Pompei, thys noble gouernoure
                     Of Rome, whych that fledde at thys batayle
                     I ſaye one of hys men, a falſe traytour
                     Hys heed of ſmote, to wynne hym fauour
                     Of Iulius, and to hym the heed brought
                     Alas Pompei, of the orient conquerour
                     That fortune vnto ſuche a fyne the wrought
                  
                  
                     ¶To Rome agayne repayreth Iulius
                     wyth hys triumphe lauriate ful hye
                     But on a tyme Brutus Caſſius
                     That euer had of hys hye eſtate enuye
                     Full priuely had made conſpyracye
                     Ayenſt thys Iulius, in ſubtel wyſe
                     And caſte the place, in whych he ſhulde dye
                     wyth bodkyns, as I ſhal you deuyſe
                  
                  
                     Thys Iulius vnto the capitol went
                     Vpon a daye, as he was wonte to gone
                     
                        And in the capitol, anone hym hent
                     Thys falſe Brutus, and hys other fone
                     And ſtycked hym wyth bodkyns anone
                     wyth many a woūde & thus they let him lye
                     But neuer geueched he at no ſtroke but one
                     Or els at two, but yf hys ſtorye lye
                  
                  
                     So manly was thys Iulius of herte
                     And ſo well loued eſtately honeſte
                     That tho hys deedly woūdes ſo ſore ſmerte
                     Hys mantel ouer hys 
                           •
                        yppes caſte he
                     For no man ſhulde ſe hys priuety
                     And as he laye in dyenge on a traunce
                     And wyſte verely that dye ſhulde he
                     Of honeſtye yet had he remembraunce
                  
                  
                     ¶Lucan to the thys ſtorye I recomende
                     And to Sueton, and Valery alſo
                     That of thys ſtorye wrytten worde & ende
                     Howe that theſe conquerours two
                     Fortune was fyrſt a frende, and ſythe a foe
                     No man truſte vpon her fauoure longe
                     But haue her in awayte for euer mo
                     wytneſſe on all the conquerours ſtronge.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Creſus.
                  
                     
                        THe ryche Creſus, whylom kynge of Lyde
                     Of whyche Creſus, Cirus ſore hym drad
                     Yet was he caught amydde all hys pryde
                     And to brenne, men to the fyre hym lad
                     But ſuch a raine downe frō yu fyrmamēt ſhad
                     That queynt the fyre, & made hym to ſcape
                     But to beware yet no grace he had
                     Tyl fortune on the galowes made him gape
                  
                  
                     When he eſcaped was, he could not ſten
                           •
                        
                     
                     For to begyn a newe araye agayne
                     He wende wel, for that fortune hym ſent
                     Suche happe, yt he eſcaped through ye rayne
                     That of hys foes he myght not be ſlayne
                     And eke a ſweuen vpon a nyght he mette
                     Of whych he was ſo proude, & eke ſo fayne
                     That in vengeaunce he all hys herte ſette
                  
                  
                     Vpon a tree he was as hym thought
                     Ther Iupiter hym wyſhe, both backe & ſyde
                     And Phebus eke a fayre towel him brought
                     To drye him with, & therwith wext his prid
                     And to hys doughter, that ſtode hym beſyde
                     whych yt he knewe in hye ſentence habounde
                     He bade her tell what it ſygnyfyed
                     And ſhe his dreme ryght thus dyd expounde
                  
                  
                     The tree (ꝙ ſhe) the galous is to mene
                     And Iupiter betokeneth ſnowe and rayne
                     And Phebus, wyth hys towel ſo clene
                     Betokeneth the ſonne beames, ſoth to ſayne
                     Thou ſhalt honged be, father certayne
                     Rayne ſhall the waſhe, & ſonne ſhall the drye
                     Thus ſhe warned hym full plat & ful payne
                     Hys doughter, that called was Phanye
                  
                  
                     And honged was Creſus the proude kynge
                     Hys royall trone myght hym not auayle
                     Tragedye is none other maner thynges
                     Ne ca
                           •
                         in ſyngynge crye ne bewayle
                     But for that fortune aldaye wol aſſayle
                     wyth vnware ſtroke, ye reygnes yt be proude
                     For whē men truſteth her, then wol ſhe fayle
                     And couer her bryght face wyth a cloude.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Peter of Spayne.
                  
                     
                        OO noble, o worthy Petro, glory of Spayne
                     whome fortune helde ſo hygh in maieſte
                     wel ought men thy pytous death complayne
                     Out of thy lande, thy brother made the fle
                     And after at a ſiege by ſubtelte
                     Thou were betrayed, & ladde vnto hys tente
                     where as he with hys owne hande ſlewe the
                     Succedynge in thy raygne and in thy rente
                  
                  
                     The felde of ſnowe, wt thegle of black therin
                     Caught wyth ye lymrod, coloured as ye glede
                     He brewe thys curſydneſſe, and al this ſynne
                     The wycked neſte was werker of thys dede
                     Not Charles, Oliuer, that toke aye hede
                     Of trouth and honoure, but of Armorike
                     Genilion Oliuer, corrupte for mede
                     Brought thys worthy kynge in ſuch a bryke.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Petro kynge of Cypre.
                  
                     O Worthy Petro, kinge of Cypre alſo
                  That Alexandrye wanne by hygh maſtrye
                  Ful many an hethē wroughteſt yu wo
                  Of whych thyne owne lyeges had enuye
                  And for no thynge, but for thy chyualrye
                  They in thy bed han ſlayne ye by ye morowe
                  Thus can fortune her whele gouerne & gye
                  
                     And out of ioye bryng men to ſorowe
               
               
                  ¶Barnabo vicounte.
                  OF Millan great Barnabo vicounte
                  God of delyte, and ſcourge of Lumbardye
                  Why ſhulde I not thyn infortune accounte
                  Sens in aſtate thou clomben were ſo hye
                  Thy brothers ſonne, yt was thy double alye
                  For he thy neuewe was, and ſonne in lawe
                  Within his priſon made the to dye
                  But why ne how not I, yt thou were ſlawe.
               
               
                  ¶Hugelyne of Pyſe.
                  
                     
                        OF the erle Hugelyne of Pyſe the langour
                     There may no tonge tel for pyte
                     But lytell oute of Pyſe ſtonte a toure
                     In whyche toure in priſon put was he
                     And with hym ben his lytel children thre
                     The eldeſt ſcarſly fyue yere of age
                     Alas fortune, it was a great cruelte
                     Suche byrdes for to put in ſuche a cage
                  
                  
                     Dampned was he to dye in that priſon
                     For Roger, which that byſhop was of Pyſe
                     Had on hym made a falſe ſuggeſtyon
                     Through which ye people gan vpon him riſe
                     And put him in priſon, in ſuche a wyſe
                     As ye haue herde, and meate & drinke he had
                     So ſmal, that vnnethe it may ſuffyſe
                     And therwithal it was ful poore and bad
                  
                  
                     And on a day befel, that in that houre
                     whā that his meate wont was to be brought
                     The geylour ſhette the doores of the toure
                     He herde it wel, but he ſpake right nought
                     And in his herte anon there fyl a thought
                     That they for hunger wolde do him dyen
                     Alas (ꝙ he) alas that I was wrought
                     Therwith the teeres fyl fro hys eyen
                  
                  
                     ¶His yonge ſonne, that thre yere was of age
                     Vnto him ſaid, father father why do ye wepe
                     Whan wyl the geylour bring our potage
                     Is there no morſel breed that ye do kepe
                     I am ſo hungry, that I may not ſlepe
                     Nowe wolde god that I might ſlepe euer
                     Than ſhuld not hunger in my wombe crepe
                     There nys nothīg but breed yt me were leuer
                  
                  
                     ¶Thus day by day, this child began to crye
                     Tyl in his fathers arme adowne it laye
                     And ſayd, farwel father I mote dye
                     And kyſte his father, and deyde the ſame day
                     And whan the woful father dyd it ſey
                     For wo, his armes two he gan to byte
                     And ſaid alas, fortune and welaway
                     Thy falſe whele, my wo al may it wyte
                  
                  
                     His children wende, that it for hūger was
                     That he his armes gnewe, and not for wo
                     And ſayd: father, do nat ſo (alas)
                     But rather eate the fleſhe vpon vs two
                     Our fleſh yu yaue vs, take our fleſh vs fro
                     And eate ynough, right thus they to him ſaid
                     And after that within a day or two
                     They layde hem in his lappe adoun, & deyde
                  
                  
                     Thus ended is this mighty erle of Pyſe
                     Him ſelfe diſpeyred eke, for hungre ſtarfe
                     From hygh eſtate fortune away hym carfe
                     Of this Tragedy, it ought ynough ſuffyſe
                     Who ſo wol here it in a longer wyſe
                     Redeth the great Poete of Itayle
                     That hyght Dante, for he can it al deuyſe
                     Fro poynt to point, not a word wol he ſayle.
                  
               
               ¶Here endeth the Monkes tale.
            
            
               ¶Here ſtynteth the knyght the mōke of his tale, and here foloweth the Prologue of the Nonnes preeſt.
               
                  HO (ꝙ the knyght) good ſir nomore of this
               That ye haue ſaid, is right ynough ywys
               And mokel more, for lytel heuyneſſe
               Is right ynough to moche folke, I geſſe
               I ſaye for me, it is a great diſeaſe
               where as men haue be in welth and eaſe
               To here of her ſodayne fal, alas
               And the contrary is ioye and ſolas
               As whan a man hath ben in pore eſtate
               
                  And clymbeth vp, and wexeth fortunate
               And there abydeth in proſperite
               Such thynges is gladſome, as thynketh me
               And of ſuche thyng were good for to tel.
               Ye (ꝙ our Hoſt) by ſaynt Poules bel
               Ye ſay right ſoth, this Monke clappeth loude
               He ſpake, how fortune coue with a cloude
               I wote not what, and alſo of a Tragedy
               Right nowe ye herde, and perdy no remedy
               It is for to bewaylen, ne complayne
               That that is done, and als it is a payne
               As ye haue ſayd, to here of heuyneſſe
               Sir mōke no more of this, ſo god you bleſſe
               Your tale anoyeth al this company
               Suche talkyng is not worth a butterfly
               For therin is there no diſporte ne game
               Therfore ſir monke, dā Piers by your name
               I pray you hertely, tel vs ſomwhat elles
               For ſykerly, nere clynkyng of your belles
               That on your bridell honge, on euery ſyde
               By heuen kyng, that for vs al dyde
               I ſhulde er this haue fal downe for ſlepe
               Al though the ſlough had ben neuer ſo depe
               Than had your tale al be tolde in vayne
               For certaynly, as that theſe clerkes ſayne
               where as a man may haue none audyence
               Nought helpeth it to tel hys ſentence
               And wel I wote, the ſubſtaunce is in me
               If any thyng, ſhal wel reported be
               Sir, ſaye ſomwhat of huntyng I you pray
               Nay (ꝙ this mōke) I haue no luſt to play
               Nowe let an other tel, as I haue tolde.
               ¶Thā ſpake our hoſt, wt rude ſpeche & bolde
               And ſayd, vnto the nonnes preeſt anon
               Come nere yu preſt, come hider thou ſir Iohn
               Tel vs ſuch a thing, as may our hertes glade
               Be blythe, though thou ryde vpon a iade
               what though thy horſe be bothe foule & lene
               If he wol ſerue the, recke not a bene
               Loke that thy herte be mery euer mo
               ¶Yes ſir (ꝙ he) yes hoſt, ſo mote I go
               But I be mery, iwys I wol be blamed
               And Right anon, his tale he hath atamed
               And thus he ſayd, vnto vs euerychon
               This ſwete preeſt, this goodly man ſir Iohn
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Prologue of the nonnes preeſt, and here foloweth hys tale.
               
                  A Poore wydowe, ſome dele yſtept in age
               was whylom dwellyng in a pore cotage
               Beſyde a groue, ſtondynge in a dale
               This wydow, of which I tel you my tale
               Sens the day that ſhe was laſte a wyfe
               In pacience, ledde a ful ſymple lyfe
               For lytel was her catel and her rent
               By huſbondrie, of ſuche as god her ſent
               She foude her ſelf, & eke her doughters two
               Thre large ſowes had ſhe, and no mo
               Thre kyne, & eke a ſhepe that hyght Mal
               wel ſooty was her bou
                     •
                  e, and eke her hal
               In whyche ſhe ete many a ſlender mele
               Of poynaūt ſauce, ne knewe ſhe neuer a dele
               Ne deynty morcel paſſed through her throte
               Her dyet was accordaunt to her cote
               Replection ne made her neuer ſyke
               A temperate dyete was her phiſyke
               And exercyſe, and hertes ſuffyſaunce
               The goute let her nothing for to daunce
               Ne apoplexie ſhent not her heed
               No wyne ne dranke ſhe, whyte ne reed
               Her borde was moſt ſerued wt whyte & black
               Milke & broū breed in which ſhe fōde no lack
               Seynde bakon, & ſomtyme an eye or twey
               For ſhe was as it were a maner dey.
               ¶A yerde ſhe had, encloſed al aboute
               with ſlyckes, and drie dytched without
               In which ſhe had a cocke hight Chaūteclere
               In al the londe, of crowyng nas hys pere.
               His voyce was meryer than the mery orgon
               On maſſe dayes, that in the churches gon
               wel ſykerer was his crowyng in hys loge
               Than is a clocke, or in an abbey an orloge
               By nature he knewe eche aſſentioun
               Of the equinoctial in the toun
               For whan degrees .xv. were aſſended
               Thā crewe he, that it might not be amended
               His combe was redder than the fyne coral
               And batelled, as it had be a caſtel wal
               His byl was blacke, as any gete it ſhone
               Lyke aſure were his legges and his tone
               His nayles whyter than the lylly floure
               And lyke the burned golde was his coloure.
               ¶This gentil cocke, had in gouernaunce
               Seuen hennes, to done his pleſaunce
               which were his ſuſters, and his paramours
               And wonder lyke to him, as of colours
               Of whiche the fayreſt hewed in the throte
               
                  was called fayre damoſel Pertelote
               He fethered her an hundred tymes a daye
               And ſhe him pleaſeth, al that euer ſhe maye
               Curteys ſhe was, diſcrete, and debonayre
               And compenable, and bare her ſelfe ſo fayre
               Sens the tyme that ſhe was ſeuenyght olde
               That trulyche, ſhe hath the herte in holde
               Of Chaunteclere, lokyng in euery lyth
               He loueth her ſo, that wel was him therwith
               But ſuche a ioye it was to here hem ſynge
               whan the bright ſunne gan to ſprynge
               In ſwete acorde, my lefe is ferre in londe
               For that tyme, as I haue vnderſtonde
               Beeſtes and byrdes coulde ſpeke and ſynge
               ¶And it ſo fyl, that in the dawnyng
               As Chaunteclere, amonge his wyues al
               Sate on his perche, that was in the hal
               And next hym ſate his fayre Pertelote
               This Chaūteclere gā to grone in his throte
               As a man in his dreme is drenched ſore
               And whā that Pertelot thus herde him rore
               She was agaſte, and ſayd herte dere
               what eyleth you to grone in this manere
               Ye be a very ſleper, fye for ſhame.
               And he anſwerde thus, by god madame
               I pray you, that ye take it not in grefe
               By god I mette, I was in ſuche miſchefe
               Right now, that yet myn hert is ſore a fright
               Nowe god (ꝙ he) my ſweuen retche a right
               And kepe my body out of foule priſoun
               Me mette, that I romed vp and doun
               within our yerde, where I ſawe a beeſt
               was lyke an hoūde, & wold haue made areeſt
               Vpon my body, and wolde haue had me deed
               His colour was betwyxt yelowe and reed
               And typped was his tayle, & bothe his eeres
               with black, vnlike the remenāt of his heeres
               His ſnowte ſmal, with glowyng eyen twey
               Yet for his loke, almoſte for feare I dey
               This cauſeth me my gronyng doutleſſe.
               ¶Away (ꝙ ſhe) fye for ſhame hertleſſe
               Alas (ꝙ ſhe) for by god aboue
               Nowe haue ye loſte my herte, & al my loue
               I can not loue a cowarde by my faythe
               For certes, what ſo any woman ſaythe
               we al deſyre, yf that it myght be
               To haue huſbondes, hardy, wyſe, and fre
               And ſecrete, and no nygarde, ne no fole
               Ne hym that is agaſte of euery tole
               Ne none auauntour, by that god aboue
               Howe durſt ye ſay for ſhame, vnto your loue
               That anye ſweuen might make you a ferde?
               Haue ye no mannes herte, and haue a berde?
               Alas, and con ye be a ferde of ſweuenis?
               Nothing but vanyte god wotte inſweuen is
               Sweuens ben engendred of replections
               And of fume, and of complections
               whan humours ben to habundāt in a wight
               Certes thys dreme, whyche ye haue met tonight
               I tel you trouthe, ye may truſt me
               Cometh of ſuperfluyte, & reed colour parde
               whiche cauſe folke to drede in her dremes
               Of arowes, and of fyre with reed lemes
               Of reed beeſtes, that wol hem byte
               Of conteke, and of waſpes great and lyte
               Right as the humour of melancolye
               Cauſeth many a man in ſlepe to crye
               For fere of great bulles, and beres blake
               Or els that blacke dyuels wol hem take
               Of other humours coulde I tel alſo
               That worke a man in ſlepe moche wo
               But I wol paſſe, as lightly as I can.
               Lo Caton, which that was ſo wyſe a mā
               
               Sayd he not thus, do no force of dremes
               Now ſir (ꝙ ſhe) whā we flye fro ye bemes
               For goddes loue, as taketh ſome laxatyfe
               Vp peryl of my ſoule, and of my lyfe
               I counſayle you the beſte, I wol not lye
               That bothe of colour, and of melancolye
               Ye purge you, and for ye ſhul not tary
               Though in this towne, be none apotecary
               I ſhal my ſelfe two herbes teche you
               That ſhal be for your heale, & for your prow
               And in our yerde, tho herbes ſhal I fynde
               The whiche haue of her properte by kynde
               To purge you byneth, and eke aboue
               Foryete not this, for goddes owne loue
               Ye be right coleryke of complection
               where the ſunne is in his aſcention
               Ne fynde you not replete of humours hote
               For yf ye do, I dare wel lay a grote
               That ye ſhal haue a feuer terciane
               Or els an ague, that may be your bane
               A day or two, ye ſhal haue digeſtyues
               Of wormes, or ye take your laxatyues
               Of laurel, centorie, and of femetere
               Or els of elder beryes, that growe there
               Of cataprice, or of gaytres beris
               Of herbe yue, growing ī our yerde yt mery is
               Plucke hem vp as they growe, & eate hem in
               Be mery huſbonde, for your father kyn
               Dredeth no dreme, I can ſay you no more.
               ¶Madame (ꝙ he) gramercy of your lore
               But natheleſſe, as touchyng dan Catoun
               
                  That of wyſdom hath ſo great renoun
               Though he bade no dremes for to drede
               By god, men may in olde bokes rede
               Of many a man, more of auctorite
               Than euer Caton was, ſo mote I the
               That al the reuers ſaythe of hys ſentence
               And haue wel founde by experyence
               That dremes ben ſignyfycations
               As wel of ioye, as of trybulations
               That folke endure, in this lyfe preſent
               There nedeth to make of this none argumēt
               The very prefe ſheweth it in dede
               One of the greateſt auctours that mē rede
               Sayth thus, that whilom two felowes wēt
               On pylgrimage, in ful good entent
               And happed ſo, they come in to a toun
               where as there was ſuche congregation
               Of people, and eke of ſtrayte herbygage
               That they ne fonde, as moche as a cotage
               In whiche they bothe might yloged be
               Wherfore they mote of neceſſyte
               As for that nyght, departe company
               And eche of hem gothe to his hoſt
                     •
                  iry
               And toke hys lodgyng, as it wolde fal
               That one of hem, was lodged in a ſtal
               Farre in a yerde, with oxen of the plough
               That other man was lodged wel ynough
               As was his auenture, or his fortune
               That vs gouerneth al, as in comune
               And ſo befel, longe or it were day
               This mā mette in his bedde, there as he lay
               Howe that his felowe gan vpon him cal
               And ſayd (alas) for in an oxes ſtal
               This nyght ſhal I be murdred, there I lye
               Nowe helpe me dere brother or I dye
               In al haſte, come to me (he ſayd)
               This man out of hys ſlepe for feere abrayd
               But whan he was waked of his ſlepe
               He turned him, and toke of this no kepe
               Him thought his dreme was but a vanyte
               Thus twyſe in his ſlepe dremed he
               And at the thyrde tyme, yet his felawe
               Cam as him thouȝt, & ſayd I now am ſlawe
               Beholde my blody woundes, depe and wyde
               A ryſe vp erly, in the morowe tyde
               And at the weſt gate of the towne (ꝙ he)
               A carte ful of donge, there ſhalt thou ſe
               In whiche my body is hydde ful priuely
               Do thou that carte areſte boldly
               My golde cauſed my dethe, ſothe to ſayne
               And told him euery point how he was ſlayn
               with a ful pytous face, pale of hewe
               And truſt wel his dreme, he foūd right trew
               For on the morowe, as ſone as it was day
               To his felowes inne, he toke the waye
               And whan that he came to the oxes ſtal
               After his felowe, he began to cal
               The hoſteler anſwerde him anon
               And ſayd, ſyr your felowe is gon
               As ſone as it was day, he went out of ye toun
               This man gan fal in ſuſpectioun
               Remembring of his dremes that he mette
               And forthe he goth, no lenger wolde he lette
               Vnto the weſtgate of the towne, and fonde
               A donge carte, as it were to donge londe
               That was arayed in the ſame wyſe
               As ye haue herde the deed man deuyſe
               And with hardy herte, he gan to crye
               Vengeaunce and iuſtyce of this felonye
               My felowe murdred is this ſame night
               And in this carte he lythe, gapyng vpright
               I crye out on the myniſters (ꝙ he)
               That ſhulde kepe and rule this cyte
               Harowe alas, here lythe my felowe ſlayne
               What ſhulde I more of this tale ſayne?
               The people out ſtarte, & tall ye carte to groūd
               And in the myddel of the donge they founde
               The deed man, that murdred was al newe.
               ¶O blyſful god, that arte ſo good and trewe
               Lo, howe thou be wrayeſt murdre alway
               Murdre wol out, that ſe we day by day
               Murdre is ſo waltſome and abhomynable
               To god, that ſo iuſte is and reſonable
               That he ne wol it ſuffre healed to be
               Though it abyde a yete, two, or thre
               Murdre wol out, this is my concluſyoun.
               And right anon, the myniſters of the toun
               Haue hente the carter, and ſore him pyned
               And eke the hoſteler ſo ſore engyned
               That they beknewe her wickedneſſe anone
               And were hanged by the necke bone
               Here may ye ſe, that dremes ben to drede.
               ¶And certes, in the ſame lefe I rede
               Right in the next chapiter after this
               I gabbe not, ſo haue I ioye and blys
               Two men wolde haue paſſed ouer the ſe
               For certayne cauſes, in to a ferre countre
               If the wynde ne had be contrarie
               That made hem in a cyte to tarye
               That ſtode ful mery vpon an hauen ſyde
               But on a daye, ayenſt an euen tyde
               The wynde gan chaunge, & blew as hem leſt
               Ioly and glad, they went to reſt
               And caſte hem ful erly for to ſayle
               
                  But herken, to one mā fyl a great meruayle
               To one of hem, in ſlepyng as he lay
               He mer a wonders dreme, agayn the day
               Him thought a mā ſtode by his beddes ſyde
               And hym cōmaunded, that he ſhulde abyde
               And ſayd him thus, if thou to morow wende
               Thou ſhalte be dreynt, my tale is at an ende.
               ¶He woke, & tolde his felow what he mette
               And prayed him his voyage for to lette
               As for that day, he prayed him for to abyde
               His felowe, that lay by his beddes ſyde
               Gan for to laugh, and ſcorned him ful faſte
               No dreme (ꝙ he) may ſo my herte agaſte
               That I wol let for to do my thynges
               I ſet not a ſtrawe for thy dremynges
               For ſweuens ben but vanytees and iapes
               Men meten alday of oules and of apes
               And eke of many a maſe therwithal
               And dremen of thing that neuer was, ne ſhal
               But ſythe I ſe that thou wolte here abyde
               And thus ſlouthe wylfully thy tyde
               God wote it rueth me, and haue good day
               And thus he toke his leue, & went his way
               But er he had halfe his courſe yſayled
               I not why, ne what miſchaunce it ayled
               But caſuelly the ſhyppes botome to rent
               And ſhyp and men, vnder the water went
               In fyght of other ſhyppes beſyde
               That with hem ſayled at the ſame tyde
               And therfore fayre Pertelot ſo dere
               By ſuche enſamples olde, mayſte thou lere
               That no man ſhulde be to recheleſſe
               Of dremes, for I ſay the doutleſſe
               That many a dreme ful ſore is for to drede
               Lo in the lyfe of ſaynt Kenelm we rede
               That was Kenelphus ſonne, the noble kyng
               Of Mereturike, how Kenelm mette a thyng
               A lytel er he were murdred on a day
               His murder in hys viſyon he ſay
               His norice him expowned it euery dele
               His ſweuen, and badde him kepe him wele
               Fro trayſon, but he was but ſeuen yere olde
               And therfore lytel tale he therof tolde
               Of any dreme, ſo holy was his hert
               By god, I had rather than my ſhert
               That ye had herde his legende, as haue I
               Dame Pertelot, I ſay to you trewly
               Macrobius, that writeth the auiſyon
               In Affrike, of the worthy Scipion
               Affyrmeth dremes, and ſayth that they been
               warnyng of thynges, that we after ſeen
               And farthermore I pray you loketh well
               In the olde Teſtament, of Danyel
               Yf he helde dremes for vanyte
               Rede eke of Ioſeph, and there ſhal ye ſe
               wonders ben ſomtyme, but I ſay nat al
               warnyng of thynges, that after ſhal fal.
               ¶Lo of Egipt the kyng, that hight Pharao
               His Baker, and his butteler alſo
               Whether they felte none effecte in dremes?
               who ſo wol ſeke actes of ſondrie remes
               May rede of dremes a wonder thyng
               Lo Creſus, whiche was of Lyde kyng
               Mette he not that he, ſatte vpon a tree
               whiche ſignifyed he ſhulde honged be
               Lo Adromeda, that was Hectors wyfe
               That day that Hector ſhulde lefe his lyfe
               She dremed in the ſame night beforne
               Howe the lyfe of Hector ſhulde be lorne
               Yf that day he went vnto bataile
               She warned him, but it might nat auayle
               He wente for to fyght neuertheleſſe
               But he was ſlayne anon of Achilles
               But that tale is to long to tel
               And eke it is nigh day I may nat dwel
               Shortely I ſay, as for concluſyon
               That I ſhal haue of this auiſion
               Aduerſyte: and I ſay farthermore
               That I ne tel of laxatyues no ſtore
               For they ben venemous, I wote it wele
               I hem defye, I loue hem neuer a dele
               But let vs ſpeke of myrthe, & ſtynte al this
               Madame Pertelot, ſo haue I blys
               Of one thyng god hath me ſent large grace
               For whan I ſe the beautie of your face
               Ye be ſo ſcarlet reed aboute your eyen
               It maketh al my drede for to dyen
               For alſo ſyker, as In principio
               Mulier eſt hominis confuſio.
               ¶Madame, the ſentence of this latyn is
               woman is mannes ioye and his blys
               For whan I fele on night your ſofte ſyde
               Al be it that I may not on you ryde
               For that our perche is made ſo narowe alas
               I am ſo ful of ioye and of ſolas
               That I defye bothe ſweuen and dreme
               And with ye worde he flew down fro ye beme
               For it was day, and eke the hennes al
               And with a chucke, he gan hem for to cal
               For he had founde a corne lay in the yerde
               Royal he was, and no more a ferde
               He feddred Pertelot twenty tyme
               And tradde her eke as oft, er it was prime
               He loketh as he were a grymme lyoun
               
                  And on his toes he romed vp and doun
               Him deyned not to ſet his fete to the grounde
               And chucked, whan he had a corne ifounde
               And to him than ran his wyues al
               As royal as a prince in his hal
               Leaue I this Chaunteclere, in his paſture
               And after wol I tel of his auenture.
               ¶whan ye monthe, in whiche ye worlde begā
               
               That hight Marche, that god firſt made mā
               
               was complete, and paſſed were alſo
               Sythe Marche began, twenty dayes & two
               Befyl that Chauntecler, in al his pride
               His ſeuen wyues walkyng him beſyde
               Caſte vp his eyen to the bright ſonne
               That in the ſygne of Taurus was ironne
               Fourty degrees & one, and ſomwhat more
               He knewe by kynde, and by none other l
                     ••
                  e
               That it was prime, & crew wt a bliſful ſteuē
               
               The ſunne he ſayd is clombe vp to the heuen
               Fourty degrees & one, & ſōwhat more iwys
               Madame Pertelot, my worldes blyſſe
               Herken howe this bliſful byrdes ſynge
               And ſe the freſhe floures howe they ſprynge
               Ful is myne hert of reuel, and ſolas
               But ſodainly him fel a ſorouful caas
               For euer the later ende of ioye is wo
               God wote, worldly ioye is ſoone ago
               And if a rethore coude faire endite
               He in a cronycle myght ſauely write
               As for a ſouerayne notabilyte
               Nowe euery wyſe man herken to me
               This ſtorie is alſo trewe I vndertake
               As is the boke of Launcelot du Lake
               That women holde in ful great reuerence
               Nowe wol I turne ayen to my ſentence
               ¶A col foxe (ful of ſleyght and iniquite)
               That in the groue had wouned yeres thre
               By hygh ymagynacion a forne caſte
               The ſame nyght, through the hedge braſte
               In to the yerde, there Chaūteclere the fayre
               was wonte and eke his wyues to repayre
               And in a bedde of wortes ſtyl he lay
               Tyl it was paſſed vndren of the day
               waytyng his tyme, on Chaunteclere to fal
               As gladly done theſe homycides al
               That in a wayte lye to murdre men
               O falſe murdrer, ruckyng in thy den
               O newe Scariot, and newe Genylion
               Falſe diſſymuler, O greke Synon
               That broughteſt Troy vtterly to ſorowe
               O Chauntecler, acurſed be the morowe
               That thou in thy yerde flewe from ye bemes
               Thou were ful wel warned by thy dremes
               That ilke day was peryllous to the
               But what yt god afore wote, muſt nedes be
               After the opynion of certayne clerkes
               witneſſe of him, that any clerke is
               That in ſchole is great altercation
               In this mater, and great diſputation
               And hath ben, of an hundred thouſande men
               But I ne can not boulte it to the bren
               As can the holy doctour ſaynt Auſtyn
               Or Boece, or the byſhop Bradwardyn
               whether that goddes worthy forewetyng
               Strayneth me nedely to do a thyng
               (Nedely clepe I ſymple neceſſyte)
               Or yf the fre choyce be graunted me
               To do that ſame thyng, or do it nought
               Though god forwote it, or it was wrought
               Or yf his wetyng ſtrayneth neuer a dele
               But by neceſſyte condycionele
               I wol not haue to done of ſuche matere
               My tale is of a cocke, as ye ſhal here
               That toke his coūſayle of his wife wt ſorow
               To walke in the yerde vpon the morowe
               That he had met the dreme, as I you tolde
               womens counſayles ben ful ofte colde
               Womens counſayle brought vs fyrſt to wo
               And made Adam fro paradiſe to go
               There as he was ful mery, and well at e
                     •••
                  
               
               But for I not, whom I myght diſpleaſe
               If I counſayle of women wolde blame
               Paſſe ouer, I ſayd it in my game
               Redeth authors, wher they trete of ſuch matere
               And what they ſay of women, ye inowe here
               Theſe ben the cockes wordes, and not myne
               I can of women no harme deuyne.
               ¶Faire in the ſonde, to bathe her merily
               Lieth Perteloe, and al her ſuſters by
               Ayenſt the ſunne, and Chaunteclere ſo free
               Songe meryer, than the Mermayde in ye ſee
               For Phiſiologus ſaythe vtterly
               Howe that they ſyngen wel and merily
               And ſo befyl, as he caſt his eye
               Among the wortes on a butterflye
               He was ware of this foxe that laye ful lowe
               Nothyng than lyſt hym for to crowe
               But cried cocke cocke, and vp he ſtert
               As one that was affrayde in his hert
               For naturally, beeſtes deſyreth to flye
               Fro her contrary, yf he may it ſe
               Tho he neuer erſt had ſeen it with his eye.
               This Chaunteclere, whan he gan hym eſpye
               He wolde haue fledde, but the foxe anone
               
                  Sayd gentil ſir, alas: what wol ye done?
               Be ye afrayde of me, that am your frende?
               Nowe certes: I were worſe than a fende
               Yf I to you wolde harme, or villany
               I am not come your counſayle to eſpye
               But trewly the cauſe of my commyng
               was onely to here howe ye ſyng
               For ſothly ye haue as mery a ſteuen
               As any angel hath, that is in heuen
               Therwith ye haue of muſyke more felyng
               Than had Boece, or any that can ſyng
               My lorde your father, god his ſoule bleſſe
               And eke your mother, of her gentylneſſe
               Haue in my houſe ben, to my great eaſe
               And certes ſir, ful fayne wolde I you pleaſe.
               But for men ſpeken of ſyngyng, I wol ſey
               So mote I broken wel myn eyen twey
               
                  
                     ••
                  ue you, ne herde I neuer man ſo ſynge
               As dyd your father in the mornynge
               Certes it was of herte, al that he ſonge
               And for to make his voyce more ſtronge
               He wold ſo payne him, yt with both his eyen
               He muſte wynke, ſo loude he muſte cryen
               And ſlouden on his typtoes ther withal
               And ſtretche forth his necke, longe and ſmal
               And eke he was of ſuche diſcrecion
               That there was no man in no regyon
               That him in ſonge or wyſedom might paſſe
               I haue wel redde dan Burnel the aſſe
               Among his verſes, how yt there was a cocke
               For that a preeſtes ſonne yaue hym a knocke
               Vpō his legges, whyle he was yonge & nyce
               He made him for to leſe his benefyte
               But certayne there is no comparyſon
               Betwyxt the wyſedom and diſcrecion
               Of your father, and of his ſubtylte
               Nowe ſyngeth ſir, for ſaynte charyte
               Let ſe, can ye your father counterfete.
               ¶This Chaūteclere his wynges gā to bete
               As a man that coulde not his treſon aſpye
               So was he rauyſhed with his flaterye
               Alas ye lordes, many a falſe flaterour
               Is in your courte, & manye a falſe leſyngour
               That pleaſe you wel more, by my faythe
               Than he that ſothfaſtneſſe vnto you ſaythe
               Redeth Eccleſiaſt of flaterye
               Beware ye lordes of her trecherye.
               ¶This Chaūteclere ſtode hye vpon his toos
               Stretching his necke, & helde his eyen cloos
               And gan to crowe loude for the nones
               And dan Ruſſel the foxe ſtarte vp at ones
               And by the gorget hent Chaunteclere
               And on his backe toward ye woode him bere
               For yet was there no man that hym ſued
               O deſteny, that mayſt not be eſchued
               Alas that Chaunteclere flewe fro the bemes
               Alas his wyfe raught not of dremes
               And on a friday fyl al this miſchaunce
               O Venus that arte goddeſſe of pleſaunce
               Sithnes yt thy ſeruaūt was this Chaūtecler
               And in thy ſeruyce dyd al his powere
               More for delyte, thā the worlde to multiplye
               why woldeſt yu ſuffre him on thy day to dye?
               ¶O Gaulfryde, dere mayſter ſouerayne
               That whā ye worthy king richard was ſlayn
               with ſhot, complaynedeſt his dethe ſo ſore
               why ne had I nowe thy ſcience and thy lore
               The friday for to chyde, as dyd ye
               For on a friday, ſhortly ſlayne was he
               Thā wold I ſhew you how yt I coude playn
               For Chauntecleres drede, and for his payne.
               ¶Certes ſuche crye, ne lamentacion
               Nas neuer of ladyes made, whan that Ilion
               was won, & Pirrus with his bright ſwerde
               whan he hent kyng Priam by the berde
               And ſlough him (as ſayd Eneidos)
               As made al the hennes in the cloos
               whan they had loſt of Chaūteclere the ſyght
               But ſoueraynly dame Pertelot ſhright
               wel louder than dyd Haſdruballes wyfe
               whan that her huſbonde had loſte his lyfe
               And that the Romayns had brent Cartage
               She was ſo ful of turment and of rage
               That wylfully in to the fyre ſhe ſterte
               And brent herſelfe, with a ſtedfaſte herte.
               ¶O woful hennes, right ſo cryed ye
               As whan that Nero brent the cyte
               Of Rome, cryed the ſenatours wyues
               For that her huſbondes ſhulde leſe her lyues
               withouten gylte Nero hath hem ſlayne
               Nowe wol I turne to my tale agayne.
               ¶The ſely wydowe, & her doughters two
               Herde the hennes crye and make wo
               And out at the dore ſterte they anon
               And ſawe the foxe towarde the wodde gon
               And bare vpon his backe the cocke away
               And cryed out harowe and wel away
               A ha the foxe, and after him they ran
               And eke with ſtaues, many a nother man
               Ran Col our dogge, Talbot, & eke garlonde
               And Malkyn, with her diſtaffe in her honde
               Ran cowe & calfe, and eke the very hogges
               For they ſo ſore a ferde were of the dogges
               And ſhoutyng of men, and of women eke
               
                  They ran ſo, her herte thought to breke
               They yellen as fendes do in hel
               The duckes cryed, as men wolde hem quell
               The geeſe for feare flewe ouer the trees
               Out of the hyues came the ſwarme of bees
               So hydous was the noyſe, a benedicite
               Certes Iacke Strawe, ne his meyne
               Ne made neuer ſhoutes halfe ſo ſhril
               whan that they wolde any flemmyng kyl
               As that day was made vpon the foxe
               Of braſſe they blewe the trompes & of boxe
               Of horne & bone, in which they blew & pouped
               And therwith they ſhriked and ſhouted
               It ſemed, as though heuen ſhulde fal
               Nowe good men I pray you herken al.
               Lo howe fortune turneth ſodainly
               The hope and the pride of her enemy
               This cocke that lay vpon the foxes bake
               In al his drede, vnto the foxe he ſpake
               And ſayd, ſyr: If I were as ye
               Yet ſhulde I ſay, as wyſe god helpe me
               Turneth ayen, ye proude churles al
               A very peſtylence vpon you fal
               Nowe am I come vnto this woodes ſyde
               Maugre your heed, the cocke ſhal here abyde
               I wol hym eete in faythe, and that anone
               ¶The foxe anſwerd, in fayth it ſhal be done
               And as he ſpake the worde, al ſodaynly
               This cocke brake from his mouthe deliuerly
               And hygh vpon a tree he ſlewe anon
               And whan the foxe ſawe that he was gon
               Alas (ꝙ he) o Chaunteclere alas
               I haue (ꝙ he) do to you treſpas
               In as moche as I made you aferde
               whā I you hent, & brought out of your yerde
               But ſir, I dyd it not in no wicked entent
               Come downe, & I ſhal tel you what I ment
               I ſhal you ſay ſothe, god helpe me ſo.
               ¶Nay than (ꝙ he) I ſhrewe vs bothe two
               And firſt I ſhrew my ſelf, both blode & bones
               If thou begyle me ofter than ones
               Thou ſhalte no more with thy flaterye
               Do me ſynge with a wynkyng eye
               For he that wynketh, whan he ſhulde ſe
               Al wylfully, god let him neuer thee.
               Nay (ꝙ ye foxe) but god yeue him miſchāce
               That is ſo indiſcrete of gouernance
               That iangleth, whā that he ſhuld haue pees
               ¶Lo, ſuche it is for to be recheles
               And neglygent, and truſte on f
                     •
                  aterye
               But ye that holde this tale a lye
               As of a foxe, of a cocke, and of a hen
               Taketh the moralyte good men
               For ſaynt Poule ſaythe, al that written is
               To our doctryne it is written iwys
               Taketh the fruyte, and let the chaffe be ſtyl
               Nowe good god, yf that it be thy wyl
               As ſaythe my lorde, ſo make vs al good men
               And brynge vs to thy hygh blyſſe. Amen.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the tale of the nonnes preeſt, and here foloweth the Manciples prologue.
               
                  SIr nonnes preeſt, oure hoſte ſayd anone
               Ybleſſed be thy breche & euery ſtone
               This was a mery tale of Chauntecler
               But by my trouthe, yf thou were a ſeculer
               Thou woldeſt be a tredfoule a right
               For yf thou haue corage, as thou haſt might
               The were nede of hennes, as I wene
               Ye more than ſeuen tymes ſeuentene
               Se whiche brawnes hath this gentil preeſt
               So great a necke, and ſuche a large breeſt
               He loketh as a ſperhauke with hys eyen
               Him nedeth not his colours for to dyen
               with braſyl, ne with grayne of Portyngale
               But ſir, fayre fal you for your tale
               And after that, he with ful mery chere
               Sayd to a nother man, as ye ſhal here.
               ¶Wote ye not where ſtondeth a lytel towne
               Whiche that is called Bob vp and downe
               Vnder the blee, in Cauntebury way
               There gan our hoſte to 
                     •
                  ape and to play
               And ſaid, ſirs: what dunne is in the myre
               Is there no man, for prayer ne for hyre
               That wol awake our felowe behynde
               A thefe him might ful lightly robbe & bynde
               Se howe he nappeth, ſe for cockes bones
               Howe he wol fal from his horſe atones
               Is that a coke of London, with miſchaunce
               Do him conforte, he knoweth his penaunce
               For he ſhal tel a tale by my fey
               Al thought it be not worthe a botel of hey
               Awake thou coke (ꝙ he) god yeue the ſorowe
               what eyleth the to ſlepe by the morowe
               Haſt thou had ſteen al night, or art yu dronke
               Or haſt yu al night with ſom queen iſwonke
               
                  So that thou mayſte not hold vp thyn heed.
               This coke that was ful pale, & nothing reed
               Sayd, ſir hoſt: ſo god my ſoule bleſſe
               There is fal on me great heuyneſſe
               But I not why, me were leuer to ſlepe
               Than the beſt gallon of wyne in chepe
               ¶Wel (ꝙ the Manciple) yf it may do eſe
               To the ſir coke, and to no wight diſpleſe
               whiche that here ryde in this companye
               And that our hoſte wyl of his curteſye
               I wol as nowe excuſe the of thy tale
               For in good faythe thy viſage is ful pale
               Thyn eyen daſe, ſothely as me thynketh
               And wel I wot, thy breth ful ſowre ſtinketh
               That ſheweth wel thou art not wel diſpoſed
               Of me certayne thou ſhalt not be gloſed
               Se howe he galpeth, lo this dronkē wight
               As though he wolde vs ſwalow anon right
               Holde cloſe thy mouthe, by thy father kyn
               The dyuel of hel ſet his fote therin
               Thy 
                     •
                  urſed 
                     •
                  rethe wyl enfecte vs al
               Fye ſlynking ſwyne, fye ſoule mote the befal
               Taketh hede ſirs of this luſty man
               
                  
                     •
                  owe ſwete ſir, wol ye iuſte at the van
               Therto me thynketh ye be wel ſhape
               I trowe that ye haue dronken wyne ape
               And that is whan men play at ſtrawe.
               And wt his ſpeche the coke wexed al wrawe
               And on the manciple he gan to nodde faſte
               For lacke of ſpech
                     •
                   & down his horſe him caſt
               where as he lay, tyl that men him vp toke
               This was a fayre cheueſaunce of a coke
               Alas that he ne had holde him by his ladyl
               And er that he ayen were in the ſadyl
               There was a great ſhouyng to and fro
               To lyfte him vp, and moche care and wo
               So vnweldy was this ſely palled goſte
               And to the Manciple than ſpake our hoſt.
               ¶Bycauſe that drinke hath domynation
               Vpon this man, by my ſaluation
               I trowe leudely wol he tel his tale
               For were it wyne, or olde moyſty ale
               That he hath dronke, he ſpeketh ſo in ye noſe
               And ſnyueleth faſt, and eke hathe the poſe
               He alſo hath to do more than ynough
               To kepe him on his caple out of the ſlough
               And yf he fal from his caple efte ſone
               Than ſhal we al haue ynough to done
               In lyftyng vp his dronken corce
               Tel on thy tale, of hym make I no force
               But yet Manciple, in fayth thou art to nyce
               Thus openly to repreue him of his vyce
               An other day he wol parauenture
               Recleyme the, and bring thy to lure
               I mene he ſpeke wyl of ſmale thynges
               And for to pynche at thy rekenynges
               That were not honeſt, yf it came to prefe.
               ¶No (ꝙ ye Manciple) yt were a gret miſchefe
               So myght he bringe me in to the ſnare
               Yet had I leuer paye for the mare
               which he rydeth on, thā he ſhuld wt me ſtryue
               I wol not wrathe him, ſo mote I thriue
               That I ſpake, I ſayd it but in bourde
               And wote ye what, I haue here in my gourd
               A draught of wyne, ye of a rype grape
               And right anon ye ſhal ſe a good iape
               This coke ſhal drinke therof, yf I maye
               Vp payne of my lyfe he wol not ſay naye
               And certaynly, to tellen as it was
               Of this veſſel the coke dranke faſte, alas
               what nedeth it, he dranke ynough beforne
               And whan he had pouped in his horne
               To the Manciple he toke the gourde agayne
               And of the drinke the coke was ful fayne
               And thonked him, in ſuche wyſe as he coude
               Than gan our hoſt to laugh wōder loude
               And ſayd: I ſe wel it is neceſſary
               wher that we gon, good drinke wt vs to cary
               For that wyl turne rancoure and diſeſe
               To accorde & loue, and many a worde to peſe
               O Bacchus, ybleſſed be thy holy name
               That ſo canſte turne erneſt in to game
               worſhyp and thonke be to thy deite
               Of that mater ye get no more of me.
               Tel on thy tale thou Manciple, I the pray
               wel ſir (ꝙ he) herkeneth what I ſay.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Manciples prologue, and here foloweth hys tale.

                  
               
               
                  WHan Phebus dwelled here in erth adoun
               As old bokes make mē
                  cioun
               He was the moſte luſty bacheler
               Of al the worlde, and eke the beſt archer
               He ſlough Phetou the ſerpent as he lay
               Slepyng ayenſt the ſunne vpon a day
               And many a nother noble worthy dede
               He with his bow wrought, as mē mow rede
               Play he coulde on euery mynſtralcye
               And ſynge, that it was a melodye
               To here of his clere voyce the ſoun
               Certes the kyng of Thebes, Amphion
               That with his ſonge, walled the cyte
               Coude neuer ſynge halfe ſo wel as he
               Therto he was the ſemelyſt man
               That is or was, ſythe the worlde began
               what nedeth it his feture to diſcryue?
               For in this worlde nas none ſo fayre a lyue
               He was therwith fulfylled of gentylneſſe
               Of honoure, and of perfyte worthyneſſe
               This Phebus, yt was floure of bachelerye
               As wel in fredome, as in chyualrye
               For his diſporte, in ſigne eke of victory
               Of Pheton, ſo as telleth vs the ſtory
               was wonte to beare in his honde a bowe
               Now had this Phebus in his houſe a crow
               within a cage ifoſtred many a daye
               And taught it ſpeche, as men teche a iaye
               whyte was thys crowe, as is a whyte ſwan
               And countrefete the ſpeche of euery man
               He coulde, whan he ſhulde tel a tale
               There was in al this world no nightyngale
               Ne coulde, by an hundred thouſande dele
               Synge ſo wonderly mery and wele
               Now had this Phebus in his houſe a wife
               whiche that he loued more than his lyfe
               And nyght and day, dyd euer his dyligence
               Her for to pleſe, and do her reuerence
               Saue onely, yf I the ſothe ſhal ſayne
               Ielous he was, & wolde haue kept her fayne
               For him were lothe, iaped for to be
               And ſo is euery wight, in ſuche degre
               But al for naught, for it auayleth nought
               A good wife, yt is clene of werke & thought
               Shulde not be kept in none awayte certayn
               And trewly the labour is in vayne
               To kepe a ſhrewe, for it wol not be
               This holde I for a very nycete
               To ſpyl laboure, for to kepe wyues
               Thus writen olde clerkes in her lyues
               But nowe to purpoſe, as I fyrſt began
               This worthy Phebus, dothe al that he can
               To pleſe her, wenyng through ſuch pleſaūce
               And for his manhode, & for his gouernaunce
               That no man ſhulde put him from her grace
               But god it wote, there may no man enbrace
               As to diſtrayne a thyng, which that nature
               Hath naturally ſet in a creature
               Take any byrde, and put him in a cage
               And do al thyne entent, and thy corage
               
                  To foſter it tenderly with meate and drinke
               Of al daynties that thou canſte be thynke
               And kepe it alſo clenly as thou may
               Al though the cage of golde be neuer ſo gay
               Yet had this byrde, by twēty thouſand folde
               Leuer in a foreſt, that is wyde and colde
               Go cete wormes, and ſuche wretchydneſſe
               For euer this byrde wyl do his beſyneſſe
               To eſcape out of his cage whan he maye
               His lyberte the byrde deſyreth aye.
               Let take a catte, & foſter her with mylke
               And tender fleſhe, & make her couche of ſylke
               And let her ſe a mouſe go by the wal
               Anon ſhe weyueth fleſhe, & couche, and al
               And euery deyntie, that is in that houſe
               Suche appetyte hath ſhe to erte the mouſe
               Lo here hath luſte his domynacion
               And appetyte flemeth diſcrecion.
               A ſhe wolfe, hath alſo a vylanous kynde
               The leudeſt wolfe that ſhe may fynde
               Or l
                     •
                  ſte of reputacion, that wol ſhe take
               In tyme whan her luſte to haue a make
               Al theſe enſamples ſpeke I by theſe men
               That ben vntrue, & no thyng by women
               For men haue euer a lycorouſe appetyte
               On lower thyng, to perfourme her delyte
               Than on her wyues, be they neuer ſo fayre
               Ne neuer ſo trewe, ne ſo debonayre
               Fleſhe is ſo newfangel, with miſchaunce
               That we ne conne in nothyng haue pleaſaūce
               That ſowneth vnto vertue, any whyle.
               ¶This Phebus, whiche thought no gyle
               Diſceyued was, for al his io
                     •
                  yte
               For vnder him an other had ſhe
               A man of lytel reputation
               Nought worthe to Phebus, in comparyſon
               The more harme is, it happeth ofte ſo
               Of whiche there cometh moche harme & wo
               And ſo befel, whan Phebus was abſent
               His wyfe anon hath for her lemman ſent
               Her lemman, certes that is a knauyſh ſpeche
               Foryeue it me, and that I you beſeche.
               ¶The wyſe Plato ſaythe, as ye mowe rede
               The worde muſt nedes acorde with the dede
               If men ſhulde tel properly a thyng
               The worde muſte coſyn be to the werkyng
               I am a boyſtouſe man, right thus ſay I
               There is but lytel difference truely
               Betwyxt a wyfe, that is of hye degre
               If of her body diſhoneſt ſhe be
               And a poore wenche, other than this
               If it ſo be they werke bothe amys
               But for the gentyl is in eſtate aboue
               She ſhal be called his lady and his loue
               And for that tother is a poore woman
               She ſhal be called his wench, or his lemmā
               
               And god it wote, myn owne dere brother
               Men lay as lowe that one as that other
               Right ſo betwixt a tytleleſſe tyraunt
               And an outlawe, or a thefe erraunt
               The ſame I ſay, there is no dyfference
               To Alyſaunder was tolde this ſentence
               That for the tyraunt is of greater might
               By force of meyne, to ſlee downe right
               And brenne houſe & home, & make al playn
               Lo therfore is he called a capitayne
               And for the outlawe hath but ſmal meyne
               And may not do ſo great an harm, as he
               Ne brynge a countrey to ſo great miſchefe
               Men callen him an outlawe or a thefe.
               ¶But for I am a man not textuele
               I wol not tel of textes neuer a dele
               I wol go to my tale, as I began.
               Whā Phebus wife had ſent for her lemmā
               
               Anon they wrought al theyr luſte volage
               This whyte crowe, that hynge aye in yt cage
               Behelde their werke, and ſaid neuer a worde
               And whā hom was come Phebus ye lorde
               This crowe ſonge, cuckow, cuckow, cuckow
               what birde (ꝙ Phebus) what ſyngeſt thou?
               Ne were thou not wont ſo merily to ſynge
               That to my herte it was a reioyſyng
               To here thy voyce, alas, what ſonge is this?
               ¶By god (ꝙ he) I ſynge not amys
               Phebus (ꝙ he) for al thy worthyneſſe
               For al thy beaute, and thy gentylneſſe
               For al thy ſonge, and thy mynſtralſye
               For al thy waytyng, blered is thyn eye
               with one of lytel reputatyon
               Not worthe to the in compariſon
               The mountenāce of a gnat, ſo mote I thriue
               For on thy bed, thy wife I ſawe hym ſwyne
               what wol ye more? ye crow anon him told
               By ſadde tokens, and by wordes bolde
               Howe that his wyfe had done her lechery
               Him to great ſhame, and to great vyllany
               And tolde him eft, he ſawe it with his eyen
               ¶This Phebus gan awayward for to priē
               
               Him thought his woful herte braſte a two
               His bowe he bent, and ſet therin a flo
               And in his yre he hath his wyfe ſlayne
               This is the effecte, there is no more to ſayne
               For ſorow wherof, he brake his mynſtralſye
               Bothe harpe and lute, getern, and ſautrye
               
                  And eke he brake his arowes, and his bowe
               And after that, thus ſpake he to the crowe.
               ¶Traytour (ꝙ he) with tonge of ſcorpion
               Thou haſte me brought to my confuſyon
               Alas that I was wrought, why nere I deed
               O dere wyfe, o gemme, o luſty heed
               That were to me ſo ſadde, & eke ſo trewe
               Now lyeſt thou deed, with face pale of hewe
               Ful gyltleſſe, that durſt I ſwere iwys
               O rakel honde, to do ſo foule amys
               O troubled wytte, o yre retcheleſſe
               That vnauyſed ſmyteſt gyltleſſe
               O wantruſt, ful of falſe ſuſpection
               Where was thy wytte and thy diſcretion
               Oh, euery man beware of rekylneſſe
               Ne trowe no thyng, without ſtrōg wytneſſe
               Smyte not to ſone, or thou wete why
               And be auyſed wel and ſykerly
               Or ye do any execution
               Vpon your yre, for ſuſpection
               Alas, a thouſande folke hath rekel yre
               Fully fordone, & brought hem in the myre
               Alas, for to ſorowe I wol my ſelfe ſle
               And to the crowe, o falſe theſe ſaid he
               I wol quite anon thy falſe tale
               Thou ſonge whylom, lyke a nyghtyngale
               Nowe ſhalt thou falſe thefe, thy ſong forgon
               And eke thy whyte fethers euerychon
               Ne neuer in al thy lyfe ſhalte thou ſpeke
               Thus ſhul men on a traytour be awreke
               Thou & thyn of ſpring euer ſhal be blake
               Ne neuer ſwete noyſe ſhal ye make
               But euer cryen ayenſt tempeſt and rayne
               In token, that through the my wife is ſlayne
               And to the crowe he ſterte, and that anon
               And pulled of hys whyte fethers euerychon
               And made him blacke, & reft him al his ſonge
               And eke his ſpeche, & out at dore him ſlonge
               Vnto the dyuel, whiche I him betake
               And for this cauſe ben al crowes blake.
               ¶Lordīges, by this enſāple I wol you pray
               Beware, and take kepe what I ſay
               Ne telleth neuer no man in your lyfe
               Howe that an other mā hath dight his wife
               He wol you hate mortally certayne
               Dan Salomon, as wyſe clerkes ſayne
               Techeth a man to kepe his tonge wel
               But as I ſayd, I am not tertuel
               But natheleſſe, thus taught me my dame
               My ſonne, thinke on ye crowe a goddes name
               My ſōne kepe wel thy tonge, & kepe thy frēde
               A wycked tonge is worſe than a fende
               My ſonne, from a fende men may hem bleſſe
               My ſonne, god of his endeleſſe goodneſſe
               walled a tonge with tethe, and lyppes eke
               For man ſhulde him auyſe what he ſpeke
               My ſonne, ful ofte for to mykel ſpeche
               Hath many a man be ſpylte, as clerkes teche
               But for lytel ſpeche, ſpoken auyſedly
               Is no man ſhente, to ſpeke generally
               My ſonne, thy tonge ſhuldeſt thou reſtrayne
               At al tymes, but whan thou doeſt thy payne
               To ſpeke of god, in honoure and prayere
               The fyrſt vertue ſonne, yf thou wolt lere
               Is to reſtrayne, and kepe wel thy tonge
               Thus lerne children, whan they be yonge
               My ſonne, of mykel ſpekyng vnauyſed
               (There laſſe ſpekyng had ynough ſuffyſed)
               Cometh mykel harme, thus was me taught
               In moche ſpeche, ſynne wanteth naught
               woſte thou wherfore a rakel tonge ſerueth
               Right as aſworde forcutteth and forke
                     •
                  ueth
               An arme on two, my dere ſonne right ſo
               A tonge cutteth frendſhyp al a to
               A tangler is to god abhomynable
               Rede Salomon, ſo wyſe and honourable
               Rede Dauid in his pſalmes, rede Senecke
               My ſonne ſpeke not, ne wyth thy heed deck
                     •
                  
               
               Diſſimule as thou were deefe, if yt thou here
               The ianglour ſpeketh of perious matere.
               The flēming ſayth, lerne if that thou leſte
               That lytel ianglyng cauſeth moche reſte
               My ſonne, if thou no wicked word haſt ſaide
               The dare not drede for to be bewrayde
               But he that hath miſſayd, I dare wel ſayne
               He may by no way clepe his worde agayne
               Thyng that is ſayd, is ſayd, & forthe it gothe
               Though him repent, or him be neuer ſo loth
               He is thral to him, to whom he hath ſayde
               A tale, for whiche he is nowe yuel apayde
               My ſonne beware, & be none auctour newe
               Of tidynges, whether they be falſe or trewe
               Where ſo thou come, amonge hye or lowe
               Kepe wel thy tonge, & thynke on the crowe.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Manciples tale, and here begynneth the Perſons Prologue.
               
                  
                  BY that the Manciple had hys tale ended
               The ſonne fro the ſouth ſyde is dyſcended
               So lowe, that it was not to my ſyght
               Degrees of fyue and twē
                  tye on hyghte
               Ten a clocke it was, ſo as I geſſe
               For elleuen foote, a lytell more or leſſe
               My ſhadowe was at that tyme, as there
               Of ſuche fete as my lengthe parted were
               In ſyxe fete equally of proportion
               
                  
                     •••
                  rwyth the Moones exaltation
               I meane Libra, alwaye gan aſcende
               As we were entrynge at the thropes ende
               For which our hoſte, as he was wont to gye
               Aye in thys caſe, thys ioly companye
               Sayd in thys wyſe, lordynges euerychone
               Nowe lacketh vs no tale more then one
               Fulfylled is my ſentence and my decre
               who woll nowe tell a tale let ſe
               Almoſte fulfylled is myne ordinaunce
               I pray to god ſo yeue him ryght good chaūce
               That telleth thys tale to vs luſtely
               Syr preeſt (ꝙ he) arte thou a vicary
               Or arte thou a perſon, ſay ſoth by thy fay
               Be what thou be, breke thou not our play
               For euery man ſaue thou, hath tolde his tale
               Vnbokell, & ſhewe vs what is in thy male
               For truely me thynketh by thy chere
               Thou ſhuldeſt knyt vp well a great matere
               Tell vs a fable anone, for kockes bones
               ¶Thys perſon hym anſwerde all at ones
               Thou getteſt fable none tolde of me
               For Paule, that wryteth to Timothe
               Repreueth hem that wayuen ſothfaſtneſſe
               And teachen fables, and ſuche wretchedneſſe
               why ſhulde I ſowe draffe out of my fyſt
               when I maye ſowe wheate, yf that my lyſt
               For whych I ſaye, yf that ye lyſt to here
               Moralite, and of vertuous matere
               And then, yf ye woll yeue me audience
               I wolde full fayne at Chriſtes reuerence
               Done you pleaſaunce lefull, as I can
               But truſteth well, I am a ſotherne man
               I can not ieſte, rum, ram, ruf, by letter
               And god wote, ryme holde I but lytel better
               And therfore yf ye lyſt, I woll not gloſe
               I woll you tell a lytell tale in proſe
               To knyt vp al thys feeſt, and make an ende
               And Ieſu for hys grace, wyt me ſende
               To ſhewe you the waye, in thys voyage
               Of thylke perfyte gloriouſe pylgrimage
               That hyght Hieruſalem celeſtiall
               And yf ye vouchſaue, anone I ſhall
               Begyn vpon my tale, for whych I pray
               Tel your aduyſe, I can no better ſay
               But natheleſſe thys meditacion
               I put it aye, vnder the correction
               Of clerkes, for I am not textuell
               I take but the ſentence, truſteth well
               Therfore I make proteſtation
               That I woll ſtande to correction.
               ¶Vpon thys worde we haue aſſented ſone
               For as it ſemed, it was for to done
               To ende in ſome vertuous ſentence
               And for to yeue hym ſpace and audience
               And bad our hoſte he ſhulde to hym ſaye
               That all we, to tell hys tale hym pray
               Our hoſte had the wordes for vs all
               Syr preeſt (ꝙ he) nowe fayre mote you befal
               Sayeth what ye lyſte, & we ſhal gladly here
               And wyth that word he ſayd in this manere
               Telleth (ꝙ he) your meditation
               But haſteth you, the ſunne woll adoun
               Beth fructuous, and that in lytell ſpace
               And to do wel, god ſende you his grace.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the Perſones prologue, and here after foloweth hys tale.

                  
               
               
                  
                     ¶Ieremi .vi. State ſuper vias, et vt dete, et interrogate de ſemitis antiquis, que ſit via bona, ambulate in ea et inuenietis refrigerium animabus veſtris.
                  
                  
                     OVr ſwete Lorde God of heuen, wolde that no mā ſhulde peryſhe, but that we tourne al to the know lege of hym, & to the blyſfull lyfe that is perdurable, amonyſheth vs by the prophete Ieremye, that ſayeth in thys wyſe. Standeth vpon the wayes and ſeeth, and aſketh of olde pathes: that is to ſaye, of olde ſentences, whych is the good waye, and walketh in that waye, and ye ſhall fynde refreſhynge for your ſoules. &c. Many be the wayes eſpirituels that lede folke to oure Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, and to the reygne of glorye: Of whych wayes there is a full noble way, and full couenable, which maye not fayle to man ne to woman, that through ſynne hath myſgone fro the ryght waye of Hieruſalem celeſtiall: and thys waye is called penitence, of whych man ſhulde gladly herkē and enquire wyth al hys herte, to wete what is penitēce, and whych is called penitence, and how many maners bene of actions or werkynges of penitence, and howe many ſpeces there bene of penitence, and whych thinges appertayne and behoue to penitence, and which thynges dyſtourbe penitence.
                  Saynt Ambroſe ſayeth, that penitence is the playnynge of man for the gylte yt he hath done, & no more to do any thynge for whych him ought to playne. And ſome doctoure ſayeth, Penitence is the waymentynge of man that ſoroweth for his ſynne, and paineth him ſelfe, for he hath myſdone Penitēce wyth certayne circumſtaunces, is very repentaūce of a man that holt hym ſelfe in ſorowe, & other payne for hys gyltes: and for he ſhalbe very penytent, he ſhall fyrſt bewayle ſynnes that he hath done, and ſtedfaſtlye purpoſe in hys herte to haue ſhryfte of mouth, and to do ſatiſfaccion, and neuer to do thynge, for whyche hym ought more bewayle or complayne, and continue in good workes: or els hys repentaunce maye not auayle. For as ſaint Iſoder ſayeth. He is a iaper and a lyer, & no very repentaunt, that eftſone doth thinge, for which hym ought repent. Wepynge and not for to ſtynte to do ſynne, may not auayle: But nattheleſſe mē ſhal hope that at euery tyme that man falleth, be it neuer ſo ofte, that he maye aryſe through penaūce, yf he haue grace: but certayne it is great doute, for as ſayeth ſaynt Gregorye. Vnnethes aryſeth he out of ſynne that is charged wyth ye charge of yuel vſage.

And therfore repentaunt folke, that ſtynt for to ſynne, and leue ſynne or ſynne leue them, holy churche holdeth them ſyker of theyr ſaluacion. And he that ſynneth, and verely repē
                     teth hym in hys laſte ende: holy churche yet hopeth hys ſaluacion, by the great mercye of our Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, for hys repentaunce: but take the ſyker waye.
                  ¶And nowe ſyth I haue declared you, what thynge is Penitence, now ye ſhal vnderſtād, that there ben thre actions of penitence. The fyrſt is, that a man be baptyſed after that he hath ſynned. Saynt Auſtyn ſayeth, but he be penitent for hys olde ſynfull lyfe, he maye not begynne the newe clene lyfe: For certes yf he be baptyſed wythout penitence of hys olde gylte, he retayneth ye marke of baptyme, but not the grace ne the remiſſyon of hys ſynnes, tyll he haue very repentaunce. An other defaute is thys, that men do deedly ſynne after that they haue receyued baptyſme. The thyrde defaute is thys, that men fall in veniall ſynnes after her baptyſme, fro day to day. Therof ſayeth ſaynt Auguſtyne, that penitence of good and humble folke, is the penitence of euery daye.
                  The ſpeces of penitence ben thre: That one of hem is ſolempne: an other is cōmune, & the thyrd is priuy. That penaūce that is ſolempne is in two maners: As to be put out of holy churche in lent, for ſlaughter of chyldren, and ſuche maner thynge. An other is when a man hath ſynned openly, of whyche ſynne the fame is openly ſpoken in the countrey: and then holy church by iugement, dyſtrayneth hym for to do open penaunce.
                  Cōmen penaunce is, that preeſtes enioyne men in certayne caſe:
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      as for to go perauēture naked in pylgrymage, or barefote. Priuy penaunce is that, that men do al daye for priuy ſynnes, of whych we ſhryue vs priuely, and receyue priuy penaunce.
                  ¶Nowe ſhalt thou vnderſtande, what is behouefull and neceſſarye to very perfyte penytence: and thys ſtonte on thre thynges. Contricion of herte, confeſſion of mouthe, and ſatiſfaction. For whych ſayth ſaynt Iohn Chriſoſtome. Penitence dyſtrayneth a man to accept benignely euery payne, that hym is enioyned, wyth contricion of herte, and ſhryfte of mouthe, wyth ſatiſfaction: and in werdynge of all maner humilite. And thys is frutefull penitence ayenſt thre thynges, in whyche we wrath our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte: thys is to ſaye: By delyte in thynkynge, by retchleſneſſe in ſpeakinge, and by wycked ſyn full werkynge. And ayenſt theſe wycked gyltes is penitence, that maye be lykened vnto a tree.
                  The roote of thys tree is contricion, that hydeth hym in the herte of hym that is verye repentaūt, ryght as the roote of a tree hydeth hym in the earth. Of thys roote of contricion ſpryngeth a ſtalke, that beareth braunches & leues of confeſſyon, and frute of ſatiſfaction. For whych Chriſt ſayth in hys goſpel. Doth digne fruyte of penitence, for by thys fruyte men maye knowe the tre, and not by the rote that is hyde in the herte of man, ne by ye braū
                     ches, ne the leues of confeſſion. And therfore our Lorde Ieſu Chriſt ſayeth thus: By the fruyte of hem ſhall ye knowe hem. Of thys roote alſo ſpryngeth a ſede of grace, yt whych ſede is mother of all ſykerneſſe, and thys ſede is egre & hote. The grace of thys ſede ſpryngeth of God, through remembraunce of the daye of dome, and on the paynes of hell. Of thys mater ſayeth Salomon, that in ye drede of God, man forletteth hys ſynne. The heate of thys ſede is the loue of God, and the deſyrynge of the ioye perdurable: Thys hete draweth the herte of man to God, and doth him hate hys ſynne: For ſothly there is nothynge that ſauoureth ſo well to a chyld, as ye mylke of hys nouryce, ne nothynge is to hym more abhominable then that malke, whē it is medled wyth other meate. Ryght ſo the ſynfull man that loueth hys ſynne, hym ſemeth that it is to hym mooſt ſwete of any thynge, but fro that tyme he loueth ſadlye our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, and deſyreth the lyfe perdurable, there is to hym nothinge more abhominable For ſothly the lawe of god is the loue of god For whyche Dauid the prophete ſayeth: I haue loued thy lawe, and hated wyckedneſſe. He that loueth God, kepeth hys lawe and hys worde.
                  ¶Thys tree ſawe the prophete Daniell in ſpirite, on the viſyon of Nabuchodonoſor, when he counſayled hym to do penitence. Penaunce is the tree of lyfe, to hem that it receyue, and he that holdeth hym in very penitence is bleſſed, after the ſentence of Salomon. In thys penitence or contricion, man

ſhal vnderſtand foure thynges, that is to ſay what is contrityon, and whyche ben the cauſes that moue a man to contricion, and howe he ſhulde be contryte, and what contricion auayleth to the ſoule. Then is it thus that contricion is the very ſorowe, that a mā receyueth in hys herte for hys ſynnes, wyth ſadde purpoſe to ſhryue hym, and to do penaunce, and neuer more to do ſynne: And thys ſorowe ſhalbe in thys maner, as ſayeth ſaynt Bernarde: It ſhalbe heuye and greuous, and full ſharpe and poynaunt in herte.
                  ¶Fyrſte, for a man hath agylted hys lorde and hys creatoure, and more ſharpe and poynaunt, for he hath agylted hys father celeſtiall: And yet more ſharpe and poynaunt, for he hath wrathed & agylted him that bought hym, that wyth hys preciouſe bloude hath delyuered vs fro the bondes of ſynne, and fro the cruelte of the dyuell, and fro the paynes of hell.
                  The cauſes that ought moue a man to cō
                     tricion bene ſyxe. Fyrſte a man ſhall remembre hym of hys ſynnes, but loke that that remembraunce ne be to hym no delyte, by no waye, but great ſhame & ſorowe for hys ſynnes. For Iob ſayeth, ſynfull men done workes worthy of confeſſyon. And therfore ſayeth Ezechiel: I wol remembre me al the yeres of my lyfe, in the bytterneſſe of my herte And God ſayeth in the Apocalypſe: Remē
                     bre ye from whence that ye be fall, for before that tyme that ye ſynned, ye were chyldren of God, and lymmes of the raygne of God: But for youre ſynne ye be waren thrall and foule and membres of the fende: hate of aungels, ſlaunder of holye churche, and foode of the falſe ſerpent, perpetual matere of the fyre of hel: And yet more foule and abhominable, for ye treſpace ſo oft tymes, as doth an hoūde that returneth ayen to eate hys owne ſpewynge: and yet be ye fouler, for youre longe cō
                     tinuynge in ſynne, and youre ſynfull vſage, for whyche ye be rooted in youre ſynne, as a beeſt in hys donge. Suche maner of thoughtes make a man to haue ſhame of hys ſynne, and no delyte. As God ſayeth, by the prophet Ezechiel: ye ſhal remēbre you of your wayes and they ſhal dyſpleaſe you ſothly. Synnes ben the wayes that lede folke to hell.
                  
                     THe ſeconde cauſe that oughte make a man to haue dyſdayne of ſinne is this, that as ſayeth ſaynt Peter: who ſo doth ſyn, is thrall of ſynne, and ſynne putteth a man in great thraldome. And therfore ſayeth the prophete Ezechiel: I wente ſorowfull, in dyſdayne of my ſelfe. Certes well ought a mā haue dyſdayne of ſynne, and wythdrawe hym fro that thraldome and vylanye. And lo what ſayeth Seneke in thys mater, he ſayeth thus: Though I wyſte, that neyther God ne man ſhulde neuer knowe it, yet wolde I haue dyſdayne for to ſynne. And the ſame Seneke alſo ſayeth: I am borne to greater thynge, thē to be thral to my body, or for to make of my body a thral Ne a fouler thrall maye no man ne woman make of hys bodye, then for to yeue his body to do ſynne, al were it ye fouleſt churle, or the fouleſt woman that lyueth, and leſt of value, yet is he then more foule and more in ſeruitude. Euer fro the hygher degre that man falleth the more is he thrall, and more to God & to the worlde vyle & abhomynable. O good God, well ought man haue great dyſdayne of ſynne, ſythe that throughe ſynne, there he was free he is made bonde. And therfore ſayeth ſaynt Auſtyne: Yf thou haſt dyſdayne of thy ſeruaunt, yf he oftēde or ſynne, haue thou then dyſdayne that thou thy ſelfe ſhuldeſt do ſynne. Take rewarde of thyne owne value, that thou ne be to foule to thy ſelfe. Alas wel ought they then haue dyſdayne to be ſeruaū
                     tes and thralles to ſynne, and ſore to be aſhamed of them ſelfe, that God of hys endleſſe goodneſſe hathe ſette in hygh aſtate, or yeue hem wytte, ſtrength of bodye, heale, beauty, or proſperite and boughte hem fro the death wyth hys herte bloude, that they ſo vnkyndlye agaynſt hys gentylneſſe quyte hym ſo vylaynouſly to ſlaughter of her owne ſoules. O good God ye women that bene of greate beautye remembreth you on the prouerbe of Salomon. He ſayeth he lykeneth a fayre woman that is a foole of her body to a rynge of golde yt were worne on the groyne of a ſowe For ryghte as a ſow wroteth in euery ord
                        •
                     ne ſo wroteth ſhe her beaute in ſtynkyng ord
                        ••
                     e of ſynne.
                  
                     
                     THe thyrde cauſe that oughte meue a man to contricion, is drede of the daye of dome, & of the horrible paynes of hel. For as ſaynt Ierome ſayeth: At euery tyme that me remē
                     breth of the daye of dome, I quake: For whē I eate and drynke, or what ſo that I do, euer ſemeth me that the trompe ſowneth in myne eare: Ryſeth ye vp that bene deed, & cōmeth to the iudgement. O good God, moch ought a man to drede ſuche a iugement, ther as we ſhalbe al, as ſaint Poule ſayeth, before ye ſete of our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, where as he ſhal make a generall congregation, where as no man may be abſent, for certes there auayleth none eſſoyne ne excuſation, and not only that oure defautes ſhalbe iuged, but alſo that all our w
                        •
                     rkes ſhal opēly be knowē. And as ſayeth ſaint Bernarde, there ne ſhal no pleading auayle, ne no ſleyght: we ſhal yeue rekenyng of euery ydell worde. There ſhall we haue a iuge that maye not be dyſceyued ne corrupte, and why? For certes, all our thoughtes bene dyſcouered, as to hym, ne for prayer ne for mede, he ſhall not be corrupte. And therfore ſayeth Salomō: The wrath of God ne wol not ſpare no wyght, for prayer ne for yeffe. And therfore at the daye of dome, there is no hope to eſcape. Wherfore as ſayeth ſaint Anſelme: full greate anguyſhe ſhall the ſynfull folke haue at that tyme: There ſhal ye fyerce and wroth iuge ſytte aboue, and vnder hym the horrible pytte of hell open, to deſtroy him that muſte be knowe hys ſynnes, whych ſynnes openlye ben ſhewed before God & before euery creature: And on the lefte ſyde, mo dyuels then any herte may thynke, for to hale & drawe the ſynfull ſoules to the payne of hel, and wythin the hertes of folke ſhalbe the bytynge conſcience, and wythout forth ſhall be the worlde al brennynge: whyther ſhal then the wretched ſynfull man flye to hyde hym? Certes he maye not hyde hym, he muſt come forth and ſhewe hym. For certes as ſayeth ſaynt Ierome, the earth ſhall caſt hym out of it and the ſee alſo, and the ayre that ſhalbe ful of thonder clappes and lyghtenynges. Now ſothly, who ſo woll remembreth him of theſe thynges: I geſſe, that thys ſynne ſhall not turne hym in delyte, but to greate ſorowe, for dredde of the payne of hell. And therfore ſayeth Iob to God: ſuffre lorde, that I may a whyle bewaile and wepe, er I go without returnynge to the derke londe, couered wyth the darkeneſſe of death, to the lāde of myſeſe and of derkneſſe, where as is the ſhadowe of death, where as there is none ordre, or ordynaunce, but ferefull drede that euer ſhall laſt. Lo, here maye ye ſe, that Iob prayed reſpyte a whyle, to bewepe and wayle hys treſpace: for ſothly one day of reſpyte is better then al the treaſoure of thys worlde. And for as moche as a man maye acquyte hym ſelfe before God by penitence in thys worlde, and not by treaſoure, therfore ſhulde he praye to God to yeue hym reſpyte a whyle, to bewepe and wayle hys treſpace: For certes al the ſorowe that a man myght make fro the begynnynge of the worlde, nys but a lytell thynge, at regarde of the ſorowe of hell. The cauſe why that Iob calleth hell the lande of darkneſſe, vnderſtandeth that he calleth it lande or earth, for it is ſtable and neuer ſhal fayle, and derke: for he that is in hell hath defaute of lyght material, for certes the darke lyght that ſhall come out of the fyre that euer ſhall brenne, ſhall turne hym all to payne that is in hell, for it ſheweth hym to the horrible deuels that hym turmenteth, couered wyth the darkeneſſe of death, that is to ſaye, that he that is in hel, ſhal haue defaute of the ſyght of God: for certes the ſyght of God is ye lyfe perdurable. The derkeneſſe of death, bene the ſynnes that the wretched man hath done whyche that dyſtourbe hym to ſe the face of God, ryght as the derke cloude betwyxt vs and the ſunne. Londe of myſeſe, bycauſe that there ben thre maner of defautes, ayenſt thre thynges that folke of thys worlde haue in thys preſent lyfe, that is to ſaye: honours, delyces, and richeſſe. Ayenſt honoure haue they in hell, ſhame and confuſyon: For well ye wote, that men call honoure the reuerence that man doth to man, but in hell is none honoure ne reuerence. For certes, no more reuerence ſhalbe do there to a kynge, then to a knaue. For whyche God ſayeth by the prophete Ieremye: Thoſe folke that me dyſpiſe ſhalbe in dyſpyte. Honour is alſo called great lordſhyp: there ſhall no wyght ſerue other, but of harme & turment. Honoure is alſo called great dygnite & hyghneſſe, but in hel ſhal they be al fortroden of dyuels. As god ſayeth

the horrible deuels ſhall go and come vpon the heedes of dampned folke: and thys is for as moche as ye hygher that they were in this preſent lyfe, the more ſhal they be abated and defoyled in hell. Ayenſt the rycheſſe of thys worlde ſhal they haue myſeſe of pouerte, that ſhal be in foure thynges: In defaute of treaſoure. Of whyche Dauid ſayeth: The ryche folke that enbraſe and knytte all her herte to treaſoure of thys worlde, ſhall ſlepe in the ſlepynge of death, and nothynge ne ſhul they fynde in her hondes of all her treaſoure. And more ouer the myſeſe of hel ſhalbe in defaute of meate and drynke. For God ſayeth thus by Moſes: They ſhalbe waſted wyth honger, and the byrdes of hell ſhal deuoure hem, wyth bytter death, and the gall of the dragon ſhall be her drynke, and the venym of the dragon her morſels. Alſo her myſeaſe ſhalbe in defaute of clothynge, for they ſhalbe naked in bodye, as of clothynge, ſaue the fyre in whych they brenne, and other fylthes: & naked ſhall they be of ſoule, of all maner of vertues, whyche that is the clothynge of the ſoule. Where bene then the gaye robes, the ſofte ſhetes, and the ſmale ſhertes? Lo, what ſayeth God of hem by the prophete Iſaye, that vnder hem ſhall be ſtrewed moughtes, and her couertures ſhall be of wormes of hell? Alſo her myſeaſe ſhalbe in defaut of frendes for he is not poore that hath good frendes, but there is no frende, for neyther God ne no creature ſhalbe frende to them, & eche of hem ſhall hate other wyth deedly hate: The ſonnes and the doughters ſhall rebell ayenſt father and mother, and kynrede ayenſt kynred, chyde & diſpyſe eche other, both daye & nyght as god ſayeth by the prophete Micheas: And the louynge chyldrē yt whylom loued ſo fleſhlye eche other, wolde eche of hem eate other yf they myght. For howe ſhulde they loue togyther in the paynes of hell, whē they hated eche other ī ye proſperite of this life: for truſt wel, her fleſhly loue was deadly hate. As ſayeth the prophet Dauid: who ſo yu loueth wyckedneſſe, he hateth his ſoule, & who ſo hateth hys owne ſoule, certes he may loue none other wyght in no maner: And therfore in hel is no ſolace ne no frendſhyp, but euer yt more kynredes that ben in hel, the more curſynges the more chydynges, and ye more deedly hate there is amonge them. Alſo they ſhal haue defaute of all maner delyces, for certes helyces ben after the appetites of the fyue wittes: as ſyght, hearynge, ſmellynge, ſauourynge, and touchynge. But in hell her ſyght ſhalbe ful of derkneſſe and of ſmoke, & therfore full of teares, and her hearynge full of waylynge and gryntynge of tethe: As ſayeth Ieſu Chriſte. Her noſtrylles ſhalbe ful of ſtynkynge. And as ſayeth Iſaye the prophete: Her ſauourynge ſhalbe full of bytter gall, and as touchynge of al her bodyes, ycouered wyth fyre that neuer ſhall quenche, and wyth wormes that neuer ſhall dye. As God ſayeth by the mouthe of Iſaye: and for as moche as they ſhall not wene that they maye dye for payne, and by death flye fro payne, that maye they vnderſtande in the wordes of Iob, that ſayeth: There is the ſhadowe of deathe. Certes a ſhadowe hath the lykenes of the thynge of whych it is ſhadowed, but ſhadowe is not ye ſame thynge of whych it is ſhadowed: ryght ſo fareth the payne of hel, it is lyke death, for the horrible anguyſhe. And why? For it payneth hem euer as though they ſhulde dye anone, but certes they ſhal not dye. For as ſayeth ſaynt Gregory to wretched caytyſes ſhall be death wythout death, & ende wythout end & defaute wythout fayling, for her death ſhal alway lyue, & her ende ſhall euer more begyn and her defaute ſhal not fayle.
                  And therfore ſayeth ſaynt Iohn the Euangelyſt, they ſhal folowe death and they ſhall not fynde hym, and they ſhall deſyre to dye, & death ſhall ſlye fro hem. And alſo Iob ſayeth, that in hel is no ordre of rule. And al be it ſo, that God hath create al thynge in ryghte order, and nothynge wythout order, but all thynges ben ordred and nombred, yet natheleſſe they that ben dampned ben nothynge in order, ne hold none order, for the erth ne ſhal beare hem no frute. For as the prophete Dauid ſayeth: God ſhall deſtroye the frute of the earth, as for hem, ne water, ne ſhal yeue hem no moyſture, ne the eyre no refreſhynge, ne fyre no lyght. For as ſayeth ſaynt Baſil
                        •
                     e: The brennynge of the fyre of thys worlde ſhal God yeue in hell to hem that bene dampned, but the lyght and the clereneſſe ſhall he yeue in heauen to hys chyldren: ryghte as good men yeue fleſhe to her chyldren, and bones to her houndes. And for they ſhal haue none hope to eſcape, ſayeth ſaynt Iob at

laſt, that there ſhal errour and griſly dreade dwell without ende. Horrour is alway dred that is to come, and this drede ſhal alwaye dwell in the hertes of hem that be damned. And therfore haue they loſt all her hope, for vii. cauſes. Fyrſt for god yt is her iuge ſhalbe without mercye to hem, and they maye not pleaſe hym ne none of his ſaynctes, ne they maye not gyue nothyng for her raunſom, ne they ſhall haue no voyce to ſpeke to hym, ne they may not ſtye fro payne, ne they haue no goodneſſe in hem, that they maye ſhewe to delyuer hem fro payne. And therfore ſayeth Salomon: The wycked man dyeth, & whā he is deed, he ſhal haue no hope to eſcape fro payne▪ who ſo than wolde wel vnderſtonde the paynes, and bethynke hym well that he hath deſerued thoſe paynes for his ſynnes, 
                        •••
                     es he ſhuld haue more talēt to ſygh and w
                        •
                     ye, than for to ſynge and playe. For as ſayth Salomon: whoſo that had the ſciēce to knowe the paynes that ben ordeyned for ſynne, he wolde make ſorowe. That ſcience, as ſayeth ſayncte Auſtyn, maketh a man to weyment in his herte.
                  
                     THe fourth poynt that ought to make a man haue contrition, is the ſorowfull remembraunce of the good that he hath lefte to do here in erthe, and alſo the good that he hath loſte. Sothlye the good werkes that he hath left, eyther they be the good werkes that he wroughte er he fyll in deedly ſinne, or els the good werkes that he wrought whyle he laye in ſynne. Sothlye the good werkes that he dyd before that he fell in ſynne ben all mortifyed aſtonyed and dull by oft ſynnynge. The werkes that he dyd whyle he laye in ſyne he deed, as to the lyfe perdurable in heuen: than the good werkes that ben mortifyed by oft ſynning, whiche he dyd beinge in charitie, may not quyck ayen without very penitēce. And of it ſayth God by the mouth of Ezechiel: Yf the ryght full man returne ayen fro his ryghtouſneſſe and do wyckedneſſe, ſhall he lyue? nay, for al the good werkes that he hath done ſhal neuer be in remembraunce, for he ſhall dye in his ſynne. And vpon that chapter ſayth S. Gregorye thus, that we ſhall vnderſtonde this principally: Yf that we don deedly ſyn, it is for nought than, to reherſe or drawe in to memory the good werkes that we haue wrought before: for certes in the werkynge of deedlye ſyn, there is no truſte in no good werke that we haue done before: that is to ſaye, as for to haue therby the lyfe perdurable in heuē. But natheleſſe the good werkes quycken and come agayne, and helpe and auayle to haue the lyfe perdurable in heuen, whan we haue contrition: But ſothlye the good werkes that men do whyle they be in deedly ſynne, for as moch as they wer don in deedly ſyn, they may neuer quycke: for ce
                        •
                     
                     tes, thynge that neuer had lyfe, maye neuer quycke: And natheleſſe, al be it that they auayle not to haue the lyfe perdurable, yet auayle they to abredge of the payne of hel, or els to get tēporall rycheſſes, or els that god wol the rather enlumyn or lyght the hert of the ſynful man to haue repentaūce, and eke they auayl for to vſe a man to do good werkes, that the fende haue the leſſe power of his ſoule. And thus the carteys Lorde Ieſu Chriſt ne wol that no good werke be loſt for in ſomwhat it ſhal auayle. But for as moch as the good werkes that men done whyle they ben in good lyfe, ben all amortified by ſyn folowyng: & alſo ſyth that all the good werkes that men don whyle they ben in dedly ſyn ben vtterly deed, as for to haue ye lyſe perdurable: wel may that man that no good werke ne doeth, ſynge that freſſhe newe ſonge (Iay tout perdu mon temps, et mon labure). For certes ſynne byreueth a man bothe the goodneſſe of nature, and alſo the goodneſſe of grace. For ſothlye the grace of the holye ghooſte fareth lyke fyre that maye not be ydle, for fyre fayleth anon as it forletteth his werkyng: and ryght ſo grace fayleth anon as it forletteth his werkynge. Than leſeth the ſynfull man the goodneſſe of glory, that onely is behyght to good men that labour and werke. wel maye he be ſory than that oweth all hys lyfe to God as lōge as he hath lyued, & alſo as longe as he ſhall lyue, that no goodneſſe ne hath to pay with his det to God, to whome he oweth all hys lyfe: for truſt well he ſhall yeue accōptes, as ſayth ſaynct Bernarde, of the goodes that haue ben yeue hym in this preſent lyfe, and how he hath hem diſpēded, inſomoch yt ther ſhall not peryſh an heer of his heed, ne a moment of an houre, ne ſhal not periſſhe of hys tyme, that he ne ſhall yeue of it a rekenynge.
                  
                     
                     THe fyfth thynge that ought to moue a man to contrition, is remembraunce of the paſſion that our Lorde Ieſu Chryſt ſuffred for our ſynnes. For as ſayth ſaynt Bernard whyle that I lyue I ſhall haue remēbraūce of the trauayles that our Lord Ieſu chriſt ſuffred in preachynge, his weryneſſe in trauaylynge: his temptations whan he faſted his longe wakynges whan he prayed, hys teares whan that he wept for pytie of good people, the wo, the ſhame, and the fylth that men ſayde to hym: of the foule ſpyttynge that men ſpyt in his face, of the buffettes yt men yaue hym: of the foule mowes, and of the reproues that men ſayde to hym, of the nayles wyth whiche he was nayled to the croſſe, and of all the remnaunt of his paſſion that he ſuffred for my ſynnes, and nothyng for his gylt. And ye ſhal vnderſtond, that in mans ſynne is euerye maner ordre or ordynaunce turned vp ſo downe. For it is ſoth, that god, reaſon, ſenſualitie, and the body of man, bene ordayned that eche of theſe foure thynges ſhoulde haue lordſhyppe ouer that other: as thus, God ſhould haue lordſhyppe ouer reaſon, and reaſon ouer ſenſualytye, and ſenſualitie ouer the body of man. But ſothly whan man ſynneth, all this ordre or ordinaunce is turned vp ſo downe. And therfore than, for as moche as reaſon of man ne woll not be ſubiect ne obeyſaūt to god, that is his Lorde by ryght, therfore leſeth it the lordſhyppe that it ſhulde haue ouer ſenſualytie, and alſo ouer the bodye of man. And why? for ſenſualitie rebelleth then ayenſt reſon: and by that way ledeth reſon the lordſhyp ouer ſenſualitie and ouer the body: For ryght as reaſon is rebell to god, ryght ſo is both ſenſualitie rebell to reaſon, & to the body alſo? And certes this diſordinaunce and this rebellion our Lord Ieſu Chriſt bought vpon his precious body full dere: & hearken in what wyſe. For as moche than as reaſon is rebel to god, therfore is man worthye to haue ſorowe & to be deed. This ſuffred oure Lord Ieſu Chriſt for man, after that he had be betrayed of his diſciple, & diſtrayned and bound, ſo that his bloude braſt out at euery nayle of his hondes, as ſayth ſ. Auſtin. And ferthermore, for as moche as reaſon of man wol not daunt ſenſualite, when it may, therfore is man worthye to haue ſhame: & thys ſuffred our Lord Ieſu chriſt for man, whan they ſpyt in his viſage. And ferthermore for as moch thā as the caytif body of man is rebel both to reſō & to ſenſualitie, therfore it is worthy death: & this ſuffred our Lord Ieſu Chryſt vpon the croſſe, where as there was no parte of his bodye free withoute greate payne & bytter paſſyon: and all this ſuffred our Lord Ieſu Chryſt that neuer forfayted And therfore reſonably maye be ſayd of Ieſu in this maner: To moch am I pained for thinges that I neuer deſerued, and to moch defouled for ſhame that man is worthye to haue: And therfore may the ſynful man wel ſay, as ſaynt Bernarde. Accurſed be the bytterneſſe of my ſynne, for which ther muſt be ſuffred ſo moche bitterneſſe. For certes after the dyuers diſcordaunce of our wickedneſſe was the paſſyon of Ieſu Chryſte ordayned in dyuers thynges: as thus. Certes ſynfull mans ſoule is betrayed of the deuyll by couetyſe of temporal proſperitie, & ſcorned by diſceyte when that he cheſeth fleſhly deſyres, & yet it is turmented by impatience of aduerſitie, & beſpet by ſeruage & ſubiection of ſyn, and at the laſt it is ſlayne fynallye. For this diſordinaūce of ſynful man was Ieſu chriſt betrayed, & after yt was he boūde, that came for to vnbynde vs of ſynne & of payne. Than was he beſcorned, yt only ſhuld haue be honoured in al thinges. Thā was his vyſage that ought to be deſyred to be ſene of al mā
                     kynde, in which viſage angels deſire to loke vylaynſly beſpet. Than was be ſcourged yt nothing had treſpaſſed, and finally thā was he crucifyed and ſlayne. Than was accōpliſſhed the wordes of Eſay: He was woūded for our myſdedes, and defoyled for our felonies. Now ſith that Ieſu chriſt toke on him the paines of our wickedneſſes, moch ought ſynful man wepe and bewayle, that for hys ſynnes Gods ſonne of heuen, ſhould al this payne endure.
                  
                     THe ſixt thing that ſhuld meue a man to cōtrition, is ye hope of thre thinges, that is to ſay foryeueneſſe of ſyn, and ye yeft of grace for to do well, and ye glory of heuen wt which God ſhall rewarde man for his good dedes: and for as moche as Ieſu chriſt yeueth vs theſe yeftes of his

largeneſſe & of his ſouerayn boūty, therfore is he called (Ieſus Nazarenus rex Indeorū) Ieſus is to ſaye, ſauyour or ſaluaciō, on whom men ſhall hope to haue foryeueneſſe of ſynnes, which that is proprely ſaluacion of ſynnes. And therfore ſaid the angel to Ioſeph: thou ſhalte call his name Ieſus, that ſhall ſaue his people of her ſynnes. And her of ſayth ſ. Peter: There is none other name vnder heuen yt is yeue to any man, by which a man maye be ſaued, but only Ieſus. Nazarenus is as moche for to ſaye, as floryſhing in which a mā ſhal hope, that he that yeueth hym remyſſyon of ſynnes, ſhall yeue hym al ſo grace well for to do. I was at the dore of thyne hert, ſayth Ieſus, & called for to enter he that openeth to me ſhal haue foryeuenes of ſynne. I wyl entre to hym by my grace, & ſuppe with hym by the good werkes, that he ſhall do, whiche werkes ben the foode of the ſoul, & he ſhal ſuppe with me by ye great ioye that I ſhal yeue hym. Thus ſhall man hope for his werkes of penaunce, that God ſhall yeue hym hys reygne, as he behyghte hym in the goſpell. Now ſhal a man vnderſtonde in whiche maner ſhall be his contrytion: I ſaye that it ſhalbe vniuerſall and totall, this is to ſaye: a man ſhalbe very repentaunt for all his ſynnes that he hath done in delyte of his thought, for it is ryght peryllous. For there ben two maner of conſentinges, that one of hem is called conſentyng of affection, whan a man is moued to do ſyn, and than delyteth hym longe for to thynke on that ſynne, and his reaſon apperceyueth it well that it is ſynne ayenſt the law of god and yet his reaſon refrayneth not his foule delyte or talent, though he ſe well apertlye, that it is ayenſte the reuerence of God, although his reaſon ne conſent not to do that ſynne in dede, yet ſaye ſome doctoures that ſuche delyte that dwelleth longe is ful perillous, albeit neuer ſo lytle. And alſo a man ſhoulde ſorowe, namely for all that euer he hath deſyred ayenſt the lawe of God, wyth perfyt conſentyng of his reaſon, for thereof is no doubt that it is deedly ſynne in conſentyng: for certes there is no deedly ſynne, but that it is fyrſte in mans thought, and after that in his delyte, and ſo forth into conſentynge and into dede: wherfore I ſaye that many mē ne repēt hem neuer of ſuch thoughtes and delytes, ne neuer ſhryue hym of it, but onelye of the dede of greate ſynnes outwarde: wherfore I ſaye that ſuche wycked delytes bene ſubtyll begylers of them that ſhalbe dampned. Moreouer, man ought to ſorowe for his wycked wordes as well as for hys wycked dedes: for certes the repentaūce of a ſynguler ſyn, and not repentaunt of all his other ſynnes, or els repent hym of all his other ſynnes, and not of a ſyngular ſyn, may not auayle: For certes god almightye is all good, and therfore eyther he foryeueth all, or els ryght nought. And therfore ſayth ſaynct Auſtyn: I wot certaynly that god is enemye to euery ſynner: and how thā he that obſerueth one ſynne, ſhal he haue for yeueneſſe of thoſe other ſynnes? Naye. And moreouer cōtrition ſhuld be wonder ſorowfull and anguiſhous, & therfore yeueth hym God playnly hys mercy: And therfore whā my ſoule was anguyſhed and ſorowfull wt
                     in me, than had I remembraunce of God, that my prayer myght come to hym. Ferthermore, contrition muſt be contynuall, & that man haue ſtedfaſte purpoſe to ſhryue hym, and to amende hym of his lyfe. For ſothly whyle contrition laſteth, man maye euer hope to haue foryeueneſſe. And of thys cōmeth hate of ſynne, that deſtroyeth bothe ſynne in hym ſelfe, and alſo in other folke at hys power. For which ſayeth Dauid: They that loue god hate wyckedneſſe: For to loue god is for to loue that he loueth, and hate yt he hateth. The laſt thynge that men ſhal vnderſtande is this. wherfore auayleth contrition. I ſaye the contrition ſomtyme delyuereth man fro ſynne: Of which Dauid ſayth I ſaye, ſayd Dauid: I purpoſed fermely to ſhryue me, and thou Lorde releaſeddeſt my ſynne. And ryght ſo as contrition auayleth not without ſad purpoſe of ſhrift if mā haue oportunitye, ryght ſo lytle worth is ſhryfte or ſatiſfaction withoute contrition. And moreouer contrition deſtroyeth the priſō of hell, & maketh weake and feble all the ſtrengthes of the deuylles, and reſtoreth the yeftes of the holy ghoſt and of al good vertues and it clenſeth the ſoule of ſyn, & delyuereth it fro the payne of hell, & fro the company of the dyuel, and fro the ſeruage of ſynne, and reſtoreth it to all goodes ſpirituels, to the companye and communion of holy churche.

Ferthermore it maketh hym that whylom was ſonne of yre, to be the ſonne of grace. And all theſe thynges ben proued by holye wrytte. And therfore he that wolde ſet hys entent to theſe thynges he were full wyſe, for truly he ne ſhulde haue than in al his life corage to ſynne, but yeue his hert and body to ſerue Chryſt, and therof do hym homage For truly our Lord hath ſpared vs ſo meke lye in our follyes, that yf he ne had pytye of mannes ſoule, a ſorye ſonge myghte we all ſynge.
               
               
                  ¶Explicit prima pars penitentie et incipit pars ſecunda.
                  
                     THe ſeconde parte of penitence is confeſſyon, that is ſigne of contrition. Now ſhul ye vnderſtōd what is confeſſyon, and yf it ought to be done or no, & which thynges be couenable to very confeſſyon. Fyrſt ſhalt thou vnderſtond ye confeſſyon is very ſhewyng of ſynnes to the preſt: this is to ſaye very, for he muſt confeſſe hym of all the condicions that belonge to his ſynne, as ferforth as he can: al muſt be ſaid, & nothing excuſed ne hydde, and not auaunt the of thy good werkes. Alſo it is neceſſary to vnderſtonde whence that ſynnes ſpring, & howe they entre, and which they ben. Of the ſpringyng of ſynnes ſayeth ſaynt Poule in thys wyſe: that ryght as by one man, ſyn entred fyrſt into this worlde, and through ſyn deth ryght ſo the deth entreth into all men that ſynne, and this man was Adam, by whom ſynne entred into this world, whē he brake the commaundement of God. And therfore he that fyrſt was ſo mighty that he ne ſhuld haue dyed, becam ſo that he muſt nedes dye whether he wolde or no, and all his progeny in this worlde that in the ſayd man ſynned. Loke that in the ſtate of innocency whē Adam and Eue were naked in paradyſe, & ſhamed not therof, how the ſerpent wylyeſt of all other beaſtes that god made, ſayde to the woman: why commaunded god you yt ye ſhulde not eate of euery tree in paradyſe? The woman anſwered: Of the frute ſayde ſhe of the trees of paradyſe we fede vs, but of the frute of the mydle tre of paradyſe god forbod vs to eat & touche, leſt we ſhuld dye. The ſerpent ſayd to the woman. Nay nay, ye ſhall not dye of death, forſoth god wotte that what daye that ye eat therof, your eyē ſhall open, and ye ſhalbe as goddes, knowing good and harme. The woman thā ſaw that the tree was good to fedyng, and fayr to the eyen, and delectable to ſyght, ſhe toke of the frute of the tree and ate, & yaue to her huſbonde, and he ate, and anon the eyen of hem both opened: And whā that they knew that they wer naked, they ſowed of fyggeleues in maner of breches to hyde her mēbres There maye ye ſe that deedly ſyn hath fyrſt ſuggeſtion of the fende as ſheweth here by the adder, and afterwarde the delyte of the fleſh, as ſheweth by Eue, and after that conſentyng of reaſon, as ſheweth here by Adā. For truſt wel though ſo it were that ye fend tempted Eue, that is to ſay the fleſh, and the fleſhe had delyte in the beautye of the frute defended, yet certes tyll that reaſon, that is to ſay Adam, conſented to the eatyng of the frute, yet ſtode he in the ſtate of innocencie. Of the ſayd Adam toke we the ſayde original ſyn of hym fleſhly diſcended be we all, & engendred of vyle and corrupte mater: And whan the ſoule is put in oure bodyes, right anon is contract original ſyn, and that that was erſt but onely payne of concupiſcencie is afterward both payne and ſyn, and therfore we bene all borne ſonnes of wrath, and of dampnatiō perdurable, if it nere baptym that we receyue, whiche benymmeth vs the coulpe but forſoth the pyne dwelleth wyth vs as to temptation, which pyne hyght concupyſcence. This concupiſcence whan it is wrongfully diſpoſed or ordayned in man, it maketh hym coueyte by couetyſye of fleſſhe fleſhly ſynne by ſyght of his eyen, as to erthlye thynges, and alſo couetyſe of hyghneſſe by pryde of herte.
                  Now as to ſpeake of the firſt couetiſe that is concupiſcence, after the lawe of our membres that were lawfully made, and by rightful iudgement of God: I ſaye for as moche as man is not obeyſaunte to God, that is his Lorde, therfore is the fleſh to hym diſobeyſaunt through concupiſcence, whiche is called noryſhing of ſynne, and occaſyon of ſynne. Therfore all the whyle that a man hath within him the pyne of concupyſcence it is impoſſyble but he be tēpted ſomtyme & moued in his fleſhe to ſyn. And this thynge

may not fayle as long as he lyueth. It may wel waxe feble by vertue of baptim, and by the grace of god through penitence, but fully ne ſhall it neuer quenche that he ne ſhall ſomtyme be moued in him ſelf, but if he wer al refrayned by ſyckneſſe or by malyce of ſorcery or colde drynkes. For lo, what ſayth ſ. Poule: the fleſh coueteth ayenſt the ſpyryte and the ſpyrite ayenſt the fleſh: they bene ſo contrary & ſo ſtryuen, that a man maye not alway do as he wold. The ſame ſaynt poul after his greate penaunce, in water, and in londe: in water by night & by day, in greate peryl and in great pyne. In londe, famyne & thurſt, colde, and clothleſſe, & ones ſloned almoſt to deth. Yet (ſayde he) alas, I caytyfe man, who ſhall delyuer me fro the priſon of my caytyfe body? And ſaynt Ierom whē he longe 
                        •
                     yme had dwelled in deſert, where as he had no companye but of wylde beaſtes, where as he had no meate but herbes & water to drink, ne bed but the naked erth, wherfore his fleſſhe was blacke as an Ethiopien for hete and nye diſtroyed for colde. Yet ſayd 
                        •
                     e that the brennyng of lechery boyled in al his body: wherfore I wot well that they be diſceyued that ſaye, they be not tempted in 
                        ••
                      bodyes. wytneſſe ſaynt Iames yt ſayeth that euerye wyght is tempted in hys owne conſciēce, that is to ſay: that eche of vs hath mater and occaſion to be tempted of the noriſhing of ſyn that is in his body. And therfore ſayth ſaynt Iohn the euangeliſt: yf we ſay that we ben without ſynne, we diſceyue our ſelf, and truthe is not in vs. Now ſhall ye vnderſtonde how ſyn wexeth and encreaeth in man. The firſt thing is the ſame noryſhing of ſyn of which I ſpoke before, the fleſhlye cōcupiſcence, and after that cōmeth ſuggeſtyon of the deuil, this is to ſay the deuyls belous, with which he bloweth in mā the fire of cōcupiſcence, and after that a mā bethinketh him wheder he wyll do or no, ye thing to which he is tēpted. And then yf a man withſtōd & weyue the firſt entiſyng of his fleſhe, & of the fende, thā it is no ſyn, & yf ſo be he do not thā feleth he anon a flame of de
                        ••
                     te, & thā it is good to beware & kepe him well, or els he wyll fall anon, to cōſentynge of ſyn, & than wyll he do it yf he maye haue tyme & place. And of this mater ſayth Moſes by the deuyll, in this maner: ye fēd ſayth, I wyll chace & purſue man by wycked ſuggeſtyon, & I wyll take hym by mouyng and ſteryng of ſyn, & I woll depart my pryſe of my praye by delyberation, and my luſt ſhal be accōplyſhed in delyte: I wyll drawe my ſworde in conſentynge. For certes, ryght as a ſwerde departeth a thynge in two peces, ryght ſo cōſentyng departeth god fro man, & than wyl I ſle hym with my hond in dede of ſyn: thus ſayth the fende. For certes than is a man all deed in ſoule, & thus is ſyn accō
                     plyſhed with temptation by delyte & conſentyng: & than is the ſyn actual. Forſoth ſyn is in two maners, eyther it is venyall or deedly ſyn. Sothlye whan man loueth any creature more then Ieſu Chryſte our creatour, than it is deedly ſynne, & venyall ſynn it is, yf man loue Ieſu chryſt leſſe thā him ought. Forſoth the dede of this venyal ſyn is ful perylous, for it myniſſheth the loue that man ſhuld haue to god more and more. And therfore yf a man charge hym ſelfe with manye ſuche venyall ſynnes: certes but if ſo be that he ſomtyme diſcharge hym of hem by ſhryft They may ful lyghtly mynyſh in hym al the loue that he hath to Ieſu Chriſt, and in this wyſe ſkyppeth venyall ſynne into deedly ſin For certes, the more that a man chargeth his ſoule with venyall ſynnes, the more he is enclyned to fall into deedlye ſynne. And therfore lette vs not be neglygent to charge vs of venyal ſynnes. For the prouerbe ſayth that many ſmall make a great. Herken this enſample. A greate vawe of the ſee commeth ſometyme with ſo greate a vyolence, that it drowneth the ſhyppe. And the ſame harme do ſomtyme the ſmal droppes of water that entreth through a lytle creueys, into the tymbre and to the botume of the ſhyp, yf men be ſo geglygent, that they dyſcharge hem not bytymes. And therfore althoughe there be a dyfference betwyxt theſe two cauſes of drownynge, allgates the ſhyppe is drowned. Ryghte ſo fareth it ſometyme of deedlye ſynne, and of anoyous venyall ſynnes, whan they multyplye in man ſo greatlye, that thoſe worldlye thynges that he loueth, through whyche he ſynneth venyally, is as great in his herte as the loue of God, or more: and therfore the loue of euery thing that is not beſet in God, ne done pryncipallye for Goddes ſake, althoughe that a man

loue it ſelfe then God: yet is it venyal ſynne and deedly ſynne whē the loue of any thing weyeth in the hert of man as moche as the loue of God or more. Deedly ſynne as ſayth ſaynct Auſtyn is when a man turneth hys hert fro God: which that is very ſouerayne bounty that maye not chaunge: and gyueth his hert to a thyng that may chaunge & flit and certes that is euery thyng ſaue God of heauen. For ſothe is that if a manne gyue hys loue whyche that he oweth to God, with all his hert vnto a creature: certes as moche of loue as he yeueth to that ſame creature ſo moche he bereueth fro God: & therfore doth he ſynne. For he that is dettour to God ne yeldeth not to god al his det that is to ſaye: al the loue of his hert. Now ſith mā vnderſtandeth generally whiche is venyall ſyn, then it is couenable to tell ſpecyallye of ſynne which that many a mā peraduenture demeth hem no ſynnes: & ſhryueth hym not of the ſame thinges: & yet neuertheleſſe they be ſynnes ſothly as theſe clerkes write that is to ſaye. At euery tyme that man eateth or drinketh more then ſuffiſeth to ye ſuſtenaūce of his body in certayne he doth ſynne: & alſo when he ſpeaketh more then it nedeth it is ſinne. Alſo when he herkeneth not benignly the cōplaynt of the pore. Alſo when he is in heale of body: and wol not faſt when other folkes faſte withoute cauſe reſonable: alſo when he ſlepeth more then nedeth: or when he cometh perchaūce to late to church: or other werkes of charitie. Alſo when he vſeth his wyfe without ſouerayne deſyre of engē
                     drure to the honour of god: or for the entent to yelde to his wyfe dette of his body. Alſo when he wol not vyſit the ſycke or the priſoner: yf he maye. Alſo yf he loue wyfe or child or other wordly thyng more then reaſon requyreth. Alſo yf he flatter or blandyſe more then him ought for any neceſſitye. Alſo yf he miniſh or withdrawe ye almeſſe of the pore. Alſo if he apparel his meat more deliciouſly then nede is or eate to haſtelye by lycorouſnes. Alſo yf he talke vanityes at churche or at gods ſeruiſe, or that he be a talker of ydle wordes, of foly or vylanye, for he ſhal yelde accomptes of it at the daye of dome. Alſo when he behyghteth or aſſureth to do thynges that he may not performe. Alſo when yt he by lyghtneſſe or folye myſſayeth or ſcorneth his neighbour. Alſo when he hath any wicked ſuſſpection of any thynge that he ne wot of ſothfaſtneſſe. Theſe thinges and mo without nōbre be ſynnes as ſayth ſ. Auſtyn Now ſhal men vnderſtande that albeit ſo yt none erthly man maye eſchue al venyal ſynnes, yet maye he refrayne hym by the brennyng loue yt he hath to our lord Ieſu chryſt and by prayers and confeſſion & other good werkes, ſo that it ſhalbe but lytle grefe. For as ſaeth ſ. Auſtin: Yf a man loue god inſuch maner, that al that euer he doth is the loue of god, or for ye loue of god verely, for he brē
                     neth in the loue of god: loke how moch that one droppe of water whiche doth fal into a great furneys ful of fyre anoyeth or greueth the brennyng of the fyre: in lyke maner anoyeth or greueth a venyall ſyn vnto that mā which is ſtedfaſt and perfyte in the loue of our ſauyour Ieſu Chryſt. Ferthermore mē maye alſo refrayne and put awaye venyall ſyn, by commenyng and receyuing worthely the body of our ſauyour Ieſu Chryſt. Alſo by takynge of holy water, by almeſdede, by general confeſſyon of Confi
                        ••
                     or at maſſe and at complyn, & by bleſſynges of byſhops and preſtes, and other good werkes.
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶De ſeptem peccatis mortalibus, et de eorum dependentus circumſtantis et ſpeciebus.
                     
                        HOw is it expediēt to tel which bene the ſeuen deedly ſynnes, that is to ſaye, the chefetayns of ſynnes. All they renne in o lees, but in dyuers maners.
                     Now bene they called ſeuen Cenes, for as moch as they be chefe, & ſprynge of al other ſynnes. Of the roote of theſe ſeuen ſynnes, then is pryde the general rote of al harmes For of this rote ſpryngeth certen braūches: as yre, enuy, accidie or ſlouth, auarice, or couetyſe, to cōmē vnderſtanding glotony and lechery: And eche of theſe chefe ſynnes haue her braunches and twigges, as it ſhalbe declared in her chapiters folowynge. And though ſo be yt noman can vtterly tel the nō
                        bre of twigges, and of the harmes that com of pryde: Yet wol I ſhew a parte of hem, as ye ſhall vnderſtonde. There is Inobedience

auauntyng, ypocriſy, diſpite, errogance, impedence, ſwellyng of hert, inſolence, elation, impacience, ſtrife, contumacy, preſumption irreuerence, pertinacy, veyne glory, and many other twygges that I can not declare. Inobedience is he that diſobeyeth for diſpyte the commaundementes of God, to his ſouerains, and to his goſtly father. Auaunter is he that boſteth of the harme or of the boūte that he hath done. Ipocrite is he that bedeth to ſhewe hym ſuch as he is, and ſheweth hym to ſeme ſuch as he is not. Diſpitous is he that hath diſdayne of hys neighbour, that is to ſaye, of hys euyn chriſten, or hath diſpite to do that hym ought to do. Errogance is he that thynketh yt he hath thoſe bou
                           ••
                        es in hym that he hath not, or weneth that he ſhulde haue hem by hys deſertes, or els that he demeth he is that he is not. Impedent is he, yt for hys pride hath no ſhame of hys pride ne ſynne. Swellyng of hert is whan man reioyſeth hym of harme that he hath done. Inſolence is he that diſpiceth in his iudgement all other folke, as in regard of his value, of hys conyng, of hys ſpekyng and of hys berynge. Elation is whan he ne may neither ſuffre to haue maiſter ne felow Impacient is he that wyl not be taught ne rebuked of hys vyce, and by ſtryfe denyeth trouth wyttyngly, and defendeth hys foly. C
                           •••
                        umaxe is he that throughe hys indignation i
                           •
                         ayenſt euerye auctorite or power of hem that ben hys ſouerayns. Preſumption is whā a man vndertaketh an empriſe that him ought not to do or els that he may nat do, and this is called ſurquidie. Irreuerence is, whan manne dothe not honoure there as hym ought to do, and loke to be reuerenced. Pertinacye is whan men defende her foly, & truſt to much on her owne witte. Vaynglory is for to haue pompe and delite in hys temporel hyneſſe, and glorye hym in worldlye eſtates. Ianglynge is whan men ſpeke to much before folke and clappeth as a myl, and take no kepe what they ſay. And yet is there a priuy ſpice of pride, that wayteth fyrſt to be ſalewed or he woll ſalue, all be he leſſe worthy thā that other is. And alſo he wayteth or deſyreth to ſytte, or els to go aboue hym in the waye, or kyſſe paxe, to be encenſed, or go to offrynge before hys neyghbour, and ſuch ſemblable thynges ayenſt his dutie parauēture, but that he hath hys hert and hys entente, in ſuche a proude deſyre to be magnyfyed and honoured before the people. Nowe bene here two maners of prides. One of hem is wythin the hert of a man, and that other is wythout. Of whych forſayd thynges ſothlye and mo than I haue ſayd apertayn to pride, that is in the hert of man, and other ſpices of pride ben wythout, but nathles, that one of theſe ſpices of pride is ſigne of that other, ryghte as the gay leueſel at the tauerne, is ſigne of the wyne that is in the celer. And thys is in many thynges: as in ſpeche & coūtenance & outragious aray of clothyng: For certes, yf ther had ben no ſyn in clothing, Chriſt wold not ſo ſone haue noted and ſpoken of the clothyng of the ryche men in the goſpell. And as ſaint Greg. ſaith that precious clothing is culpable, for the derth of it & for his ſoftneſſe, and for hys ſtraungeneſſe and diſguiſyng: and for the ſuperfluite, or for the inordinate ſcantneſſe of it. Alas? may nat a man ſe in our dayes the ſynfull coſtlye arraye of clothyng, and namely in to much ſuperfluite, or elles in to diſordinate ſcantneſſe. As to the fyrſt ſynne in ſuperfluite of clothynge ſuche that maketh it ſo dere to the harme of the people, not only the coſt of imbroydring the diſguyſed endendyng, or barringe, oundyng, palyng, wyndynge, or bendynge, and ſemblable waſt of cloth in vanite. But there is alſo the coſtlye furrynge in her gownes, ſo much pouſyng of cheſel to make hooles, ſo much daggyng of ſheres forche, with the ſuperfluite in lengthe of the foreſayd gownes, traylyng in the donge & in the myre, on horſe and alſo on fote, as well of man as of woman. That all that traylynge is verilye as in effecte waſted, conſumed thredebare & rotten wyth donge, rather than it is yeue to the poore, to greate damage of the forſayde pore folke, & yt in ſōdrie wiſe, thys is to ſaye that the more the cloth is waſted, the more muſte it coſte the poore people for the ſcarſneſſe. And moreouer, yf ſo be that they wold yeue ſuch pounſed and dagged clothyng to the poore people, it is not cōuenient to were for her eſtate, ne ſufficient to her neceſſite, to kepe hem fro the diſtemperaunce of the firmament. Vpon that other ſyde, to ſpeke of ye horrible diſordinate ſcātneſſe, of clothinge

as ben theſe cutted ſloppes or hanſelines, yt through her ſhortnes couer not the ſhamful mēbres of mā, to wicked intent. Alas, ſome of hem ſhew the boſſe of her ſhap, & the horible ſwole membres that ſemeth like to malady of hernia, in the wrappyng of her hoſē & alſo the buttockes of hem fare as it were the hynder parte of a ſheape in the ful of the mone. And moreouer the wretched ſwollen mēbres that they ſhewe through diſguiſing in departing of her hoſen, in white and reed ſemeth that halfe her ſhameful preuy membres were flayne. And yf ſo be that they depart her hoſen in other colours, as is white & blew, or whyte and blacke, or blacke & red and ſo forth: Thā ſemeth it as by variaūce of colour that yu halfe part of her preuy mē
                        bres, ben corrupt by the fyre of ſaynt Anthony, or by canker, or other ſuch miſchaunce. Of the hinder part of her buttockes it is ful horrible for to ſe, for certes in that parte of her body there as they purge her ſtynkynge ordure, that foule partie ſhew they to ye people proudly in diſpite of honeſtie, which honeſtie that Ieſu Chriſt and hys frendes obſerued to ſhewe in her life. Now as the outragious araye of women, God wotte that thoughe yt viſages of ſome of hem ſeme full chaſt, & debonayre, yet notify in her araye or afyre, licorouſnes & pride: I ſay not that honeſtie in clothing of mā or woman is vncouenable, but certes the ſuperfluitie of diſordinate quantite of clothynge is reprouable. Alſo the ſyn of ornement or of apparayle is in thinges that apertayne to rydynge, as in companye, delicate horſes that bene holden for delite, that ben ſo fayre, fatte, & coſtlye, & alſo in many a nyce knaue, that is ſuſteined bicauſe of hem, in curious harneis, as in ſadels, cropers, peytrels, & bridels couered wt precious clothing, & rich barres of plates of gold & of ſiluer. For which god ſayth by zacharye the prophete, I woll confounde the ryders of ſuch horſes. Theſe folke take lytel regarde of the riding of goddes ſonne of heuen, and of hys harneys whan he rode vpō the aſſe, and non other harneys but the pore clothes of his diſciples, ne we rede not that euer he rode on other beeſt. I ſpeke thys for the ſynne of ſuperfluitie, and not for reſonable honeſtye, whan reaſon it requireth. And moreouer, certes pryde is greatly notyfyed in holdynge of great meyny, whan they be
                           •
                         of lytle profyte, or of ryght no profyte, and namely whan that meyne is felonous and dammageous to the people by hardynes of hygh lordſhyp, or by waye of offyces. For certes ſuch lordes ſell thā her lordſhyppe to the dyuel of hell, whā they ſuſtayne the wickedneſſe of her meyne. Or els, whan theſe folke of lowe degree: as thoſe that kepe hoſtelries, ſuſtayne theſe of the hoſtelers, and that is in manye maner of diſceytes: thoſe maner of folke ben the flyes that folow the hony, or els the houndes that folow the 
                           •
                        arayn. Such forſaid folke ſtrangel ſpirituelly her lordſhyps: For ſuch, thus ſayeth Dauid the prophete, wicked death might come on thoſe lordſhips, and God gyue that they might diſcend in to b
                           •
                        l▪ all down: For in her houſes bene iniquities and ſhreudneſſe, and not god of heuen. And certes, tyll they done amendemēt▪ right as god yaue hys bleſſing to Pharao by the ſeruice of Iacob, & to Laban, by the ſeruice of Ioſeph: Ryght ſo god wol yeue hys curſe to ſuch lordſhyps, as ſuſtayn the wyckednes of her ſeruauntes, but they come to amendement. Pride of the table appeareth alſo full ofte: for certes, ryche men ben called to feſtes and pore folke ben
                           •
                         put awaye & rebuked. And alſo in exceſſe of diuers meates and drynkes, & namely ſuch maner bake meates & diſhemetes brenning of wylde fyre: peynted and caſtelled w
                           •
                        th paper and ſemblable waſte, ſo that it is 
                           ••
                        
                        uſyon to thynke. And alſo in to greate 
                           ••
                        
                        cyouſneſſe of veſſell and curioſytye of m
                           ••
                        ſtralcye, the whyche a man is ſterred mo
                           •
                         to delyces of lecherye, yf ſo be he ſette hys herte the leſſe vpon oure Lorde Ieſu Chri
                           •
                        t certaynlye it is a ſynne. And certaynlye the delyces myght be ſo greate in thys caſe, that a man myghte lyghtlye fall by hem into a deadly ſynne. The eſpeces that ſourde of pride, ſothly whan they ſourde of malyce ymagined, auyſed, and forecaſte, or els of vſage ven deedly ſyn, it is no dout. And whā they ſourde by freelte vnauyſed ſodenlye, & ſodenlye wythdrawe ayene, all be they greuouſe ſynnes, I geſſe that they be nat deedly. Now might mē aſke, wherof that pride ſourdeth and ſpringeth. I ſaye that ſōtyme it ſpryngeth of the goodes of nature, ſomtyme of the goodes of fortune, and ſōtyme

of the goodes of grace. Certes the goodes of nature ſtondeth only in goodes of bodye, or goodes of ye ſoule. Certes goodes of the body bene heel of body, ſtrength, deliuernes beautie, gentry, frāchiſe. Goodes of nature of the ſoule, ben good with ſharpe vnderſtā
                        dyng, ſubtel engin, vertue naturel, good memory. Goodes of fortune, be ryches, hye degrees of lordſhips, prayſyngs of the people Goodes of grace: bene ſcience, power to ſuffer ſpounell traueyle, benigne, vertuous cō
                        templation, vnderſtanding of temptation & ſemblable thynges: of whych forſayd goodes: certes it is a full greate folye, a man to haue pride in any of hem all. Nowe, as for to ſpeke of goodes of nature, God wot, that ſomtyme we haue hem in nature, aſmoche to our damage as to our profyt. As to ſpeke of heel of body, truly it paſſeth ful lyghtly, & alſo it is full oft occaſion of ſickeneſſe of the ſoule: for God wot ye fleſhe is a great enemy to the ſhule: & therfore the more that the bodyes hole, the more be we in peril to fal. Alſo for to haue pride in hys ſtrength of body, it is an hie foly: for certes the fleſhe coueteth ayenſt the ſpirite: & the more ſtrōg the fleſhe is the ſorier maye the ſoule be. And ouer all this ſtrength of body & worldly hardineſſe, cauſeth ful oft many man to perell and miſchaunce, & alſo to haue pride of his gentry, is right great foly: for oftyme the gētry of ye body taketh awey the gentry of the ſoule: & alſo we ben al of o father & mother: & all we ben of o nature rotten & corrupt, both rich & pore. Forſoth o maner gētry is for to praiſe that aparelleth mānes courage: wyt vertue & moralite, maketh him Chriſtes chyld. For truſt well, that ouer what mā that ſyn hath mayſtry, he is a very churle to ſynne. Nowe ben there general ſignes of gētlenes as eſche wyng of vice & ribaudry, & ſeruage of ſy
                           •
                        n worde, in werke, & countenaunce & vſyng of vertue, curteſy, & clennes, & to be liberal: that is to ſay, large by meaſure: for yt yt paſſeth meaſure, is foly & ſynne: Another is to remembre hym of boūtie, that he of other folke hath receiued: Another is to be benigne to hys good ſubictes, wherfore ſayth Senecke: there is nothyng more couenable to a mā of hygh eſtate, than debonairte and pite. And therfore theſe flyes that men call bees, whan they make her kynge, they cheſe one that hath no pricke, wherwyth he may ſtynge.
                     Another is, man to haue a noble hert & a diligent, to attayne to the hyghe vertuous thynges. Nowe certes, a man to haue pride in the goodes of grace, is alſo an outragious foly: for thoſe gyftes of grace yt ſhulde haue tourned hym to goodneſſe, and to medycen, tourneth hym to venym and confuſion, as fayth ſaynte Greg. Certes alſo, who ſo hath pride in the goodneſſe of fortune, he is a ful greate fole: For ſomtyme is a mā a great lorde by the morne, that is a catyfe, and a wretche or it be nyght: and ſomtyme the ryches of a man is cauſe of his death. Somtyme the delyces of a man, is cauſe of a greuous melady throughe whyche he dyeth. Certes, the comendation of the people is ſomtyme full falſe and brotell for to truſt Thys day they prayſe, to morow they blame. God wot, deſyre to haue cōmendation of the people, hath cauſed death to manye a buſye man. Nowe ſyth that ſo it is, that ye haue vnderſtande what is pride, and which be the ſpeces of it, and whence it ſourdeth & ſpryngeth: nowe ye ſhall vnderſtand which is the remedy ayenſt it. Humilytie or mekeneſſe is the remedye ayenſt pride, yt is a vertue, through whyche a mā hath very knowledge of hym ſelfe, and holdeth of hym ſelfe no price ne deyntie, as in regarde of hys deſertes, conſyderynge euer hys freelte. Now bene there thre maner of humilytes: As humylyte in herte, another humylytye is in mouthe, and the thyrde is in workes. The humilytie in herte, is in four maners: That one is, whan a manne holdeth hym ſelfe as nought worth before God of heuen. The ſeconde is, whan he diſpiceth none other man. The thyrde is, whan he ne recketh nat though men holde hym nought worth. And the fourth is, whā he is not ſory of his humiliation. Alſo the humilitie of mouth is in four thinges. In a temperate ſpeche, in humilitie of ſpech, & whā he cōfeſſeth with his owne mouth, that he is ſuche as him thynketh, that he is in his hert: Another is, whā he prayſeth the bounte of another man & nothyng therof minyſſheth. Humilitye alſo in werke, is in foure maners. The fyrſte is, whan he putteth other men before him, ye ſecond is to cheſe the loweſt place ouer al, the

thyrde is, gladly to aſſent to good coūſayle, the fourth in, to ſtand gladly to the awarde of his ſouerains, or of him that is in hier degre. Certeyn this is gret werke of humilite.
                     
                        ¶De Inuidia.
                        
                           AFter Pride woll I ſpeke of the foule ſynne of Enuye, whyche that is after the worde of the philoſofer, ſorow of other mennes proſperitie. And after the worde of ſaynt Auguſtin: it is ſorowe of other mennes wele, & the ioy of other mēnes harme. This foule ſynne is platly agaynſte the holy ghoſt: al be it ſo, that euery ſynne is ayenſt the holy goſt: yet nathles, for aſmoch as bounte apertayneth properly to the holy goſt: & enuy cometh properly of malice, therfore it is properlye ayenſt the bountie of the holy goſt. Nowe hath malice two ſpeces, yt is to ſay: hardines of herte in wickednes, or els the fleſhe of a man is ſo blynde, that he cōſidreth nat that he is in ſyn, or recketh nat yt he is in ſyn, which is the hardines of ye deuyl. That other ſpece of enuy is, whan that a mā denyeth trouth, whā he knoweth that it is trouth, & alſo whā he repenteth ye grace that God hath yeue to his neyghbour: & all this is by enuy. Certes, thā is enuy ye worſt ſinne that is, for ſothly al other ſinnes be ſō
                           time onely ayenſt o ſpeciall vertue: but certes, enuy is againſt al vertues & al goodnes For it is ſory ayenſt al boūties of her neighbour, & in this maner, it is diuers from al other ſynnes. Alas: for there ne is any ſynne that it ne hathe ſome delyte in it ſelefe, ſaue only enuy, that euer hath in it ſelfe anguiſhe & ſorow. The ſpeces of enuy ben theſe, there is fyrſte ſorowe of other mennes goodneſſe and of her proſperitie, & proſperite is kyndlye mater of ioye: Than is enuye a ſynne ayenſt kynde. The ſeconde ſpece of enuye, is ioy of other mennes harme, and that is properly lyke to the deuyll, that euer reioyſeth hym of mannes harme. Of theſe two ſpeces cometh bacbytynge, and thys ſynne of bacbytynge or detractynge hathe certayne ſpeces, as thus: Some man prayſeth hys neyghboure by a wycked entent, for he maketh alwaye a wycked knot at the laſt ende: alway he maketh a but at the laſt ende that is digne of more blame, thā is worth al the prayſyng. The ſeconde ſpece is, that if a mā be good, or doth or ſayeth a thynge to good entente, the backbyter woll turne al yt goodneſſe vp ſo downe, to hys ſhreude entente. The thyrde is to amyniſhe the bountye of hys neyghbour. The fourth ſpece of backbytyng is thys, that yf men ſpeke goodneſſe of a man, than woll the backbiter ſaye: Perfay ſuch a man is yet better than he, in diſprayſynge of hym ye men prayſe. The fyfth ſpece is thys, for to cōſent gladly and herkē gladly to ye harme that men ſpeke of other folke: Thys ſynne is ful great, and aye encreſeth after the wycked entent of the backbiter. After backbytynge cometh grutching or murmuration, and ſomtyme it ſpryngeth of unpacience ayenſt God, and ſomtyme ayenſt man. Ayenſt God it is whan a man grutcheth ayenſt payne of hel, or ayenſt pouertie or loſſe of catel, or ayenſt rayne or tempeſte, or els grutcheth that ſhrewes haue proſperite, or els for that good mē haue aduerſite: and all theſe thynges ſhulde men ſuffre paciently, for they come by the ryghtfull iudgement and ordinaunce of God. Somtime cometh grutching of auarice, as Iudas grutched ayenſt Maudelen, whan ſhe anoynted the heed of our lorde Ieſu Chriſte, with 
                              〈◊〉
                            precious oyntment. Thys maner murmu
                              •
                           rynge is ſuche, as whan man grutcheth of goodnes that hym ſelfe doth, or that other folke done of her owne catel. Somtyme cometh murmure of pride, as whan Symon the phariſee grutched ayenſt Maudeleyn, whan ſhe aproched to Ieſu Chriſt & wepte at hys fete for her ſynnes. And ſomtyme it ſourdeth of enuy, whā mē diſcouer a mans harme yt was priuy, or bereth him on hand a thing that is falſe. Murmure alſo is ofte among ſeruaūtes ye grutche whā her ſoueraynes byd hem do lefull thynges, & for as much as they dare not opēly wythſay ye cō
                           maūdemēt of her ſoueraynes, yet woll they ſay harme & grutche & murmure priuely for very diſpite: which wordes they cal the dyuels pater noſter, though ſo be that the dyuel had neuer pater noſter, but yt lende folke yeueth it ſuch a name. Somtyme it cometh of yre or pryuy hate, yt nouryſheth rancoure in the herte, as afterwarde I ſhall declare. Than cometh alſo bytterneſſe of herte, thorowe

whych bytterneſſe euery good dede of hys neyghboure ſemeth to hym bitter & vnſauery. Than cometh diſcorde that vnbyndeth al maner of frendſhyp. Than cometh ſcornyng of hys neyghbour, all do he neuer ſo well. Than cometh accuſynge, as whan man ſeketh occaſion to anoy his neighbour whych is lyke the craft of the dyuel, yt wayteth both daye and nyght to accuſe vs all. Than cometh malignitie, through whyche a man anoyeth hys neyghbour priuely if he may: and yf he may not algate hys wycked wyll ſhall not let as for to brenne his houſe priuely, or enpoyſon or ſle hys beaſtes, and ſemblable thynges. Nowe woll I ſpeke of the remedye ayenſt thys foule ſynne of enuy. Firſt is the loue of God principally, and louyng of hys neyghbour as hym ſelfe: for ſothly that one ne may not be wythout that other. And truſte well that in the name of thy neyghbour thou ſhalte vnderſtande the name of thy brother, for certes all we haue one father fleſhly & one mother, yt is to ſaye, Adam & Eue, & alſo one father ſpirituell yt is God of heuen. Thy neyghboure art thou bounde for to loue, & wyll him all goodneſſe & therfore ſayth god: loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe, yt is to ſaye, to ſaluatiō both of lyfe & ſoule. And moreouer thou ſhalte loue hym or worde & in benigne admonyſhynge & chaſtyſyng, & comforte him in his noyaunces, & pray for him with al thy hert. And in dede thou ſhalte loue him in ſuch wyſe that thou ſhalt do to him in charitie, as thou woldeſt that it were done to thine owne perſon: and therfore thou ne ſhalt do hym no damage in wicked worde, ne harme in his bodye ne in his catel, ne in hys ſoule by entyſyng of wicked enſample. Thou ſhalte not deſyre hys wyfe ne none of hys thynges. Vnderſtande alſo that in the name of neyghbour is comprehēded hys enemy: Certes man ſhal loue hys enemy by the commaundement of God and ſothly thy frende thou ſhalt loue in god. I ſaye thine enemy ſhalt thou loue for goddes ſake▪ by hys cōmaūdemēt, for if it were reaſon that man ſhulde hate his enemy, forſoth god wolde not receyue vs to hys loue yt ben hys enemies. Ayenſt thre maner of wrō
                           ges that his enemy doth to him, he ſhall do thre thynges, as thus: ayenſt hate & rācour of hert, he ſhal loue hym in hys hert: Ayenſt chiding & wicked wordes, he ſhall praye for his enemy: Ayenſt wicked dedes, he ſhal do him bountie. For Chriſte ſayeth: Loue your enemies, & pray for hem yt ſpeke you harme & for hem that chaſe and purſue you: and do bounte to hem yt hate you. Lo, thus cōmaū
                           deth vs our Lorde Ieſu Chriſt to do to our enemies: For ſoth nature driueth vs to loue our frendes, and parfay our enemyes haue more nede of loue than our frendes, & they yt more nede haue, certes to hem ſhall men do goodneſſe. And certes in that dede haue we remembraunce of the loue of Ieſu Chriſt yt dyed for hys enemyes: And in aſmuche as that loue is more greuous to perfourme, ſo much is the more gret the merite, & therfore the louyng of our enemye hath cōfounded ye dyuels venym: For ryght as the dyuel is cō
                           founded by humilitie, righte ſo is he wounded to the deth by the loue of our enemy, certes thā is loue the medicyn that caſteth out the venym of enuie fro mannes herte. The ſpeces of this place ſhall be more largely declared in her chapiters folowyng.
                     
                     
                        ¶De Ira.
                        
                           AFter enuye wol I diſcriue the ſynne of Ire, for ſothly who ſo hath enuye vpon hys neyghbour, anone he woll comenlye fynde hym a mater of wrathe in word or in dede, ayenſt hym to whō he hath enuye: And as wel cometh ire of pride as of enuy, for ſothly he that is proud or enuyous is lyghtly wrothe. Thys ſynne of yre, after the diſcriuynge of ſaynte Auſtyn is wycked wyll to be auēged by worde or by dede. Ire after the phyloſopher, is the feruent bloude of mā yquycked in hys hert, through which he wolde harme to hym that he hateth: for certes the herte of man by eſchaufynge and mouyng of hys bloude, wexeth ſo troubled that it is out of al maner of iugement of reaſon. But ye ſhal vnderſtande ye ire is in two maners, that one of hem is good, & that other is wicked. The good ire is by ielouſye of goodnes, through which a mā is wrothe with wickednes, & ayenſt wickedneſſe. And therfore ſaith a wiſe man, that ire is bet thā playe. This ire is with debonairte, and it is wroth without bitternes, not wroth ayenſt the man, but wrath with the miſdede of the

man: As ſaith the prophete Dauid: Iraſcimini, et nolite peccare. Nowe vnderſtande that wicked ire is in two maners, that is to ſaye, ſodayn ire or haſty ire wythout auyſement & conſentyng of reaſon: The meaning and the ſence of this is, that the reaſon of a mā ne cōſent not to that ſodayne ire, & than it is venyal. Another ire is ful wycked, that cometh of felony of hert, auyſed and caſt before, wyth wicked wyl to do vengeaunce, & therto his reaſon cōſenteth: and ſothly thys is deedly ſynne. Thys ire is ſo diſpleaſaunt to God, that it troubleth hys houſe, & chaſeth the holy goſte out of mans ſoule, & waſteth & diſtroyeth that likeneſſe of God, that is to ſay the vertue of that is in mans ſoule and putteth in hym the lykeneſſe of the dyuel, and taketh the man fro God that is his rightful lord. This is a ful great pleaſaūce to the dyuell, for it is the dyuels fournayes that is eſchaufed with the fyre of hell: For certes ryght ſo as fyre is more myghtye to diſtroy erthly thinges thā any other elemēt ryght ſo ire is myghty to diſtroy al ſpirituel thynges. Loke how that fyre of ſmale coles that ben almoſt deed vnder aſſhen, woll reuyue or quycke ayen whan they bene touched wyth brymſtone, right ſo ire wol euermore quyck ayen whan it is touched by the pride that is couered in mans hert. For certes fyre ne maye not come out of nothynge, but yf it were firſt in the ſame thinge naturally: as fyre is drawe out of flyntes wyth ſtele. And ryght ſo as pride is many tymes mater of ire, ryghte ſo is rancour nourice & keper of ire. There is a maner tree, as ſayth ſaynt Iſodore, yt whan a man maketh fyre of the ſayd tree, & couer the coles of it wyth aſſhen, ſothly the fyre of it wol laſt a yere or more: And right ſo fareth it of rācoure whā it is ones conceyued in the hertes of ſome men, certes it wol laſt perauēture from one Eſter day vntyl another Eſter day or more But certes that ſame man is ful ferre from the mercy of god al that whyle. In this forſayde dyuels fourneis there forge thre ſhrewes: Pride that aye bloweth & encreaſeth the fyre by chiding & wicked wordes: Than ſtandeth enuy & holdeth hote yron in ye fyre vpon the hert of man with a payre of longe tonges of long rācour. And thā ſtādeth the ſyn of cōtumely or ſtrife & cheſt, & battereth and forgeth by vilaynous repreuinges. Certes this curſed ſyn anoyeth both to the man hym ſelfe & alſo hys neyghbour. For ſothly almooſt al the harme or damage that anye mā doth to his neighbour cōmeth of wrath for certes outragious wrath dothe all that euer the foule fende willeth or cōmaundeth hym, for he ne ſpareth neither our lorde Ieſu Chriſte, neyther his ſwete mother. And in hys outragiouſe angre & yre, alas alas, ful many & diuers at that time, feleth in his hert ful wickedly both of Chriſt and alſo of al his halowes: Is not this a curſed vice? yes certes. Alas it taketh fro mā his witte & hys reaſon, and all his debonayre lyfe ſpirituell that ſhulde kepe his ſoule. Certes it wythdraweth alſo goddes dewe lordſhyp, and that is mans ſoule, and the loue of hys neighbours. It ſtryueth alſo all day ayenſt trouth, it reueth him the quyete of his hert, & ſubuerteth hys ſoule. Of tre cōmeth theſe ſtinkinge engendrures. Firſt hate, yt is olde wrath diſcord, through which a man forſaketh his olde frend yt he hath loued ful long And than cometh warre and euerye maner of wrong that a mā doth to his neyghbour in body or in catell. Of this curſed ſyn of 
                              〈◊〉
                            cometh alſo māſlaughter. And vnderſtand wel that homicide, that is manſlaughter is in diuers wyſe.
                        Some maner of homicide is ſpirituell and ſome is bodily. Spirituell manſlaughter is in .vi. thynges. Fyrſt by hate as ſayth Saynte Iohan: He that hateth hys brother, is an homicide. Homicede is alſo by backebytynge, of whyche backebytinge ſayeth Salomon, that they haue two ſweatdes, wyth whych they ſlee her neyghbours For ſothlye as wycked is to take from hym hys good name as hys lyfe. Homicide is alſo in geuing of wycked counſel by fraude as for to geue counſayle to areyſe wrongfull cuſtomes, and talages. Of whyche ſayeth Salomon: A Lyon roringe and a be
                              ••
                           e hongry, be lyke to the cruel lordes in wythholdyng or abredging of the ſhepe or ye hyre of the wages of ſeruauntes, or els in vſury, or in wythdrawyng of the almeſſe of poore folke. For whyche the wyſe man ſayeth. Fedethe hym that almooſte dyeth for honger, for ſothly but if ye fede him ye ſlee him. And al theſe bene deedlye ſynnes. Bodylye manſlaughter

is when thou ſleeſt hym wyth thy tonge: An other maner is, when thou commaundeſt to ſlee a mā, or els yeueſt coūſayle to ſlee a man. Manſlaughter in dede is in foure maners. That one is by lawe, ryghte as a Iuſtyce dampneth hym that is coulpable to the death: But let the Iuſtice be ware that he do it ryghtfully, & that he do it not for delyte to ſpyll bloode, but for kepyng of ryghteouſnes. An other homicide is done for neceſſitie, as when a mā ſleeth an other in his defence, and that he ne maye none otherwyſe eſcape wythout ſlaughter of hys aduerſary, he doth ſynne, and he ſhal beare penaunce as for deedly ſynne. Alſo yf a man by caſe or aduenture ſhote an arowe or caſte a ſtone, with whych he ſleeth a man, he is an homicide. Al ſo if a womā by negligēce ouerlieth her child in her ſlepynge, it is homicide & deedly ſynne Alſo when a man diſtourbleth conception of a chylde, and maketh a woman eyther bareyne by drynkynge of venymous herbes, thorough whyche ſhe maye not conceyue, or ſletth a chylde by drynkes, or els putteth certayne materiall thynges in her ſecre places to ſlee the chylde, or els doth vnkyndly ſynne by whyche a man or a womā ſhedeth her nature in maner or in a place there as a chylde maye not be conceyued. Or els yf ſo be that a woman hathe conceyued, and hurteth her ſelfe, and by that myſhap the chylde is ſlayne yet it is homicide. What ſaye we of thoſe women that murtheren her chyldren for bycauſe of eſchewynge of worldly ſhame? Certes it is an horryble homicide. Homicide is alſo yf a man approche to a womā by deſyre of lecherye, thorough whyche the chylde is peryſhed, or els ſmyteth a woman wetyngly throughe whyche ſhe leſeth her chylde: All theſe bene homicides and horrible dedly ſynnes. Yet come there of yre mo ſynnes, as well in worde as in thought, and dede: As he that arretteth vpon God, or blameth god of the thynge of whych he is hym ſelfe gylty or dyſpyſeth God and all hys halowes, as done the curſed haſardours in dyuers countreyes: Thys curſed ſynne done they, when they fele in her herte ful wyckedly of God & of hys halowes. Alſo when they treate vnreuerentlye the ſacrament of the aulter, that ſynne is ſo great that vnneth it may be releaſed, but that the mercy of God paſſeth al hys werkes it is ſo greate and he ſo benygne. Then commeth of yre an atterly anger, whē a man is ſharpelye amoneſhed in hys ſhryfte to leaue hys ſynne: Then woll he be angry and anſwere hokerlye and angerlye, or defende or excuſe hys ſynne by vnſtedfaſtneſſe of hys fleſhe, or elles he dydde it for to holde companye wyth hys felowes, or elles he ſayeth the fende entyced hym, or elles he dothe it for hys youth, or elles his complexion is ſo coragious that he maye not forbeare, or elles it is hys deſtenye he ſayeth vnto a certayne age, or elles he ſayeth it commeth hym of gē
                           tylneſſe of hys aūceſters, and ſemblable thynges. All theſe maner of folke ſo wrappe hem in her ſynnes, that they ne woll not delyuer hym ſelfe: For ſothlye no wyghte that excuſeth hym ſelfe wylfullye of hys ſynne, maye not be delyuered of hys ſynne tyl that he mekelye beknoweth hys ſynne. After thys then commeth ſwearynge, that is expreſſe agaynſte the commaundemente of God, and thys befalleth often of angre and of yre. God ſayeth: Thou ſhalte not take the name of thy Lorde God in vayne or in ydell. Alſo oure Lorde Ieſu Chriſte ſayeth by the worde of ſaynte Mathewe: Ne wyll ye not ſweare in all maner, neyther by heauen, for it is goddes trone, ne by earth, for it is the benche of his feete, ne by Hieruſalem, for it is the cytie of a greate kynge, ne by thyne heed, for thou mayſte not make an heere neyther whyte ne blacke: but ſay by youre worde, yea yea, naye naye: and what that is more, it is of yuell. Thus ſayeth Chriſte. For Chriſtes ſake ſweare not ſo ſynfullye in dyſmembrynge of Chriſte: By ſoule, herte, bones, and bodye, for certes it ſemeth that ye thynke that the curſed Iewes ne dyſmembred not ynoughe the preciyous perſone of Chriſte, but ye dyſmembre hym more. And yf ſo be that the lawe compell you to ſweare, then ruleth you after the lawe of God in your ſwearyng as ſayeth Ieremy the fourth chapter. Thou ſhalte kepe thre condicions, thou ſhalt ſwere in trouth, in dome & in ryghtwyſeneſſe, thys is to ſaye, thou ſhalte ſweare ſothe. For euerye leſynge is ayenſt Chriſt, for Chriſt is verye trouth. And thynke well thys that euerye great ſwearer not compelled laufully to ſwere, the plage ſhal not depart fro his houſe whyle he vſeth ſuche vnlawfull ſwearynge.

Thou ſhalte ſwere alſo in dome, when thou arte conſtrayned by thy domes man to wytneſſe trouthe: Alſo thou ſhalt not ſweare for enuye, neyther for fauoure, neyther for mede or rewarde, but onelye for ryghteouſneſſe & for declarynge of it to the honoure and worſhyppe of God, and to the aydinge and helpe of thyne euen chriſten. And therfore euerye man that taketh goddes name in ydel, or falſelye ſweareth wyth hys mouthe, or els taketh on hym the name of Chriſte to be called a chriſten man, and lyueth ayenſt Chriſtes lyuynge and hys teachynge, all they take goddes name in ydell. Loke alſo what ſayeth ſaynt Peter, Actuum. iiij. Capitu. Non eſt aliud nomē ſub celo. &c. There is none other name ſayeth ſaynt Peter vnder heauen yeue to men, in whyche they maye be ſaued, that is to ſaye, but the name of Ieſu Chriſt. Take hede eke howe precious is the name of Ieſu Chriſt, as ſayeth ſaynt Paule, ad Philippenſes ſecundo. In nomine Ieſu. &c. That in the name of Ieſu euery knee of heauenly creatures, earthlye, and of hell ſhulde bowe, for it is ſo hye and ſo worſhypfull, that the curſed fende in hel ſhulde tremble to heare it named Then ſemeth it that men that ſweare ſo horriblye by hys bleſſed name, that they dyſpyſe it more boldely then the curſed Iewes, or els the dyuell that trembleth whē he heareth hys name.
                        Nowe certes ſyth that ſwearyng, but yf it be lawfullye done, is ſo hyelye defended: moche more is forſwearynge falſlye, and yet nedeleſſe.
                        What ſay we alſo of hem that delyte hem in ſwearynge, and holde it a genterye or a māly dede to ſweare great othes? And what of hem yt of very vſage ne ceaſe not to ſweare greate othes, all be the cauſe not worthe a ſtrawe? Certes thys is horrible ſynne. Swerynge ſodeynly is alſo a great ſynne. But let vs go now to that horrible ſynne ſwearynge of adiuration and coniuration, as done theſe falſe enchaūtours or nigromācers in baſyns full of water, or in a bryght ſwearde, in a cercle, in a fyre, or in the ſholderbone of a ſhepe? I can not ſaye but that they done curſedly & dampnably ayenſt Chriſte, and all the fayth of holy churche.
                        What ſay we of hem yt beleue on Deuinales, as by flyghte or by noyſe of byrdes or of beeſtes, or by ſorte, by Geomācye, by dremes, by chyrkynge of dores or crakynge of houſes, by gnawynge of rattes, & ſuche maner wretchedneſſe▪ Certes al theſe thynges ben defended by god and holy church, for whyche they bē accurſed tyl they come to amendemēt yt on ſuch fylth ſet her belyue. Charmes for woū
                           des or maladye of men or of beeſtes, yf they take any effecte, it maye be perauenture that God ſuffreth it, for folke ſhuld yeue the more fayth and reuerence to hys name.
                        Nowe woll I ſpeke of leaſynges whych generally is falſe ſygnifyaunce of worde in entent to dyſceyue hys euen chriſten. Some leſynge is, of which there cometh none auaū
                           tage to no wyght, and ſome leaſyng turneth to the profyte or eaſe of o man, and to the damage of an other man. An other leaſynge is for to ſaue hys lyfe or hys catell, whych commeth of delyte for to lye, in which delyte they woll forge a longe tale, and paynt it wyth al circumſtaunces, where al the tale of ye groūd is falſe. Some leaſynge cometh for he woll ſuſteyne hys wordes: Some leaſyng cometh of retcheleſneſſe wythout auyſemēt, and ſemblable thynges. Lette vs nowe touche the vyce of flaterye, whyche ne cometh not gladlye but for drede, or for couetyſe. Flatterye is generally wronful prayſynge. Flaterers bene the dyuels nouryces, that noryſhe, hys chyldren wyth mylke of loſyngerye: Forſoth Salomon ſayeth that Flatery is worſe then detraction, for ſomtyme detractiō maketh an hauteyne man be the more humble, for he dredeth detraction, but certes flaterye maketh a man tenhaunce hys herte and countenaunce Flaterers be ye deuels enchaūtours, for they make a man to wene hym ſelfe be lyke, that he is not lyke. Thoſe be lyke to Iudas that betraye a man to ſell hym to hys enemy. Flaterers ben the dyuels chapleyns yt euer ſinge Placebo. I reken flatery in the vyces of yre for ofte tyme yf a man be wrothe wyth another, then woll he flater ſome wyghte to ſuſtayne hym in hys quarell. Speake we nowe of ſuche curſynge as cometh of yrous herte Malyſon generally maye be ſayd euery maner power of harme: Such curſing bereueth man fro the raygne of God, as ſayeth ſaynt Poule. And oft tyme ſuch curſyng wrongfully returneth ayen to him that curſeth, as byrd that turneth ayen to hys owne neſte. And

ouer all thynge men ought eſhewe to curſe her chyldren and yeue to the deuel her engendrure as farre forth as in hem is: certes it is great peryll and great ſynne. Lette vs then ſpeake of chydynge and reproche, whych ben full great woundes in mās herte, for they vnſowe the ſemes of frendſhyp in mans herte: for certes vnneth maye a man be playnly be accorded wyth hym, that hym openly hath reuyled and repreued, and dyſlaundred: Thys is a full gaſtly ſynne as Chriſte ſayeth in the goſpell. And take hede nowe that he that repreueth hys neyghboure eyther he repreueth hym by ſome harme of paine that he hath vppon hys body as meſell, croked, harlot, or by ſome ſynne that he doth. Now yf he repreue hym by harme of payne, then turneth the re
                           
                              ••
                           efe to Ieſu Chriſt: For payne is ſende by the ryghtwyſe ſonde of God, and by hys ſuffraunce, be it meſelry, meyme, or maladye: And yf he repreue him vncharitably of ſynne as thou holour, thou dronkelewe harlot, and ſo forth. Then pertayneth that to the reioyſynge of the deuell, whyche euer hath ioye yt men done ſynne. And certes chydynge maye not come but of vylaynous hert, for after the haboundaunce of the herte ſpeaketh ye mouth full ofte. And ye ſhal vnderſtande, that loke by any waye when any man ſhall chaſtyſe or correct another, that he beware frō chydyng or repryuynge: for truely but he beware, he maye full lyghtlye quycken the fyre of angre and of wroth, whych he ſhulde quenche: And perauenture ſleeth him whych he myght chaſtyſe wyth benignite. For as ſayeth Salomō The amiable tonge is the tree of lyfe, that is to ſaye, of lyfe ſpirituell. And ſothlye a diſſolute tonge ſleeth the ſpirites of hym that repreueth, and alſo of hym whych is repreued Lo, what ſayeth ſaynt Auguſtyne: There is nothynge ſo lyke the dyuels chylde, as he whych ofte chydeth.
                        A ſeruaunt of God behoueth not to chyde And thoughe that chydynge be a vyllainous thynge betwyxte all maner folke, yet it is certis mooſt vncouenable bytwene a man and hys wyfe, for there is neuer reſte. And therfore ſayeth Salomon: An houſe that is vncouered and droppynge and a chydynge wyfe, ben a lyke.
                        A man whych is in a droppynge houſe in many places, though he eſchewe the droppynge in one place, it droppeth on hym in an other place: So fareth it by a chydynge wyfe, yf ſhe chyde hym in one place ſhe woll chyde hym in another: And therfore better and greatly more pleſaunt is a morſell or lytell gobet of bread wyth ioye, then an houſe fylled full of delyces wyth chydynge & guerrynge, ſayeth Salomon. Saynt Poule ſayeth: O ye women, beth ye ſubiecte to youre huſbandes, as you behoueth and ought in God: And ye mē loueth your wyues, ad Coloſſenſes .iij.
                        Afterwarde ſpeke we of ſcornyng whych is a wycked ſynne, and namely when he ſcorneth a man for hys good werkes: For certes ſuche ſcorners fare lyke the foule tode, that maye not endure to ſmell ye ſwete ſauoure of the vyne whē it flouryſheth. Theſe ſcorners bene partynge felowes wyth the dyuell, for they haue ioye whē the dyuell wynneth, and ſorowe yf he leſeth. They ben aduerſaryes of Ieſu Chriſt, for they hate that he loueth, that is to ſaye, ſaluation of ſoule.
                        Speake we nowe of wycked counſayle, ye whych is a traytoure, for he dyſceyueth hym that truſteth in hym: Vt Achitofel ad Salomonem. But natheleſſe, yet is hys wycked counſayle fyrſt ayenſt hym ſelfe, for as ſayeth the wyſe man: euery falſe lyuynge hath this properte in hym ſelfe, that he that wol anoye another man, he anoyeth fyrſt hym ſelfe. And men ſhall vnderſtande, that man ſhall not take hys counſayle of falſe folke, ne of angrye folke, or greuous folke, ne of folke that loue ſpecially to moche worldly folke, namely in counſaylynge of ſoules.
                        Nowe cometh the ſynne of hem that ſowe and make dyſcorde amonge folke, whyche is a ſynne that Chriſt hateth vtterly, & no wonder is: for he deyde for to make concorde. And more ſhame do they to Chriſte then dyd they that hym crucifyed: For God loueth better that frendſhip be amonges folke then he dyd hys owne body, which that he gaue for vnite Therfore ben they lykened to the dyuell that euer be aboute to make dyſcorde. Nowe commeth the ſynne of double tōge, ſuch as ſpeke fayre before folke, and wyckedly behynde, or els they make ſemblaūt as though they ſpak of good entencion, or els in game and playe, and yet they ſpeake of wycked entent.
                        Nowe cometh hewrayenge of counſayle,

through whych a man is dyffamed: Certes vnneth maye he reſtore the domage. Nowe cometh menace, that is an open folye, for he that ofte menaceth, he threateth more then he maye performe full ofte tyme. Nowe commeth ydell wordes, that is wythout profyte of hym that ſpeaketh the wordes, and alſo of hym that herkeneth the wordes: Or els ydel wordes ben thoſe that ben nedeleſſe or wyth out entent of naturall profyte. And all be it that ydell wordes be ſomtyme venyall ſynne yet ſhulde men doute hem, for we ſhall yeue rekenynge of hem before God. Now cometh ianglynge that maye not be wythout ſynne. And as ſayeth Salomon: it is a ſygne of a perte folye. And therfore a philoſopher ſayde when men aſked hym howe that he ſhulde pleaſe the people, he anſwerde: Do many good workes and ſpeake few vanities. After this cometh the ſynne of iaperies, that ben ye deuels apes, for they make folke to laughe at her iaperye, as folke do at the gaudes of an ape: whych iapes defendeth ſaynt Paule. Loke howe that vertuous wordes and holy comforte hem that trauayle in the ſeruyce of Chriſt: Ryght ſo comforteth the villaynous wordes and knackes of iapers hem, that trauayle in the ſeruyce of the deuell. Theſe bene the ſynnes of the tonge, that come of yre and of other ſynnes.
                        
                           The remedy ayenſt Ire
                           
                              THe remedy ayenſt Ire, is a vertue that men cal Manſuetude, that is Debonairie, and alſo another vertue that men clepe Pacience or ſufferaunce. Debonayrte wythdraweth and refrayneth the ſtee rynges and mouynges of mannes corage in herte, in ſuche maner that they ne ſkyppe not out by anger ne yre. Sufferaunce ſuffereth ſwetely all the anoyaunces and wronges ye men done to man outwarde. Saynt Ierome ſayeth thys of debonairte, yt it doth no harme to no wyght, ne ſayeth: ne for no harme that men do ne ſaye, he ne chafeth ayenſt reaſon. Thys vertue ſomtyme cometh of nature: for as ſayeth the philoſopher, A man is a quycke thynge by nature, debonayre and tretable to goodneſſe: but when debonairte is enformed of grace, then it is the more worth.
                           Pacience is another remedye ayenſt ire, & is a vertue that ſuffreth ſwetely euery mannes goodneſſe, & is not wroth for no harme that is done to hym. The philoſopher ſayeth that pacience is the vertue that ſuffreth debonairly all the outrages of aduerſite, and euerye wycked worde. Thys vertue maketh a man lyke to God, and maketh hym goddes owne chylde: as ſayeth Chriſt. Thys vertue dyſcomfyteth thyne enemye. And therfore ſayeth the wyſe man: Yf thou wolde vanquyſhe thyne enemye learne to ſuffre. And thou ſhalte vnderſtande that a man ſuffreth foure maner of greuaunces in outward thynges, ayenſt the whyche foure he muſte haue foure maner of paciences.
                           The fyrſt greuaunce is of wycked wordes whyche ſuffred Ieſu Chriſte wythout grutchynge full paciently, when the Iewes dyſpyſed hym full ofte. Suffre thou therfore paciently, for the wyſe man ſayeth: Yf thou ſtryue with a foole, though ye foole be wroth or though he laugh, alwaye thou ſhalte haue no reſte. That other greuaunce outwarde is to haue domage of thy catell: There ayenſt ſuffred Chriſt full paciently, whē he was d
                                 •
                              ſpoyled of al that he had in thys lyfe, and that was but hys clothes. The thyrde greuaunce is a man to haue harme in hys body: That ſuffred Chriſt full paciently in al his paſſion The fourth greuaunce is in outragious laboure in werkes▪ wherfore I ſaye, that folke that make her ſeruauntes to trauayle to greuouſlye or out of tyme, as in holy dayes, ſothly they do great ſynne. Here ayenſt ſuffered Chriſt full paciently, and taught vs pacience when he bare vpon hys bleſſed ſhoulders the croſſe, vpon which he ſhuld ſuffre dyſpytous death. Here maye men learne to be paciēt, for certes not only Chriſten be paciente for loue of Ieſu Chriſt, and for reward of bleſſed lyfe that is perdurable, but certes the olde paynems that neuer were chriſtened, cōmended and vſed the vertue of paciēce. A philoſopher vpon a tyme that wolde haue beate his dyſciple for hys great treſpace, for whych he was moued, & brought a rodde to beate the chylde & when this chyld ſawe the rodde, he ſayd to hys mayſter: what thynke ye to do? I woll beate the ſayd the mayſter for thy correction. Forſoth ſayd the childe, ye ought fyrſt correct

your ſelfe that haue loſt al your pacience for the offence of a chylde. Forſoth ſayd the mayſter all wepynge, thou ſayeſt ſoth: Haue thou the rodde my dere chylde, and correcte me for myne impacience. Of pacience cometh obedience, throughe whyche a man is obediente to Chriſt & to al hem to which he ought be obediēt in Chriſt. And vnderſtand wel that obedience is perfyte when that a man doth glad lye and haſtely with good herte entierlye, all that he ſhulde do. Obedience generally is to perfourme the doctryne of God and of hys ſo ueraygnes, to whych hym ought to be obeyſaunt in all ryghteouſneſſe.
                        
                     
                     
                        ¶De Accidia.
                        
                           AFter the ſynnes of Enuy and yre, nowe woll I ſpeke of the ſynne of Accidie: for enuy blindeth the herte of a mā, and yre troubleth a man & accidie maketh hym heuy, thoughtfull & penſyfe. Enuye and yre maken bytterneſſe in herte▪ whych bytterneſſe is mother of accidie & taketh fro hym the loue of al goodneſſe, thē is accidie the anguyſhe of trouble of herte. And ſaynt Auguſtyne ſayeth: It is anoye of goodneſſe and anoye of harme. Certes thys is a dampnable ſynne, for it doth wronge to Ieſu Chriſt, in as moche as it benōmeth the ſeruyce that men ought do to Chriſte, as ſayeth Salomon: but accidie doth no ſuche diligence. He doth all thynge wyth anoye & with wrawneſſe, ſlackneſſe, and excuſation: wyth ydelneſſe and vnluſt.
                        For whych the boke ſayeth: Acurſed be he that doth the ſeruice of god negligently. Thē is accidie enemye to euery eſtate of man. For certes the ſtate of man is in thre maners.
                        Eyther it is in the eſtate of Innocency, as was the eſtate of Adam before that he fyll in to ſynne, in whych eſtate he was hold to worke, as in prayſynge and laudynge God. And ther eſtate is ye eſtate of ſynfull mē: in which eſtate men bene holden to laboure in prayenge to God for amendement of her ſynnes, and that he woll graunte hem to ryſe out of her ſynnes.
                        Another eſtate is the ſtate of grace, in whiche ſtate he is holden to workes of penitence: and certes to all theſe thynges is accidie contrary, for he loueth no buſyneſſe at all. Nowe certes, thys foule ſynne accidie is alſo a full great enemye to the lyfelode of the body, for it ne hath no purueyaunce ayenſt tēporel neceſſite, for it forſwoleth, forſlogeth, & deſtroyeth al goodes temporel by recheleſneſſe. The iiij. thynge is, that accidie is lyke hem ye bene in the payne of hel, bycauſe of her ſlouth and heuyneſſe: for they that be dampned bene ſo bounde, that they maye neyther well do ne thynke. Of accidie cometh fyrſt that a man is anoyed and encombred to do any goodneſſe, & maketh ye God hath abhominacion of ſuch accidie, as ſayeth ſaynt Iohn. Nowe cometh ſlouth that wol nat ſuffre no hardneſſe ne penaunce: for ſothly ſlouth is ſo teder and ſo delycate, as ſayeth Salomon, that he woll ſuffre no hardneſſe ne penaunce, and therfore he marreth all that he doth. Ayenſt thys rotten ſynne of accidie & ſlouth, ſhulde men exerciſe hem ſelfe & vſe hem to do good workes: and māly and vertuouſly catch corage to do, thyn kynge that our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte quyteth euery good dede, be it neuer ſo lyte. Vſage of labour is a great thyng. For it maketh as ſayeth ſaynt Bernard, ye labourer to haue ſtrōge armes and harde ſenewes: & ſlouth maketh heuye, feble, and tender. Then cometh drede to begynne to worke any good workes. For certes he that enclyneth to ſynne, hym thynketh it is ſo great an empryſe for to vndertak the workes of goodneſſe, and caſteth in hys herte, that the circumſtaunces of goodneſſe bene ſo greuouſe and weyghtye for to ſuffre, that he dare not vndertake to do workes of goodneſſe, as ſayeth ſaynt Gregorye.
                        Nowe cometh wanhope, that is dyſpayre of the mercye of God, that cometh ſomtyme of to moch outragious ſorow, and ſomtyme of to moch drede, ymaginynge that he hath do ſo moch ſynne, that it wol not auayle him tho he wolde repent hym and forſake ſynne: thorough whych dyſpayre or drede, he abandoneth al hys herte to euery maner ſynne, as ſayeth ſaynt Auguſtyne. Whych dampnable ſynne, yf it continue vnto hys ende, it is called ſynnynge in the holy gooſt.
                        Thys horrible ſynne is ſo peryllous, that he that is dyſpayred there nys no felony ne no ſynne that he douteth for to do, as ſhewed well by Iudas. Certes aboue al ſynnes then is thys ſynne mooſt dyſpleaſaunt to Chriſt and moſte aduerſary. Sothly he that

dyſpayreth hym is lyke to the cowarde champion recreaunt, that flyeth wythout nede. Alas alas, nedeles is he recreaūt, and nedeleſſe dyſpayreth. Certes the mercy of God is euer redy to the penitent perſon, & is aboue al hys werkes. Alas can not a mā bethynke hym on the goſpel of ſaint Luke. xv. where as Chriſt ſayeth, that as well ſhall there be ioye in heauen vpon a ſynfull man that doth penitence, as vpon foure ſcore & nynetene ryghtful mē that nede no penitence. Loke ferther in the ſame goſpell the ioye and ye feeſt of the good man that had loſte hys ſonne, whē hys ſonne wyth repentaunce was retourned to hys father. Can they not remembre hem alſo, that (as ſayeth ſaynt Luke) capi. xxx. Howe that the thefe that was hāged beſyde Ieſu Chriſt ſayd: Lorde remembre me, when thou commeſt in to thy reygne. Forſoth ſayd Chriſt, I ſaye to the: To daye ſhalte thou be with me in paradyſe. Certes, there is none ſo horrible ſynne of man, that ne maye in hys lyfe be dyſtroyed by penitence, thorough vertue of paſſyon and of the death of Chriſte. Alas what nede men then to be dyſpayred, ſyth that hys mercy is ſo ready and large? Aſke and haue. Then commeth ſompnolence, that is ſluggye ſlombrynge, whyche maketh a man heuy and dull in body and in ſoule, & this ſinne cometh of ſlouth: And certes the time that by waye of reaſon man ſhulde not ſlepe, is by ye morowe, but yf there were cauſe reaſonable. For ſothely the morowe tyde is moſt couenable a man to ſaye hys prayers, & for to thāke God, and to honoure God, & to yeue almeſſe to the poore, that cometh fyrſt in the name of Ieſu Chriſt. Lo, what ſayth Salomō? who ſo woll by the morowe awake to ſeke me, he ſhall fynde me. Then cometh neglygence or retcheleſneſſe, that recketh of nothynge. And though that ignoraunce be mother of al harmes, certes neglygence is the noryce. Negligence ne dothe no force when he ſhall do a thynge, whether he do it well or euell. The remedye of theſe two ſynnes is, as ſayeth the wyſe man: That he that dredeth God ſpareth not to do that he ought to do, and he that loueth god he woll do dylygēce to pleaſe god by hys werkes, and abādone hym ſelfe wyth al hys myght wel for to do. Thē cometh ydelneſſe, that is the yate of all harmes. An ydell man is lyke to a place that hath no walles, ye dyuell maye entre on euerye ſyde, or ſhote at hym that is dyſcouert, by temptation on euery ſyde. Thys ydelneſſe is the thorruke of all wycked and vylayne thoughtes, and of al ordure. Certes the heauen is yeue to hem that wyll laboure, and not to ydell folke. Alſo Dauid ſayeth, that they ne be not in the laboure of men, ne they ſhall not be whypped wyth men. Certes then ſemeth it they ſhall be turmented wyth the dyuels in hell, but yf they do penaunce.
                        Then cometh the ſynne that mē cal Tarditas, as when a man is ſo latered, or tarienge or he woll tourne to god: and certes that is a great foly. He is lyke hym that falleth in the dyche, and woll not aryſe. And thys vyce cometh of falſe hope, that he thynketh he ſhall lyue longe, but that hope fayleth full ofte.
                        Then cometh lacheſſe, that is he that whē he begynneth any good worke, anone he wol leaue and ſtynte it, as done they that haue any perſone to gouerne, and ne take of him no more hede, anone as they fynde any contrary or any anoye. Theſe ben the newe ſheperdes that let theyr ſhepe wyttyngly go renue to ye wolfe that is in the breres, or do not force of her owne gouernaunce. Of thys cometh pouerte and deſtruction bothe of ſpirituall and temporell thynges. Then cometh a maner coldneſſe that freſeth the herte of man. Then cometh vndeuotion, through whyche a man is ſo blont, and as ſayeth ſaynte Bernarde, hath ſuche langour in hys ſoule, that he may neyther rede ne ſynge in holy church, ne here ne thynke of no deuotion, ne trauayle wyth hys handes in no good worke, that it nys to hym vnſauery and al apalled. Then wareth he ſlowe and ſlombry and ſone wol be wroth and ſone is enclyned to hate and enuy. Then cometh the ſynne of worldly ſorowe, ſuch as is called Triſtitia, that ſleeth a man, as ſayeth ſaynt Poule. For certes ſuche ſorow worketh the death of the ſoule and body alſo, for therof cometh that a man is anoyed of hys owne lyfe. wherfore ſuche ſorowe ſhorteth full ofte the lyfe of man, er that hys tyme is come by waye of kynde.
                        
                           ¶Remedium contra peccatum Accidie.
                           
                              
                              AYenſt thys horryble ſynne of Accidie, and the braunches of the ſame, ther is a vertue that is called Fortitudo or ſtrēgth, that is an affection, throughe whiche a man diſpyſeth anoycus thynges: This vertue is ſo mighty and ſo rygorous, that it dare withſtonde mightily, and wiſely kepe hym ſelf fro perylles that ben wycked, and wraſtel ayenſt thaſſautes of the dyuel, for it enhaunceth and enforceth the ſoule, right as accidie abateth & maketh it feble: for thys fortitude may endure by longe ſuffraunce the trauayles that ben couenable. This vertue hath manye ſpeces, the fyrſte is called Magnanimite, that is to ſay, great corage. For certes there behoueth great corage ayenſt accidie, leſt that it ne ſwalowe ye ſoule by the ſynne of ſorowe, or diſtroye it by wanhope. Certes this vertue maketh folke vnder take harde and greuous thynges by her own wyl wiſely and reſonably. And for as moch as the deuyll fyghteth ayenſt a man more by ſubtylte and ſleyght than by ſtrength, therfore ſhall a man wythſtonde hym by wytte, reaſon, and diſcretion. Thā are there the vertues of faythe and hope in God and in hys ſayntes, to eſchue and accompliſſhe the good workes, in the whyche he purpoſeth fermely to contynue. Than cometh ſuretie or ſykerneſſe, and that is whan a man ne douteth no traueyle in tyme commyng, of the good workes that he hathe begonne. Than cometh Magnifycence, that is to ſaye, whan a man dothe and parformeth great workes of goodneſſe that he hath begon, and that is thende why that men ſhuld do good workes. For in the accompliſhyng of good workes, lyeth the great guerdon. Thā is there Conſtance, that is ſtableneſſe of corage, and thys ſhulde be in hert by ſtedfaſt faythe, and in mouthe, in be
                              
                                 •
                              ynge, in chere, and in dede. Alſo there ben mo ſpecyall remedyes ayenſt accidie, in dyuers workes: as in cōſyderatyō of ye paynes of hell, the ioyes of heuen, and in truſte of the grace of the holy ghooſt, that wyll yeue hym myght to performe his good entent.
                        
                     
                     
                        ¶De Auaricia.
                        
                           AFter Accidie woll I ſpeke of Auarice, and of couetyſe. Of whych ſyn ſaynt Poule ſayth the rote of al harmes is couetyſe, ad Timoth. vi. For ſothly whan the hert of man is cō
                           founded in it ſelfe and troubled, and that the ſoule hath loſt the confort of god, than ſeketh he an ydell ſolace of worldlye thynges. Auarice, after the diſcryption of ſaynt Auguſtyn, is a lycorouſneſſe in hert to haue erthly thynges. Some other folke ſaye, that auaryce is for to purchace many erthely thynges, & nothynge to yeue to hem that haue nede.
                        And vnderſtonde that auarice ſtōdeth nat onely in londe ne catel, but ſomtyme in ſciēce and glorye, & in euerye maner of outragious thynges is Auaryce. And couetyſe is thys. Couetyſe is for to coueit ſuche thynges that thou haſt nat. And auarice is to with holde & kepe ſuche thynges as thou haſte wythout right. Sothly this auarice is a ſynne that is ful dāpnable, for al holy writ curſeth it, & ſpeketh ayenſt ye vice, for it doth wrong to Ieſu chriſt: for it taketh fro him the loue that men to hym owe, & tourneth it backeward ayenſt al reaſon, and maketh that the auarycious man hath more hoope in hys catell, than in Ieſu Chriſt, and dothe more obſeruaunce in kepyng of hys treaſour, than he dothe in the ſeruyce of Ieſu Chriſt. And therfore ſaythe ſaynt Poule, ad Epheſios quinto: That an auarycious man is the thraldome of idolatrye. What dyfference is there betwyxt an ydolaſter and an auaricyous man? But that an ydolaſter perauenture ne hathe nat but a mawmet or two, & the auaricious man hath many. For certes euery floreyn in hys co
                              •
                           re, is his maumet. And certes the ſynne of maumetry is the fyrſte that God defended, as in the .x. commaūdements it beareth wytneſſe, in Exodi Capitu. xx. Thou ſhalte haue no falſe goddes before me, ne thou ſhalte make to the no graue thynge. Thus is an auaricious man, that loueth hys treaſour before God, an idolaſter. And through this curſed ſynne of Auyryce and Couetyſe, cometh theſe harde lordeſhyppes, through whyche they ben ſtreyned by tyllages, cuſtomes, and cariages, more than her duetye or reaſon is, or elles take they of her bondmen amercyamentes, whyche myght more reſonablye be

called extortions than mercyamentes. Of whiche amerciamentes or raunſomynge of bondmen, ſome lordes ſtewardes ſay that it is rightful, for as moche as a churle hath no temporel thynge, that it ne is his lordes, as they ſaye. But certes theſe lordſhyppes do wrong, that bereue theyr bondmen thynges that they neuer yaue hem. Auguſtinus de Ciuitate dei. Libro. ix. Sothe is, that the conditiō of thraldom, and the fyrſt cauſe of thraldome was for ſynne.
                        Thus may ye ſe, that thoffence deſerued thraldome, but nat nature. Wherfore theſe lordes ne ſhulde not moche glorifye hem in her lordeſhyps, ſythe that they by natural cō
                           dycion ben not lordes ouer thralles, but for that thraldome came fyrſte by the deſerte of ſynne. And more ouer there as the law ſayth, that temporel goodes of bonde folke ben the goodes of her lorde: ye, that is for to vnderſtonde, the goodes of the Emperour, to defende hem in her ryght, but not to robbe hem ne reue hem. Therfore ſaythe Seneca: thy prudence ſhulde lyue benygnly with ye thralles. Thoſe that thou calleſt thy thralles, ben goddes people: and for humble people ben Chriſtes frendes, they ben contubernyall wt the lordes. Thynke alſo that of ſuche ſede as chorles ſprynge, of ſuche ſede ſpryng lordes: as wel may the chorle be ſaued as the lorde. The ſame dethe that taketh the chorle, ſuche dethe taketh the lorde. Wherfore I rede do right ſo with the chorle as thou woldeſt that thy lorde dyd wyth the yf thou were in hys plyght. Euery ſynful man is a chorle to ſyn: I rede the lorde certes, that thou werke in ſuche wyſe with thy chorles, that they rather loue the thā drede the. I wote wel that there is degree aboue degree, as reſon is, and ſkyll is that men do her deuoyre there as it is due: But certes extorcions and diſpyte of your vnderlynges is dampnable. And ferthermore vnderſtonde wel, that theſe conquerours or tyrauntes make ful ofte thralles of hem that ben borne of as royal bloode as ben they that hem conquere. This name of thraldom was neuer erſt knowe, tyl that Noe ſayd that his ſonne Canam ſhulde be thral to his brethern for hys ſynne. What ſaye we than of hē that pyl and do extorcions to holy church: Certes the ſwerde that men yeue fyrſte to a knyght, whan he is newe dubbed, ſygnyfyeth that he ſhulde defende holy churche, and not robbe and pyl it, and who ſo doth he is traytour to Chryſt. And as ſaythe ſaynt Auſtyn, they ben the dyuels woulues that ſtrangle the ſhepe of Ieſu chriſt, and done worſe than woulues for ſothely whan the woulfe hathe full hys wombe, he ſtynteth to ſtrangle ſhepe: But ſothlye the pyllours and dyſtroyers of holy church goodes ne do not ſo, for they ne ſtynte neuer to pyll. Nowe as I haue ſayde, ſythe ſo is that ſynne was fyrſte cauſe of thraldom than is it thus, that at the tyme that all thys world was in ſynne, thā was al this worlde in thraldom and in ſubiection, but certes ſyth the tyme of grace came, god ordayned yt ſome folke ſhulde be more hye in eſtate and in degre, and ſome folke more lowe, and that eche ſhulde be ſerued in hys aſtate. And therfore in ſome coūtreys there they be thralles, whā they haue turned hem to ye faythe, they make her thralles free out of thraldome, and therfore certes the lorde oweth to hys man that the man oweth to the lorde. The pope calleth hym ſelfe ſeruaunte of the ſeruauntes of God, but for as the eſtate of holy churche ne might not haue ben, ne the comen profyte myght not haue be kept, ne peace ne reſte in erthe, but yf god had ordayned that ſome mā had hier degree and ſome men lower. Therfore was ſoueraynte ordayned to kepe, mayntayne, and defende her vnderlynges and her ſubiectes in reaſon, as ferforth as it lyeth in her power, and not to diſtroye ne confounde hem. Wherfore I ſay, that thoſe lordes that ben lyke wolues that deuour the poſſeſſyons or the catel of poore folkes wrongfully, with out mercy or meſure, they ſhal receyue be the ſame meſure yt they haue meſured to poore folke, the meſure of Ieſu Chriſt but it be amended. Nowe cometh diſceyte betwixt marchaunt and marchaunt. And thou ſhalt vnderſtonde that marchaundyſe is in two maners, that one is bodily, and that other is gooſtly: that one is honeſt and leful and that other is diſhoneſt and vnleful.
                        The bodily marchaundyſe that is lefull & honeſt is thys: that there as god hath ordayned that a reygne or a countreye is ſuffyſaūt to hym ſelfe, than it is honeſte and lefull that of haboundaunce of hys countrey, men helpe an other countrey that is nedy: And therfore there muſte be merchaūtes to bring

fro one countrey to that other her marchaundyſe.
                        That other marchaundyſe that mē haunten with fraude, and trecherye, and diſceyte, with leaſynges and falſe othes, is right curſed and dampnable. Eſpirituel marchaundyſe is properly Symonye, that is ententife deſyre to bye any thynge eſpyrituel, that is a thynge whyche apertayneth to the ſayntuarye of God, and to cure of the ſoule. This deſyre yf ſo be that a man do hys dilygence to perfourme it, al be it that hys deſyre ne take non effecte, yet it is to him a deedlye ſynne, & yf he be ordred, he is irreguler. Certes ſymonye is called of Symon Magus, that wolde haue bought for temporell catell the yefte that God had yeue by the holy gooſt to ſaynt Peter and to the Apoſtels: And therfore vnderſtonde that he that ſelleth and he that byethe thynges eſpyrituels, ben called Symonyakes, be it by catell, be it by procuring or by fleſhly prayer of his frendes, fleſhly frendes or eſpyrituell frendes, fleſſhly in two maners, as by kynred or other frendes: Sothlye yf they praye for hym that is not worthy and able, it is ſymonye yf he take the benefice, and yf he be worthy and able there is none. That other maner is whan man or woman prayeth for folke to auaunce hem only for wycked fleſhly affection, whyche they haue vnto the perſons, and that is foule ſymonye. But certes in ſeruyce, for which men yeuen thinges eſpyrituel vnto her ſeruaūtes it muſt be vnderſtonde that the ſeruice muſte be honeſt, or els not, and alſo that it be without bargeynyng, and that the perſon be able. For as ſayth ſaynt Damaſen: Al the ſynnes of the worlde at regarde of this ſynne, are as a thyng of naught, for it is the greateſt ſynne that may be after the ſynne of Lucifer and of Antichriſt: For by this ſynne God forleſeth the churche and the ſoule whyche he bought wyth hys precious bloode, by hem that yeue churches to hem that bē not worthy, for they put in theues hondes that ſteale the ſoules of Ieſu Chriſt, and diſtroy hys patrimony. By ſuche vnworthy preeſtes and curates haue lende men leſſe reuerence of the ſacramentes of holy churche, and ſuch yeuers of churches put the chyldren of Chriſt out, and put in the churche the dyuels owne ſonnes: they ſel the ſoules that lambes ſhulde kepe to the wolfe which ſtrangleth hem, and therfore ſhal they neuer haue parte of the paſture of lambes, that is the blyſſe of heuen. Nowe cometh haſardrie wyth hys apertenauntes, as tables and rafles, of whyche cometh diſceyte, falſe othes, chydynges, and al rauyneſſe, blaſphemynges, and renyenges of God, and hate of hys neyghbours, waſte of goodes, myſpendynge of tyme, and ſomtyme manſlaughter. Certes haſardours ne mowe not be without great ſynne. Of auarice cometh alſo leſynges theft, falſe wytneſſe, and falſe othes: and ye ſhall vnderſtonde that theſe be great ſynnes, and expreſſe ayenſt the commaundementes of God, as I haue ſayd. Falſe wytneſſe is in worde, and alſo in dede: In worde as for to byreue thy neyghboures good name by thy falſe wytneſſe, or byreue hym his catel or his herytage, by thy falſe wytneſſyng, whā thou for yre or for mede, or for enuye, beareſt falſe wytneſſe, or accuſeſt him, or excuſeſt thy ſelfe falſly. Ware ye queſtmongers and notaries: Certes for falſe wytneſſynge was Suſan in ful great ſorowe & payn, and manye another mo. The ſyn of thefte is alſo expreſſe ayenſt goddes heſt, & in two maners, corporell and ſpirituel, the temporel theft is: As for to take thy neyghbours catel ayenſt his wyl, be it by force or by ſleight, be it by mette or by meſure by ſtealynge alſo of falſe endytementes vpō hym and in borowyng of thy neyghbours catell, in entent neuer to paye it ayen, and ſemblable thynges. Eſpyrituel thefte is ſacrylege, that is to ſay, hurtyng of holye thynges ſacred to Chriſt in two maners, by reaſon of the holy place, as churches or churche yerdes For which euery villaynous ſynne that men don in ſuche places maye be called ſacrylege, or euerye vyolence in the ſemblable places. Alſo that they withdrawe falſely the rightes that longe to holye churche and pleaſynge. And generally ſacrilege is to reue holy thing fro holye place, or vnholye thynge out of holye place, or holy thynge out of vnholy place.
                        
                           ¶Releuatio contra peccatum Auaricie.
                           
                              
                              HOwe ſhal ye vnderſtonde, that releuynge of auarice is miſericorde and pyte largely taken. And men might aſke why that miſericorde and pyte are releuyng of auarice: Certes the auaricious man ſheweth no pyte ne miſericorde to the nedeful man. For he delyteth hym in the kepynge of hys treaſure, and nat in the reſcuynge ne releuynge of his euyn chriſten. And therfore ſpeke I fyrſte of myſericorde. Than is myſericorde (as ſaythe the Philoſopher) A vertue, by whyche the corage of man is ſtered, by ye myſeaſe of hym that is myſeaſed. Vpon whyche myſericorde foloweth pyte, in performyng and fulfilling of charitable workes of mercy, helpeth and comforteth him that is myſeaſed. And certes theſe thynges moue and ſtere a man to myſericorde of Ieſu chriſt that he yaue hym ſelfe for our offence, & ſuffred dethe for myſericorde, and forgaue vs our original ſynnes, and therby releaſed vs fro the paynes of hel, & myniſhed the paynes by penitens, and yeueth grace wel to do, and at laſte the blyſſe of heuen. The ſpeces of myſericorde ben for to lene, and alſo for to yeue: for to foryeue and releace, and for to haue pyte in herte and compaſſyō, of the miſchefe of his euen chriſten, and alſo to chaſtyſe there as nede is. Another maner of remedy ayenſt Auaryce, is reſonable largeſſe: but ſothlye here behoueth the conſyderacyon of the grace of Ieſu Chriſt, and of the temporell goodes, and alſo of the goodes perdurable that Ieſu Chriſt yafe to vs, and to haue remembraunce of the dethe whyche he ſhal receyue, he knoweth not whan where, ne howe: and alſo that he ſhall forgo all that he hath, ſaue onely that whyche he hath expended in good werkes.
                           But for as moche as ſome folke been vnmeſurable, menne ought for to auoyde and eſchue folyſhe largeſſe, the whiche ſome people cal waſte.
                           Certes he that is foole large, yeueth not hys catel, but he leſeth hys catel?
                           Sothlye what thynge that he yeueth for veynglorye, as to mynſtrels and to folke to beare his renome in the world, he hath ſynne therof & none almeſſe: Certes he leſeth foule hys good that he ne ſeketh wyth the yefte of hys good nothyng but ſynne. He is lyke to an horſe that ſeketh rather to drynke drouy or troubled water than for to drynke water of the clere welle. To hem apperteynē the ſayd curſynges, that Chriſt ſhal yeue at the day of dome, to hem that ſhal be dampned.
                        
                     
                     
                        ¶Sequitur de Gula.
                        
                           AFter Auaryce cometh Gloteny, whyche is expreſſe ayenſt the commaundement of god. Gloteny is vnnteſurable appetyte to eete or to drynke, or els to do ynough to the vnmeſurable appetyte and diſordeyned couetyſe to eate or to drynke. This ſynne corrupteth all thys worlde, as is well ſhewed in the ſynne of Adam and of Eue. Loke alſo what ſaythe ſaynt Poule of glotenye. Many (ſaythe he) gone, of whyche I haue often ſayde to you, and nowe I ſay it wepynge, that ben the enemyes of the croſſe of Chryſt, of whyche the ende is dethe, and of whyche her wombe is her god and her glorye, in confuſyon of hem that ſo deuour erthly thinges. He that is vſed to this ſynne of gloteny, he ne may no ſynne withſtonde, he muſt be in ſeruage of al vices, for it is the dyuels hourde, there he hydeth and reſteth hym. This ſynne hath many ſpeces: The fyrſte is dronkeneſſe that is the horryble ſepulture of mans reſon: and therfore whan man is dronke he hath loſte his reſon: And thys is deedly ſynne. But ſothly whan that a man is not wonte to ſtronge drynke, and parauenture ne knoweth not ye ſtrength of the drynke, or hath febleſſe in hys heed, or hathe trauayled, through whych he drinketh the more, al be he ſodainly caught wt drynke, it is no deedly ſynne, but venyal. The ſeconde ſpece of glotenye is, that the ſpyrite of a man wexeth al troubled, for dronkeneſſe byreneth him the diſcretion of his wytte.
                        The thyrde maner ſpece of glotonye is whan a man deuoureth his meate, and hath not ryghtful maner of eetyng. The fourth is whan through the great abundaunce of hys meete, the humours in hys body ben diſtempred. The fyfth is foryetfulneſſe by to moche drynkyng, for whych ſomtyme a man forgetteth er the mornyng what he dyd on the euenyng before.
                        
                           In other maner ben diſtyncte the ſpeces of glotenye after ſaynt Gregorie. The fyrſte is For to eate before tyme to eate. The ſeconde is whā a man gyueth hym to delycate meate or drynke. The thyrde is whan men take to moche ouer meaſure. The fourthe is curioſyte, wyth great entent to make and appareyle hys meate. The fyfthe is for to eate to gredely.
                        Theſe ben the fyue fyngers of the dyuels honde, by whyche he draweth ſolke to ſynne.
                        
                           ¶The remedy ayenſt Glotony.
                           
                              AYenſt glotony the remedy is abſtynē
                              ce, as ſayth Galyene: but that I holde nat meritorious, yf he do it for the heale of hys body. Saynte Auguſtyne woll that abſtynence be done for vertue, and wyth pacience. Abſtinence (ſayth he) is lytel worth but yf a man haue good wyl therto, and but if he be enforced by pacience and charyte, and that men do it for goddes ſake, and in hope to haue the blyſſe of heuen.
                           The felowes of abſtynence be attemperaunce, that holdeth the meane in all thynges. Alſo ſhame that eſcheweth all diſhoneſtye. Suffyſaunce that ſeketh no ryche meates ne drynkes, ne dothe nat force of outragi
                              
                                 ••
                              g appareylyng of meate. Meſure alſo, that reſtreyneth by reaſon, the vnmeſurable appetyte of eatyng. Soberneſſe alſo, that reſtrayneth the outrage of drynke. Sparynge alſo, that reſtrayneth ye delycate eaſe to ſytte longe at meate, wherfore ſome folke ſtonden of her owne wyl whan they eete, bycauſe they wol eate at laſſe leyſar.
                        
                     
                     
                        ¶De Luxuria.
                        
                           AFter Glotonye cometh Lecherye, for theſe two ſynnes been ſo nye coſyns, that oftyme they wol nat depart. God wote this ſynne is ful diſpleſaunt to god, for he ſayde hym ſelfe: do no lecherye. And therfore he putteth great paynes ayenſt thys ſynne.
                        For in the olde lawe, yf a woman thrall were take in thys ſynne, ſhe ſhulde be beate wyth ſtaues to dethe. And yf ſhe were a gentylwoman ſhe ſhulde be ſlayne wyth ſtones. And yf ſhe were a byſſhops doughter, ſhe ſhulde be brent by goddes commaundement.
                        Moreouer by the ſynne of lecherye, God drowned al the world and after that he brent fyue cytees with thunder and lightnyng, and ſanke hem in to hel.
                        Nowe lette vs ſpeke than of the ſayd ſtynking ſynne of lechery, that men cal auowtrye of wedded folke, that is to ſaye, yf that one of hem be wedded or els bothe.
                        Saynt Iohan ſaythe, that auoutrers ſhalbe in hell in a ſtacke brennynge of fyre and of brimſtone for the ſtenche of her ordure: Certes the brekynge of this ſacrament is an horryble thyng: It was made of God hym ſelfe in paradyſe, and confermed by Ieſu Chriſt, as wytneſſeth ſaynt Mathewe in the goſpel: A man ſhall leaue father and mother & take hym to hys wyfe, and they ſhalbe two in one fleſh.
                        Thys ſacrament betokeneth the knyttyng togyther of Chryſte and holye churche. And not onely that god forbade auoutrye in dede, but alſo he commaunded that thou ſhuldeſt not coueyte thy neyghbours wyfe. In thys heſte ſaythe ſaynt Auguſtyne is forboden all maner couetyſe to do lecherye. Lo, what ſaythe ſaynt Mathewe in the goſpell, that who ſo ſeeth a woman to couetyſe of hys luſt he hath done lecherye wyth her in his herte. Here may ye ſe that not only the dede of thys ſynne is forboden, but alſo the deſyre to that ſynne. Thys curſed ſynne anoyeth greuouſlye hem that it haunte: and fyrſt to her ſoule, for he oblygethe it to ſynne and to payne of dethe, whyche is perdurable. Vnto the body anoyeth it greuouſly alſo, for it dryeth hym and waſteth, and ſhenteth hym, and of hys bloode he maketh ſacryfyce to the fende of hel: It waſteth hys catell and his ſubſtaūce. And certes yf it be a foule thynge a man to waſte hys catell on women: yet it is a fouler thynge whan that for ſuche ordure women diſpende vpon men her catell and her ſubſtaunce. This ſynne as ſayth the Prophete, taketh from man and woman her good fame and her honour, and it is full delectable and pleaſaunt to the dyuell. For therby wynneth he the more parte of thys wretched worlde. And ryght as a marchaūt delyteth him moſt

in that chaffare whiche he hath moſte auauntage and profyte of, ryght ſo delyteth ye fende in this ordure.
                        This is that other honde of the dyuel, with fyue fyngers, to catche the people to hys vilanye. The fyrſte is the folyſhe lokynge of the folyſhe woman and of the folyſſhe man, that ſleeth ryght as the Baſilycock or cokatryce ſleeth folke by venym of hys ſyght: for the couetyſe of the eyen foloweth the couetyſe of ye herte. The ſeconde fyngre is the vilaynous touchynge in wycked maner. And therfore ſayth Salomon: that who ſo toucheth and handleth a woman, he fareth as that man that handleth the ſcorpyon, whiche ſtyngeth & ſodaynly ſleeth through his enuenemyng, or as who ſo that toucheth warme pytche blemyſheth hys fyngers. The thyrde is foule wordes, whych fareth lyke fyre, which right anon brenneth the herte. The fourth fynger is the kyſſynge: And truely he were a great foole that wolde kyſſe the mouthe of a brennyng ouen or of a forneys. And more fooles ben they that kyſſe in vilanye, for that mouth is the mouthe of hell, and namely theſe olde dotardes holours, which woll kyſſe and flicker, and beſye hem ſelfe thoughe they maye naught do. Certes they ben lyke to houndes: For an hounde whan he cometh nigh to the roſere, or by other benches, though ſo be that he maye not pyſſe, yet woll he heue vp hys legge and make a countenaunce to pyſſe. And for that manye man weneth that he maye not ſynne for no lycorouſneſſe that he dothe wyth hys wyfe. Truely that oppynyon is falſe: God wote a man maye ſlee hym ſelfe wyth hys owne knyfe, and make hym ſelfe dronke of his owne tonne. Certes be it wife, be it chylde or anye worldly thynge, that he loueth before God, it is hys maumet, and be is an ydolaſter. A man ſhulde loue his wyfe by diſcrecyon, paciently and attemperatlye, and than is ſhe as though it were his ſuſter. The fyfthe fyngre of the dyuels honde is the ſtynkynge dede of lecherye. Truely the fyue fyngers of glotonye the dyuell putteth in to the wombe of a man: And wyth his fyue fyngers of lecherye he grypeth hym by ye reynes for to throwe hym in to the furneys of helle, there as they ſhal haue the fyre and the wormes that euer ſhal laſte, and wepynge and waylynge, and ſharpe hungre and thurſte, grymneſſe of dyuels, whyche ſhal al to trede hem withouten ende. Of lecherye as I ſayd ſourdeth and ſpringeth dyuers ſpeces: As fornycacyon, that is bytwene man and woman which be not maryed and is deedly ſyn, and ayenſt nature: Al that is enemye and diſtruction to nature is ayenſt nature. Perfay the reaſon of a man telleth him wel alſo that it is deedly ſynne, for as moche as god forbade lecherye. And ſaynte Poule yeueth hem the reygne that nis dewe to no wyght but to hem that done deedly ſynne. An other ſynne of lecherye is to byreue a maydes maydenhede, for he that ſo dothe, certes he caſteth a mayden out of the hyeſt degre that is in thys preſente lyfe, and byreueth her that precious frute that the boke calleth the hundred frutes I ne can ſaye it none other wyſe in Engliſh, but in Latyn it hight (Centeſimus fruct
                              •••
                           .) Certes he that ſo dothe is cauſe of many damages and vilanyes, mo than anye man can reken: ryght as he is cauſe of many damages ſomtyme that beeſtes do in the felde, that breke the hedge or the cloſure, through which he diſtroyeth that maye not be reſtored: For certes no more may mayden hede be reſtored than an arm that is ſmytte fro the body 
                              •
                           u
                              •
                           y retourne ayen and were: She maye haue mercy, this wote I wel, yf that ſhe haue wel to do penitence, but neuer ſhall it be that ſhe nas corrupte. And all be it ſo yt I haue ſpaike ſomwhat of auoutry, alſo it is good to ſhew the perylles that longe to auoutrye, for to eſchewe that foule ſynne. Auoutrye in latyn is for to ſaye, approchynge of an other mannes bedde, throughe whyche thoſe that ſomtyme were one fleſh, abandon her bodyes to other perſones. Of thys ſynne as ſaythe the wyſe man folowe many harmes: Firſte breakynge of faythe, and certes in faythe is the keye of chriſtendome: and whan that faythe is broke and loſte, ſothly chriſtendom ſtout veyneard without fruite. Thys ſynne is alſo theft, for thefte generally is to reue a wight his thyng ayenſt hys wyll. Certes thys is the fouleſt thefte that may be, whan that a womā ſtealeth her body fro her huſbonde and yeueth it to her holour to defoyle her, and ſtealeth her ſoule fro Chriſt, and yeueth it to the dyuell: This is a fouler thefte than for to breake a church and ſteale away the chalyce, for theſe auouterers breke the temple of god ſpyrituellye,

and ſteale the veſſell of grace, that is the body and the ſoule: For whyche Chriſt ſhall diſtroye hem, as ſayth ſaynte Paule. Sothlye of thys thefte doubted greatlye Ioſeph, whan that hys Lordes wyfe prayed hym of vylanye, whan he ſayde: Lo my Ladye howe my Lorde hath take to me vnder my warde, all that he hathe in thys worlde, ne nothynge of hys thynges is out of my power, but only ye that be his wyfe: and how ſhulde I than do thys wyckedneſſe and ſyn ſo horrible ayenſt God, and ayenſt my lorde God it forbede. Alas, all to lytell is ſuche trouthe nowe founde. The thyrde harme is the fylthe, throughe whyche they breake the commaundemente of God, and defoyle the outer of matrymonye, that is Chriſte. For certes in ſo muche as the ſacrament of maryage is ſo noble and ſo digne, ſo muche is it greater ſynne for to breake it: For God made maryage in Paradyſe in the eſtate of innocencye, to multiply mankynde in the ſeruice of God, and therfore is the breakynge therof the more greuous, of whiche breking come falſe heyres ofte time, that wrongfullye occupye folkes heritages, and therfore wol Chriſt put hem out of the reygne of heuen, that is herytage to good folke. Of thys breakyng cometh alſo oft time that folke vnware wedde or ſynne wyth her owne kyn
                           
                              •
                           ed: and namely theſe harlottes that haunte bordels of theſe foule women, that maye be 
                              •
                           ekened to a comune gonge, where as men pourge her ordure. what ſay we alſo of putours, that lyue by the horrible ſynne of putrye, and conſtreyne women to yeue to hem a certeyne rente of her bodyly putery, yee ſō
                           tyme of hys owne wyfe or hys chylde, as done theſe baudes: Certes theſe bene curſed ſynnes. Vnderſtande alſo that auoutrie is ſette gladlye in the ten commaundementes bytwene thefte and man ſlaughter, for it is the greateſt thrft yt may be, for it is thefte of bodye and of ſoule, and it is like to homicide for it kerueth a two and breketh a two hem that fyrſt were made of one fleſhe. And therfore by the olde lawe of God they ſhulde be ſlaine, but nathleſſe by ye law of Ieſu Chriſt that is lawe of pytye, whan he ſayde to the woman that was fonde in auoutrye, and ſhulde haue be ſlayne wyth ſtones after the wyll of the Iewes, as was her lawe: Go ſayde Ieſu Chriſte, and haue no more wyll to do ſinne. Sothly the vengeaunce of auoutrye is awarded to the paynes of hell, but if ſo be that it be diſtourbed by penitence. Yet bene there mo ſpeces of thys curſed ſynne, as whan that one of hem is relygyouſe or elles bothe, or of folke that bene entred in to ordre, as ſubdeaken, deaken, or Preeſte, or hoſpitaliers. And euer the hyer that he is in ordre, the greater is the ſynne. The thynges that greatlye agredge her ſynne is the breaking of her auow of chaſtitie whā they receyued the order. And more ouer ſothe is that holye order is chefe of all the treaſorye of God and hys eſpecial ſigne and maike of chaſtite, to ſhew that they ben ioyned to chaſtitie, whych is the mooſt precious life that is: & theſe ordred folke bene ſpeciallye titled to God and of the ſpecial meyne of God, for whyche whan they done deedly ſynne they bene traytoures of God and of hys people, for they lyue of the people. Preeſtes ben angels as by dignetie of her miſterye, but forſoth ſaynt Paule ſayth yt Sathanas tranſfourmeth hym in an angell of lyght. Sothly the preeſt that haunteth deedly ſynne, he maye be lykened to the angell of derkeneſſe, tranſfourmed in the aungell of lyght, he ſemeth angel of lyght, but forſoth he is angel of derkeneſſe. Suche preeſtes be the ſonnes of Helye, as ſheweth in the boke of kynges, that they were the ſonnes of Beliall, that is the dyuell. Beliall is to ſaye wythout iudge and ſo fare they, hem thynketh they be free and haue no iuge, no more than hathe a free bulle that taketh whiche cowe that hym lyketh in the towne. So fare they by wemen, for ryght as one free bulle is ynoughe for al a towne, ryghte ſo is a wycked preeſte corruption ynoughe for all a paryſhe, or for all a countre: Theſe preeſtes, as ſayth the boke ne can not miniſtre the miſtery of preſthode to the people, ne they knowe not God, they ne helde hem not apayed, as ſayth the boke of ſodeyne fleſhe that was to hem offered, but they toke by force the fleſſhe that was raw. Certes, ſo that theſe ſhrewes ne helde hem not apayed of roſted and ſodde fleſhe, with which the people fedde hem in greate reuerence, but they wol haue rawe fleſhe of folkes wyues and her doughters, & certes theſe women yt cōſente to her harlotry done

great wronge to Chriſt and to holy church, al halowes, and al ſoules, for they byreue al theſe hem that ſhulde worſhyp Chriſte, and holy churche, and praye for chriſten ſoules, and therfore haue ſuch preeſtes and her lem mans alſo that conſente to her lecherye, the curſing of al the court chriſten, til they come to amendemente. The thyrde ſpece of auoutrye is ſomtyme betwixt a mā & his wyfe, & that is whan they take no regarde in her aſſemblynge, but only to her fleſhly delyte, as ſayeth ſaynt Ierome, & ne reken of nothing but that they ben aſſēbled bycauſe they ben maryed, al is good ynough, as they thinke: but in ſuche folke hath the dyuell power, as ſayde the angell Raphaell to Tobye, for in her aſſemblyng they put Ieſu Chriſt out of her herte, and gyue her ſelfe to all ordure. The fourthe ſpece is the aſſēble of hem that bene of affinitie, or els of hem, wyth which her fathers or her kynred haue dealed in the ſynne of lecherye: Thys ſynne maketh hem lyke to houndes, that take no kepe to kynred And certes parentele is in two maners, eyther ghoſtly or fleſhly: goſtly as for to deale wyth hys godſyb, for ryght ſo as he that engendreth a chyld is hys fleſhly father: right ſo is hys God father hys father eſpirituell: for whyche a woman maye in no leſſe ſynne aſſemble wyth her godſyb, than wyth her owne fleſhly brother. The fifth ſpece is that abhominable ſynne, of whyche abhominable ſyn no man vnneth ought ſpeke ne write nathleſſe it is openly reherſed in holy writ. Thys curſed ſynne done men and women in diuers entente and in diuers maner: But though that holy writ ſpeke of horrible ſyn, certes holy writte maye not be defoyled, no more thā the ſūne that ſhyneth on the donghyll. Another ſynne apertayneth to lecherye that cometh ſleping, & this ſyn cometh often to hem that be maydens, & alſo to hem that be corrupt, & this ſyn mē cal Polucion, that commeth of thre maners: Somtime of languyſhyng of body, for the humours bene to ranke & aboundaunt in the body of man, ſō
                           time of infirmite, for febleneſſe of the vertue retentife, as phiſike maketh mencion: Somtime for ſurfet of meate & drinke, & ſomtime of vylanous thoughtes that ben encloſed in mannes mynd whā he goeth to ſlepe which maye not be without ſynne, for whych men muſte kepe hem wyſelye, or elles maye men ſynne full greuouſly.
                        
                           ¶Remedium contra peccatum luxurie.
                           
                              NOwe cometh the remedy ayenſt lecherye, & yt is generally chaſtitie and continence that reſtrayne all diſordinate menynges yt come of fleſhely talentes. And euer the greater meryte ſhal he haue that mooſt reſtreyneth the wycked chaufynges of the ordoure of thys ſin, & thys is in two maners: That is to ſay chaſtite in mariage & chaſtite in widowhed Now ſhalt yu vnderſtande ye matrimony 
                                 •
                              s leful aſſēblyng of man & woman that 
                                 •••••
                              
                              uen by vertue of thys ſacramente, the bonde throughe whyche they maye not be departed in all her lyfe, that is to ſaye, while that they lyue both. Thys, as ſayeth the boke, is a full greate ſacramente, God made it as I haue ſayd in paradyſe, and wolde hym ſelfe be borne in mariage: and for to halowe maryage he was at a weddynge, where as he turned water in to wyne, whyche was the fyrſte miracle that he wrought in earthe before hys diſciples. Trew effecte of mariage clenſeth fornication and replenyſheth holye churche of good lynage, for that is the ende of mariage, and chaungeth deedly ſynne in to venyal ſinne, bitwene hem that ben wedded, & maketh the hertes as one of hem that bene wedded, as well as the bodyes.
                           Very mariage was eſtabliſhed by god er that ſyn began, whan naturall law was in his ryght poynt in Paradiſe. And it was ordayned that o man ſhulde haue but a woman, and o womā but o man, as ſaith ſaint Auguſtyne, by many reaſons.
                           Fyrſte for mariage is figured betwixt Chriſt and holy churche.
                           Another is for a man is head of a womā alway by ordinaunce it ſhuld be ſo. For yf a womā had mo men thā one, than ſhuld ſhe haue mo heedes thā one, and that were a ryght horrible ſynne before God, and alſo a woman myght not pleaſe ſo manye folke at ones: and alſo there ſhuld neuer be reſt ne quiete amonge hem, for eche of hem wolde

aſke her owne ryght. And furthermore, no man ſhulde know hys owne engendrure, ne who ſhulde haue hys heritage, and the woman ſhulde be the leſſe beloued.
                           Now cometh how that a man ſhulde bere hym wyth hys wyfe, & namely in two thynges: that is to ſaye, in ſufferaunce and reuerence, as ſhewed Chriſt whan he fyrſte made womā. For he ne made her of ye heade of Adam, for ſhe ſhulde not claym to greate lordſhyp, for there as the woman hathe the mayſtrye, ſhe maketh to muche variaunce, there nede no mo enſamples of thys, the experience al daye, ought ynough ſuffice.
                           Alſo certes, God ne made not woman of the fote of Adam, for ſhe ſhuld not behold to lowe, for ſhe can not paciently ſuffre: but God made woman of the rybbe of Adam, for woman ſhulde be felowe vnto man.
                           Man ſhulde beare hym to hys wyfe in fayth▪ in trouth, and in loue (as ſayth ſaynt Paule that a man ſhulde loue hys wyfe, as Chriſt loueth holye churche, that loued it ſo well that he dyed for it: ſo ſhulde a man for hys wyfe, yf it were nede.
                           Nowe howe that a woman ſhulde be ſubiecte to her huſbande: that telleth ſaynte Peter, fyrſt in obedience. And alſo as ſayth the decree: A womā that is a wyfe, as long as ſhe is a wyfe ſhe hath none auctoritye to ſwere ne beare witnes without leaue of her huſbande yt is her Lorde, alwaye he ſhulde be ſo by reaſon. She ſhulde alſo ſerue hym in al honeſtye & be attēpperate of her array.
                           I woll well that they ſhulde ſet her entent to pleaſe her huſbādes but not be queintiſe of her araye. S. Ierom ſayeth: wiues yt be apparelled in ſylke and precious purple, ne mowe nat clothe hem in Ieſu Chriſte. Saynt Greg. ſayeth alſo: that no wyghte ſeketh precious aray, but only for vaynglory to be honoured the more of the people. It is great foly a woman to haue great araye, outwarde, and in her ſelfe be foule inwarde A wyfe ſhulde alſo be meſurable in lokynge in bearyng, and in laughing, and diſcrete in al her wordes and her dedes, and aboue all worldelye thynges ſhe ſhulde loue her huſbande wyth al her herte, and to hym be true of her bodye: So ſhulde an huſbande be to hys wyfe: For ſythe that all the body is the huſbandes, ſo ſhuld her hert be, or els there is betwixte hem two, as in that no perfyte mariage. Than ſhall men vnderſtande that for thre thynges a man and hys wyfe fleſhly may aſſemble. The firſt is for thentent of engendrure of chyldren to the ſeruice of god for certes that is the cauſe finall of matrimony. Another cauſe is to yelde ech of hem to other ye dettes of her bodyes, for neyther of hem hath power of ther owne bodyes. The thyrde is to eſchew lechery and vyllanye. The fourthe is forſoth deedlye ſynne. As to the fyrſte is meritorye: the ſeconde alſo, for as ſayeth the decre, that ſhe hath meryte of chaſtite that yeldeth to her huſbande the dette of her body, yee thought it be ayenſt her lykynge and the luſte of her herte. The thyrde maner is venyall ſynne, and truelye ſcarſcely may anye of theſe be wythout venyal ſynne for the corruption and for the delyte. The fourth maner is for to vnderſtand if they aſſemble only for amorous loue, and for none of the forſayde cauſes, but for to accomplyſhe the brennynge delyte, they recke not howe ofte, ſothlye it is deedly ſinne: and yt wyth ſorowe ſome folke woll payne hem more to do then to her appetyte ſuffiſeth.
                           The ſeconde maner of chaſtitye is for to be a clene wydowe and eſchew the enbraſynges of a man, and deſyre the enbraſynge of Ieſu Chriſte: Theſe bene thoſe that haue bene wyues, and haue forgote her huſbandes, and alſo women that haue done lecherye, and bene receyued by penitence. And certes yf that a wyfe coulde kepe her all chaſte by licence of her huſbande, ſo that ſhe yeue neuer none occaſion that he offende, it were to her a greate meryte. Thys maner of woman that obſerueth chaſtitie in clothynge & in countenaunce, abſtinent in eatinge & drinkyng, in ſpekyng and in dede, ſhe is the veſſel or the boxe of the bleſſed Maudelayne ye fulfylleth holy church of good ordour. The thyrde maner of chaſtitie is virginitie, and it behoueth that ſhe be holye in herte, & clene of body, than is ſhe ſpouſe of Ieſu Chriſte, and ſhe is the life of aungels: ſhe is the pray ſynge of thys worlde, & ſhe is as theſe martyrs in regaly: ſhe hath in her yt tonge maye not tell ne herte thynke. Virginitie bare our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, and virgyn was hym ſelfe.
                           Another remedy ayenſt lechery is ſpeciallye

to withdrawe ſuche thynges as yeue occaſyon to that vylanye: as eaſe, eatynge, and drinkyng: For certes whan the potte boylleth ſtronglye, the beſt remedy is to wyth draw the fyre. Slepyng longe in great quiete is alſo a great nouryce to lecherye.
                           Another remedy ayenſt lechery is that a man or a woman eſchew the company of hem by whiche he douteth to be tēpted: For all be it ſo that the dede is withſtande, yet is there great temptation. Sothly a whyte walle, all thoughe it ne brenne not fullye by ſtickyng of the candell, yet is the wal blacke of the flame. Ful oft tyme I rede that no mā truſt in hys owne perfection, but he be ſtronger than Sampſon, or holyer than Daniel or wyſer than Salomon.
                           Nowe after that I haue declared you as I can, the ſeuyn deedly ſinnes, and ſome of her braūches, wyth her remedies: Sothly yf I coulde, I wolde tel you the ten commaundementes, but ſo hye doctrine I put to diuines. Nathleſſe I hope to God they ben touched in this treatiſe eche of hem.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  ¶Sequitur ſecunda pars penitentie.
                  
                     NOwe for aſmuche as the ſeconde parte of penitence ſtont in confeſſion of mouth, as I be gan in the fyrſte chap, I ſaye ſaynte Auſten ſayeth.
                  Sinne is euery worde and euery dede and all that men coniecte agaynſt the lawe of Ieſu Chriſte, and thys is for to ſynne in hert, in mouth, and in dede, by the fyne wyttes, which ben ſyght, hearyng, ſmellyng, taſtyng or ſauour, & felynge. Nowe it is good to vnderſtande, that that agredgeth muche euery ſinne. Thou ſhalt conſider what thou art that doſte the ſyn, whether thou be male or female, yonge or olde, gentyll or thrall, free or ſeruaunt, hole or ſicke, wedded or ſingle, ordred or vnordred, wyſe or fole, clerke or ſeculer, yf ſhe be of thy kynrede bodilye or goſtly, or no, yf any of thy kynred haue ſynned wyth her or no, & many mo thynges. Another circumſtaunce is this, whether it be done in fornicacion or in aduoutry or no, in maner of homiced or no, horrible great ſynnes or ſmal, & how long thou haſt cōtinued in ſynne. The thyrde circumſtaunce is the place there thou haſt done ſynne, wheder in other mennes houſes or in thyne owne, in felde, in church or in churchyarde, in church dedecate or no. For yf the churche be halowed & man or woman ſpyl his kinde, within that place by way of ſinne or wicked tēptation, the churche is enterdited, & the preeſt that dyd ſuch a villany, the terme of all hys life he ſhulde no more ſynge maſſe, and if he did, he ſhulde do deedly ſynne at euery tyme yt he ſo ſonge maſſe. The fourth circūſtaūce is by which mediatours or by which meſſē
                     gers, or for enticement, or for cōſentment to beare cōpany with felowſhyp. For manye a wretche for to beare cōpanye, wol go to the dyuel of heel: wherfore they that egge or cō
                     ſent to the ſinne, ben parteners of the ſinne, & of the temptation of the ſynner. The fyfth circumſtaunce is howe many times that he hath ſynned, if it be in his minde, & how oft he hath fallen. For he that oft falleth in ſyn, he diſpiceth the mercy of God and encreſeth his ſinne, & is vnkynde to Chriſt, & he we
                        •
                     
                     eth the more feble to withſtande ſyn, a ſynneth the more lyghtly & the later ryſeth, & is more ſlow to ſhriue him; & namely to him yt is his cōfeſſour. For whiche that folke whā they fal ayen to her olde folyes, eyther they leaue theyr olde cōfeſſour, or els they depart her ſhrift in diuers partes. But ſothly ſuche departed ſhrifte deſerueth no mercy of God for her ſynnes. The ſixte circumſtaunce is, why that a man ſinneth as by temptation: & if him ſelfe procure that temptation, or by the excitinge of other folke, or if he ſyn wyth a woman by force or by her aſſente, or yf the woman maugre her heede haue be a forced or none. This ſhall ſhe tell, whether it were for couetiſe or pouertye, or yf it were by her procurement or no, and ſuch other thinges. The ſeuenth circumſtaunce is, in what maner he hathe do hys ſynne, or howe that ſhe hathe ſuffred that folke haue do to her. And the ſame ſhall the man tell playnly wyth all the circumſtaunces, and whether he hathe ſynned wyth cōmen bordel woman or none or done hys ſynne in holye tymes or none, in faſting time or none, or before hys ſhrifte or after hys later ſhryfte, and hath parauenture broke therby his penaunce enioyned by whoſe helpe or whoſe counſayle, by ſoce
                        ••
                     e

or crafte, all muſte be tolde, & all theſe thynges after as they be gret or ſmale, & grudge the conſcience of man or womā. And eke the preeſt that is thy iuge, maye the better be auyſed of his iugement in yeuyng of penaūce and that is after thy contrition. For vnderſtande wel that after tyme that a man hath defoyled hys baptyme by ſynne, yf he woll come to ſaluation there is none other waye but by penaunce, ſhryfte, and ſatiſfaction, & namely by the two, yf there be a confeſſoure to whom he may ſhriue him, and the thyrde yf he haue lyfe to perfourme it. Than ſhall a man loke and conſider, that yf he wol make a trewe & a profitable confeſſion, there muſt be foure conditions.
                  Fyrſt it muſt be in ſorowfulneſſe of hert as ſayth the kynge Ezechiel to God, I wol remēbre me al the yeres of my lyfe in bitterneſſe of my hert. This cōdition of bytternes hath fyue ſignes: The fyrſt is that confeſſion muſte be ſhamefaſte, not for to couer ne hide her ſin for he hath offēded his lord god & defoyled his ſoule. And herof ſayth ſaynte Auguſtyn: The herte traueyleth for ſhame of his ſinne, & for he hath greate ſhamefaſtnes he is worthy to haue gret mercy of god which was the cōfeſſion of the Publicaue, that wolde not heaue vp hys eyen to heuen for he had offended god of heuen, for which ſhamfaſtneſſe he had anone ye mercy of god. And therof ſayeth ſaynt Auguſtyn: yt ſuche ſhameful folke be next foryeueneſſe & mercy.
                  Another ſigne is humilite in cōfeſſion, of which ſayth ſaynt Peter▪ Humbleth you vnder the might of god: ye hande of God is ſtrong in cōfeſſion, for therby god foryeueth the thy ſinnes, for he alone hath the power And this humilite ſhalbe in hert, and in outwarde ſignes: For righte as he hath humilitie to God in his herte, ryghte ſo ſhulde he humble his bodye outwarde to the preeſt, yt ſytteth in goddes ſtede. For which in no maner, ſyth that Chriſte is ſouerayne, and the Preeſte meane and mediatoure betwixte Chriſte, and the ſynner is laſte by waye of reaſon. Than ſhulde nat the ſynner ſytte as hye as his cōfeſſour but knele before him or at his fete, but yf ſyckeneſſe cauſe it: For he ſhal not take hede who ſytteth there, but in whoſe place he ſytteth. A man that hath treſpaſſed to a Lorde & cometh to aſke mercye and make hys accorde, and ſytteth hym downe by hym, men wolde holde hym outragious and nat worthy ſo ſone for to haue remiſſion of hys treſpace.
                  The thyrde ſigne is, howe thy ſhryfte ſhulde be full of teares yf thou maye, and yf thou maye nat wepe wyth thy bodily eyen, than wepe in thyne herte, whyche was the confeſſion of ſaynte Peter. For after that he had forſake Ieſu Chriſte, he wente out and wepte full bitterly.
                  The fourth ſigne is, that thou ne lette nat for ſhame to ſhewe thy cōfeſſion: Such was the confeſſion of Magdaleyn, that ne ſpared for no ſhame of hem that were at the feeſt, to go to oure Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, and beknowe to hym her ſynnes. The fyfth ſigne is, that a man or a woman be obeyſaunte to receyue the penaunce that hem is enioyned. For certes Ieſu Chriſte, for the offences of man was obedient to deth. The ſeconde condition of very confeſſion is, that it be haſtely done. For certes, yf a man had a deedly wounde, euer the lenger that he taryeth to heale hym ſelfe, the more wolde it corrupte and haſte hym to hys deathe, and alſo the wounde wolde be the worſe for to heale. And ryghte ſo fare the ſynne, that longe tyme is in a man vnſhewed. Certes a man ought haſtelye ſhewe hys ſynnes for manye cauſes, as for drede of deathe, that commeth ofte ſodaynlye, and no certayne what tyme it ſhall be, ne in what place, and alſo the drenchyng of o ſynne draweth in another: and alſo the lenger that he taryeth the farther he is fro Chriſte. And if he abide to hys laſt day, ſcarſcely may he ſhriue hym or remembre hym of hys ſynnes, or repente for the greuous maladye of hys death. And for as muche as he ne hathe in hys lyfe herkened Ieſu Chriſte whan he hath ſpoken, he ſhall crye to Ieſu Chriſte at hys laſt day and ſcarſcely woll he herken hym. And vnderſtande that thys condition muſte haue foure thynges.
                  Thy ſhryfte muſt be prouided before & auyſed, for wycked haſt doth no profyte, yf a mā ſhriue him of hys ſynnes, be it of pride or enuye, and ſo forthe wyth the ſpeces and circumſtaunces of ſynne. And that he haue cōprehended in hys mynde the nombre and greatneſſe of hys ſynnes, and howe longe

he hathe lyen in ſyn. And alſo that he hathe be contrite for hys ſynnes, and in ſtedfaſte purpoſe (by the grace of God) neuer ayen to fal to ſynne. And alſo that he drede & counterwayte hym ſelfe that he flye the occaſion of ſynne, to whych he is enclined. Alſo thou ſhalt ſhryue the of al thy ſynnes to a man, & not part to o man and part to another, that is to vnderſtande, in entent to depart thy cō
                     feſſion for ſhame or drede, for it is but ſtranglynge of thy ſoule. For certes Ieſu Chriſte is entierly al good, in hym nys none imperfection, and therfore eyther he foryeueth all perfeitely, or els neuer a deale. I ſaye nat yt yf thou be aſſigned to thy penytencer for certayne ſynne that thou arte bounde to ſhewe hym all ye remenant of thy ſynnes, of which thou haſte bē ſhryuen of thy curate, but yf it lyke to the of thy humilite, thys is no parte of thy ſhrift. Ne I ſay nat there as I ſpeke of diuiſion of cōfeſſion, that yf thou haue licence to ſhryue the to a diſcrete & an honeſte preeſte where the lyketh, & by lycence of thy curate, that thou ne mayeſt well ſhryue the to him of al thy ſynnes. Let no ſynne be vntolde as farre as thou haſt remembraunce. And whan thou ſhalt be ſhryuen to thy curate, tell hym all thy ſynnes that thou haſte do ſyth thou waſt laſte ſhriuen. Thys is no wycked entent of diuiſion of ſhrift.
                  Alſo the very ſhrift aſketh certayne cō
                     dicions. Fyrſt that thou ſhriue the by thy fre wyl, nat conſtrayned for ſhame of folke, ſickeneſſe, ne ſuch other thynges. For it is reaſon, that he that treſpaceth by his free wyll that by his free wyl he confeſſe his treſpace and that none other man tell hys ſynne but him ſelfe, ne he ſhal nat nay ne deny his ſin, ne wrath him ayenſt the preeſt for amonyſſhyng him to leaue hys ſynne. The ſeconde condition is, that thy ſhryfte be laufull, that is to ſay, that thou ſhriueſt the. And alſo the preeſt that hereth thy confeſſion be veryly in fayth of holy churche, and that a man ne be not diſpeyred of the mercy of Ieſu Chriſte, as Caym or Iudas. And alſo a man muſte accuſe him ſelf of his owne treſpace & not another, but he ſhall blame & wyte hym ſelfe and his owne malice of his ſynne, and none other: But natheleſſe if that another man be occaſion or entycer of hys ſyn, or the eſtate of a perſon be ſuch by which his ſynne is agredged, or els yt he may not playnly ſhryue him but he tel the perſonne wyth whiche he hath ſynned, than may he tell, ſo that his entent ne be not to backbyte the perſon, but only to declare hys confeſſion. Thou ne ſhalte not alſo make no leaſynges in thy confeſſiō for humilitie, parauenture to ſay that thou haſt commiſed and done ſuche ſynnes as of whyche that thou ne were neuer gyltye. For ſaint Auguſtyn ſayeth, yf that thou bicauſe of thyne humilitye makeſt leaſynges of thy ſelfe, though thou were not in ſinne before, yet arte thou than in ſynne through thy leaſynge. Thou muſte alſo ſhewe thy ſynne by thyne owne proper mouthe, but thou be dombe & not by no letter▪ For thou that haſt done the ſynne, ſhalte haue the ſhame therfore. Thou ſhalt not eke paynt thy cōfeſſion by fayre ſubtell wordes, to couer the more thy ſynne: for than begyleſt thou thy ſelfe & nat the preeſt, thou muſte tell it playne, be it neuer ſo foule ne horrible. Thou ſhalte alſo ſhryue the to a preeſt, that is diſcrete to coū
                     ſayle the, and alſo thou ſhalte nat ſhriue the for vaynglorye, ne for ypocriſye, ne for no cauſe but only for the loue and feare of Ieſu Chriſt, and heale of thy ſoule. Thou ſhalte not alſo ren to the preeſt ſodainly to tel him lightly thy ſinne, as who ſayth, to tel a tape or a tale, but auyſedly and with good deuotion: And generally ſhryue the ofte yf thou ofte fal ofte aryſe by confeſſion. And though thou ſhriue the ofter than ones of the ſynne which thou haſt be ſhriuen of, it is the more merite. And as ſayth ſaynt Auguſtyn, thou ſhalt haue the more lyghtly foryeuenes and grace of God, both of ſinne and payne. And certes ones a yere at leeſt, it is laufull to be houſeled, for ſurely ones a yere all thynges renouellen.
                  Nowe haue I tolde you of very cōfeſſion, that is the ſeconde parte of penitence.
               
               
                  ¶Explicit ſecunda pars penitentie: Et ſequitur tertia pars.
                  
                     THe thyrde part of penitence is ſatiſfaction, & that ſtant moſte generallye in almeſſe dedes & bodily payne. Now ben there thre maner of almes. Cōtritiō of hert, where a mā offreth him ſelf to god.
                  
                     An other is, to haue pytie of default of his neyghbour. And the thyrde is in gyuyng of good counſayle, gooſtly and bodily wheras men haue nede, and namely in ſuſtenance of mans fode. And take kepe yt a mā hath nede of theſe thynges generallye, he hath nede of fode of clothing, & of herbrow: He hath nede of charitable counſayle, viſityng in priſon in ſickeneſſe, and ſepulture of his body. And if thou mayſt nat viſite the nedeful in thy perſone, viſite them with thy meſſage & yeftes. Theſe been generally the almeſſe & workes of charite, of hem that haue temporal riches or diſcretion in counſaylyng. Of theſe workes ſhalte thou here at the daye of dome. Theſe almeſſes ſhalt thou do of thyn owne proper thynges, & haſteſy & priuely if thou mayſt: But natheleſſe, if thou mayſt nat do it priuely, thou ſhalte nat forbeare to do almeſſe though mē ſe it, ſo that it be nat do for thanke of the worlde, but only for thanke of Ieſu chriſt. For as witneſſeth ſaynt Mathu Cap. v. A cyte maye nat be hydde that is ſet on a mountayne, ne men lyght nat a lantern to putte it vnder abuſſhel but ſette it vpon a candelſticke to yeue light to men in ye houſe.
                  Right ſo ſhul your lyght, light before men that they maye ſe your good workes, & glorify our father that is in heuen.
                  Now as to ſpeake of bodely payne, it ſtont in prayers, wakyng, faſtyng, vertuous teachyng of oriſons. And ye ſhal vnderſtonde, that oriſons or prayers is to ſaye a pitious wyll of herte, that ſetteth it in God, and expreſſeth by worde outwarde to remeue harmes, and to haue thynges ſpiritual and durable, and ſomtyme temporall thynges. Of which oriſons, certes in the oryſon of the pater noſter: hath Ieſu Chryſt encloſed mooſt thynges. Certes it is priuileged of thre thinges in his dignitie, for whyche it is more digne than anye other prayer, for that Ieſu Chryſt hym ſelfe made it, and it is ſhort, for it ſhuld be lerned yt more lyghtly, & to holde it the more eaſye in hert, and helpe hym ſelfe the ofter with that oriſon: And for a manne ſhulde be the leſſe werye to ſaye it, & not excuſe hym to lerne it, it is ſo ſhorte and eaſye: and for it comprehendeth in it ſelfe all good prayers. The expoſition of this holy prayer that is ſo excellent and digne, I refere to the maſters of theology, ſaue thus moche woll I ſaye, that whan thou prayeſt, that God ſhoulde foryeue the thyne offences, as thou foryeueſt them that haue offended the. Be well ware that thou be not oute of charitye. This holy oriſon aminiſheth alſo venial ſyn and therfore it appertayneth ſpecyallye to penitence.
                  This prayer muſt be truly ſayd and in parfyte fayth, and that men praye to God ordinatly, diſcretly, and deuoutly, and alwaye a man ſhall put his wyll to be ſubiecte to the wyll of God. This oryſon muſte alſo be ſayd with great humbleneſſe and full pure & honeſtlye, and not to the auoyaunce of anye man or woman: It muſte alſo be continued with the workes of charitie. It auayleth alſo ayenſt the vices of the ſoule: For as ſaith ſaynct Ierome: By faſtyng ben ſaued the vices of the fleſſhe, and by prayer the vyces of the ſoule.
                  After this thou ſhalt vnderſtond, that bodily prayer ſtont in waking. For Ieſu chriſt ſayth: wake ye and praye, that ye ne entre in to wycked temptation. Ye ſhul vnderſtonde alſo, that faſtyng ſtont in thre thynges: In forberyng of bodily mete and drinke, in forbering of wordly iolitie, and in forberynge of deedly ſyn: this is to ſay: that a man ſhall kepe hym fro deedly ſyn with all his myght
                  And thou ſhalt vnderſtond alſo, that god ordayned faſtynge, and to faſtynge pertayneth four thynges. Largeneſſe to pore folke gladneſſe of hert ſpiritual: not to be angrye ne anoyed, ne grutche for he faſteth and alſo reſonable hour to eat by meaſure, that is to ſaye, a man ſhall not eate in vntyme, ne ſyt the lenger at the table, for he faſteth.
                  Than ſhalt thou vnderſtonde, that bodily payne ſtont in diſciplyne or teachynge by worde or wrytynge, or by example. Alſo in wearynge of heer or ſtamyn or of harbergions on her naked fleſſhe for Chryſtes ſake, and that ſuche maner penaunces, ne make nat thyne hert bytter or angrye, ne anoyed of thy ſelfe, for better is to caſt awaye thyne heere, than to caſt away the ſwetneſſe of Ieſu Chryſt. And therfore ſayth ſaynct Poule: Clothe you, as they that ben choſen of God in hert of miſericorde, debonartie, ſuffraūce and ſuche maner of clothyng, of which Ieſu Chryſte is more pleaſed, than with heeres or habergions.
                  
                     Than is diſciplyne alſo, in knockynge of thy breſt, in ſcourgyng with roddes, in knelyng, in tribulation, in ſuffrynge pacientlye wronges that ben do to the, & alſo in paciēt ſuffrynge of ſyckneſſe, or leſyng of worldlye goodes or cattel, or wyfe, chylde, or other frendes.
                  Than ſhalt thou vnderſtande which thinges diſtourbe penaunce, and that is in foure maners, drede, ſhame, hope, and wanhope, that is deſperation: And for to ſpeake fyrſte of drede for whiche he weneth that he maye ſuffre no penaunce. There ayenſt is remedy for to thynke that bodilye penaunce is but ſhorte and lytle, at regarde of the payne of hell that is ſo cruell and ſo longe, that it laſteth without ende.
                  Nowe ayenſt the ſhame that a man hath to ſhryue hym, and namely theſe ypocrytes that wold be hold ſo perfyte, that they haue no nede to ſhryue hem. Ayenſte that ſhame ſhulde a man thynke that by way of reaſon, that he that hath not be aſhamed to do foul thynges: certes hym ought not be aſhamed for to do fayre thynges, and that is cōfeſſyons. A man ſhuld alſo thinke that god ſeeth and knoweth all his thoughtes and all hys werkes: To hym may nothyng be hyd ne couered. Men ſhoulde alſo remembre hem of the ſhame that is to com at the day of dome to hem that ben not penitent and ſhryuen in this preſent lyfe. For all the creatures in erth and in hell ſhall ſe apertly, all that they hydde in this preſent worlde. Nowe for to ſpeake of the hope of hem that bene ſo negligent and ſlow to ſhryue them: that ſtondeth in two maners. That one is, that he hopeth for to lyue longe, and for to purchace moche rycheſſe for his delyte, and thā he wol ſhriue hym: And as he ſayeth, hym ſemeth than tymely ynough to come to ſhryft.
                  An other is of ſurquidrie that he hath in chriſtes mercy. Ayenſt the fyrſt vyce he ſhal thynke that our lyfe is in no ſykerneke, and alſo that all the rycheſſes in this world ben in aduenture, and paſſe as a ſhadowe on the wall: And as ſayth ſaynct Gregorye, that it appertayneth to the great ryghteouſneſſe of god, that neuer ſhal the payne ſtynte of hem that neuer wold withdrawe hem fro ſynne her thankes, but euer continued in ſynne: for that perpetuall wyll to do ſynne, ſhall they haue perpetuall payne. wanhope is in two maners. The fyrſt wanhope is in the mercy of god. That other is that they thynke that they ne myght not longe perſeuer in goodneſſe. The fyrſte wanhope commeth of that he demeth that he hath ſynned ſo greatlye & ſo oft and ſo longe lyen in ſynne, that he ſhal not be ſaued. Certes agaynſt that curſed wā
                     hope ſhuld he thynke that the paſſion of Ieſu Chryſte is more ſtronge for to vnbynde, than ſynne is ſtronge for to bynde. Ayenſte the ſeconde wanhope he ſhal thynke that as often as he falleth he maye ryſe agayne by penitence: and though he neuer ſo long hath lyen in ſynne, the mercy of Chryſt is alway redy to receyue hym to mercye. Ayenſte the wanhope that he deemeth, he ſhoulde not longe perſeuer in goodneſſe, he ſhall thynke, that the febleneſſe of the deuyl may nothyng do but yf men woll ſuffre hym, and alſo he ſhall haue ſtrēgth of the helpe of Ieſu chriſt and of all holye churche, and the protection of angels yf hym lyſt.
                  Than ſhal men vnderſtande what is the fruyte of penaunce, and after the wordes of Ieſu Chryſt, it is endleſſe bleſſe of heauen. There ioye hath neuer ende, no contrariety of wo ne greuaunce: ther al harmes ben paſſed of this preſēt lyfe, there as is ye ſykernes fro the payne of hell, there as is the blyſfull company that reioyſe hem euermo, eueriche of others ioye: ther as the body of man, that ſomtyme was foule and dark, is more clere than the ſunne: there as the body that ſomtyme was ſycke, freyle, and feble, and mortall, is immortall, and ſo ſtronge and hol
                        •
                     , that there ne maye nothyng appeyre it: ther as is neyther hungre, thurſt ne colde, but euery ſoule replenyſſhed with the ſyght of the perfyte knowynge of God. This blyſfull reygne may men purchace by pouertie eſpirituel, and the glory by lowneſſe, the plentie of ioye by hungre and thurſt, and the reſt by trauayle, and the lyf by deth and mortification of ſyn: to whiche lyfe he vs bryng that bought vs with his pecious bloude. AMEN.
               
               ¶Here endeth the perſons tale.
            
            
               
               ¶Here begynneth the Plowmans Prologue.
               
                  
                     THe Ploweman plucked vp his plowe.
                  whan mydſommer mone was comen in
                  And ſayd his b
                        •
                     eſtes ſhuld rate ynowe
                  And lyge in the graſſe vp to the chynne
                  They ben feble both oxe and cowe
                  Of hem nys left but bone and ſkynne
                  He ſhoke of ſnare and cultre of drowe
                  And honge his harneys on a py
                        ••
                     e.
               
               
                  ¶He toke his tabarde and his ſtaffe eke
                  And on his heed he ſet his hat
                  And ſayde he wolde ſaynt Thomas ſeke
                  On pylgremage he goth forth platte
                  In ſcrippe he bare both breed and lekes
                  He was forſwonke and all forſwatte
                  Men might haue ſene through both his chekes
                  And euery wang toth and where it ſat
               
               
                  ¶Our hoſte behelde wele all about
                  And ſawe this man was ſunne ybrent
                  He knewe well by his ſenged ſhoute
                  And by his clothes that were to rent
                  He was a man wont to walke about
                  He nas nat alway in cloyſtre ypent
                  He coulde not religiouſlyche loute
                  And therfore was he fully ſhent.
               
               
                  ¶Our hoſt him axed, what man art thou?
                  Syr (quod he) I am an hyne
                  For I am wont to go to the plowe
                  And erne my meate yer that I dyne
                  To ſwete and ſwynke I make auowe
                  My wyfe and chyldren therwith to fynde
                  And ſerue God and I wyſt howe
                  But we leude men bene full blynde.
               
               
                  ¶For clerkes ſaye we ſhullen be fayne
                  For her lyuelod ſwet and ſwynke
                  And they ryght nought vs gyue agayne
                  Neyther to eate ne yet to drinke
                  The mowe by lawe, as they ſayne
                  Vs curſe and dampne to hell brynke
                  Thus they putten vs to payne
                  with candles queynt and belles clynke.
               
               
                  ¶They make vs thralles at her luſt
                  And ſayne we mowe nat els be ſaued
                  They haue the corne and we the duſt
                  who ſpeaketh ther agayn they ſay he raued
                  ¶what man ꝙ our hoſt, canſt thou preache
                  Come nere and tell vs ſome holy thynge
                  ¶Syr quod he, I herde ons teache
                  A preſt in pulpyt a good preachynge
               
               
                  ¶Saye on quod our hoſt, I the beſeche.
                  Syr I am redy at your byddyng
                  I praye you that noman me reproche
                  whyle that I am my tale tellynge.
               
            
            
               ❀Thus endeth the prologue, and here foloweth the fyrſt parte of the tale.

                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        A Sterne ſtryfe is ſtered newe
                     In many ſtedes in a ſtounde
                     Of ſōdry ſedes that bene ſewe
                     It ſemeth that ſom ben vnſounde
                     For ſome be great growen vngrounde
                     Some ben ſoule, ſymple and ſmall
                     whether of hem is falſer ſounde
                     The falſer foule mote hym befall
                  
                  
                     ¶That one ſyde is that I of tell
                     Popes, cardynals and prelates
                     Parſons, monkes, and freers fell
                     Priours, abbottes of great eſtates
                     Of heuyn and hell they kepe the yates
                     And Peters ſucceſſours they ben all
                     This is demed by olde dates
                     But falſhed foule mought it befall
                  
                  
                     ¶The other ſyde ben poore and pale
                     And people put out of preaſe
                     And ſeme caytyffes ſore & cale
                     And euer in one without encreaſe
                     I clepeth iollers and loudleſe
                     who toteth on hem they bene vntall
                     They ben arayed all for the peace
                     But falſſhed foule mote it befall.
                  
                  
                     ¶Many a countrey haue I ſought
                     To knowe the falſer of theſe two
                     But euer my trauayle was for nought
                     All ſo ferre as I haue go
                     But as I wandred in a wro
                     In a wodde beſyde a wall
                     Two foules ſawe I ſytte tho
                     The falſer foul mote hym befall.
                  
                  
                     ¶That one dyd plede on the Popes ſyde
                     A gryffon of a grymme ſtature
                     A Pellycane withouten pryde
                     To theſe lollers layde his lure
                     He muſed his matter in meaſure
                     To counſayle Chryſt euer gan he call
                     The gryffon ſhewed as ſharpe as fyre
                     But falſhed foule mote it befall.
                  
                  
                     ¶The Pellycan began to preache
                     Both of mercy and of mekeneſſe
                     And ſayd that Chryſt ſo gan vs teache
                     And meke and mercyable gan bleſſe
                     The Euangely beareth wytneſſe
                     A lambe he lykeneth Chriſt ouer all
                     In tokenynge that he mekeſt was
                     Sith pryde was out of heuen fall.
                  
                  
                     ¶And ſo ſhulde euery Chriſtned be
                     Preeſtes, Peters ſucceſſours
                     Beth lowlyche and of lowe degree.
                     And vſen none erthly honours
                     
                        Neyther crowne, ne curious couetours
                     Ne pylloure, ne other proude pall
                     Ne nought to cofren vp great treaſours
                     For falſhed foule mote it befall
                  
                  
                     ¶Preeſts ſhulde for no cattel plede.
                     But chaſten hem in charite
                     Ne to no bateyle ſhulde men lede
                     For inhaunſyng of her owne degree
                     Nat wylne ſyttynges in hye ſee
                     Ne ſouerayntie in houſe ne hall
                     All worldly worſhippe defye and flee
                     For who ſo wylleth highnes foule ſhall fall
                  
                  
                     ¶Alas who may ſuche ſayntes call
                     That wylneth welde erthlye honour
                     As lowe as Lucifere ſuche ſhall fall
                     In baleful blackneſſe ybuylden her boure
                     That eggeth the people to errour
                     And maketh them to hem thrall
                     To Chryſt I holde ſuche one traytour
                     As lowe as Lucifer ſuche one ſhall fall.
                  
                  
                     ¶That wylleth to be kynges peeres
                     And hygher than the Emperour
                     Some that were but poore freers
                     Nowe wollen waxe a warryour
                     God is nat her gouernour.
                     That holdeth noman his permagall
                     whyle couetyſe is her counſaylour
                     All ſuche falſhed mote nede fall.
                  
                  
                     ¶That hye on horſe wylleth ryde
                     In glytterande golde of great araye
                     I paynted and portred all in pryde
                     No cōmen knyght maye go ſo gaye
                     Chaunge of clothyng euery daye
                     with golden gyrdles great and ſmall
                     As boyſtous as is bere at baye
                     All ſuche falſhed mote nede fall.
                  
                  
                     ¶with pryde punyſhed the poore
                     And ſome they ſuſtayne with ſale
                     Of holy churche maketh an hore
                     And fylleth her wombe with wyne and ale
                     with money fylleth many a male
                     And chaffren churches when they fall
                     And telleth the people a leude tale
                     Suche falſe faytours foule them befall.
                  
                  
                     ¶with chaunge of many maner meates
                     with ſonge and ſolace ſyttynge longe
                     And fylleth her wombe, and faſt fretes
                     And from the meate to the gonge
                     And after meat with harpe and ſonge
                     And eche man mote hem lordes call
                     And hote ſpyces euer amonge
                     Suche falſe faytours foule hem fall
                  
                  
                     ¶And myters mo than one or two
                     I perled as the quenes heed
                     A ſtaffe of golde, and pyrrey lo
                     As heuy as it were made of lead
                     with cloth of golde both newe and redde
                     with glytterande golde as grene as gall
                     By dome wyll dampne men to deed
                     All ſuche faytours foule hem fall.
                  
                  
                     ¶And Chryſtes people proudly curſe
                     with brode bokes, and braying bell
                     To putte pennyes in her purſe
                     They woll ſell both heuen and hel
                     And in her ſentence and thou wylt dwell
                     They wyllen geſſe in her gaye hall
                     And though the ſoth thou of hem tell
                     In great curſynge ſhalt thou fall.
                  
                  
                     ¶That is bleſſed, that they bleſſe
                     And curſed that they curſe woll
                     And thus the people they oppreſſe
                     And haue theyr lordſhyppes at full
                     And many be marchauntes of woll
                     And to purſe penyes woll come thrall
                     The poore people they all to pull
                     Suche falſe faytours foule hem fall
                  
                  
                     ¶Lordes mote to hem loute
                     Obeyſaunt to her brode bleſſyng
                     They ryden with her royall route
                     On a courſer, as it were a kynge
                     with ſaddle of golde glyttryng
                     with curyous harneys quayntly crallyt
                     Styroppes gaye of golde maſtlyng
                     All ſuche falſhed foule befall it.
                  
                  
                     ¶Chryſtes minyſters clepen they bene
                     And rulen all in robberye
                     But Antichriſt they ſeruen clene
                     Attyred all in tyrannye
                     wytneſſe of Iohns prophecye
                     That Antichriſte is her admirall
                     Tyffelers attyred in trecherye
                     All ſuche faytours foule hem fall.
                     ¶who ſayth that ſome of hem may ſynne
                     
                        He ſhalbe done to be deed
                     Some of hem woll gladly wynne
                     All ayenſt that whiche god forbed
                     All holyeſt they clepen her heed
                     That of her rule is regall
                     Alas that euer they eten breed
                     For all ſuche falſhed woll foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶Her heed loueth all honour
                     And to be worſhypped in worde and dede
                     Kynges mote to hem knele and coure
                     To the Apoſtles, that chryſt forbede
                     To Popes heſtes ſuche taketh more hede
                     Than to kepe Chryſtes cōmaundement
                     Of gold and ſyluer mote ben her wede
                     They holdeth hym hole omnipotent
                  
                  
                     ¶He ordayneth by his ordynaunce
                     To paryſh preeſtes a powere
                     To another a greater auaunce
                     A greater poynt to his myſtere
                     But for he is hygheſt in erth here
                     To hym reſerueth he many a poynt
                     But to Chryſt that hath no pere
                     Reſerueth he neyther opyn ne ioynt
                  
                  
                     ¶So ſemeth he aboue all
                     And Chryſt abouen hym nothyng
                     whan he ſytteth in his ſtall
                     Dampneth and ſaueth as hym thynke
                     Suche pryde tofore god doth ſtynke
                     An Angell bad Iohn to hym nat knele
                     But only to god do his bowynge
                     Such wyllers of worſhip muſt nede euyll fele.
                  
                  
                     ¶They ne clepen Chryſt, but ſ
                           •
                        tūs deus
                     And clepen her heed Sanctiſſimus
                     They that ſuche a ſect ſewys
                     I trowe they taken hem amyſſe
                     In erth here they haue her blyſſe
                     Her hye maſter is Belyal
                     Chryſtes people from hem wyſſe
                     For all ſuche falſe wyll foule tall.
                  
                  
                     ¶They mowe both bynde and loſe
                     And all is for her holy lyfe
                     To ſaue or dampne they mowe thoſe
                     Betwene hem now is great ſtryfe
                     Many a man is kylled with a knyfe
                     To wete which of hem haue lordſhyp ſhall
                     For ſuche Chryſt ſuffred woundes fyue
                     For all ſuche falſhed wyll foule fall.
                  
                  
                     ¶Chryſt ſayd: Qui gladio percutit
                     with ſwerde ſhall dye
                     He bad his preeſtes peace and gryth
                     And bade hem not drede for to dye
                     And bad them be both ſymple and ſlye
                     And carke not for no cattall
                     And truſteth on god that ſytteth on hye
                     For all falſe ſhull foule fall.
                  
                  
                     ¶Theſe wollen make men to ſwere
                     Ayenſt Chryſtes cōmaundement
                     And Chryſtes membres all to tere
                     On roode, as he wer newe yrent
                     Suche lawes they make by cōmen aſſent
                     Echeon it choweth as a ball
                     Thus the poore be fully ſhent
                     But euer falſhed foule it befall.
                  
                  
                     ¶They vſen no ſymonye
                     But ſellen churches and prioryes
                     Ne they vſen no enuye
                     But curſen all hem contraryes
                     And hyreth men by dayes and yeres
                     with ſtrength to holde hem in her ſtall
                     And culleth all her aduerſaryes
                     Therfore falſhed foule thou fall
                  
                  
                     ¶with purſe they purchaſe perſonage
                     with purſe they paynen hem to plede
                     And men of warre they woll wage
                     To brynge her enemyes to the dede
                     And lordes lyues they woll lede
                     And moche take, and gyue but ſmall
                     But he it ſo get, from it ſhall ſhede
                     And make ſuche falſe ryght foule fal
                  
                  
                     ¶They halowe nothyng but for hyre
                     Churche, font, ne veſtement
                     And make orders in euery ſhyre
                     But preeſtes paye for the parchement
                     Of ryatours they taken rent
                     Therwith they ſmere the ſhyppes ſkall
                     For many churches ben ofte ſuſpent
                     All ſuche falſhed yet foule it fall.
                  
                  
                     Some lyueth nat in lecherye
                     But haunten wenches, widdowes & wyues
                     And punyſheth the poore for putrye
                     Them ſelfe it vſeth all theyr lyues
                     And but a man to them ſhryues
                     To heuen come neuer he ſhall
                     He ſhalbe curſed as be caytyues
                     
                        To hell they ſayne that he ſhall fall
                  
                  
                     ¶There was more mercy in Maximyen
                     And in Nero, that neuer was good
                     Than is nowe in ſome of them
                     whan he hath on his furred hoode
                     They folowe Chriſt that ſhedde his blode
                     To heuen, as buckette in to the wall
                     Suche wreches ben worſe than wode
                     And all ſuche faytours foule hem fall
                  
                  
                     ¶They gyue her almeſſe to the ryche
                     To maynteynours, and to men of lawe
                     For to lordes they woll be lyche
                     An harlottes ſonne nat worthe an hawe
                     Sothfaſtneſſe ſuche han ſlawe
                     They kembe her crokettes with chriſtall
                     And drede of god they haue downe drawe
                     All ſuche faytours foule hem fall
                  
                  
                     ¶They maken parſons for the penny
                     And canons of her cardynals
                     Vnnethes amongeſt hem all any
                     That he ne hath gloſed the goſpell fals
                     For Chriſt made neuer no cathedrals
                     Ne wyth hym was no cardynall
                     wyth a Redde hatte as vſyn mynſtrals
                     But falſhed foule mote it befall
                  
                  
                     ¶Theyr tythyng, and her offryng both
                     They clemeth it by poſſeſſyon
                     Therof nyll they none forgo
                     But robben men as raunſome
                     The tythyng of Turpe lucrum
                     with theſe maiſters is meynall
                     Tythyng of bribry, and larſon
                     wyll make falſhed full foule to fall
                  
                  
                     ¶They taken to ferme her ſompnours
                     To harme the people what they may
                     To pardoners, and falſe faytours
                     Sell her ſeales I dare well ſay
                     And all to holden great array
                     To multiply hem more metall
                     They drede full lytell domes day
                     whan all ſuche ſhall foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶Suche harlottes ſhull men dyſclaunder
                     For they ſhullen make her gree
                     And ben as proude as Alexaunder
                     And ſayne to the poore, wo be ye
                     By yere eche preeſte ſhall paye hys fee
                     To encreaſe hys lemmans call
                     Suche heerdes ſhull well yuell the
                     And all ſuche falſe ſhull foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶And yf a man be falſely famed
                     And wolde make purgacioun
                     Than woll the offycers be agramed
                     And aſſigne hym fro towne to towne
                     So nede he muſt paye raunſome
                     Though he be clene, as is chriſtall
                     And than haue an abſolutioun
                     But all ſuche falſe ſhull foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶Though he be gyltie of the dede
                     And that he maye money pay
                     All the whyle his purſe woll blede
                     He maye vſe it fro day to day
                     Theſe byſhoppes offycers gone full gay
                     And thys game they vſen ouer all
                     The poore to pyll is all theyr pray
                     All ſuche falſe ſhull foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶Alas, god ordayned neuer ſuche lawe
                     Ne no ſuche crafte of couetyſe
                     He forbade it by hys ſawe
                     Suche gouernours mowen of god agryſe
                     For all his rules is ryghtwyſe
                     Theſe newe poyntes ben pure papall
                     And goddes lawe they diſpyce
                     And all ſuche faytours ſhul foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶They ſayne that Peter had the key
                     Of heuyn and hell, to haue and holde
                     I trowe Peter toke no money
                     For no ſynnes that he ſolde
                     Suche ſucceſſours ben to bolde
                     In wynnyng all theyr wytte they wrall
                     Her conſcience is waxen colde
                     And all ſuche faytours foule hem fall
                  
                  
                     ¶Peter was neuer ſo great a fole
                     To leaue hys key with ſuche a lorell
                     Or to take ſuche curſed ſuche a tole
                     He was aduyſed nothyng well
                     I trowe they haue the key of hell
                     Theyr maiſter is of that place marſhall
                     For there they dreſſen hem to dwell
                     And with falſe Lucifere there to fall
                  
                  
                     ¶They ben as proude as Lucifarre
                     As angry, and as enuyous
                     From good faythe they ben full farre
                     
                        In couetyſe they ben curyous
                     To catche catell as couytous
                     As hoūde, that for hungre woll yall
                     Vngoodly, and vngratious
                     And nedely ſuche falſhed ſhal foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶The pope and he were Peters heyre
                     Me thynke he erreth in this caſe
                     whan choyſe of byſhoppes is in diſpeyre
                     To choſen hem in dyuers place
                     A lorde ſhall write to hym for grace
                     For hys clerke anone pray he ſhall
                     So ſhall he ſpede hys purchaſe
                     And all ſuche falſe foule hem fall
                  
                  
                     ¶Though he can no more good
                     A lordes prayer ſhalbe ſpedde
                     Though he be wylde of wyll or wood
                     Nat vnderſtandyng what men han redde
                     A leude boſter, and that god forbede
                     As good a byſhoppe is my horſe ball
                     Suche a Pope is foule be ſtedde
                     And at laſt woll foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶He maketh byſhoppes for erthly thanke
                     And nothyng for Chriſtes ſake
                     Suche that ben full fatte and ranke
                     To ſoule heale none hede they take
                     Al is well done what euer they make
                     For they ſhal anſwere at one fors all
                     For worldes thanke, ſuche worch and wake
                     And all ſuche falſe ſhall foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶Suche that canne nat her Crede
                     wyth prayer ſhull be made prelates
                     Nother canne the goſpell rede
                     Suche ſhull nowe welde hye eſtates
                     The hye goodes frendſhyp hem makes
                     They toteth on her ſomme totall
                     Suche bere the keyes of hell yates
                     And all ſuche falſe ſhall foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶They forſake for Chriſtes loue
                     Traueyle, hungre, thurſt, and colde
                     For they ben ordred euer all aboue
                     Out of youthe tyl they ben olde
                     By the dore they go, nat in to the folde
                     To helpe theyr ſhepe they nought trauall
                     Hyred men all ſuche I holde
                     And all ſuche falſe foule hem fall
                  
                  
                     ¶For Chryſt her kyng they woll forſake
                     And knowe hym nought for hys pouerte
                     For Chriſtes loue they woll wake
                     And drynke pyement ale aparte
                     Of god they ſeme nothyng a ferde
                     As luſty lyueth, as dyd Lamuall
                     And dryuen her ſhepe in to deſerte
                     All ſuche faytours ſhull foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶Chriſt hath .xij. Apoſtels here
                     Nowe ſay they, there may be but one
                     That may nat erre in no manere
                     who leueth nat this ben loſt echone
                     Peter erred, ſo dyde nat Iohn
                     why is he cleped the principall?
                     Chriſt cleped hym Peter, but him ſelf ye ſtone
                     All falſe faytours foule hem fall
                  
                  
                     ¶why curſen they the croyſery
                     Chriſtes chriſten creatures
                     For bytwene hem is nowe enuy
                     To be enhaunſed in honours
                     And chriſten lyuers with her labours
                     Fyr they leuyn on no man mortall
                     But do to dethe with diſhonours
                     And all ſuche falſe foule hem fall
                  
                  
                     ¶what knoweth a tyllour at the plowe
                     The popes name, and what he hate
                     Hys crede ſuffyſeth to hym ynowe
                     And knoweth a cardynall by hys hatte
                     Rough is the poore vnrightly latte
                     That knoweth Chriſt hys god royall
                     Suche maters be nat worth a gnatte
                     But ſuche falſe faytours foule hem fall
                  
                  
                     ¶A kyng ſhall knele and kyſſe hys ſhowe
                     Chryſt ſuffred a ſynfull to kyſſe his fete
                     Me thynketh he holdeth hym hye ynowe
                     So Lucifer dyd, that hye ſette
                     Suche one me thynketh hym ſelfe foryete
                     Eyther to the trouth he was nat call
                     Chryſt that ſuffred woundes wete
                     Shall make ſuche falſhed foule fall
                  
                  
                     ¶They layeth out her large nettes
                     For to take ſyluer and golde
                     Fyllen coffers, and ſackes fettes
                     There as they ſoules catche ſholde
                     Her ſeruauntes be to them vnholde
                     But they can doublyn theyr rentall
                     To bygge hem caſtels, and bygge hem holde
                     And all ſuche falſe foule hem fall.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶Here endeth the fyrſt parte of thys tale, and herafter foloweth the ſeconde parte
                  
                     
                        TO accorde with this worde fal
                     No more Engliſh can I fynde
                     Shewe another nowe I ſhall
                     For I haue moche to ſaye behynde
                     Howe preeſtes han the people pynde
                     As curteys Chriſt hath me kende
                     And putte thys matter in my mynde
                     To make thys maner men amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Shortly to ſhende hem, and ſhewe nowe
                     Howe wrongfully they worche and walke
                     O hye god, nothyng they tell, ne howe
                     But in goddes worde, telleth many a balke
                     In hernes holde hem and in halke
                     And prechyn of tythes and offrende
                     And vntruely of the goſpell talke
                     For hys mercy god it amende
                  
                  
                     ¶What is Antichriſt to ſaye
                     But euyn Chriſtes aduerſary
                     Suche hathe nowe ben many a day
                     To Chriſtes byddyng full contrary
                     That from the trouthe clene varry
                     Out of the waye they ben wende
                     And Chriſtes people vntruely cary
                     God for hys pytie it amende
                  
                  
                     ¶That lyuen contrary to Chriſtes lyfe
                     In hye pride agaynſt mekeneſſe
                     Agaynſt ſufferaunce they vſen ſtryfe
                     And angre ayenſt ſobreneſſe
                     Agaynſt wyſedome wylfulneſſe
                     To Chriſtes tales lytell tende
                     Agaynſt meaſure outragyouſneſſe
                     But whan god woll it maye amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Lordly lyfe ayenſt lowlyneſſe
                     And demyn all without mercy
                     And couetyſe ayenſt largeſſe
                     Agaynſt trewth trechery
                     And agaynſt almeſſe enuy
                     Agaynſt Chriſt they comprehende
                     For chaſtyte they maynteyne lechery
                     God for hys grace thys amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Ayenſt penaunce they vſe delyghtes
                     Ayenſt ſuffraunce ſtronge defence
                     Ayenſt god they vſen yuel rightes
                     Agaynſte pytie puniſhementes
                     Open yuell ayenſt contynence
                     Her wycked wynnyng worſe diſpende
                     Sobreneſſe they ſette in to diſpence
                     But god for hys goodneſſe it amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Why cleymen they holy hys powere
                     And wranglen ayenſt all hys heſtes
                     Hys lyuyng folowen they nothyng here
                     But lyuen worſe than wytleſſe beeſtes
                     Of fyſhe and fleſhe they louen feeſtes
                     As lordes they ben brode ykende
                     Of goddes poore they haten geſtes
                     God for hys mercy thys amende
                  
                  
                     ¶With Dyuers ſuche ſhall haue her dome
                     That ſayne that they be Chriſtes frendes
                     And do nothyng as they ſhulde done
                     All ſuche ben falſer than ben fendes
                     On the people they ley ſuche bendes
                     As god is in erthe they han offende
                     Surour for ſuche Chriſt nowe ſende vs
                     And for hys mercy thys amende
                  
                  
                     ¶A token of Antichriſt they be
                     Hys careckes ben nowe wyde yknowe
                     Receyued to preche ſhall no man be
                     wythout token of hym I trowe
                     Eche chriſten preeſt, to prechyn owe
                     From god aboue they ben ſende.
                     Goddes worde, to all folke for to ſhowe
                     Synfull man for to amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Chriſt ſente the poore for to preche
                     The royall ryche he dyd nat ſo
                     Nowe dare no poore the people teche
                     For Antichriſt is ouer all her foe
                     Amonge the people he mote go
                     He hath bydden, all ſuche ſuſpende
                     Some hath he hente, and thynketh yet mo
                     But all thys god may well amende
                  
                  
                     ¶All tho that han the worlde forſake
                     And lyuen loly, as god badde
                     In to her priſon ſhullen be take
                     Betyn and bounden, and forthe ladde
                     Herof I rede no man be dradde
                     Chriſt ſayd, hys ſhulde be ſhende
                     Eche man ought herof be gladde
                     For god full well it woll amende
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶They take on hem royall powere
                     And ſaye they haue ſwerdes two
                     One curſe to hell, one flee men here
                     For at hys takyng Chriſt had no mo
                     Yet Peter had one of tho
                     But Chriſt, to Peter ſmyte gan defende
                     And in to the ſheth badde putte it tho
                     And all ſuche myſcheues god amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Chriſt badde Peter kepe his ſhepe
                     And with his ſwerde forbade hym ſmyte
                     Swerde is no tole with ſhepe to kepe
                     But to ſheperdes that ſhepe woll byte
                     Me thynketh ſuche ſheperdes ben to wyte
                     Ayen her ſhepe with ſwerde that contende
                     They driue her ſhepe with great diſpyte
                     But all thys god may well amende
                  
                  
                     ¶So ſucceſſours to Peter be they nought
                     Whom Chriſt made chefe paſtoure
                     Aſwerde no ſheperde vſen ought
                     But he wold ſlee, as a bochoure
                     For who ſo were Peters ſucceſſour
                     Shulde bere hys ſhepe tyll hys backe bende
                     And ſhadowe hem from euery ſhoure
                     And all thys god maye wel amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Succeſſours to Peter ben theſe
                     In that that Peter Chriſt forſoke
                     That had leuer the loue of god leſe
                     Than a ſheperde had to leſe his hoke
                     He culleth the ſhepe as dothe the coke
                     Of hem taken the woll vntrende
                     And falſely gloſe the goſpell boke
                     God for his mercy them amende
                  
                  
                     ¶After Chriſt had take Peter the kay
                     Chryſt ſayd, he muſte dye for man
                     That Peter to Chriſt gan withſay
                     Chriſt badde hym go behynde Sathan
                     Suche coūſaylours many of theſe men han
                     For worldes wele, god to offende
                     Peters ſucceſſours they ben for than
                     But all ſuche god may well amende
                  
                  
                     ¶For Sathan is to ſay no more
                     But he that contrary to Chriſt is
                     In thys they lerne Peters lore
                     They ſewen hym whan he dyd myſſe
                     They folowe Peter forſothe in thys
                     In al that Chriſt wolde Peter reprehende
                     But nat in that that longeth to heuyn blyſſe
                     God for hys mercy hem amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Some of the Apoſtels they ſewen in caſe
                     Of ought that I can vnderſtonde
                     Hym that betrayed Chriſt, Iudas
                     That bare the purſe in euery londe
                     And al that he myght ſette on honde
                     He hydde and ſtale, and myſpende
                     His rule theſe traytours han in honde
                     Almighty God hem amende
                  
                  
                     ¶And at laſt hys lorde gan tray
                     Curſedly through hys falſe couetyſe
                     So wolde theſe, trayen hym for money
                     And they wyſten in what wyſe
                     They be ſeker of the ſelfe enſyſe
                     From all ſothneſſe they ben frende
                     And couetyſe chaungen with queyneyſe
                     Almighty God all ſuche amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Were Chriſt on erthe here efte ſone
                     Theſe wolde dampne hym to dye
                     All hys heſtes they han fordone
                     And ſayne his ſawes ben hereſy
                     And ayenſt his commaundementes they crye
                     And dampne all hys to be brende
                     For it lyketh nat hem ſuche loſengery
                     God almighty hem amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Theſe han moremyght in Englande hert
                     Than hath the kynge and all hys lawe
                     They han purchaſed hem ſuche powere
                     To taken hem whom lyſte nat knawe
                     And ſay that hereſy is her ſawe
                     And ſo to pryſone woll hem ſende
                     It was nat ſo by elder dawe
                     God for hys mercy it amende
                  
                  
                     ¶The kynges lawe wol no man deme
                     Angerlyche withouten anſwere
                     But yf any man theſe myſqueme
                     He ſhalbe bayghted as a bere
                     And yet wel worſe they woll hym tere
                     And in pryſone woll hem pende
                     In gyues, and in other gere
                     Whan God woll, it maye mende
                  
                  
                     ¶The kyng taxeth nat hys men
                     But by aſſente of the commynalte
                     But theſe eche yere woll raunſom hem
                     Mayſterfully, more than doth he
                     Her ſeales by yere better be
                     
                        Than is the kynges in extende
                     Her offycers han gretter fee
                     But thys miſchefe god amende
                  
                  
                     ¶For who ſo woll proue a teſtament
                     That is natt all worthe tenne pounde
                     He ſhall paye for the parchement
                     The thyrde parte of the money all rounde
                     Thus the people is raunſounde
                     They ſaye ſuche parte to hem ſhulde apende
                     There as they grypen it gothe to grounde
                     God for hys mercy it amende
                  
                  
                     ¶A ſymple fornycatioun
                     Twenty ſhyllynges he ſhall paye
                     And than haue an abſolution
                     And all the yere vſen it forthe he maye
                     Thus they letten hem go a ſtray
                     They recke nat though the ſoule be brende
                     Theſe kepyn yuell Peters key
                     And all ſuche ſheperdes God amende
                  
                  
                     ¶Wonder is, that the parlyament
                     And all the lordes of thys londe
                     Here to taken ſo lytell entent
                     To helpe the people out of her honde
                     For they ben harder in theyr bonde
                     Worſe beate, and bytter brende
                     Than to the kyng is vnderſtande
                     God hym helpe thys to amende
                  
                  
                     ¶What byſſhoppes, what relygions
                     Han in thys lande as moche laye fee
                     Lorſhyppes, and poſſeſſyons
                     More than the lordes, it ſemeth me
                     That maketh hem leſe charyte
                     They mowe nat to God attende
                     In erthe they haue ſo hyghe degree
                     God for hys mercy it amende
                  
                  
                     ¶The Emperour yaf the pope ſomtyme
                     So hyghe lordſhyp hym aboute
                     That at laſte the ſely kyme
                     The proude Pope putte hym out
                     So of thys realme is in doute
                     But lordes be ware and them defende
                     For nowe theſe folke be wonder ſtoute
                     The kynge and lordes nowe thys amende.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Thus endeth the ſeconde parte of this tale, and her after foloweth the thyrde.
                  
                     
                        MOyſes lawe forbode it tho
                     That preeſtes ſhulde no lordſhyppes welde
                     Chriſtes Goſpel byddeth alſo
                     That they ſhulde no lordſhyppe helde
                     Ne Chriſtes Apoſtels were neuer ſo bolde
                     No ſuche lordeſhyppes to them enbrace
                     But ſmeren her ſhepe and kepe her folde
                     God amende hem for hys grace
                  
                  
                     ¶For they ne ben but countrefete
                     Men may knowe hem by her fruite
                     Her gretneſſe maketh hem god foryete
                     And take hys mekeneſſe in diſpyte
                     And they were poore and had but lyte
                     They nolde nat demen after the face
                     But noryſhe her ſhepe, and hem nat byte
                     God amende hem for hys grace
                  
                  
                     ¶Gyfon.
                     ¶What canſt thou preche ayenſt chanons
                     That men clepen ſeculere?
                  
                  
                     Pely.
                     They ben curates of many towns
                     On erthe they haue great powere
                     They han great prebendes and dere
                     Some two or thre, and ſome mo
                     A perſonage to ben a playeng fere
                     And yet they ſerue the kynge alſo
                  
                  
                     ¶And lette to ferme all that fare
                     To whom that woll moſt gyue therfore
                     Some woll ſpende, and ſome woll ſpa
                           •
                        
                     
                     And ſome woll laye it vp in ſtore
                     A cure of ſoule they care nat fore
                     So they mowe money take
                     whether her ſoules be wonne or lore
                     Her profytes they woll nat forſake
                  
                  
                     ¶They haue a gederyng procuratour
                     That can the poore people enplede
                     And robben hem as a rauynour
                     And to hys lorde the money lede
                     And catche of quicke and eke of dede
                     And riche
                           •
                         hym and hys lorde eke
                     And to robbe the poore can gyue good rede
                     Of olde and yonge, of hole and ſyke
                  
                  
                     ¶Therwith they purchaſe hem lay fee
                     In londe, there hem lyketh beſt
                     And buylde alſo brode as a cyte
                     
                        Bothe in the Eſt, and eke in the weſt
                     To purchaſe thus they ben ful preſt
                     But on the poore they woll nought ſpende
                     Ne no good gyue to goddes geſt
                     Ne ſende hym ſome that all hath ſende
                  
                  
                     ¶By her ſeruyce ſuche woll lyue
                     And truſſe that other in to treaſour
                     Though all her paryſhe dye vnſhriue
                     They woll nat gyue a roſe floure
                     Her lyfe ſhulde be as a myrrour
                     Bothe to lered and to leude alſo
                     And teche the people her lele labour
                     Suche myſter men ben all myſgo.
                  
                  
                     ¶Some of hem ben harde nygges
                     And ſome of hem ben proude and gay
                     Some ſpende her good vpon gygges
                     And fynden hem of great aray
                     Alas, what thynke theſe men to ſay
                     That thus diſpenden goddis good
                     At the dredefull domes daye
                     Suche wretches ſhulbe worſe than wood
                  
                  
                     ¶Some her churces neuer ne ſye
                     Ne neuer o peny thyder ne ſende
                     Though the poore pariſhens for hungre dye
                     O peny on hem wyl they nat ſpende
                     Haue they receyuynge of the rente
                     They recke neuer of the remenant
                     Alas the deuyll hath clene hem blent
                     Suche one is Sathanas ſoiournant
                  
                  
                     ¶And vſen horedome and harlotry
                     Couetyſe, pomp
                           •
                        , and pride
                     Slouthe, wrathe, and eke enuy
                     And ſewen ſynne by euery ſyde
                     Alas, where thynke ſuche tabyde
                     Howe woll they accomptes yelde
                     From hye God they mowe hem nat hyde
                     Suche wyllers wytte is nat worth a nelde
                  
                  
                     ¶They ben ſo roted in richeſſe
                     That Chriſtes pouert is foryet
                     Serued wyth ſo many meſſe
                     Hem thynketh that Manna is no mete
                     All is good that they mowe gete
                     They wene to lyue euermore
                     But whan god at dome is ſette
                     Suche treaſour is a feble ſtore
                  
                  
                     ¶Vnneth mote they matyns ſaye
                     For countyng and for court holdynge
                     And yet he iangleth as a iaye
                     And vnderſtont hym ſelfe nothynge
                     He woll ſerue bothe erle and kynge
                     For hys fyndyng and hys fee
                     And hyde hys tythynge and hys offrynge
                     This is a feble charite
                  
                  
                     ¶Other they ben proude, or coueytous
                     Or they ben harde, or hungry
                     Or they ben lyberall or lecherous
                     Or els medlers wyth marchandry
                     Or maynteyners of men wyth maiſtry
                     Or ſtewardes, countours, or pledours
                     And ſerue God in hypocriſy
                     Such preeſtes ben Chriſtes falſe traytours
                  
                  
                     ¶They ben falſe, they ben vengeable
                     And begylen men in Chriſtes name
                     They ben vnſtedfaſt and vnſtable
                     To tray her lorde, hem thynketh no ſhame
                     To ſerue God they ben full lame
                     Goddes theues, and falſly ſtele
                     And falſely goddes worde defame
                     In wynnyng is her worldes wele
                  
                  
                     ¶Antichryſt theſe ſeruen all
                     I pray the who may ſay nay?
                     Wyth Antichryſt ſuche ſhull fall
                     They folowen hym in dede and fay
                     They ſeruyn hym in ryche array
                     To ſerue Chryſt ſuche falſely fayne
                     Why, at the dredeful domes day
                     Shull they not folowe hym to payne?
                  
                  
                     ¶That knowen hem ſelfe that they done yll
                     Ayenſt Chriſtes commaundement
                     And amende hem neuer ne wyll
                     But ſerue Sathan by one aſſent
                     Who ſayth ſothe he ſhalbe ſhent
                     Or ſpeketh ayenſt her falſe lyuyng
                     who ſo well lyueth ſhalbe brent
                     For ſuche ben gretter than the kyng
                  
                  
                     ¶Pope, Byſhoppes, and Cardynals
                     Chanons, Perſons, and Vycaire
                     In goddes ſeruyce I trowe ben falſe
                     That ſacramentes ſellen here
                     And ben as proude as Lucifere
                     Eche man loke whether that I lye
                     Who ſo ſpeketh ayenſt her powere
                     It ſhall be holden hereſy
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Loke howe many orders take
                     Onely of Chriſte, for hys ſeruyce
                     That the worldes goodes forſake
                     who ſo taketh orders, or other wyſe
                     I trowe that they ſhall ſore agryſe
                     For all the gloſe that they conne
                     All ſewen not thys aſſyſe
                     In yuell tyme they thus begonne
                  
                  
                     ¶Loke howe many amonge hem all
                     Holden not thys hye waye
                     wyth Antichriſt they ſhullen fall
                     For they wolden God betraye
                     God amende hem that beſt maye
                     For many men they maken ſhende
                     They weten well the ſothe I ſaye
                     But the dyuell hath foule hem blende
                  
                  
                     ¶Some on her churches dwell
                     Apparaylled poorely, proude of porte
                     The ſeuen ſacramentes they done ſell
                     In cattel catchynge is her comforte
                     Of eche matter they wollen mell
                     And done hem wronge is her dyſporte
                     To afray the people they ben fell
                     And holde hem lower then doth the lorde
                  
                  
                     ¶For the tythynge of a ducke
                     Or of an apple, or an aye
                     They make men ſweare vpon a boke
                     Thus they foulen Chriſtes ſay
                     Suche bearen yuell heauen kay
                     They mowen aſſoyle, they mowe ſhryue
                     wyth mennes wyues ſtrongly play
                     wyth true tyllers ſturte and ſtryue
                  
                  
                     ¶At the wreſtlynge, and at the wake
                     And chefe chauntours at the nale
                     Markette beaters, and medlynge make
                     Hoppen and houten wyth heue and hale
                     At fayre freſhe, and at wyne ſtale
                     Dyne and drynke, and make debate
                     The ſeuen ſacramentes ſet at ſayle
                     Howe kepe ſuche the kayes of heuen gate?
                  
                  
                     ¶Mennes wyues they wollen holde
                     And though that they ben ryght ſory
                     To ſpeake they ſhull not be ſo bolde
                     For ſompnynge to the conſyſtory
                     And make hem ſaye mouth I lye
                     Though they it ſawe wyth her eye
                     Hys lemman holden openly
                     No man ſo hardy to axe why
                  
                  
                     ¶He woll haue tythynge and offrynge
                     Maugre who ſo euer it gruche
                     And twyſe on the daye he woll ſynge
                     Goddes preſtes nere none ſuche
                     He mote on huntyng wyth dogge and byche
                     And blowen hys horne, and cryen hey
                     And ſorcery vſen as a wytche
                     Suche kepen yuell Peters key
                  
                  
                     ¶Yet they mote haue ſome ſtocke or ſtone
                     Gayly paynted, and proudly dyght
                     To maken men lyuen vpon
                     And ſaye that it is full of myght
                     Aboute ſuche, men ſette vp great lyght
                     Other ſuche ſtockes ſhull ſtande therby
                     As darke as it were mydnyght
                     For it maye make no maſtry
                  
                  
                     ¶That it leude people ſe mowe
                     Thou Mary, thou worcheſt wōder thynges
                     Aboute that, that men offren to nowe
                     Hongen broches, ouches, and rynges
                     The preeſt purchaſeth the offrynges
                     But he nyll offre to none ymage
                     wo is the ſoule that he for ſynges
                     That precheth for ſuche a pylgrimage
                  
                  
                     ¶To men and women that ben poore
                     That ben Chriſtes owne lykeneſſe
                     Men ſhullen offre at her dore
                     That ſuffren honger and dyſtreſſe
                     And to ſuche ymages offre leſſe
                     That mowe not fele thurſt ne colde
                     The poore in ſprete gan Chriſte bleſſe
                     Therfore offreth to feble and olde
                  
                  
                     ¶Buckelers brode, and ſweardes longe
                     Baudryke, wyth baſelardes kene
                     Suche toles about her necke they honge
                     wyth Antichriſt ſuche preeſtes bene
                     Vpon her dedes it is well ſene
                     whome they ſeruen, whome they honoren
                     Antichriſtes they bene clene
                     And goddes goodes faſly deuouren
                  
                  
                     ¶Of ſcarlet and grene gay gownes
                     That mote be ſhape for the newe
                     To clyppen & kyſſen counten in townes
                     The damoſeles that to the daunce ſewe
                     Cutted clothes to ſewe her hewe
                     
                        wyth longe pykes on her ſhone
                     Our goddes goſpell is not trewe
                     Eyther they ſeruen the dyuell or none
                  
                  
                     ¶Nowe ben preſtes pokes ſo wyde
                     That men muſt enlarge the veſtement
                     The holy goſpell they done hyde
                     For they contraryen in rayment
                     Suche preeſtes of Lucifer ben ſent
                     Lyke conquetours they ben arayde
                     The proude pendauntes at her ars ypent
                     Falſely the truthe they han betrayde
                  
                  
                     ¶Shryfte ſyluer ſuche wollen aſke is
                     And woll men crepe to the crouche
                     None of the ſacramentes ſaue aſkes
                     wythout mede ſhall no man touche
                     On her byſhoppe theyr warant vouche
                     That is lawe of the decre
                     wyth mede and money thus they mouche
                     And thus they ſayne is charite
                  
                  
                     ¶In the myddes of her maſſe
                     They nyll haue no man but for hyre
                     And full ſhortly let forth paſſe
                     Suche ſhull men fynde in eche ſhyre
                     That perſonages for profyte deſyre
                     To lyue in lykynge and in luſtes
                     I dare not ſayne, Sans oſe ieo dyre
                     That ſuche ben Antichriſtes preeſtes
                  
                  
                     ¶Or they yeſ the byſhoppes why
                     Or they mote ben in hys ſeruyce
                     And holden forth her harlotry
                     Suche prelates ben of feble empryſe
                     Of Goddes grame ſuche men agryſe
                     For ſuche matters that taken mede
                     Howe they excuſe hem, and in what wyſe
                     Me thynketh they ought greatly drede
                  
                  
                     ¶They ſayne that it to no man longeth
                     To reproue them though they erre
                     But falſely goddes goodeſſe they fongeth
                     And therwyth maynteyne wo and werre
                     Her dedes ſhulde be as bryght as ſterre
                     Her lyuynge, leude mannes lyght
                     They ſaye the pope maye not erre
                     Nede muſte that paſſe mannes myght
                  
                  
                     ¶Though a preſt lye wt his leman al nyght
                     And tellen hys felowe, and he hym
                     He goth to maſſe anone ryght
                     And ſayeth he ſyngeth out of ſynne
                     Hys byrde abydeth hym at hys ynne
                     And dyghteth hys dyner the meane whyle
                     He ſyngeth hys maſſe for he wolde wynne
                     And ſo he weneth God begyle
                  
                  
                     ¶Hem thynketh longe tyll they be mette
                     And that they vſen forth all the yere
                     Amonge the folke when he is ſette
                     He holdeth no man halfe hys pere
                     Of the byſhoppe he hath powere
                     To ſoyle men, or els they ben lore
                     Hys abſolution maye make them ſkere
                     And wo is the ſoule that he ſyngeth fore
                  
                  
                     ¶The Gryffon began for to threte
                     And ſayd, of monkes canſt thou ought
                     The Pellycan ſayd, they ben full grete
                     And in thys world moch wo hath wrought
                     Saynt benet, that her order brought
                     Ne made hem neuer on ſuche manere
                     I trowe it came neuer in hys thought
                     That they ſhulde vſe ſo great power
                  
                  
                     ¶That a man ſhulde a monke lorde cal
                     Ne ſerue on knees, as a kynge
                     He is as proude as prynce in pall
                     In meate, and drynke, and all thynge
                     Some wearen myter and rynge
                     wyth double worſted well ydyght
                     wyth royall meate and ryche drynke
                     And rydeth on a courſer as a knyght
                  
                  
                     ¶Wyth hauke and wyth houndes eke
                     wyth broches or ouches on hys hode
                     Some ſaye no maſſe in all a weke
                     Of deynties is her moſte foode
                     wyth lordſhyppes and wyth bondmen
                     Thys is a royall religion
                     Saynt Benet made neuer none of hem
                     To haue lordſhyppe of man ne towne
                  
                  
                     ¶Nowe they ben queynte and curious
                     wyth fyne clothe cladde and ſerued clene
                     Proude angry, and enuyous
                     Malyce is moche that they meane
                     In catchynge crafty and couetous
                     Lordly lyuen in great lykynge
                     Thys lyuynge is not religious
                     Accordynge to Benette in hys lyuynge
                  
                  
                     ¶They ben clerkes, her courtes they ouer ſe
                     
                        Her poore tenaunce fully they ſlyte
                     The hyre that a man amerced be
                     The gladlyer they woll it wryte
                     Thys is farre from Chriſtes pouerte
                     For all wyth couetyſe they endyte
                     On the poore they haue no pyte
                     Ne neuer hem cheryſhe but euer hem byte
                  
                  
                     ¶And cōmenly ſuche ben comen
                     Of poore people, and of hem begete
                     That thys perfection han ynomen
                     Her fathers ryden not but on her fete
                     And trauaylen ſore for that they ete
                     In pouert lyueth yonge and olde
                     Her fathers ſuffreth drought and wete
                     Many hongry meles, thurſt, and colde
                  
                  
                     ¶And all thys the monkes han forſake
                     For Chriſtes loue and ſaynt Benette
                     To pryde and eaſe haue hem take
                     Thys religion is yuell beſette
                     Had they ben out of religioun
                     They muſt haue honged at the plowe
                     Threſhynge & dykynge fro towne to towne
                     wyth ſory mete, and not halfe ynowe
                  
                  
                     ¶Therfore they han thys all forſake
                     And taken to ryches, pryde, and eaſe
                     Full fewe for God woll monkes hem make
                     Lytell is ſuche order for to prayſe
                     Saynt Benet ordayned it not ſo
                     But badde hem be cherelyche
                     In churlyche maner lyue and go
                     Boyſtous in earth, and not lor
                           •
                        lych
                  
                  
                     ¶They dyſclaunder ſaynt Benette
                     Therfore they haue hys holy curſe
                     Saynt Benet wyth hem neuer mette
                     But yf they thought to robbe hys purſe
                     I can no more herof tell
                     But they ben lyke tho before
                     And clene ſerue the dyuell of hell
                     And ben hys treaſoure and hys ſtore
                  
                  
                     ¶And all ſuche other counterfaytours
                     Chanons, Canons, and ſuche dyſgyſed
                     Ben goddes enemyes and traytours
                     Hys true religion han foule dyſpyſed
                     Of Freres I haue tolde before
                     In a makynge of a Crede
                     And yet I coulde tell worſe and more
                     But men wolde weryen it to rede
                  
                  
                     ¶As goddes goodneſſe no man tell myght
                     wryte ne ſpeake, ne thynke in thought
                     So her falſhed, and her vnryght
                     May no man tell that euer god wrought
                     The Gryffon ſayd, thou canſt no good
                     Thou came neuer of no gentyll kynde
                     Other I trowe thou waxeſt wood
                     Or els thou haſt loſte thy mynde
                  
                  
                     ¶Shulde holy churche haue no heed?
                     who ſhulde be her gouernayle
                     who ſhulde her rule, who ſhulde her reed
                     who ſhulde her forthren, who ſhulde auayle
                     Eche man ſhall lyue by hys trauayle
                     who beſt doth, ſhall haue moſte mede
                     wyth ſtrength yf men the churche aſſayle
                     wyth ſtrength men muſt defende her nede
                  
                  
                     ¶And the pope were purely poore
                     Nedy, and nothynge ne hadde
                     He ſhulde be dryuen from dore to dore
                     The wycked of hym nolde not be dradde
                     Of ſuche an heed men wolde be ſadde
                     And ſynfully lyuen as hem luſt
                     wyth ſtrength, amendes ſuche be made
                     wyth wepen wolues from ſhepe be wuſt
                  
                  
                     ¶Yf the pope and prelates wolde
                     So begge, and bydde, bowe and borowe
                     Holy churche ſhulde ſtande full colde
                     Her ſeruauntes ſytte and ſoupe ſorowe
                     And they were noughty foule and horowe
                     To worſhyppe god men wolde wlate
                     Bothe on euen and on morowe
                     Suche harlotry men wolde hate
                  
                  
                     ¶Therfore men of holy churche
                     Shulde ben honeſt in all thynge
                     worſhypfully goddes workes werche
                     So ſemeth it to ſerue Chriſt her kynge
                     In honeſt and in clene clothynge
                     wyth veſſels of golde and clothes ryche
                     To God honeſtly to make offrynge
                     To hys lordſhypppe none is lyche
                  
                  
                     ¶The Pellican caſte an houge crye
                     And ſayd alas, why ſayeſt thou ſo
                     Chriſt is our heed that ſytteth on hye
                     Heddes ne ought we haue no mo
                     we ben hys membres both alſo
                     And father he taught vs to cal hym als
                     Mayſters to be called defended he tho
                     
                        All other mayſters ben wycked and fals
                  
                  
                     ¶That taketh mayſtry in hys name
                     Gooſtly, and for earthly good
                     Kynges and lordes ſhulde lordſhyp hane
                     And rule the people wyth mylde mode
                     Chriſt for vs that ſhedde hys blode
                     Badde hys preeſtes no mayſterſhyp haue
                     Ne carke nat for cloth ne fode
                     From euery myſchefe he wyll hem ſaue
                  
                  
                     ¶Her ryche clothynge ſhalbe ryghtwyſneſſe
                     Her treaſoure, trewe lyfe ſhalbe
                     Charite ſhalbe her rycheſſe
                     Her lordſhyppe ſhalbe vnite
                     Hope in God, her honeſte
                     Her veſſell clene conſcience
                     Poore in ſpirite, and humilite
                     Shalbe holy churches defence
                  
                  
                     ¶What ſayd the Gryffon may the greue
                     That other folkes faren wele
                     what haſte thou to done wyth her lyue
                     Thy falſheed eche man may fele
                     For thou canſt no catell gete
                     But lyueſt in londe as a lorell
                     wyth gloſynge getteſt thou thy mete
                     So fareth the deuell that wonneth in hell
                  
                  
                     ¶He wolde that eche mā there ſhulde dwell
                     For he lyueth in clene enuye
                     So wyth the tales that thou doeſt tell
                     Thou woldeſt other people dyſtry
                     wyth your gloſe, and your hereſy
                     For ye can lyue no better lyfe
                     But clene in hypocriſy
                     And bryngeſt the in wo and ſtryfe
                  
                  
                     ¶And therwyth haue not to done
                     For ye ne haue here no cure
                     Ye ſerue the dyuell, neyther God ne man
                     And he ſhall paye you your hyre
                     For ye woll fare well at feeſtes
                     And warme clothed for the colde
                     Therfore ye gloſe goddes heſtes
                     And begyle the people yonge and olde
                  
                  
                     ¶And all the ſeuen ſacramentes
                     Ye ſpeake ayenſt, as ye were ſlye
                     Ayenſt tythynges, offringes, wt your entētes
                     And on our lordes body falſly lye
                     And all thys ye done to lyue in caſe
                     As who ſayeth, there ben none ſuche
                     And ſayne the pope is not worth a peaſe
                     To make the people ayen hym gruche
                  
                  
                     ¶And thys cōmeth in by fendes
                     To brynge the chriſten in dyſtaunce
                     For they wolde that no man were frendes
                     Leaue thy chattrynge wyth myſchaunce
                     Yf thou lyue well, what wylt thou more
                     Let other men lyue as hem lyſt
                     Spende in good, or kepe in ſtore
                     Other mennes conſcience neuer thou nyſt
                  
                  
                     ¶Ye han no cure to anſwere fore
                     what meddell ye, that han not to done
                     Let men lyue as they han done yore
                     For thou ſhalte anſwere for no man
                     The Pellican ſayd, Syr, nay
                     I diſpyſed not the pope
                     Ne no ſacramente, ſoth to ſay
                     But ſpeake in charite and good hope
                  
                  
                     ¶But I dyſpyſe her hye pryde
                     Her rycheſſe, that ſhulde be poore in ſpirite
                     Her wyckedneſſe is knowe ſo wyde
                     They ſerue god in falſe habyte
                     And turnen mekeneſſe in to pryde
                     And lowlyneſſe in to hye degre
                     And goddes wordes turne and hyde
                     And that am I moued by charite
                  
                  
                     ¶To lette men to lyue ſo
                     wyth all my connynge and al my myght
                     And to warne men of her wo
                     And to tell hem trouth and ryght
                     The ſacramentes be ſoule hele
                     Yf they ben vſed in good vſe
                     Ayenſt that ſpeake I neuer a dele
                     For then were I nothynge wyſe
                  
                  
                     ¶But they that vſen hem in myſſe manere
                     Or ſette hem vp to any ſale
                     I trowe they ſhall abye hem dere
                     Thys is my reaſon, thys is my tale
                     who ſo taketh hem vnryghtfullyche
                     Ayenſt the ten cōmaundementes
                     Or by gloſe wreched lyche
                     Selleth any of the ſacramentes
                  
                  
                     ¶I trowe they do the deuell homage
                     In that they weten they do wronge
                     And therto I dare well wage
                     
                        They ſeruen Satan for al her ſonge
                     To tythen and offren is holſome lyfe
                     So it be done in dewe manere
                     A man to houſelyn and to ſhryue
                     weddynge, and all the other in fere
                  
                  
                     ¶So it be nother ſolde ne bought
                     Ne take ne gyue for couetyſe
                     And it be ſo taken it is nought
                     who ſelleth hem ſo, maye ſore agryſe
                     On our Lordes body I do not lye
                     I ſaye ſoth thorowe trewe rede
                     Hys fleſhe and blode through hys myſtrye
                     Is there, in the forme of brede
                  
                  
                     ¶Howe it is there, it nedeth not ſtryue
                     whether it be ſubgette or accydent
                     But as Chriſt was, when he was on lyue
                     So is he there verament
                     Yf pope or cardynall lyue good lyue
                     As Chriſt commaunded in hys goſpell
                     Ayenſt that woll I not ſtryue
                     But me thynketh they lyue not well
                  
                  
                     ¶For yf the pope lyued as god bede
                     Pryde and hyghneſſe he ſhulde dyſpyſe
                     Rycheſſe, couetyſe, and crowne on hede
                     Mekeneſſe and pouerte he ſhulde vſe
                     The Gryffon ſayd he ſhulde abye
                     Thou ſhalbe brent in balefull fyre
                     And all thy ſecte I ſhall dyſtrye
                     Ye ſhalbe hanged by the ſwyre
                  
                  
                     ¶Ye ſhullen be hanged and to drawe
                     who gyueth you leaue for to preache
                     Or ſpeake agaynſt goddes lawe
                     And the people thus falſely teache
                     Thou ſhalt be curſed wyth boke and bell
                     And dyſſeuered from holy churche
                     And clene ydampned into hell
                     Otherwyſe but ye woll worche
                  
                  
                     ¶The Pellycan ſayd that I ne drede
                     Your curſynge is of lytell value
                     Of god I hope to haue my mede
                     For it is falſhede that ye ſhewe
                     For ye ben out of charite
                     And wylneth vengeaunce, as dyd Nero
                     To ſuffren I woll redy be
                     I drede not that thou canſt do
                  
                  
                     ¶Chriſt badde ones ſuffre for hys loue
                     And ſo he taught all hys ſeruauntes
                     And but thou amende for hys ſake aboue
                     I drede not all thy mayntenaunce
                     For yf I drede the worldes hate
                     Me thynketh I were lytell to prayſe
                     I drede nothynge your hye eſtate
                     Ne I drede not your dyſeaſe
                  
                  
                     ¶Wolde ye turne and leaue your pryde
                     Your hye porte, and your rycheſſe
                     Your curſynge ſhulde not go ſo wyde
                     God brynge you into ryghtwyſneſſe
                     For I drede not your tyranny
                     For nothynge that ye can done
                     To ſuffre I am all redy
                     Syker I recke neuer howe ſoone
                  
                  
                     ¶The Gryffon grynned as he were wode
                     And loked louely as an owle
                     And ſwore by cockes herte bloode
                     He wolde hym tere euery doule
                     Holy churche thou dyſclaundreſt foule
                     For thy reaſons I woll the all to race
                     And make thy fleſhe to rote and moule
                     Loſell, thou ſhalte haue harde grace
                  
                  
                     ¶The Gryffon flewe forth on hys waye
                     The Pellycane dyd ſytte and wepe
                     And to hym ſelfe he gan ſaye
                     God wolde that any of Chriſtes ſhepe
                     Had herde, and yeake kepe
                     Eche a worde that here ſayd was
                     And wolde it wrytte and well it kepe
                     God wolde it were all for hys grace
                  
                  
                     Plowman.
                     ¶I anſwerde, and ſayd I wolde
                     Yf for my trauayle any man wolde pay
                  
                  
                     Pelycā.
                     He ſayd yes, theſe yt god han ſolde
                     For they han ſtore of money
                  
                  
                     Plowmā.
                     I ſayd, tell me and thou may
                     why telleſt thou mennes treſpace?
                  
                  
                     Pelycan.
                     He ſaid, to amēde hem in good fay
                     Yf God woll gyue me any grace
                  
                  
                     ¶For Chriſt hym ſelfe is lykened to me
                     That for hys people dyed on rode
                     As fare I, ryght ſo fareth he
                     He fedeth hys byrdes wyth hys blode
                     But theſe done yuell ayenſt gode
                     And ben hys fone vnder frendes face
                     I tolde hem howe her lyuynge ſtode
                     God amende hem for hys grace
                  
                  
                     
                     Plowmā.
                     what ayleth ye Gryffon, tell why
                     That he holdeth on that other ſyde
                     For they two ben lykely
                     And wyth kyndes robben wyde
                  
                  
                     Pellicā.
                     The foule betokeneth pryde
                     As Lucifer, that hygh flewe was
                     And ſyth he dyd hym in euell hyde
                     For he agylted goddes grace
                  
                  
                     ¶As byrde flyeth vp in the ayre
                     And lyueth by byrdes that ben meke
                     So theſe be flowe vp into dyſpayre
                     And ſhenden ſely ſoules eke
                     The ſoules that ben in ſynnes ſeke
                     He culleth hem, knele therfore alas
                     For brybry goddes forbode breke
                     God amende it for hys grace
                  
                  
                     ¶The hynder parte is a lyoun
                     A robber and a rauynere
                     That robbeth the people in earth a downe
                     And in erth holdeth none hys pere
                     So fareth thys foule both ferre and nere
                     And wyth tēporel ſtrength they people chaſe
                     As a lyon proude in earth here
                     God amende hem for hys grace
                  
                  
                     Pellican.
                     ¶He ſlewe forth wyth hys wynges twayne
                     All droupynge, daſed, and dull
                     But ſoone the Gryffon came agayne
                     Of hys foules the earth was full
                     The Pellican he had caſt to pull
                     So great a nombre neuer ſene there was
                     what maner of foules tellen I woll
                     Yf God woll gyue me of hys grace
                  
                  
                     ¶Wyth the Gryffon comen foules fele
                     Rauyns, rokes, crowes, and pye
                     Grayfoules, agadred wele
                     Igurde aboue they wolde hye
                     Gledes and boſardes weren hem by
                     whyte molles and puttockes token her place
                     And lapwynges, that well cōneth lye
                     Thys felowſhyp han for gerde her grace
                  
                  
                     ¶Longe the Pellican was out
                     But at laſte he cometh agayne
                     And brought wyth hym the Phenix ſtoute
                     The Gryffon wolde haue flowe ful faynt
                     Hys foules that flewen as thycke as rayne
                     The Phenix tho began hem chace
                     To flye from hym it was in vayne
                     For he dyd vengeaunce and no grace
                  
                  
                     ¶He ſlewe hem downe wythout mercy
                     There aſtarte neyther free ne thrall
                     On hym they caſt a rufull crye
                     when the Gryffon downe was fall
                     He bete hem not, but ſlewe hem all
                     whyther he hem droue no man may trace
                     Vnder the erthe me thought they yall
                     Alas they had a feble grace
                  
                  
                     ¶The Pellican then axed ryght
                     For my wrytynge yf I haue blame
                     who woll for me fyght of flyght?
                     who ſhall ſhelde me from ſhame
                     He that had a mayde to dame
                     And the lambe that ſlayne was
                     Shall ſhelde me from goſtly blame
                     For erthely harme is goddes grace
                  
                  
                     ¶Therfore I praye euery man
                     Of my wrytynge haue me excuſed
                     Thys wrytynge wryteth the Pellican
                     That thus theſe people hath dyſpyſed
                     For I am freſhe fully aduyſed
                     I nyll not maynteyne hys manace
                     For the deuell is often dyſguyſed
                     To brynge a man to yuell grace
                  
                  
                     ¶Wyteth the Pellican and not me
                     For herof I nyl not auowe
                     In hye ne in lowe, ne in no degre
                     But as a fable take it ye mowe
                     To holy churche I wyll me bowe
                     Eche man to amende hym Chriſt ſende ſpace
                     And for my wrytynge me alowe
                     He that is almyghty for hys grace
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               ¶Thus endeth the boke of Caunterbury tales. And here after foloweth the Romaunt of the Roſe.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  ¶The Romaūt of the Roſe.
               
            
            
               
               
               
                  MAnye man ſayen, that in ſweuenynges
               There nys but fables & leſynges
               But men may ſome ſweuen ſene
               which hardlye that falſe ne bene
               But aftewarde ben apparaunt
               This maye I drawe to warraunt
               An author that hyght Macrobes
               That halte nat dreames falſe ne lees
               But vndoth vs the auyſyoun
               That whylom mette kyng Cipioun
               And whoſo ſayth, or weneth it be
               A
                     •
                  ape, or els nycetie
               To wene that dremes after fall
               Lette whoſo lyſt a foole me call
               For this trowe I, and ſaye for me
               That dremes ſignifiaunce be
               Of good and harme to many wightes
               That dremen in her ſlepe a nyghtes
               Full many thynges couertly
               That fallen after all openly
               within my twenty yere of age
               whan that loue taketh his corage
               Of yonge folke, I went ſoone
               To bed as I was wont to done
               And faſt I ſlept, and in ſlepyng
               Me met ſuche a ſwenyng
               That lyke me wonders wele
               But in that ſweue is neuer a dele
               That it nys afterwarde befal
               Rygh as this dreame wol tell vs all
               Now this dreme wol I ryme aryght
               To make your hertes gaye and lyght
               For loue it prayeth, and alſo
               Cōmaundeth we that it be ſo
               And yf there any aſke me
               whether that it be, he or ſhe
               How this boke, which is here
               Shall hate that I rede here
               It is the Romaunce of the Roſe
               In which all the arte of loue I gloſe.
               ¶The matter fayre is of to make
               God graunt me in gre that ſhe it take
               For whome that it begone is
               And that is ſhe, that hath ywys
               So mokel pryſe, and therto ſhe
               So worthy is beloued to be
               That ſhe well ought of pryſe and ryght
               Be cleped Roſe of euery wyght
               That it was May me thought tho
               It is fyue yere or more ago
               That it was May, thus dremed me
               In tyme of loue and iolitie
               That all thyng gynneth waxen gay
               For there is neyther buſke nor haye
               In May, that it nyl ſhrouded bene
               And it with newe leues wrene
               Theſe woddes eke recoueren grene
               That drye in wynter ben to ſene
               And the erth wexeth proude withall
               For ſwote dewes that on it fall
               And the pore eſtate forgette
               In which that wynter had it ſette
               And than becometh the ground ſo proude
               That it woll haue a newe ſhroude
               And maketh ſo queynt his robe and fayre
               That it had hewes an hundred payre
               Of graſſe and floures, ynde and Pers
               And many hewes full dyuers
               That is the robe I mene ywys
               Through which the grounde to prayſen is
               The byrdes that han lefft her ſonge
               whyle they han ſuffred colde full ſtronge
               In wethers grylle, and derke to ſyght
               Ben in may, for the ſunne bryght
               So glad, that they ſhewe in ſyngyng
               That in her herte is ſuche lykyng
               That they mote ſyngen and ben lyght
               Than doth the nyghtyngale her myght
               To maken noyſe, and ſyngen blythe
               Than is blyſfull many a ſythe
               The chelaundre, and the popyngay
               Than yonge folke entenden aye
               For to ben gay and amarous
               The tyme is than ſo ſauorious
               Harde is his hert that loueth nought
               In May whan al this myrth is wrought
               whan he may on theſe braunches here
               The ſmall byrbes ſyngen clere
               Her blyſfull ſwete ſwete ſonge pitions
               And in this ſeſon delytious
               whan loue affirmeth all thynge
               Me thougt one nyght in my ſlepyng
               Ryght in my bedde full redely
               That it was by the morowe erly
               And vp I roſe and gan me clothe
               Anon I wyſh myne hondes both
               A ſyluer nedle forth I drowe
               Out of an aguyler queynt ynowe
               And gan this nedle threde anon
               For out of towne me lyſt to gone
               
                  The ſowne of bryddes for to heare
               That on theſe buſkes ſyngen cleare
               That in the ſwete ſeaſon that lefe is
               with a threde baſtyng my ſleues
               Alone I went in my playing
               The ſmall foules ſonge herkenyng
               That payned hem full many a payre
               To ſynge on bowes bloſſomed fayre
               Iolyfe and gaye, full of gladneſſe
               Towarde a ryuer gan I me dreſſe
               That I herde renne faſt by
               For fayrer playing none ſawe I
               Than playen me by that ryuere
               For from an hyll that ſtode there nere
               Come downe the ſtreme full ſtyffe & bolde
               Clere was the water, and as colde
               As any well is ſoth to ſayne
               And ſomdele laſſe it was than Sayne
               But it was ſtrayter, wele awaye
               And neuer ſaugh I er that daye
               The water that ſo wele lyked me
               And wonder gladde was I to ſe
               That luſty place, and that ryuere
               And with that water that ran ſo clere
               My face I wyſh, tho ſawe I wele
               The botome ypaued euery dele
               with grauell, full of ſtones ſhene
               The medowes ſofte, ſote and grene
               Beet ryght on the water ſyde
               Ful clere was than the morowe tyde
               And full attempre out of drede
               Tho gan I walken thorowe the mede
               Downwarde aye, in my playing
               The ryuers ſyde cooſtyng.
               And when I had a whyle ygone
               I ſawe a Garden ryght anon
               Full longe and brode, and euery dele
               Encloſed was, and walled wele
               with hye walles enbatayled
               Portrayed without and wel entayled
               with many ryche portreytures
               And both the ymages and peyntures
               Gan I beholde beſely
               And I woll tell you redely
               Of thilke ymages the ſemblaunce
               As ferre as I haue remembraunce.
               A mydde ſawe I hate ſtonde
               That for her wrath and yre, and onde
               Semed to be a mynoreſſe
               And angry with a chydereſſe
               And full of gyle, and fell corage
               By ſemblaunt was that ylke ymage
               And ſhe was nothyng wele arayed
               But lyke a wode woman afrayed
               Yfrounced foule was her vyſage
               And grynnyng for diſputous rage
               Her noſe ſnorted vp for tene
               Full hydous was ſhe for to ſene
               Ful foule and ruſty was ſhe this
               Her heed ywryththen was ywys
               Full grymly with a great towayle.
               ¶An ymage of an other entayle
               A lyſte halfe was her faſt by
               Her name aboue her heed ſawe I
               And ſhe was called Felony
               ¶An other ymage that vyllany
               Ycleped was ſawe I and fonde
               Vpon the wall on her right honde
               Vyllany was lyke ſomdele
               That other ymage, and truſteth wele
               She ſemed a wicked creature
               By countenaunce in portreture
               She ſemed be full diſpytous
               And eke full proude, and outragious
               wel coulde he paynt I vndertake
               That ſuche an ymage coulde make
               Full foule and chorlyſh ſemed ſhe
               And eke vyllanous for to be
               And lytle coulde of norture
               To worſhyppe any creature.
               ¶And next was paynted Couetyſe
               That eggeth folke in many a gyſe
               To take and yeue ryght nought agayne
               And great treaſures vp to layne
               And that is ſhe that for vſure
               Leueth to many a creature
               The laſſe for the more wynnyng
               So couetous is her brennyng
               And that is ſhe for pennes feele
               That teacheth for to robbe and ſteele
               Theſe theues and theſe ſmall harlotes
               And that is routh, for by her throtes
               Full many one hongeth at the laſt
               She maketh folke compaſſe and caſt
               To taken other folkes thynge
               Through robbery and myſcouetyng
               And that is ſhe that maketh trechours
               And ſhe maketh falſe pledours
               That with her termes and her domes
               Done maydens, chyldren, and eke gromes
               Her herytage to forgo
               Full croked were her hondes two
               For couetyſe is euer wode
               To grypen other folkes good
               
                  Couetyſe, for her wynnyng
               Full lefe hath other mens thyng
               ¶An other ymage ſette ſaugh I
               Next Couetiſe faſt by
               And ſhe was cleped Auaryce
               Ful foule in payntyng was that vyce
               Full ſad and caytyfe was ſhe eke
               And alſo grene as any leke
               So euyll hewed was her coloure
               Her ſemed to haue lyued in langour
               She was lyke thyng for hungre deed
               That lad her lyfe onely by breed
               Kneden with eyſell ſtronge and egre
               And therto ſhe was leane and megre
               And ſhe was clad full poorely
               All in a torne courtpy
               As ſhe were al with dogges torne
               And both behynde and eke beforne
               Clouted was ſhe beggarly
               A mantell honge her faſt by
               Vpon a benche weke and ſmall
               A burnyt cote honge there withall
               Furred with no menyuere
               But with a furre rough of heere
               Of lambe ſkynnes heuy and blake
               It was ful olde I vndertake
               For Auarice to cloth her wele
               Ne haſteth her neuer adele
               For certaynly it were her lothe
               To wearren oft that ylke clothe
               And yf it were forweared, ſhe
               wolde haue full great nycetie
               Of clothyng, er ſhe bought her newe
               All were it bad of woll and hewe
               This Auarice helde in her hande
               A purſe that honge by a bande
               And that ſhe hydde and bonde ſo ſtronge
               Men muſt abyde wonder longe
               Out of the purſe or there come ought
               For that ne cōmeth in her thought
               It was not certayne her entent
               That fro that purſe a peny went
               And by that ymage nygh ynough
               was paynted Enuy that neuer lough
               Nor neuer wel in her herte ferde
               But yf ſhe eyther ſawe or herde
               Some great myſchannce, or great diſeſe
               Nothyng may ſo moche her pleſe
               As myſchefe and myſaduenture
               Or whan ſhe ſeeth diſcomfyture
               Vpon any worthy man fall
               Than lyketh her well withall
               She is full glad in her corage
               Yf ſhe ſe any great lynage
               Be brought to nought in ſhameful wyſe
               And yf a man in honour ryſe
               Or by his wyt, or by his proweſſe
               Of that hath ſhe great heuyneſſe
               For truſteth well ſhe goth nye wood
               whan any chaunce happeth good
               Enuye is of ſuche crueltie
               That fayth ne trouth holdeth ſhe
               To frende ne felowe, badde or good
               Ne ſhe hath kynne none of her blood
               That ſhe nys full her enemy
               She nolde, I dare ſayne hardely
               Her owne father fared wele
               And ſore abydeth ſhe euery dele
               Her malyce, and her male talent
               For ſhe is in ſo great turment
               And hate ſuche, when folke doth good
               That nygh ſhe melteth for pure wood
               Her herte kerueth and ſo breaketh
               That god the people well awreketh
               Enuy ywys ſhall neuer let
               Some blame vpon the folke to ſet
               I trowe that yf Enuy ywys
               Knewe the beſt man that is
               On this ſyde or beyonde the ſee
               Yet ſomwhat lacken hym wolde ſhe
               And yf he were ſo hende and wyſe
               That ſhe ne myght al abate his pryſe
               Yet wolde ſhe blame his worthyneſſe
               Or by her wordes make it leſſe
               I ſawe Enuy in that payntyng
               Had a wonderfull lokyng
               For ſhe ne loked but awry
               Or ouetwharte, all baggyngly
               And ſhe had a foule vſage
               She myght loke in no vyſage
               Of man ne woman, forth ryght playne
               But ſhu
                     •
                  te her one eye for diſdayne
               So for enuy brenned ſhe
               whan ſhe myght any man ſe
               That fayre or worthy were, or wyſe
               Or els ſtode in folkes pryſe
               ¶Sorowe was paynted next Enuy
               Vpon that wall of maſourye
               But well was ſene in her colour
               That ſhe had lyued in langour
               Her ſemed to haue the iaundice
               Not halfe ſo pale was Auaryce
               Ne nothynge lyke of leaneſſe
               For ſorowe, thought, and great diſtreſſe
               
                  That ſhe had ſuffred daye and nyght
               Made her yelowe, and nothyng bryght
               Ful fade, pale, and megre alſo
               was neuer wight yet halfe ſo wo
               As that her ſemed for to be
               Nor ſo fulfylled with yre, as ſhe
               I trowe that no wyght myght her pleſe
               Nor do that thyng that myght her eſe
               Nor ſhe ne wolde her ſorowe ſlake
               Nor comfort none vnto her take
               So depe was her wo begon
               And eke her hert in angre ronne
               A ſorowfull thyng wel ſemed ſhe
               Nor ſhe had nothyng ſlowe be
               For to cratchen all her face
               And for to rent in many place
               Her clothes, and for to tere her ſwyre
               As ſhe that was fulfylled of yre
               And all to torne laye eke her heere
               About her ſhulders here and there
               As ſhe that had it all to rent
               For angre and for male talent
               And eke I tell you certaynly
               How that ſhe wept full tenderly
               In worlde nys wyght ſo harde of hert
               That had ſene her ſorowes ſmerte
               That nolde haue had of her pytye
               So wo begonne a thynge was ſhe
               She al to daſht her ſelfe for wo
               And ſmote togyther her hondes two
               To ſorowe was ſhe full intentyfe
               That wofull recheleſſe caytyfe
               Her rought lytle of playing
               Or of clyppynge or kyſſynge
               For whoſo ſorowful is in herte
               Hym luſt not to playe ne ſterte
               Ne for to dauncen, ne to ſynge
               Ne may his hert in tempre brynge
               To make ioye on euen or morowe
               For ioye is contrary vnto ſorowe.
               Elde was paynted after this
               That ſhorter was a fote iwys
               Than ſhe was wont in her yonghede
               Vnneth her ſelfe ſhe myght fede
               So feble and eke ſo olde was ſhe
               That faded was all her beautye
               Ful ſalowe waxen her colour
               Her heed for hore was whyte as floure.
               Iwys great qualme ne were it none
               Ne ſynne, although her lyfe were gone
               All woxen was her body vnwelde
               And drye and dwyned al for elde
               A foule forwelked thynge was ſhe
               That whylom rounde and ſoft had be
               Her eares ſhoken faſt withall
               As from her heed they wolde fall
               Her face frounced and forpyned
               And both her hondes lorne forwyned
               So olde ſhe was, that ſhe ne went
               A fote, but it were by potent
               The tyme that paſſeth nyght and daye
               And reſtleſſe trauayleth aye
               And ſteleth from vs ſo priuely
               That to vs ſemeth ſekerly
               That it in one poynt dwelleth euer
               And certes it ne reſteth neuer
               But goth ſo faſt, and paſſeth aye
               That there nys man that thynke may
               what tyme that nowe preſent is
               Aſketh at theſe clerkes this
               For men thynke it redely
               Thre tymes bene paſſed by
               The tyme that maye not ſoiourne
               But goth, and may neuer returne
               As water that downe renneth aye
               But neuer droppe returne maye
               There maye nothynge as tyme endure
               Metall, nor erthly creature
               For all thyng it frette and ſhall
               The tyme eke that chaungeth all
               And all doth waxe, and foſtred be
               And all thynge deſtroyeth he
               The tyme that eldeth our aunceſtours
               And eldeth kynges and emperours
               And that vs all ſhall ouercōmen
               Er that deth vs ſhal haue nōmen
               The tyme that hath all in welde
               To elden folke had made her elde
               So inly, that to my wetyng
               She myght helpe her ſelfe nothyng
               But turned ayen vnto chyldheed
               She had nothyng her ſelfe to lede
               Ne wytte ne pythe in her holde
               More than a chylde of two yere olde
               But natheleſſe I trowe that ſhe
               was fayre ſometyme, and freſh to ſe
               whan ſhe was in her ryght full age
               But ſhe was paſt all that paſſage
               And was a doted thyng becōmen
               A furred cappe on had ſhe nummen
               well had ſhe clad her ſelfe and warme
               For colde myght els done her harme
               Theſe olde folke haue alwaye colde
               Her kynde is ſuche when they ben olde.
               
                  ¶Another thynge was done there writ
               That ſemed lyke an Ipocryt
               And it was cleped Pope holy
               That ylke is ſhe, that priuely
               Ne ſpareth neuer a wycked dede.
               whan men of her take none hede
               And maketh her outwarde precious
               wyth pale vyſage and pytous
               And ſemeth a ſimple creature
               But there nys no miſauenture
               That ſhe ne thynketh in her corage
               Ful lyke to her was thylke ymage
               That maked was lyke her ſemblaunce
               She was ful ſymple of countenaunce
               And ſhe was clothed and eke ſhod
               As ſhe were for the loue of God
               Yolden to religion
               Such ſemed her deuocion
               A pſauter helde ſhe faſt in honde
               And beſyly ſhe gan to fonde
               To make many a faynt prayere
               To god, and to hys ſayntes dere
               Ne ſhe was gaye, freſhe, ne iolyfe
               But ſemed to be ful ententyfe
               To good werkes, and to fayre
               And therto ſhe had on an hayre
               Ne certes ſhe was fatte nothyng
               But ſemed wery for faſtyng
               Of colour pale and deed was ſhe
               From her the gates aye werned be
               Of paradyſe, that blyſful place
               For ſuch folke maken leane her grace
               As Chriſt ſayeth in hys Euangyle
               To gette hem priſe in towne a whyle
               And for a lytle glory veigne
               They leſen god and eke hys reigne
               ¶And alderlaſte of euerychone
               was paynted Pouert al alone
               That nat a peny had in holde
               Although ſhe her clothes ſolde
               And though ſhe ſhulde an honged be
               For naked as a worme was ſhe
               And yf the wether ſtormy were
               For colde ſhe myght haue dyed there.
               She ne had on but a ſtrayte olde ſacke.
               And many a cloute on it there ſtacke
               Thys was her cote, and her mantele
               No more was there neuer adele
               To cloth her wyth, I vndertake
               Great leyſer had ſhe to quake
               And ſhe was put, that I of talke
               Ferre fro theſe other, vp in an halke
               There lurked, and there coured ſhe
               For poore thyng where ſo it be
               Is ſhamefaſte, and diſpiſed aye
               Acurſed may well be that daye
               That poore man conceyued is
               For god wot al to ſelde iwys
               Is any pore man well yfedde
               Or well arayed or ycledde
               Or well beloued, in ſuch wyſe
               In honour, that he maye aryſe.
               ¶Al theſe thynges wel auyſed
               As I haue you er thys deuyſed
               wyth golde and aſſure ouer all
               Depaynted were on the wall
               Square was the wall, and hygh ſomdele
               Encloſed, and ybarred wele
               In ſtede of hegge, was that gardyn
               Come neuer ſhepherde therin
               In to that gardyn, wel wrought
               who ſo that me coulde haue brought
               By ladders, or els by degre
               It wolde wel haue lyked me
               For ſuch ſolace, ſuch ioy, and pley
               I trowe that neuer man ne ſey
               As was in that place delicious
               The gardyn was not daungerous
               To herberowe byrdes many one
               So ryche a yere was neuer none
               Of byrdes ſonge, and braunches grene
               Therin were byrdes mo I wene
               Then bene in al the realme of Fraunce
               Ful bliſful was the accordaunce
               Of ſwete pytous ſonge they made
               For al thys worlde it ought glade.
               And I my ſelfe ſo mery ferde.
               whan I her blyſful ſonges herde
               That for an hundred pounde wolde I
               If that the paſſeage openly
               Had be vnto me free
               That I nolde entren for to ſe
               Thaſſemble, god kepe it 
                     〈◊〉
                   care
               Of byrdes, whych therin ware
               That ſongen through her mery throtes
               Daunces of loue, and mery notes.
            
            
               whan I thus herde foules ſynge
               I fell faſt in a waymentyng
               By whych arte, or by what engyn
               I myght come in to that gardyn
               But way I couthe fynde none
               In to that gardayn for to gone
               Ne nought wyſt I yf that there were
               
                  Eyther hole or place where
               By whych I might haue entre
               Ne there was none to teache me
               For I was al a lone I wys
               For wo and anguyſhe of thys
               Tyl at laſte bethought I me
               That by no waye ne myght it be
               That there nas ladder ne way to pace
               Or hole, in to ſo fayre a place
               Tho gan I go a ful great paas
               Enuyron, euen in compas
               The cloſyng of the ſquare wall
               Tyl that I founde a wicket ſmall
               So ſhette, that I ne might in gone
               And other entre was there none
            
            
               Vpon the dore I gan to ſmyte
               That was fetys, and ſo lyte
               For other way coulde I not ſeke
               Ful longe I ſhofe, and knocked eke
               And ſtode full longe al herkenynge
               If that I herde any wyght comynge
               Tyl that the dore of thylke entre
               A mayden curteys opened me
               Her heer was as yelowe of hewe
               As any baſen ſcoured newe
               Her fleſhe tender as is a chycke
               with bent browes, ſmoth and ſlycke
               And by meaſure large were
               The openyng of her eyen clere
               Her noſe of good proporcion
               Her eyen gray, as is a faucon
               with ſwete breth, and wel ſauoured
               Her face white, and wel coloured
               with lytle mouth and rounde to ſe
               A cloue chynne eke had ſhe
               Her necke was of good faſſyon
               In length and greatneſſe by reaſon
               without bleyne, ſcabbe, or royne
               Fro Hieruſalem vnto Burgoyne
               There nys a fayre necke ywys
               To fele howe ſmoth and ſofte it is
               Her throte alſo white of hewe
               As ſnowe on braunche ſnowed newe
               Of body ful wel wrought was ſhe
               Men neden not in no countre
               A fayrer body for to ſeke
               And of fyne Orfrays had ſhe eke
               A chapelet, ſo ſemely on
               Ne wered neuer mayde vpon
               And fayre aboue that chapelet
               A roſe garlande had ſhe ſet
               She had a gay mirrour
               And wyth a rych golde treſour
               Her heed was treſſed queyntly
               Her ſleues ſewed fetouſly
               And for to kepe her handes fayre
               Of gloues white ſhe had a payre
               And ſhe had on a cote of grene
               Of cloth of Gaunt, withouten wene
               wel ſemed by her apparayle
               She was not wont to great trauayle
               For whan ſhe kempt was fetouſlye
               And wel arayed and rychly
               Than had ſhe done al her iournee
               For mery and wel begone was ſhe
               She ladde a luſty lyfe in Maye
               She had no thought, by nyght ne daye
               Of nothyng, but yf it were onely
               To grayth her well and vncouthly.
            
            
               whan that thys dore had opened me
               Thys May, ſemely for to ſe
               I thanked her as I beſt might
               And aſked her howe that ſhe hight
               And what ſhe was, I aſked eke
               And ſhe to me was nought vnmeke
               Ne of her anſwere daungerous
               But fayre anſwerde, and ſayd thus
               Lo ſ
                     •
                  e, my name is ydelneſſe
               So clepe men me, more and leſſe
               Ful myghty and ful ryche am I
               And that of one thyng namely
               For I entende to nothyng
               But to my ioye, and my playeng
               And for to kembe and tryſſe me
               Aquaynted am I and priue
               wyth myrth, lorde of thys gardyne
               That fro the lande of Alexandryne
               Made the trees hyther to be fette
               That in thys garden bene yſette
               And whan the trees were waxen on hyght
               Thys wall, that ſtant here in thy ſyght
               Dyd myrth encloſen al aboute
               And theſe ymages al without
               He dyd hem both entayle and peynte
               That neyther bene iolyfe ne queynte
               But they bene full of ſorow and wo
               As thou haſte ſene a whyle ago
            
            
               
                  ANd ofte tyme hym to ſolace
               Sir myrth commeth in to this place
               
                  And eke wyth hym cometh his meyne
               That lyuen in luſt and ioylyte
               And now is myrth therin, to here
               The byrdes howe they ſyngen clere
               The mauys and the nyghtyngale
               And other ioly byrdes ſmale
               And thus he walketh to ſolace
               Hym and hys folke, for ſweter place
               To playen in, he may not fynde
               Although he ſought one in tyl Inde
               The alther fayreſt folke to ſe
               That in thys worlde may founde be
               Hath myrth wyth hym in hys route
               That folowen hym alwayes aboute.
            
            
               whan ydelneſſe had tolde all thys
               And I had herkened wel ywys
               Than ſayde I to dame ydelneſſe
               Nowe alſo wyſly god me bleſſe
               Syth myrth, that is ſo fayre and fre
               Is in thys yerde, wyth his meyne
               Fro thylke aſſemble, yf I may
               Shal no man werne me to day
               That I thys nyght ne mote it ſe
               For wel wene I there wyth him be
               A fayre and ioly companye
               Fulfylled of al curteſye
               And forth without wordes mo
               In at the wycket went I tho
               That Idelneſſe had opened me
               In to that garden fayre to ſe
            
            
               And whan I was in ywys
               myne herte was ful glad of thys
               For wel wende I ful ſykerly
               Haue bene in paradyſe erthly
               So fayre it was, that truſteth well
               It ſemed a place eſpirituell
               For certes as at my deuyſe
               There is no place in paradyſe
               So good in for to dwel or be
               As in that garden thought me
               For there was many a byrde ſyngyng
               Throughout the yerde al thryngyng
               In many places were nyghtyngales
               Alpes, fynches, and wodwales
               That in her ſwete ſonge delyten
               In thylke places as they habyten
               There might men ſe many flockes
               Of turtles and lauerockes
               Chalaundres fele ſawe I there
               That wery nygh forſongen were
               And thruſtels, teryns, and mauyſe
               That ſongen for to wyne hem pryſe
               And eke to ſurmount in her ſonge
               That other birdes hem amonge
               By note made fayre ſeruiſe
               Theſe byrdes, that I you deuiſe
               They ſonge her ſonge, as fayre and well
               As angels done eſpirituell
               And truſteth me, whan I hem herde
               Ful luſty and well I ferde
               For neuer yet ſuch melodye
               was herde, of man that myght dye
               Such ſwete ſonge was hem amonge
               That me thought it no byrdes ſonge
               But it was wonder lyke to be
               Songe of Meremaydens of the ſee
               That for her ſyngyng is ſo clere
               Though we Meremaydens clepe hem here
               In Englyſhe, as is our vſaunce
               Men clepe hem Sereyns in Fraunce
            
            
               
                  ENtentyfe weren for to ſynge
               Theſe byrdes, that not vnkonnynge
               were of her craft, and aprentyſe
               But of ſonge ſubtyl and wyſe
               And certes, whan I herde her ſonge
               And ſawe the grene place amonge
               In herte I wext ſo wonder gay
               That I was neuer erſt, er that day
               So iolyfe, nor ſo wel bygo
               Ne mery in herte, as I was tho
               And than wyſt I, and ſawe ful well
               That ydelneſſe me ſerued well
               That me put in ſuch iolyte
               Her frende wel ought I for to be
               Syth ſhe the dore of that gardyn
               Had opened, and me let in.
            
            
               From hence forth, how that I wrought
               I ſhal you tell, as me thought
               Fyrſt wherof myrth ſerued there
               And eke what folke there wyth hym were
               wythout fable I wyl diſcriue
               And of that garden eke as bliue
               I wol you tellen after thys
               The fayre faſſyon al ywys
               That well wrought was for the nones
               I may not tel you al atones
               But as I may and can, I ſhall
               
                  By ordure tellen you all.
               Ful fayre ſeruice, and eke ful ſwete
               Theſe byrdes maden as they ſete
               Layes of loue, ful wel ſownyng
               they ſongen in her iargonyng
               Some hye, and ſome lowe ſonge
               Vpon the braunches grene iſpronge
               The ſwetneſſe of her melodye
               Made al my hert in reuelrye
               And whan that I had herde I trowe
               Theſe byrdes ſyngyng on a rowe
               Than myght I not wyth holde me
               That I ne went in for to ſe
               Her myrth, for my deſyryng
               was hym to ſene ouer all thyng
               His countenaunce and hys manere
               That ſyght was to me full dere.
            
            
               
                  THo wēt I forth on my ryght hande
               Downe by a lytell pathe I founde
               Of myntes full, and fenell grene.
               And faſt by wythout wene
               Her myrth I founde, and ryghte anon
               Vnto her Myrth gan I gon
               There as he was hym to ſolace
               And wyth hym in that luſty place
               So fayre folke and ſo freſhe had he
               That whan I ſawe, I woundred me
               Fro whence ſuch folke myght come
               So fayre they wexen all and ſome
               For they were lyke, as to my ſyght
               To angels, that bene fethered bryght
               Theſe folke, of whych I tell you ſo
               Vpon a karole wenten tho
               A lady karoled hem, that hyght
               Gladneſſe, blyſful and lyght
               well coulde ſhe ſyng and luſtely
               None halfe ſo wel and ſemely
               And couth make in ſonge ſuche refraynyng
               It ſate her wonder wel to ſyng
               Her voice ful clere was and ful ſwete
               She was not rude ne vnmete
               But couth ynough of ſuch doyng
               As longeth vnto karollyng
               For ſhe was wont in euery place
               To ſyngen fyrſt, folke to ſolace
               For ſyngyng mooſt ſhe gaue her to
               No crafte had ſhe ſo lefe to do.
            
            
               
                  THo myghteſte thou karolles ſene
               And folke daunce and mery bene
               And many a fayre turnyng
               Vpon the grene graſſe ſpringyng
               There myghteſt thou ſe theſe ſtutours
               Mynſtrales and eke ioglours
               That wel to ſynge dyd her payne
               Some ſonge longes of Lorayne
               For in Loreyne her notes be
               Ful ſweter than in thys countre
               There was many a tymbeſtere
               And ſaylours, that I dare wel ſwere
               Couth her craft ful parfetly
               The tymbres vp ful ſubtelly
               They caſt, and hente ful ofte
               Vpon a fynger fayre and ſofte
               That they fayled neuer mo.
               Ful fetys damoſels two
               Ryght yonge, and ful of ſemelyhede
               In kyrtels, and none other wede
               And fayre treſſed euery treſſe
               Had myrth done for hys nobleneſſe
               Amydde the carole for to daunce
               But therof lyeth no remembraunce
               Howe that they daunced queyntly
               That one wolde come al priuely
               Agayne that other, and when they were
               Togyther almooſt, they threwe yfere
               Her mouthes ſo, that through her play
               It ſemed as they kyſt alway
               To dauncen well couthe they the gyſe
               what ſhulde I more to you deuyſe
               Ne bode I neuer thence go
               whyles that I ſawe hem daunce ſo
               Vpon the karole wonder faſte
               I gan beholde, tyl at laſt
               A lady gan me for to eſpye
               And ſhe was cleped curteſye
               The worſhypfull, the debonayre
               I praye to god euer fal her fayre
               Ful curteyſly ſhe called me
               what do ye there Beau ſire (ꝙ ſhe)
               Come, and yf it lyke you
               To dauncen, daunceth wyth vs now
               And I wythout taryeng
               went in to the carollyng
               I was abaſhed neuer a dele
               But it to me lyked ryght wele
               That curteſye me cleped ſo
               And bade me on the daunce go
               
                  For yf I had durſt certayne
               I wolde haue karoled ryght fayne
               As man that was to daunce right blyth
               Than gan I loke ofte ſyth
               The ſhap, the bodyes, and the cheres
               The countenaunce and the maneres
               Of all the folke that daunced there
               And I ſhall tell what they were.
            
            
               Ful fayre was myrth, ful longe and high
               A fayrer man I neuer ſigh
               As rounde as appel was his face
               Full roddy and whyte in euery place
               Fetys he was and well beſey
               with metely mouthe, and eyen grey
               Hys noſe by meſure wrought full ryght
               Cryſpe was his heere, and eke full bryght
               His ſhulders of large brede
               And ſmallyſhe in the gyrdelſtede
               He ſemed lyke a purtreyture
               So noble he was of hys ſtature
               So fayre, ſo ioly, and ſo fetyſe
               with lymmes wrought at poynt deuyſe
               Delyuer, ſmerte, and of great myght
               Ne ſawe thou neuer man ſo lyght
               Of herde vnneth had he nothyng
               For it was in the fyrſt ſpryng
               Full yonge he was, and mery of thought
               And in ſamette, wyth byrdes wrought
               And wyth golde beten full fetouſly
               Hys bodye was clad full rychly
               wrought was hys robe in ſtraunge gyſe
               And all to ſlyttered for queyntyſe
               In many a place, lowe and hye
               And ſhode he was with great mayſtrye
               wyth ſhone decoped, and wyth lace
               By drury, and by ſolace
               Hys leefe a roſen chapelet
               Had made, and on hys heed it ſet
               And were ye who was hys ſefe
               Dame gladneſſe there was hym ſo lefe
               That ſyngeth ſo well wyth glad corage
               That from ſhe was twelue yere of age
               She of her loue graunt hym made
               Sir myrth her by the fynger hade
               Daunſynge, and ſhe hym alſo
               Greate loue was a twixt hem two
               Both were they fayre and bryght of hewe
               She ſemed lyke a roſe newe
               Of colours, and her fleſhe ſo tendre
               That wyth a brere ſmalle and tendre
               Men myght it cleue, I dare well ſe
                     •
                  
               
               Her forheed frouncels al pley
               Bent were her browes two
               Her eyen gray, and glad alſo
               That laugheden aye in her ſemblaunt
               Fyrſt or the mouthe by couenaunt
               I wot not what of her noſe I ſhal diſcryue
               So fayre hath no woman a lyue
               Her heere was yelowe, and clere ſhynyng
               I wot no lady ſo lykyng
               Or frayes freſhe, was her garlande
               I whiche haue ſene a thouſande
               Sawe neuer ywys no garlande yet
               So well wrought of ſylke as it
               And in an ouergylte ſamyte
               Cladde ſhe was, by greate delyte
               Of whiche her leefe a robe werde
               The meryer ſhe in her herte ferde
               And next her went, on her other ſyde
               The god of loue, that can deuyde
               Loue, and as hym lyketh it be
               But he can cherles daunten, he?
               And maken folkes pride fallen
               And he can well theſe lordes thrallen
               And ladyes put at lowe degre
               whan he maye hem to proude ſe.
            
            
               Thys god of loue of hys faſſyoun
               was lyke no knaue, ne quyſtroun
               Hys beautie greatly was to priſe
               But of his robe to deuyſe
               I drede encombred for to be
               For not ycladde in ſylke was he
               But all in floures and ſtourettes
               I paynted all wyth amorettes
               And wyth loſenges and ſcochons
               wyth byrdes, lyberdes, and lyons
               And other beaſtes wrought full wele
               Hys garment was euerydele
               Ypurtrayed and ywrought wyth flours
               By diuers medelynge of colours
               Floures there were of many gyſe
               Yſet by compace in a ſyſe
               There lacked no floure to my dome
               Ne not ſo muche as floure of brome
               Ne vyolet, ne eke peruynke
               Ne floure none, that men can on thynke
               And many a roſe lefe full longe
               was entermedled there amonge
               And alſo on hys heed was ſet
               Of roſes reed a chapelet
               But nyghtyngales a full greate route
               That flyen ouer hys heede aboute
               
                  The leaues felden as they flyen
               And he was al with byrdes wrien
               with popingay, with nyghtyngale
               with chaulaundre, and with wodewale
               wyth fynche, with larke, and with archāgel
               He ſemed as he were an angel
               That downe were comen fro heuen clere
               Loue had wyth hym a bachelere
               That he made alwayes wyth hym be
               Swete lokynge, clepyng was he
               Thys bacheler ſtode beholdyng
               The daunce, and in hys hande holdyng
               Turke bowes two, full wel deuyſed had he
               That one of hem was of a tree
               That beareth a fruite of ſauoure wicke
               Ful croked was that foule ſtycke
               And knotty here and there alſo
               And blacke as bery, or any ſlo
               That other vowe was of a plante
               without wemme, I dare warrante
               Ful euen and by proporcion
               Trectes and longe, of ful good faſſyon
               And it was paynted well and twhitten
               And ouer al diapred and written
               wyth ladyes and with bacheleres
               Ful lyghtſome and glad of cheres
               Theſe bowes two helde ſwete lokyng
               That ſemed lyke no gadlyng
               And ten brode arowes helde he there
               Of whych fyue in hys ryghthande were
               But they were ſhauen well and dyght
               Nocked, and fethered aryght
               And al they were wyth golde begon
               And ſtronge poynted euerychon
               And ſharpe for to keruen wele
               But yron was there none ne ſtele
               For al was golde, men myght ſe
               Out take the fethers and the tree.
            
            
               
                  THe ſwyfteſte of theſe arowes fyue
               Out of a bowe for to dryue
               And beſt fethered for to flye
               And fayreſt eke, was cleped beautie
               That other arowe, that hurteth leſſe
               was cleped (as I trowe) Sympleſſe
               the thyrde cleped was Fraunchyſe
               That fethered was in noble wyſe
               wyth valour and wyth curteſye
               The fourth was cleped companie
               That heuy for to ſhoten is
               But who ſo ſhoteth ryght ywys
               May therwith done great harme and wo
               The fyfth of theſe, and laſt alſo
               Fayre Semblaunt men that arowe cal
               The leeſt greuous of hem al
               yet can it make a full greate wounde
               But he maye hope hys ſores ſounde
               That hurt is wyth that arowe ywys
               Hys wo the better beſtowed is
               For he maye ſoner haue gladneſſe
               His langour ought to be the leſſe
            
            
               
                  FIue arowes were of other gyſe
               That bene full foule to deuyſe
               For ſhaft & end, ſoth for to tel
               were alſo black as fend in hel
               The fyrſt of hem is called pride
               That other arowe next hym beſyde
               It was cleped vyllanye
               That arowe was, as with felonye
               Enuenymed, and wyth ſpitous blame
               The thyrde of hem was cleped ſhame
               The fourth wanhope cleped is
               The fyfth the newe thought ywys
            
            
               Theſe arowes that I ſpeke of here
               were all fyue on one manere
               And all were they reſemblable
               To hem was wel ſyttyng and able
               The foule croked bowe hydous
               That knotty was, and all roynous
               That bowe ſemed wel to ſhete
               Theſe arowes fyue, that bene vnmete
               And contrarye to that other fyue
               But though I tell not as blyue
               Of her power, ne of her myght
               Hereafter ſhall I tellen ryght
               The ſoth, and eke ſignyfyaunce
               As ferre as I haue remembraunce
               All ſhall be ſayd I vndertake
               Er of thys boke an ende I make
            
            
               Nowe come I to my tale agayne
               But alderfyrſt, I woll you ſayne
               The faſſyon and the countenaunces
               Of al the folke that on the daunce is
               The god of loue iolyte and lyght
               Ladde on his hande a lady bryght
               Of hygh priſe, and of great degre
               Thys lady was called beaute
               
                  And an arowe, of whych I tolde
               Full well thewed was ſhe holde
               Ne ſhe was darke ne browne, but bryght
               And clere as the moone lyght
               Agayne whome all the ſterres ſemen
               But ſmale candels, as we demen
               Her fleſhe was tender as dewe of floure
               Her chere was ſymple as byrde in boure
               As whyte as lylye or roſe in ryſe
               Her face gentyll and treatyſe
               Fetys ſhe was, and ſmale to ſe
               No wyntred browes had ſhe
               Ne popped her, for it neded nought
               To wyndre her, or to paynt her ought
               Her treſſes yelowe, and longe ſtraughten
               Vnto her heles downe they raughten
               Her noſe, her mouth, and eye and cheke
               well wrought, and all the remenaunt eke
               A full great ſauour and a ſwote
               Me thought in myne herte rote
               As helpe me God, when I remembre
               Of the faſſyon of euery membre
               In worlde is none ſo fayre a wyght
               For yonge ſhe was, and hewed bryght
               Sore pleaſaunt, and fetyſe wyth all
               Gent, and in her myddell ſmall
               Beſyde Beaute yede Rycheſſe
               And hyght lady of great nobleſſe
               And great of price in euery place
               But who ſo durſt to her treſpace
               Or tyll her folke, in werke or dede
               He were full hardy out of drede
               For both ſhe helpe and hyndre may
               And that is not of yeſterday
               That ryche folke haue full great myght
               To helpe, and eke to greue a wyght
               The beſt and greateſt of valoure
               Dydden Rycheſſe full great honoure
               And beſy weren her to ſerue
               For that they wolde her loue deſerue
               They cleped her Lady great and ſmall
               Thys wyde worlde her dredeth all
               Thys worlde is all in her daungere
               Her courte hath many a loſengere
               And many a traytour enuyous
               That ben full beſy and curious
               For to dyſprayſe, and to blame
               That beſt deſeruen loue and name
               To forne the folke hem to begylen
               Theſe loſyngeours hem prayſe and ſmylen
               And thus the worlde wt worde anoynten
               But afterwarde they pryll and poynten
               The folke, ryght to the bare bone
               Behynde her backe when they ben gone
               And foule abaten folkes pryſe
               Full many a worthy man and wyſe
               Han hyndred, and ydon to dye
               Theſe loſyngeours wyth her flaterye
               And maketh folke full ſtraunge be
               There as hem ought ben pryue
               well yuell mote they thryue and thee
               And yuell aryued mote they be
               Theſe loſengeours full of enuye
               No good man loueth her companye.
            
            
               Rycheſſe a robe of purple on hadde
               Ne trowe not that I lye or madde
               For in thys worlde is none it lyche
               Ne by a thouſande dele ſo ryche
               Ne none ſo fayre, for it full wele
               wyth Orfreyes leyde was euerydele
               And purtrayde in the rybanynges
               Of dukes ſtories, and of kynges
               And wyth a bende of golde taſſyled
               And knoppes fyne of golde amyled
               Aboute her necke of gentyll entayle
               was ſhette the ryche Cheueſayle
               In whych there was full great plente
               Of ſtones clere, and fayre to ſe.
               ¶Rycheſſe a gyrdell had vpon
               The bokell of it was of ſton
               Of vertue great, and mokell of myght
               For who ſo bare the ſtone ſo bryght
               Of venyme durſte hym nothynge dout
               whyle he the ſtone had hym about
               That ſtone was greatly for to loue
               And tyll a ryche mans behoue
               worth all the golde in Rome, and Fryſe
               The Mourdant wrought in noble gyſe
               was of a ſtone full precious
               That was ſo fyne and vertuous
               That whole a man it couth make
               Of palſye, and of toth ake
               And yet the ſtone had ſuche a grace
               That he was ſeker in euery place
               All thylke daye not blynde to bene
               That faſtynge myght that ſtone ſene
               The barres were of golde full fyne
               Vpon a tyſſue of Satyne
               Full heuy, great, and nothynge lyght
               In eueryche was a beſaunt wyght
               Vpon the treſſes of rycheſſe
               was ſet a cercle for nobleſſe
               Of brende golde, that full lyght ſhone
               
                  So fayre trowe I was neuer none
               But he were konnynge for the nones
               That coulde deuyſe all the ſtones
               That in that cercle ſhewen clere
               It is a wonder thynge to here
               For no man coulde prayſe or geſſe
               Of hem the value or rycheſſe
               Rubyes there were, Saphyrs, Ragounces
               And Emeraudes, more then two ounces
               But all before full ſubtelly
               A fyne Charboncle ſette ſawe I
               The ſtone ſo clere was and ſo bryght
               That all ſo ſoone as it was nyght
               Men myght ſene to go for nede
               A myle or two, in length and brede
               Such lyght ſprange out of the ſtone
               That Rycheſſe wonder bryght ſhone
               Both her heed, and all her face
               And eke aboute her all her place
               Dame rycheſſe on her honde gan lede
               A yonge man full of ſemelyhede
               That ſhe beſt loued of any thynge
               Hys luſt was moche in houſholdynge
               In clothynge was he full fetyſe
               And loued well to haue horſe of pryſe
               He wende to haue reproued be
               Of thefte or murdre, yf that he
               Had in hys ſtable an hackenay
               And therfore he deſyred aye
               To ben acqueynted wyth Rycheſſe
               For all hys purpoſe, as I geſſe
               was for to make great dyſpence
               wythouten warnynge or defence
               And Rycheſſe myght it well ſuſtene
               And her dyſpences wel mayntene
               And hym alwaye ſuche plentye ſende
               Of golde and ſyluer for to ſpende
               wythout lackynge or daungere
               As it were pourde in a garnere.
            
            
               And after on the daunce went
               Largeſſe, that ſet all her entent
               For to ben honorable and free
               Of Alexanders kynne was ſhe
               Her moſte ioye was ywys
               when that ſhe yafe, and ſayd: haue thys
               Not auaryce the foule caytyfe
               was halfe to grype ſo ententyfe
               As Largeſſe is, to yeue and ſpende
               And God alwaye ynowe her ſende
               So that the more ſhe yaue awaye
               The more ywys ſhe had alwaye
               Great loos hath Largeſſe, and great pryſe
               For both wyſe folke and vnwyſe
               were wholy to her bandon brought
               So well wyth yeftes hath ſhe wrought
               And yf ſhe had an enemy
               I trowe that ſhe couth craftely
               Make hym full ſone her frende to be
               So large of yeftes, and wyſe was ſhe
               Therfore ſhe ſtode in loue and grace
               Of ryche and poore in euery place
               A full great foole is he ywys
               That both ryche and poore, and nygarde is
               A lorde maye haue no maner vyce
               That greueth more then auaryce
               For nygarde neuer wyth ſtrength of hande
               May wynne hym great lordſhyp or lande
               For frendes all to fewe hath he
               To done hys wyll performed be
               And who ſo woll haue frendes here
               He maye not holde hys treaſour dere
               For by enſample tell I thys
               Ryght as an adamant ywys
               Can drawen to hym ſubtelly
               The yron, that is layde therby
               So draweth folkes hertes ywys
               Syluer and golde that yeuen is
               Largeſſe had on a robe freſhe
               Of ryche purpure Sarlynyſhe
               well fourmed was her face and clere
               And opened had ſhe her colere
               For ſhe ryght there had in preſent
               Vnto a lady made preſent
               Of a golde broche, full well wrought
               And certes it myſſate her nought
               For through her ſmocke wrought with ſylke
               The fleſhe was ſene as whyte as mylke
               Largeſſe, that worthy was and wyſe
               Helde by the honde a knyght of pryſe
               was ſybbe to Arthour of Breteygne
               And that was he that bare the enſeygne
               Of worſhyp, and the Gouſfaucoun
               And yet he is of ſuche renoun
               That men of hym ſaye fayre thynges
               Before barons, erles, and kynges
               Thys knyght was comen all newly
               Fro tourneynge faſte by
               There had he done great chyualrye
               Through hys vertue and hys mayſtrye
               And for the loue of hys lemman
               He caſte downe many a doughty man
               And nexte hym daunced dame Fraūchyſe
               Arayed in full noble gyſe
               
                  She nas not browne ne dunne of hewe
               But whyt as ſnowe yfallen newe
               Her noſe was wrought at poynt deuyſe
               For it was gentyll and tretyſe
               wyth eyen glad, and browes hent
               Her heer downe to her heles went
               And ſhe was ſymple as downe on tree
               Full debonayre of herte was ſhe
               She durſt neyther ſaye ne do
               But that, that hyr longeth to
               And yf a man were in dyſtreſſe
               And for her loue in heuyneſſe
               Her herte wolde haue full great pyte
               She was ſo amyable and free
               For were a man for her beſtadde
               She wolde ben ryght ſore adradde
               That ſhe dyd ouer great outrage
               But ſhe hym holpe hys harme taſwage
               Her thought it all a vylanye
               And ſhe had on a ſuckeny
               That not of hempe heerdes was
               So fayre was none in all Arras
               Lorde it was ryddeled fetylly
               There nas not a poynt truely
               That it nas in hys ryght aſſyſe
               Full well yclothed was Fraunchyſe
               For there nys no cloth ſytteth bette
               On damoſell, then doth rokette
               A woman well more fetyſe is
               In rokette, then in cote ywys
               The whyte rokette ryddeled fayre
               Betokeneth that full debonayre
               And ſwete was ſhe that it bere
               By her daunced a Bachelere
               I can not tellen you what he hyght
               But fayre he was and of good hyght
               All had he ben, I ſaye no more
               The lordes ſonne of wyndeſore.
               And next that daunced Curteſye
               That prayſed was of lowe and hye
               For neyther proude ne fole was ſhe
               She for to daunce called me
               I praye God gyue her good grace
               For when I come fyrſt into the place
               She nas not nyce, ne outrageous
               But wyſe and ware, and vertuous
               Of fayre ſpeche, and fayre anſwere
               was neuer wyght myſſayde of here
               She bare no rauncour to no wyght
               Clere browne ſhe was, and therto bryght
               Of face and body auenaunt
               I wotte no lady ſo pleaſaunt
               She were worthy for to bene
               An empereſſe or crowned quene.
               And by her went a knyght dauncynge
               That worthy was and well ſpeakynge
               And full well coude he done honour
               The knyght was fayre and ſtyffe in ſtour
               And in armure a ſemely man
               And welbeloued of hys lemman.
               ¶Fayre Idelneſſe then ſaugh I
               That alwaye was me faſt by
               Of her haue I wythout fayle
               Tolde you the ſhappe and appareyle
               For (as I ſayd) Lo, that was ſhe
               That dyd to me ſo great bounte
               She the gate of that garden
               Vndyd, and let me paſſen in
               And after daunced as I geſſe
               And ſhe fulfylled of luſtyneſſe
               That nas not yet .xij. yere of age
               wyth herte wylde, and thought volage
               Nyce ſhe was, but ſhe ne mente
               None harme ne ſleyght in her entente
               But onely luſt and iolyte
               For yonge folke, well weten ye
               Haue lytell thought, but on her playe
               Her lemman was beſyde alwaye
               In ſuche a gyſe that he her kyſte
               At all tymes that hym lyſte
               That all the daunce myght it ſe
               They make no force of preuyte
               For who ſo ſpake of hem yuell or wele
               They were aſhamed neuer a dele
               But men myght ſene hem kyſſe there
               As it two yonge douues were
               For yonge was thylke bachelere
               Of beaute wote I none hys pere
               And he was ryght of ſuche an age
               As Youth hys lefe, and ſuche corage
               The luſty folke that daunced there
               And alſo other that wyth hem were
               That weren all of her meyne
               Full hende folke, wyſe, and free
               And folke of fayre porte truely
               There were all comenly
               when I had ſene the countenaunces
               Of hem that ladden thus theſe daunces
               Then had I wyll to gone and ſe
               The garden that ſo lyked me
               And loken on theſe fayre Laurelles
               On Pyne trees, Cedres, and Olmeres
               The daunces then ended were
               For many of hem that daunced there
               
                  where wyth her loues went away
               Vnder the trees to haue her playe.
            
            
               
                  A Lorde they lyued luſtely
               A Great foole were he ſekerly
               That nolde hys thākes ſuch lyfe lede
               For thys dare I ſayne out of drede
               That who ſo myght ſo well fare
               For better lyfe durſt hym not care
               For there nys ſo good paradyſe
               As to haue a loue at hys deuyſe
               Out of that place went I tho
               And in that gardyn gan I go
               Playenge alonge full merely
               The god of Loue full haſtely
               Vnto hym Swete lokynge clepte
               No lenger wolde he that ſhe kepte
               Hys bowe of golde, that ſhone ſo bryght
               He had hem bent anone ryght
               And he full ſone ſette an ende
               And at a brayde he gan it bende
               And toke hym of hys arowes fyue
               Full ſharpe and ready for to dryue
               Nowe God that ſytteth in maieſte
               Fro deedly woundes he kepe me
               Yf ſo be that he had me ſhete
               For yf I wyth hys arowe mete
               It had me greued ſore ywys
               But I that nothynge wyſt of thys
               went vp and downe, full many a waye
               And he me folowed faſt alwaye
               But no where wolde I reſle me
               Tyll I had in all the garden be.
            
            
               
                  THe garden was by meaſurynge
               Ryght euen and ſquare in compaſynge
               It as longe was as it was large
               Of fruyte had euery tre hys charge
               But it were any hydous tree
               Of whych there were two or thre
               There were, and that wote I full wele
               Of Pome garnettes a full great dele
               That is a frute full well to lyke
               Namely to folke when they be ſyke
               And trees there were, great foyſon
               That baren nuttes in her ſeaſon
               Suche as men nutmygges call
               That ſwote of ſauour ben wythall
               And Almandres great plente
               Fygges, and many a date tre
               There weren, yf men had nede
               Through the gardyn, in length and brede
               There was eke werynge many a ſpyce
               As clowe, gylofre, and lycorice
               Gyngere, and greyne de Parys
               Canell, and ſetewale of prys
               And many a ſpyce delytable
               To eaten when men ryſe fro table
               And many homely trees ther were
               That peches, coynes, and apples bere
               Medlers, plommes, peeres, cheſteynis
               Cheryſe, of whych many one fayne is
               Notes, aleys, and bolas
               That for to ſene it was ſolas
               wyth many hygh laurer, and pyne
               was renged clene all that gardyne
               wyth Cypres, and wyth Olyueris
               Of whych that nygh no plenty here is
               There were Elmes great and ſtronge
               Maples, aſhe, oke, aſpe, plants longe
               Fyne ewe, popler, and lyndes fayre
               And other trees full many a payre
               what ſhulde I tell you more of it?
               There were ſo many trees yet
               That I ſhulde all encombred be
               Er I had rekened euery tree
               Theſe trees were ſette that I deuyſe
               One from another in aſſyſe
               Fyue fadome or ſyxe, I trowe ſo
               But they were hye and great alſo
               And for to kepe out well the ſonne
               The croppes were ſo thycke yronne
               And euery braunche in other knytte
               And full of grene leues ſytte
               That ſonne myght there none dyſcende
               Leſt the tender graſſes ſhende
               There myght men Does and Roes yſe
               And of ſquyrels full great plente
               From bowe to bowe alwaye lepynge
               Connes there were alſo playenge
               That comyn out of her clapers
               Of ſondry colours and maners
               And maden many a tourneynge
               Vpon the freſhe graſſe ſpryngynge
               In places ſawe I welles there
               In whych there no frogges were
               And fayre in ſhadowe was euery well
               But I ne can the nombre tell
               Of ſtremys ſmall that by deuyſe
               Myrthe had done come through condyſe
               Of whych the water in rennynge
               Gan make a noyſe full lykynge
               
                  Aboute the brynkes of theſe welles
               And by the ſtremes ouer all elles
               Sprange vp the graſſe, as thycke yſet
               And ſofte as any veluet
               On whych men myght hys lemman ley
               As on a fetherbed to pley
               For the erthe was full ſoft and ſwete
               Through moyſture of the well wete
               Spronge vp the ſote grene gras
               As fayre, as thycke, as myſter was
               But moche amended it the place
               That therth was of ſuche a grace
               That it of floures hath plente
               That both in ſomer and wynter be
               There ſprange the vyolet al newe
               And freſhe peruynke ryche of hewe
               And floures yelowe, whyte, and rede
               Suche plente grewe there neuer in mede
               Full gaye was all the grounde and queynt
               And poudred, as men had it peynt
               wyth many a freſhe and ſondrye floure
               That caſten vp full good ſauoure
               I woll not longe holde you in fable
               Of all thys garden delectable
               I mote my tonge ſtynten nede
               For I ne maye wythouten drede
               Naught tellen you the beaute all
               Ne halfe the bounte there wyth all
               I went on ryght hande and on lefte
               Aboute the place, it was not lefte
               Tyll I had all the garden bene
               In the efters that men myght ſene
               And thus whyle I wente in my playe
               The God of loue me folowed aye
               Ryght as an hunter can abyde
               The beeſt, tyll he ſeeth hys tyde
               To ſhoten at goodmeſſe to the dere
               when that hym nedeth go no nere
               And ſo befyll, I reſted me
               Beſydes a well vnder a tree
               whych tree in Fraunce men call a Pyne
               But ſyth the tyme of kynge Pepyne
               Ne grewe there tree in mannes ſyght
               So fayre, ne ſo well woxe in hyght
               In all that yarde ſo hygh was none
               And ſpryngynge in a marble ſtone
               Had nature ſet, the ſoth to tell
               Vnder that pyne tree a well
               And on the border all wythout
               was wrytten in the ſtone about
               Letters ſmall, that ſayden thus
               Here ſtarfe the fayre Narciſus.
               Narciſus was a bachelere
               That loue had caught in hys daungere
               And in hys nette gan hym ſo ſtrayne
               And dyd hym ſo to wepe and playne
               That nede hym muſte hys lyfe forgo
               For a fayre lady that hyght Echo
               Hym loued ouer any creature
               And gan for hym ſuche payne endure
               That on a tyme ſhe hym tolde
               That yf he her louen nolde
               That her behoued nedes dye
               There laye none other remedye
               But natheleſſe for hys beaute
               So fyers and daungerous was he
               That he nolde graunten her aſkynge
               For wepynge ne for fayre prayenge
               And when ſhe herde hym werne her ſo
               She had in herte ſo great wo
               And toke it in ſo great dyſpyte
               That ſhe wythout more reſpyte
               was deed anone: but ere ſhe deyde
               Full pytouſly to God ſhe prayde
               That proude herte Narciſus
               That was in loue ſo daungerous
               Myght on a daye ben hampred ſo
               For loue, and bene ſo hote for wo
               That neuer he myght to ioye attayne
               Then ſhulde he fele in euery vayne
               what ſorowe true louers maken
               That ben ſo vyllaynouſly forſaken
            
            
               
                  THys prayer was but reaſonable
               Therfore God held it ferme and ſtable
               For Narciſus ſhortly to tell
               By auenture came to ye well
               To reſt hym in the ſhadowynge
               A daye, when he come from huntinge
               Thys Narciſus had ſuffred paynes
               For rennynge all daye in the playnes
               And was for thurſt in great dyſtreſſe
               Of herte, and of hys weryneſſe
               That had hys breth almoſt be nomen
               when he was to that wel ycomen
               That ſhadowed was with braunches grene
               He thought of thylke water ſhene
               To drynke, and freſhe hym well wythall
               And downe on knees he gan to fall
               And forth hys necke and heed out ſtraught
               To drynke of that well a draught
               And in the water anone was ſene
               
                  Hys noſe, hys mouth, hys eyen ſhene
               And he therof was all abaſhed
               Hys owne ſhadowe had hym betraſſhed
               For well wende he the forme ſe
               Of a chylde of great beaute
               well couth loue hym wreke tho
               Of daunger and of pryde alſo
               That Narciſus ſomtyme hym bere
               He quyte hym well hys guerdon there
               For he muſed ſo in the well
               That ſhortly the ſoth to tell
               He loued hys owne ſhadowe ſo
               That at laſte he ſtarfe for wo
               For when he ſawe that he hys wyll
               Myght in no maner waye fulfyll
               And that he was ſo faſte caught
               That he hym couth comforte naught
               He loſt hys wytte, ryght in that place
               And deyde wythin a lytell ſpace
               And thus hys waryſon he toke
               For the lady that he forſoke
               Ladyes I praye enſample taketh
               Ye that ayenſt your loue myſtaketh
               For yf her death be you to wyte
               God can full well your wyle quyte.
            
            
               
                  WHen yt thys lettre of whych I tel
               Had taught me yt it was ye welle
               Of Narciſus in hys beaute
               I gan anon wythdrawe me
               when it fell in me remembraunce
               That hym betyde ſuche myſchaunce
               But at the laſt then thought I
               That ſcathleſſe, full ſekerly
               I myght vnto the welle go
               wherof ſhulde I abaſhen ſo
               Vnto the welle then went I me
               And downe I louted for to ſe
               The clere water in the ſtone
               And eke the grauell, whych that ſhone
               Downe in the botome▪ as ſyluer fyne
               For of the welle, thys is the fyne
               In worlde is none ſo clere of hewe
               The water is euer freſhe and newe
               That welmeth vp, wyth wawes bryght
               The mountenaunce of two fynger hyght
               Aboute it is graſſe ſpryngynge
               For moyſte ſo thycke and well lykynge
               That it ne maye in wynter dye
               No more then maye the ſee be drye.
            
            
               
                  DOwne at the botome ſet ſawe I
               Two criſtall ſtones craftely
               In thylke freſhe and fayre well
               But o thynge ſothly dare I tell
               That ye woll holde a great maruayle
               when it is tolde, wythouten fayle
               For when the ſunne clere in ſyght
               Caſte in that welle hys bemes bryght
               And that the heete dyſcended is
               Then taketh the criſtall ſtone ywys
               Agayne the ſonne an hundred hewes
               Blewe, yelowe, and reed that freſh & new is
               Yet hath the meruaylous criſtall
               Suche ſtrength, that the place ouer all
               Both foule and tree, and leues grene
               And all the yerde in it is ſene
               And for to done you to vnderſtonde
               To make enſample woll I fonde
               Ryght as a myrrour openly
               Sheweth all thynge that ſtandeth therby
               As well the coloure, as the fygure
               wythouten any couerture
               Ryght ſo the criſtall ſtone ſhynynge
               wythouten any dyſceyuynge
               The entrees of the yerde accuſeth
               To hym that in the water muſeth
               For euer in whych halfe that ye be
               Ye maye well halfe the gardyne ſe
               And yf the turne, he maye ryght wele
               Sene the remnaunt euery dele
               For there is none ſo lytell thynge
               So hydde ne cloſed wyth ſhyttynge
               That it ne is ſene, as though it were
               Paynted in the criſtall there
               Thys is the myrrour perillus
               In whych the proude Narciſus
               Sey all hys fayre face bryght
               That made hym ſyth to lye vpryght
               For who ſo loketh in that myrrour
               There may nothynge be hys ſocour
               That he ne ſhall there ſe ſomthynge
               That ſhall hym lede into laughynge.
               Full many a worthy man hath it
               yblent, for folke of greateſt wyt
               Ben ſoone caught here and wayted
               wythouten reſpyte ben they beyted
               Here cometh to folke of newe rage
               Here chaungeth many a wyght corage
               Here lyeth no rede ne wytte therto
               For Venus ſonne, dan Cupido
               Hath ſowen there of loue the ſede
               That helpe ne lyeth there none, ne rede
               
                  So cercleth it the welle aboute
               Hys gynnes hath he ſet withoute
               Right for to catche in hys panters
               Theſe damoſels and bachelers
               Loue wyll none other byrde catche
               Though he ſet eyther nette or latche
               And for the ſede that here was ſowen
               Thys welle is cleped, as well is knowen
               The welle of Loue, of very ryght
               Of whyche there hath full many a wyght
               Spoken in bokes dyuerſely
               But they ſhull neuer ſo verily
               Diſcripcion of the welle here
               Ne eke the ſothe of thys matere
               As ye ſhull, whan I haue vndo
               The crafte that her belongeth to.
            
            
               
                  AL way me lyked for to dwell
               To ſene the chriſtall in the well
               That ſhewed me full openly
               A thouſande thynges faſte by
               But I may ſay in ſory houre
               Stode I to loken or to powre
               For ſythen I ſore ſyghed
               That Myrrour hath me nowe entriked
               But had I fyrſt knowen in my wyt
               The vertue and ſtrengthes of it
               I nolde not haue muſed there
               Me had bette ben els where
               For in the ſnare I fell anone
               That had bytreſhed many one
               In thylke Myrrour ſawe I tho
               Amonge a thouſande thynges mo
               A Roſer charged full of roſis
               That with an hedge aboute encloſis
               Tho had I ſuche luſte and enuye
               That for Parys ne for Pauye
               Nolde I haue lefte to gone and ſe
               There greateſt heape of roſes be
               whan I was with thys rage hente
               That caught hath many a man and ſhente
               Towarde the Roſer gan I go
               And whan I was not ferre therfro
               The ſauour of the roſes ſwote
               Me ſmote right to the herte rote
               As I had all enbaumed me
               And yf I ne had endouted me
               To haue ben hated or aſſayled
               My thankes woll I not haue fayled
               To pull a roſe of all that route
               To bere in myne honde aboute
               And ſmellen to it where I went
               But euer I dredde me to repent
               And leſte it greued or forthought
               The lorde that thylke gardyn wrought
               Of roſes there were great wone
               So fayre ware neuer in Rone
               Of knoppes cloſe, ſome ſawe I there
               And ſome well better woxen were
               And ſome there ben of other moyſon
               That drowe nygh to her ſeaſon
               And ſpedde hem faſte for to ſprede
               I loue well ſuche roſes rede
               For brode roſes, and open alſo
               Ben paſſed in a day or two
               But knoppes wyll freſhe be
               Two dayes at leeſt, or els thre
               The knoppes greatly lyked me
               For fayrer may there no man ſe
               who ſo myght haue one of all
               It ought hym ben full lefe withall
               Myght I garlonde of hem geten
               For no rycheſſe I wolde it leten
               Amonges the knoppes I chefe one
               So fayre, that of the remenaunt none
               Ne preyſe I halfe ſo well as it
               Whan I auyſe in my wyt
               For it ſo well was enlumyned
               wyth colour reed, as wel fyned
               As nature couthe it make fayre
               And it hath leaues wel foure payre
               That kynde hath ſet through hys knowynge
               Aboute the redde roſes ſpringyng
               The ſtalke was as ryſhe ryght
               And theron ſtode the knoppe vpright
               That it ye bowed vpon no ſyde
               The ſwote ſmel ſpronge ſo wyde
               That it dyed all the place aboute
               whan I had ſmelled the ſauour ſwote
               No wyll had I fro thence yet go
               But ſomdele nere it went I tho
               To take it, but myne honde for drede
               Ne durſte I to the Roſe bede
               For thyſtels ſharpe of many maners
               Netles, thornes, and hoked briers
               For moche they diſtourbled me
               For ſore I dradde to harmed be.
            
            
               
                  THe god of loue, with bowe bent
               That all day ſet had hys talent
               To purſue and to ſpyen me
               was ſtondyng by a fygge tree
               And whan he ſawe how that I
               Had choſen ſo ententifly
               
                  The bothum more vnto my paye
               Than any other that I ſay
               He toke an arowe, ful ſharply whette
               And in hys bowe whan it was ſette
               He ſtreight vp to hys eere drough
               The ſtronge bowe, that was ſo tough
               And ſhotte at me ſo wonder ſmerte
               That through myn eye vnto myn herte
               The takel ſmote, and depe it wente
               And therwithal ſuch colde me hente
               That vnder clothes warme and ſofte
               Sythen that day I haue chyuered ofte
               Whan I was hurte thus in ſtounde
               I fell downe platte vnto the grounde
               Myne hert fayled, and faynted aye
               And longe tyme in ſwoune I laye
               But whan I came out of ſwounyng
               And had wytte, and my felyng
               I was al mate, and wende full wele
               Of bloode haue lorne a full great dele
               But certes the arowe that in me ſtoode
               Of me ne drewe no droppe of bloode
               For why, I founde my woundes al drey
               Than toke I with myn hondes twey
               The arowe, and full faſte it ought plyght
               And in the pullyng ſore I ſyght
               So at the laſte the ſhafte of tree
               I drough out, with the fethers thre
               But yet the hoked heed ywis
               The whiche Beaute called is
               Gan ſo depe in myne herte pace
               That I it myght not arace
               But in myn hert ſtyll it ſtoode
               All bledde I not a droppe of bloode
               I was bothe anguyſhous and trouble
               For the peryll that I ſawe double
               I nyſte what to ſay or do
               Ne get a leche my woundes to
               For neyther through graſſe ne rote
               Ne had I helpe of hope ne bote
               But to the bothum euer mo
               Myn herte drewe, for all my wo
               My thought was in none other thyng
               For had it ben in my kepyng
               It wolde haue brought my lyfe agayne
               For certes euenly, I dare wel ſayne
               The ſyght onely, and the ſauoure
               Alegged moche of my langoure
               Than gan I for to drawe me
               Towarde the Bothom fayre to ſe
               And loue had get hym in his throwe
               Another arowe in to hys bowe
               And for to ſhote gan hym dreſſe
               The arowes name was Sympleſſe
               And whan that Loue gan nygh me nere
               He drowe it vp withouten were
               And ſhotte at me wyth al hys myght
               So that thys arowe anon ryght
               Throughout eygh as it was founde
               In to myn herte hath made a wounde
               Than I anon dyd all my crafte
               For to drawen out the ſhafte
               And therwithall I ſyghed efte
               But in myn herte the heed was lefte
               whyche aye encreſed my deſyre
               Vnto the bothom drowe I nere
               And euermo that me was wo
               The more deſyre had I to go
               Vnto the Roſer, where that grewe
               The freſhe bothom, ſo bright of hewe
               Better me were to haue letten be
               But it behoued nede me
               To don ryght as myne herte badde
               For euer the body muſte be ladde
               After the herte, in wele and wo
               Of force togyther they muſte go
               But neuer this archer wolde fyne
               To ſhote at me wyth all hys pyne
               And for to make me to hym mete
               The thyrde arowe he gan to ſhete
               Whan beſt hys tyme he myght eſpye
               The whiche was named Curteſye
               In to myne herte it dyd auale
               A ſwoune I fell, bothe deed and pale
               Longe tyme I lay, and ſtyrred nought
               Tyll I abrayde out of my thought
               And faſte than I auyſed me
               To drawe out the ſhafte of tree
               But euer the heed was lefte behynde
               For aught I couthe pull or wynde
               So ſore it ſtycked whan I was hytte
               That by no crafte I myght it flytte
               But anguyſhous and full of thought
               I lefte ſuche wo, my wounde aye wrought
               That ſomoned me alway to go
               Towarde the Roſe, that pleſed me ſo
               But I ne durſte in no manere
               Bycauſe the archer was ſo nere
               For euermore gladly as I rede
               Brent chylde of fyre hath moche drede
               And certes yet for al my peyne
               Though that I ſyght, yet arowes reyne
               And grounde quarels, ſharpe of ſteele
               Ne for no payne that I might fele
               
                  Yet myght I not my ſelfe with holde
               The fayre Roſer to beholde
               For Loue me yaue ſuche hardyment
               For to fulfyll hys commaundement
               Vpon my fete I roſe vp than
               Feble, as a for wounded man
               And forthe to gon might I ſette
               And for the archer nolde I lette
               Towarde the Roſer faſte I drowe
               But thornes ſharpe, mo than ynowe
               There were, and alſo thyſtels thicke
               And breres brymme for to pricke
               That I ne myght get grace
               The roughe thornes for to pace
               To ſene the freſhe Roſes of hewe
               I muſte abyde, thought it me rewe
               The hedge about ſo thycke was
               That cloſed the Roſes in compas
               But o thyng lyked me right wele
               I was ſo nyghe, I myght fele
               Of the bothom the ſwote odoure
               And alſo ſe the freſhe coloure
               And that right greatly lyked me
               That I ſo nere might it ſe
               Suche ioye anon therof had I
               That I forgate my maladye
               To ſene I had ſuche delyte
               Of ſorowe and angre I was all quyte
               And of my woundes that I had thore
               For no thyng lyken me myght more
               Than dwellen by the Roſer aye
               And thence neuer to paſſe awaye
               But whan a whyle I had be thare
               The god of Loue, whyche all to ſhare
               Myne herte wyth hys arowes kene
               Caſteth hym to yeue me woundes grene
               He ſhotte at me full haſtely
               An arowe named Company
               The whyche takell is full able
               To make theſe ladyes merciable
               Than I anon gan chaungen hewe
               For greuaunce of my wounde newe
               That I agayne fel in ſwounyng
               And ſyghed ſore, in complaynyng
               Sore I complayned that my ſore
               On me gan greuen more and more
               I had non hope of allegeaunce
               So nygh I drowe to diſperaunce
               I rought of dethe, ne of lyfe
               Whether that loue wolde me dryfe
               If me a martyr wolde he make
               I might hys power not forſake
               And whyle for anger thus I woke
               The god of Loue an arowe toke
               Ful ſharpe it was and pugnaunt
               And it was called Fayre ſemblaunt
               The whiche in no wyſe wol conſent
               That any louer hym repente
               To ſerue hys loue, with herte and all
               For any peryll that may befall
               But though thys arowe was kene grounde
               As any raſour that is founde
               To cutte and kerue at the poynte
               The god of Loue it had anoynte
               wyth a precious oyntment
               Somdele to yeue alegement
               Vpon the woundes that he hade
               Through the body in my herte made
               To helpe her ſores, and to cure
               And that they may the bette endure
               But yet thys arowe, without more
               Made in myne herte a large ſore
               That in full great payne I abode
               But aye the oyntement went abrode
               Throughout my woundes large and wyde
               It ſpredde aboute in euery ſyde
               Through whoſe vertue, and whoſe myght
               Myne herte ioyfull was and lyght
               I had ben deed and all to ſhent
               But for the precious oyntment
               The ſhafte I drowe out of the arowe
               Rokyng for wo right wonder narowe
               But the heed, whiche made me ſmerte
               Lefte behynde in myne herte
               wyth other foure, I dare wel ſay
               That neuer woll be take away
               But the oyntment halpe me wele
               And yet ſuche ſorowe dyd I fele
               That al day I chaunged hewe
               Of my woundes freſhe and newe
               As men might ſe in my vyſage
               The arowes were ſo ful of rage
               So varyaunt of diuerſyte
               That men 
                     •
                  n eueryche myght ſe
               Bothe great anoye, and eke ſwetneſſe
               And ioye meynt with bytterneſſe
               Nowe were they eaſy, now were they wood
               In hem I felte bothe harme and good
               Nowe ſore without aleggement
               Nowe ſoftyng wyth oyntment
               It ſoftned here, and pricketh there
               Thus eaſe and anger togyther were.
            
            
               
               
                  THe God of Loue delyuerly
               Come lepande to me haſtely
               And ſayd to me in great iape
               Yelde the, for thou may not eſcape
               May no defence auayle the here
               Therfore I rede make no daungere
               If thou wolte yelde the haſtely
               Thou ſhalt rather haue mercy
               He is a foole in ſykerneſſe
               That wyth daunger or ſtoutneſſe
               Rebelleth, there that he ſhulde pleſe
               In ſuche folye is lytell eſe
               Be meke, where thou muſte nedes bowe
               To ſtryue ayen is nought thy prowe
               Come atones, and haue ydo
               For I woll that it be ſo
               Than yelde the here debonairly
               And I anſwered full humbly
               Gladly ſir, at your byddyng
               I wol me yelde in all thyng
               To your ſeruyce I woll me take
               For god defende that I ſhulde make
               Ayen your byddyng reſyſtence
               I woll not don ſo great offence
               For yf I dyd, it were no ſkyll
               Ye may do wyth me what ye wyll
               Saue or ſpyll, and alſo ſlo
               Fro you in no wyſe may I go
               My lyfe, my dethe, is in your honde
               I may not laſte out of your bonde
               Playne at your lyſte I yelde me
               Hopyng in herte, that ſomtyme ye
               Comforte and eſe ſhull me ſende
               Or els ſhortly, this is the ende
               withouten helthe, I mote aye dure
               But yf ye take me to your cure
               Comforte or helthe, howe ſhulde I haue
               Sythe ye me hurte, but ye me ſaue
               The helthe of loue mote be founde
               where as they token fyrſt her wounde
               And yf ye lyſt of me to make
               Your priſoner, I woll it take
               Of herte and wyll fully at gre
               Holy and playne I yelde me
               wythout feynyng or feyntyſe
               To be gouerned by your empryſe
               Of you I here ſo moche price
               I woll ben hole at your deuyce
               For to fulfyll your lykyng
               And repente for nothyng
               Hopyng to haue yet in ſome tyde
               Mercy, of that I abyde
               And wyth that couenaunt yelde I me
               Anone downe knelyng vpon my kne
               Proferyng for to kyſſe hys fete
               But for nothyng he wolde me lete.
            
            
               
                  ANd ſaid, I loue the bothe and preiſe
               Sens that thyn anſwer doth me eſe
               For thou anſwered ſo curteſly
               For now I wote wel vtterly
               That thou arte gentyll by thy ſpeche
               For though a man ferre wolde ſeche
               He ſhulde not fynden in certayne
               No ſuche anſwere of no vilayne
               For ſuche a worde ne myght nought
               Iſſe out of a vilayns thought
               Thou ſhalt not leſen of thy ſpeche
               For thy helpyng woll I eche
               And eke encreſen that I maye
               But fyrſt I woll that thou obaye
               Fully for thyne auauntage
               Anon to do me here homage
               And ſythe kyſſe thou ſhalte my mouthe
               whiche to no vilayne was neuer couthe
               For to aproche it, ne for to touche
               For ſaufe of cherles I ne vouche
               That they ſhall neuer neyght it nere
               For curteys, and of fayre manere
               well taught, and full of gentylnyſſe
               He muſte ben, that ſhall me kyſſe
               And alſo of full hygh fraunchyſe
               That ſhall atteyne to that empreſe
               And fyrſt of o thyng warne I the
               That payne and great aduerſyte
               He mote endure, and eke trauayle
               That ſhall me ſerue, without fayle
               But there agaynſt the to comforte
               And wyth thy ſeruyce to diſporte
               Thou mayſt full glad and ioyfull be
               So good a mayſter to haue as me
               And lorde of ſo hygh renoun
               I beare of loue the Gonfenoun
               Of Curteſy the banere
               For I am of the ſelfe manere
               Gentyll, curteys, meke, and fre
               That who euer ententyfe be
               Me to honoure, doute, and ſerue
               And alſo that he hym obſerue
               Fro treſpace and fro vilanye
               And hym gouerne in curteſye
               wyth wyll and wyth entencion
               
                  For whan he fyrſt in my priſon
               Is caught, than muſte he vtterly
               Fro thence forthe full beſyly
               Caſte hym gentyll for to be
               If he deſyre helpe of me
               Anon without more delay
               withouten daunger or affray
               I become hys man anone
               And gaue hym thankes many a one
               And kneled downe wyth hondes ioynt
               And made it in my porte ful queynt
               The ioye went to my hert rote
               whan I had kyſſed hys mouthe ſo ſwote
               I had ſuche myrthe and ſuche lykyng
               It cured me of languyſhyng
               He aſked of me than hoſtages
               I ha
                     •
                  te he ſayd taken fele homages
               Of one and other, where I haue bene
               Diſteyned ofte, withouten wene
               Theſe felons ful of falſyte
               Haue many ſythes begyled me
               And through her falſhede her luſte acheued
               Wherof I repent, and am agreued
               And I hem get in my daungere
               Her falſhede ſhull they bye full dere
               But for I loue the, I ſay the playne
               I woll of the be more certayne
               For the ſo ſore I woll nowe bynde
               That thou away ne ſhalt not wynde
               For to denyen the couenaunt
               Or done that is not auenaunt
               That thou were falſe, it were great ruthe
               Sythe thou ſemeſt ſo full of truthe
               Sir, yf the lyſt to vnderſtande
               I meruayle the aſkyng thys demande
               For why or wherfore ſhulde ye
               Hoſtages or borowes aſke of me
               Or any other ſykerneſſe
               Sythe ye wot in ſothfaſtneſſe
               That ye me haue ſuſpriſed ſo
               And hole myne herte taken me fro
               That it woll do for me nothyng
               But yf it be at your byddyng
               Myne herte is yours, and myn right nought
               As it behoueth, in dede and thought
               Redy in all to worche your wyll
               whether ſo turne to good or yll
               So ſore it luſteth you to pleſe
               No man therof may you diſeſe
               Ye haue theron ſette ſuche iuſtyſe
               That it is werreyed in many wyſe
               And yf ye doute it nolde obey
               Ye may therof do make a key
               And holde it wyth you for hoſtage
               Nowe certes thys is none outrage
               (Quod loue) and fully I accorde
               For of the body he is full lorde
               That hath the herte in hys treſore
               Outrage it were to aſken more.
            
            
               
                  THan of his aumener he drough
               A lytell key fetyſe ynough
               which was of gold poliſhed cler
               And ſaid to me, wt this key here
               Thyn hert to me nowe woll I ſhette
               For all my iowell loke and knette
               I bynde vnder this lytell key
               That no wight maye cary awey
               This key is full of great poſte
               wyth whyche anon he touched me
               Vnder the ſyde full ſoftely
               That he myne herte ſodaynly
               wythout anoye hadde ſpeered
               That yet right nought it hath me deered
               Whan he hadde done his wyll all out
               And I had putte hem out of doute
               Syr I ſayd: I haue right great wyll
               Your luſte and pleaſure to fulfyll
               Loke ye my ſeruyce take at gree
               By thylke faythe ye owe to me
               I ſaye nought for recreaundyſe
               For I nought doute of your ſeruyce
               But the ſeruaunt traueyleth in vayne
               That for to ſeruen dothe hys payne
               Vnto that lorde, whyche in no wyſe
               Conne hym no thanke for hys ſeruyce.
            
            
               
                  LOue ſayd, diſmay the nought
               Syth thou for ſocour haſte me ſought
               In thāke thy ſeruice wol I take
               And high of degree I woll the make
               If wyckedneſſe ne hynder the
               But (as I hoope) it ſhall nought be
               To worſhyppe no wyght by auenture
               Maye come, but yf he payne endure
               Abyde and ſuffre thy diſtreſſe
               That hurteth nowe, it ſhall be leſſe
               I wotte my ſelfe what maye the ſaue
               What medicyne thou woldeſt haue
               And yf thy trouthe to me thou kepe
               I ſhall vnto thyne helpyng eke
               To cure thy woundes and make hem clene
               where ſo they be olde or grene
               
                  Thou ſhalte be holpen at wordes fewe
               For certaynly thou ſhalte well ſhewe
               Where that thou ſerueſt with good wyll
               For to accomplyſhen and fulfyll
               My commaundementes daye and nyght
               whyche I to louers yeue of right.
            
            
               
                  AH ſyr, for goddes loue (ſayd I)
               Er ye paſſe hens ententyfely
               Your commaundemētes to me ye ſay
               And I ſhall kepe hem yf I may
               For hem to kepen is all my thought
               And yf ſo be I wote hem nought
               Than maye I vnwyttingly
               Wherfore I praye you entierly
               wyth all myne herte, me to lere
               That I treſpace in no manere
               The god of Loue than charged me
               Anone, as ye ſhall here and ſe
               worde by worde, by right empryſe
               So as the Romaunt ſhall deuyſe
               The maiſter leſeth hys tyme to lere
               whan the diſciple woll nat here
               It is but vayne on hym to ſwynke
               That on hys lernynge woll nat thynke
               Who ſo luſte loue, lette hym entende
               For nowe the Romance begynneth to amēde
               Nowe is good to here in faye
               If any be that canne it ſaye
               And poynt it as the reaſon is
               Sette for other gate ywis
               It ſhall nat well in all thyng
               Be brought to good vnderſtondyng
               For a reder that poynteth yll
               A good ſentence maye ofte ſpyl
               The boke is good at the endyng
               Made of newe and luſty thyng
               For who ſo woll the endyng here
               The crafte of loue he ſhall nowe lere
               If that he woll ſo longe abyde
               Tyll I thys Romance maye vahyde
               And vndo the ſygnyfiaunce
               Of thys dreme in to Romaunce
               The ſothfaſtneſſe that nowe is hydde
               without couerture ſhall be kydde
               whan I vndone haue thys dremyng
               wherin no worde is of leaſyng.
            
            
               
                  VIllany at the begynnyng
               I woll ſaye loue ouer all thyng
               Thou leaue, yf thou wolte be
               Falſe, and treſpace ayenſt me
               I curſe and blame generally
               All hem that louen villany
               For villany maketh villeyne
               And by hys dedes a chorle is ſeyne
               Theſe villayns arne without pyte
               Frendſhyp, loue, and all bounte
               I nyll receyue vnto my ſeruyce
               Hem that ben villayns of empriſe
               But vnderſtonde in thyne entent
               That thys is not myne entendement
               To clepe no wight in no ages
               Onely gentyll for hys lynages
               But who ſo is vertuous
               And in hys porte not outragyous
               whan ſuche one thou ſeeſt the beforne
               Though he be not gentyll borne
               Thou mayſte well ſeyne thys is in ſothe
               That he is gentyll, bycauſe he dothe
               As longeth to a gentylman
               Of hem none other deme I can
               For certaynly withouten drede
               A chorle is demed by hys dede
               Of hye or lowe, as ye may ſe
               Or of what kynrede that he be
               Ne ſay nought for none yuell wyll
               Thyng that is to holden ſtyll
               It is no worſhyp to miſſey
               Thou mayſte enſample take of key
               That was ſomtyme for miſſayeng
               Hated bothe of olde and yonge
               As ferre as Gaw
                     •
                  yn the worthy
               was preyſed for hys curteſye
               Kaye was hated, for he was fell
               Of worde diſpytous and cruell
               wherfore be wyſe and aqueyntable
               Goodly of worde, and reſonable
               Bothe to leſſe and eke to mare
               And whan thou comeſt there men are
               Loke that thou haue in cuſtome aye
               Fyrſt to ſalue hem yf thou maye
               And yf it fall that of hem ſomme
               Salue the fyrſt, be not domme
               But quyte hem curteſly anon
               wythout abydyng, er they gon
               For nothyng eke thy tonge applye
               To ſpeke wordes of rybaudrye
               To villayne ſpeche, in no degre
               Late neuer thy lyppe vnbounden be
               For I nought holde hym in good faythe
               Curteys that foule wordes ſaythe
               And all women ſerue and preyſe
               And to thy power her honour reyſe
               
                  And yf that any miſſayere
               Diſpiſe women, that thou mayſt here
               Blame him, and byde hym holde him ſtyll
               And ſette thy myght, and all thy wyll
               women and ladyes for to pleaſe
               And to do thynge that may hem eaſe
               That they euer ſpeke good of the
               For ſo thou mayſt beſt prayſed be
               Loke fro pride thou kepe the wele
               For thou mayſt both perceyue and fele
               That pride is bothe foly and ſynne
               And he that pryde hath him wythin
               Ne may hys herte in no wyſe
               Meken ne ſouplen to ſeruyce
               For pride is founde in euery parte
               Contrarye vnto loues arte
               And he that loueth trewly
               Shulde hym conteyne iolyly
               wythout pride in ſondrie wyſe
               And hym diſgyſen in queyntyſe
               For queynte aray, wythout drede
               Is nothyng proude, who taketh hede
               For freſhe aray, as men may ſe
               wythout pride may ofte be
               Mayntayne thy ſelfe after thy rent
               Of robe and eke of garment
               For many ſyth fayre clothyng
               A man amendeth in much thyng
               And loke alwaye that they be ſhape
               what garment that thou ſhalte make
               Of hym that can beſte do
               wythall that parteyneth therto
               Poyntes and ſleues be wel ſyttande
               Ryght and ſtreyght on the hande
               Of ſhone and bootes, newe and fayre
               Loke at the leeſt thou haue a payre
               And that they ſytte ſo fetouſly
               That theſe rude may vtterly
               Meruayle, ſyth that they ſytte ſo playne
               Howe they come on or of agayne
               weare ſtrayte gloues wyth aumere
               Of ſylke, and alway wyth good chere
               Thou gyue, yf thou haue rycheſſe
               And yf thou haue naught ſpende the leſſe
               Alwaye be mery, yf thou may
               But waſt not thy good alway
               Haue hatte of floures, as freſhe as May
               Chapelet of Roſes of whytſondaye
               For ſuche araye ne coſtneth but lyte
               Thine handes waſhe, thy teeth make white
               And let no fylth vpon the be
               Thy nayles blacke, yf thou mayſt ſe
               Voyde it awaye delyuerly
               And kembe thyne heed ryght iolyly
               Farce not thy viſage in no wyſe
               For that of loue is not thempryſe
               For loue doth haten, as I fynde
               A beaute that cometh nat of kynde
               Alwaye in hert I rede the
               Glad and mery for to be
               And be as ioyfull as thou can
               Loue hath no ioye of ſorowful man
               That yuel is ful of curteſy
               That knoweth in hys malady
               For euer of loue the ſyckneſſe
               Is meynte wyth ſwete and bytterneſſe
               The ſore of loue is maruaylous
               For nowe the louer ioyous
               Nowe can he playne, nowe can he grone
               Nowe can he ſyngen, nowe maken mone
               To day he playneth for heuyneſſe
               To morowe he playneth for iolyneſſe
               The lyfe of loue is ful contrarye
               whyche ſtoundemeale can ofte varye
               But yf thou canſt myrthes make
               That men in gre wol gladly take
               Do it goodly, I commaunde the
               For men ſhulde where ſo euer they be
               Do thynge that hem ſyttynge is
               For therof commeth good loos and pris
               wherof that thou be vertuous
               Ne be not ſtraunge ne daungerous
               For yf thou good ryder be
               Prycke gladly that men may ſe
               In armes alſo yf thou come
               Purſue tyl thou a name haſte wonne
               And yf thy voice be fayre and clere
               Thou ſhalt maken no greate daungere
               whan to ſynge they goodly pray
               It is thy worſhyp for to abey
               Alſo to you it longeth aye
               To harpe and gyterne, daunce and playe
               For yf he can wel fote and daunce
               It maye hym greatly do auaunce
               Amonge eke for thy lady ſake
               Songes and complayntes that thou make
               For that wol meuen in her hete
               whan they reden of thy ſmerte
               Loke that no man for ſcarce the holde
               For that may greue the manyfolde
               Reſon wol that a louer be
               In his gyftes more large and fre
               Than chorles that be not of louyng
               For who therof can any thyng
               
                  He ſhal be lefe aye for to yeue
               In londes lore who ſo wolde leue
               For he that through a ſodayne ſyght
               Or for a kyſſyng anon ryght
               yaue hole his herte, in wyl and thought
               And to hym ſelfe kepeth right nought
               After this ſwyfte, it is good reaſon
               He yeue his good in abandon.
            
            
               
                  NOwe woll I here reherce
               Of that I haue ſayde in verce
               All the ſentence by and by
               In wordes fewe compendouſly
               That thou mayſte the better on hem thynke
               whether ſo it be thou wake or wynke
               For the wordes lytel greue
               A man to kepe, whan it is breue
               who ſo with loue wol gon or ryde
               He mote be curteyes, and voyde of pryde
               Mery, and full of iolyte
               And of largeſſe a loſed be.
            
            
               Firſt I ioyne the here in penaunce
               That euer without repentaunce
               Thou ſet thy thought in thy louyng
               To laſt without repentyng
               And thynke vpon thy myrthes ſwete
               That ſhal folowe after whan ye mete.
            
            
               And for thou trew to loue ſhalt be
               I wyl, and cōmaunde the
               That in one place thou ſet al hole
               Thyne hert, wythout halfen dole
               For trechery and ſykerneſſe
               For I loued neuer doubleneſſe
               To many his hert that wol depart
               Eueryche ſhal haue but lytel parte
               But of hym drede I me right nought
               That in one place ſetteth his thought
               Therfore in o place it ſette
               And lette it neuer thens flette
               For if thou yeueſt it in lenyng
               I holde it but a wreched thyng
               Therfore yeue it hole and quyte
               And thou ſhalt haue the more meryte
               If it be lent, than after ſoone
               The bounte and the thanke is done
               But in Loue, free yeuen thyng
               Requireth a great guerdonyng
               yeue it in yeft al quyte fully
               And make thy gyfte debonairly
               For men that yefte holde more dere
               That yeuen is wyth gladſome chere
               That gyfte nought to prayſen is
               That man yeueth maugre his
               whan thou haſte yenen thyne hert (as I
               Haue ſayd) the here openly
               Than auentures ſhall the fall
               whych harde and heuy bene wyth all
               For oft whan thou bethynkeſt the
               Of thy louynge, where ſo thou be
               From folke thou muſt depart in hye
               That none perceyue thy malady
               But hyde thyne harme thou muſt alone
               And go forth ſole, and make thy mone
               Thou ſhalt no whyle be in o ſtate
               But whylom colde and whylom hate
               Nowe reed as Roſe, now yelowe and fade
               Such ſorowe I trowe thou neuer hade
               Cotidien, ne quarteyne
               It is nat ſo full of peyne
               For often tymes it ſhall fall
               In loue, amonge thy paynes all
               That thou thy ſelfe al holy
               Foryeten ſhalt ſo vtterly
               That many tymes thou ſhalt be
               Styl as an ymage of tree
               Dome as a ſtone, wythout ſteryng
               Of fote or hande, wythout ſpekyng
               Than ſone after al thy payne
               To memorye ſhalt thou come agayne
               A man abaſhed wonder ſore
               And after ſyghen more and more
               For wytte thou wele wythouten wene
               In ſuch eſtate ful ofte haue I bene
               That haue the yuel of loue aſſayde
               wher through thou arte ſo diſmayde
            
            
               
                  AFter a thought ſhal take the ſo
               That thy loue is to ferre the fro
               Thou ſhalte ſaye (God) what maye thys be
               That I ne may my lady ſe?
               Myne hert alone is to her go
               And I abyde al ſole in wo
               Departed fro myne owne thought
               And wyth myne eyen ſe ryght nought
               Alas myne eyen ſene I ne may
               My carefull hert to conuay
               Myne hertes gyde, but they be
               I prayſe nothyng what euer they ſe
               Shulde they abyde than, nay
               But gone and viſiten wythout delay
               That myne herte deſyreth ſo
               For certaynly, but yf they go
               
                  A foole my ſelfe I may wel holde
               whan I ne ſe what myne hert wolde
               wherfore I wol gone her to ſene
               Or eaſed ſhal I neuer bene
               But I haue ſome tokenyng
               Than goſt thou forth wythout dwelling
               But oft thou fayleſt of thy deſyre
               Er thou mayſt come her any nere
               And waſteſt in vayne thy paſſage
               Than falleſt thou in a newe rage
               For want of ſyght, thou gynneſt mourne
               And homewarde penſyfe thou doſt returne
               In greate miſchefe than ſhalt thou be
               For than agayne ſhall come to the
               Syghes and playntes wyth newe wo
               That no itchynge prycketh ſo
               who wote it nought, he may go lere
               Of hem that byen loue ſo dere
               No thyng thyne herte appeſen maye
               That ofte thou wolt gone and aſſaye
               If thou mayſt ſene by auenture
               Thy lyues ioye, thyne hertes cure
               So that by grace, yf thou myght
               Attayne of her to haue a ſyght
               Than ſhalt thou done none other dede
               But wyth that ſyght thyne eyen fede
               That fayre freſhe whan thou mayſt ſe
               Thyne herte ſhal ſo rauyſhed be
               That neuer thou woldeſte thy thankes lete
               Ne remoue, for to ſe that ſwete
               The more thou ſeeſt in ſothfaſtneſſe
               The more thou couyteſt of that ſwetneſſe
               The more thyne hert brenneth in fyre
               The more thyne hert is in deſyre
               For who conſydreth euerydele
               It may be lykened wonder wele
               The payne of loue vnto a fere
               For euermore thou neygheſt nere
               Thought, or who ſo that it be
               For very ſoth I tel it the
               The hotter euer ſhalt thou brenne
               As experience ſhal the kenne
               where ſo comeſt in any coſte
               who is next fyre he brenneth moſte
               And yet forſoth for al thyne hete
               Thoughe thou for loue ſwelte and ſwete
               Ne for no thynge thou felen maye
               Thou ſhalt not wyllen to paſſe awaye
               And though thou go, yet muſt the nede
               Thynke al day on her fayre hede
               whom thou behelde wyth ſo good wyll
               And holde thy ſelfe begyled yll
               That thou ne haddeſt none hardyment
               To ſhewe her ought of thyne entent
               Thyne hert full ſore thou wolte diſpiſe
               And eke repreue of cowardyſe
               That thou ſo dull in euery thyng
               were dome for drede, wythout ſpekyng
               Thou ſhalt eke thynke thou dydeſt folye
               That thou were her ſo faſt bye
               And durſt not auntre the to ſay
               Some thyng, er thou come away
               For thou haddeſte no more wonne
               To ſpeke of her whan thou begonne
               But yet ſhe wolde for thy ſake
               In armes goodly the haue take
               It ſhuld haue bene more worth to the
               Than of treaſour great plente
               Thus ſhalte thou mourne & eke cōplayne
               And get encheſon to gone agayne
               Vnto thy walke, or to thy place
               where thou behelde her fleſhely face
               And neuer for falſe ſuſpection
               Thou woldoſt fynde occaſion
               For thou gone vnto her houſe
               So arte thou than deſyrouſe
               A ſyght of her for to haue
               If thou thyne honour myghteſt ſaue
               Or any erande myghteſt make
               Thyder, for thy loues ſake
               Ful fayne thou woldeſt, but for drede
               Thou goeſt not, leeſt that men take hede
               wherfore I rede in thy goyng
               And alſo in thyne agayne commyng
               Thou be wel ware that men ne wyt
               Feyne the other cauſe than it
               To go that waye, or faſt bye
               To heale wel is no folye
               And yf ſo be it happe the
               That thou thy loue there mayſt ſe
               In ſeker wyſe thou her ſalewe
               wherwyth thy colour wol tranſmewe
               And eke thy bloude ſhall all to quake
               Thy hewe eke chaungen for her ſake
               But worde and wytte, wyth chere full pale
               Shal wante for to tell thy tale
               And yf thou mayſt ſo ferforth wynne
               That thou reaſon durſt begynne
               And woldeſt ſayne thre thynges or mo
               Thou ſhalt ful ſcarſly ſayne the two
               Though thou bethynke the neuer ſo wele
               Thou ſhalt foryete yet ſomdele
            
            
               
               
                  BVt yf thou deale wyth trecherye
               For falſe louers mowe all folye
               Saine what the luſt wtoutē drede
               They be ſo double in her falſhede
               For they in herte can thynke o thynge
               And ſayne another in her ſpekynge
               And whan thy ſpeche is ended all
               Ryght thus to the it ſhall befall
               If any worde than come to mynde
               That thou to ſaye haſte lefte behynde
               Than thou ſhalt brenne in great martyre
               For thou ſhalt brenne as any fyre
               Thys is the ſtryfe and eke the affraye
               And the batell that laſteth aye
               Thys bargayne ende maye neuer take
               But yf that ſhe thy peace wyll make
               And whan the nyght is comen anon
               A thouſande angres ſhall come apon
               To bedde as faſte thou wolte the dyght
               where thou ſhalt haue but ſmall delyght
               For whan thou weneſt for to ſlepe
               So full of payne ſhalte thou crepe
               Sterte in thy bedde aboute full wyde
               And turne full often on euery ſyde
               Nowe downwarde groſſe, & nowe vpright
               And walowe in wo the longe nyght
               Thyn armes ſhalte thou ſprede a brede
               As man in werre were forwerede
               Than ſhall the come a remembraunce
               Of her ſhappe and her ſemblaunce
               wherto none other maye be pere
               And wete thou well wythout were
               That the ſhall ſe ſomtyme that nyght
               That thou haſte her, that is ſo bryght
               Naked betwene thyne armes there
               All ſothfaſtneſſe as though it were
               Thou ſhalte than make caſtels in Spayne
               And dreme of ioye, al but it vayne
               And the delyten of ryght nought
               whyle thou ſo ſlombreſt in that thought
               That ſo ſwete and delytable
               The whyche in ſoth nys but a fable
               For it ne ſhall no whyle laſte
               Than ſhalte thou ſyghe and wepe faſte
               And ſaye dere god, what thynge is this
               My dreme is turned all amys
               whyche was ful ſwete and apparent
               But nowe I wake it is all ſhent
               Nowe yede thys mery thought away
               Twenty tymes vpon a day
               I wolde thys thought wolde come agayne
               For it alegeth well my payne
               It maketh me full of ioyefull thought
               It ſleeth me that it laſteth nought
               Ah lorde, why nyll ye me ſocoure?
               The ioye I trowe that I langoure
               The deth I wolde me ſhulde ſlo
               whyle I lye in her armes two
               Myne harme is harde wythouten wene
               My great vneaſe full ofte I mene
            
            
               
                  BVt wolde loue do ſo I myght
               Haue fully ioye of her ſo bryght
               My payne were quitte me richly
               Alas to greate a thynge aſke I
               It is but folye, and wronge wenyng
               To aſke ſo outragious a thyng
               And who ſo aſketh folyly
               He mote be warned haſtely
               And I ne wote what I maye ſay
               I am ſo ferre out of the way
               For I wolde haue full great lykyng
               And full greate ioye of laſſe thyng
               For wolde ſhe of her gentylneſſe
               withouten more, me ones keſſe
               It were to me a greate guerdon
               Relece of al my paſſion
               But it is harde to come therto
               All is but foly that I do
               So hygh I haue myne herte ſette
               where I maye no comforte gette
               I wote not where I ſaye wel or nought
               But thys I wote well in my thought
               Thet it were better of her alone
               For to ſtynte my wo and mone
               A loke on her I caſt goodly
               That for to haue all vtterly
               Of an other all hole the play
               Ah lorde where I ſhal byde the day
               That euer ſhe ſhal my lady be
               He is full cured, that maye her ſe
               A god, whan ſhall the dawnyng ſprynge?
               To lyggen thus is an angry thynge
               I haue no ioye thus here to lye
               whan that my loue is not me bye
               A man to lyen hath great diſeſe
               whyche may not ſlepe, ne reſt in eſe
               I wolde it dawed, and were now day
               And that the nyght were went away
               For were it daye, I wolde vp ryſe
               Ah ſlowe ſunne, ſhewe thyne enpriſe
               Spede the to ſprede thy beemes bryght
               And chace the derkeneſſe of the nyght
               To put away the ſtoundes ſtronge
               
                  whych in me laſten al to longe
               The nyght ſhalte thou contynue ſo
               wythout reſt, in payne and wo
               yf euer thou knewe of loue diſtreſſe
               Thou ſhall mowe lerne in that ſickeneſſe
               And thus endurynge ſhalte thou lye
               And ryſe on morowe vp erly
               Out of thy bedde, and harneys the
               Er euer dawnyng thou mayſt ſe
               Al priuely than ſhalte thou gone
               what whyder it be thy ſelfe alone
               For reyne or hayle, for ſnowe, for ſlete
               Thyder ſhe dwelleth, that is ſo ſwete
               The whiche may fall a ſlepe be
               And thynketh but lytle vpon the
               Than ſhalte thou go, ful foule aferde
               Loke yf the gate be vnſperde
               And wayte wythout in wo and payne
               Ful yuel a coulde in wynde and rayne
               Than ſhalt thou go the dore before
               If thou mayſt fynde any ſhore
               Or hole, or refte, what euer it were
               Than ſhalte thou ſtoupe, and laye to eer
                     •
                  
               
               If they wythin a ſlepe be
               I meane al ſaue thy lady free
               whom wakynge yf thou mayſt aſpye
               Go put thy ſelfe in inpardye
               To aſke grace, and the bymene
               That ſhe may wete wythout wene
               That thou nyght no reſte haſte had
               So ſore for her thou were beſtad
               women well ought pytie to take
               Of hem that ſorowen for her ſake
               And loke for loue of that relyke
               That thou thynke none other lyke
               For whan thou haſt ſo great annoy
               Shal kyſſe the er thou go awey
               And holde that in ful great deynte
               And for that no man ſhal the ſe
               Before the houſe, ne in the way
               Loke thou begone agayne er day
               Such commyng, and ſuch goyng
               Such heuyneſſe, and ſuch walkyng
               Maketh louers wythouten any wene
               Vnder her clothes pale and lene
               For loue leaueth coloure ne cleerneſſe
               who loueth trewe hath no fatneſſe
               Thou ſhalt well by thy ſelfe ſe
               That thou muſt nedes aſſayed be
               For men that ſhape hem other way
               Falſely her ladyes for to betray
               It is no wonder though they be fatte
               wyth falſe othes her loues they gatte
               For ofte I ſe ſuche loſengeours
               Fatter than Abottes or priours
               Yet wyth o thynge I the charge
               That is to ſaye, that thou be large
               Vnto the mayde, that her doth ſerue
               So beſt her thanke thou ſhalt deſerue
               yeue her gyftes, and get her grace
               For ſo thou may thanke purchace
               That ſhe the worthy holde and fre
               Thy lady, and al that may the ſe
               Alſo her ſeruauntes worſhyp aye
               And pleaſe as much as thou maye
               Great good through hem maye come to the
               Bycauſe wyth her they bene priue
               They ſhal her tell howe they the fande
               Curreys and wyſe, and wel doande
               And ſhe ſhal preyſe wel the more
               Loke out of lande, thou be not fore
               And yf ſuch cauſe thou haue, that the
               Behoueth to gone out of countre
               Leaue hole thyne hert in hoſtage
               Tyl thou agayne make thy paſſage
               Thynke longe to ſe the ſwete thyng
               That hath thyne herte in her kepyng
               Nowe haue I tolde the, in what wyſe
               A louer ſhal do me ſeruice
               Do it than, yf thou wolte haue
               The mede, that thou after craue.
            
            
               
                  WHan loue al thys had boden me
               I ſayd hym, ſir howe may it be
               That louers may in ſuch manere
               Endure ye paine ye haue ſaid here
               I meruayle me wonder faſte
               Howe any man may lyue or laſte
               In ſuch payne, and ſuch brennyng
               In ſorowe and thought, and ſuch ſyghyng
               Aye vnreleſed wo to make
               whether ſo it be they ſlepe or wake
               In ſuch anoy continually
               As helpe me god this meruayle I
               Howe man, but he were made of ſtele
               Myght lyue a month, ſuch paynes to fele
            
            
               
                  THe God of loue than ſayde me
               Frende, by the fayth I owe to the
               May no man haue good, but he it bye
               A man lyueth more tenderlye
               
                  The thyng, that he hath bought moſte dere
               For wete thou well wythout were
               In thanke that thinge is taken more
               For whych a man hath ſuffred ſore
               Certes no wo ne may attayne
               Vnto the ſore of loues payne
               None yuell therto ne may amounte
               No more than a man counte
               The droppes that of the water be
               For drye as wel the greate ſee
               Thou myghteſt, as the harmes tell
               Of hem that wyth loue dwell
               In ſeruice, for peyne hem ſleeth
               And that eche man wolde flye the deth
               And trowe they ſhulde neuer eſcape
               Nere that hope couthe hem make
               Glad as man in priſon ſete
               And may not getten for to ete
               But barlye breed, and water pure
               And lyeth in vermyn and in ordure
               wyth all thys yet can he lyue
               Good hope ſuch comforte hath hym yeue
               whiche maketh wene that he ſhall be
               Delyuered and come to liberte
               In fortune is full truſt
               Though he lye in ſtrawe or duſt
               In hope is all hys ſuſtaynyng
               And ſo for louers in her wenyng
               which loue hath ſhytte in hys priſoun
               Good hope is her ſaluatioun
               Good hope (howe ſore that they ſmerte)
               yeueth hem both wyll and herte
               To profer her bodye to martyre
               For hope ſo ſore doth hem deſyre
               To ſuffre eche harme that men deuyſe
               For ioye that afterwarde ſhall aryſe
            
            
               
                  HOpe in deſyre catche victorye
               In hope of loue is all the glorye
               For hope is all ye loue maye yeue
               Nere hope, there ſhulde no lēger lyue
               Bleſſed be hope, whych with deſyre
               Auaunceth louers in ſuch manyre
               Good hope is curteyſe for to pleaſe
               To kepe louers from all diſeaſe
               Hope kepeth hys lande, and woll abyde
               For any peryll that maye betyde
               For hope to louers, as mooſt chefe
               Doth hem endure all miſchefe
               Hope is her helpe whan myſter is
               And I ſhall yeue the eke ywys
               Thre other thynges, that greate ſolace
               Doth to hem that be in my lace
               The fyrſte good that maye be founde
               To hem that in my lace be bounde
               Is ſwete thought, for to recorde
               Thynge wherwyth thou canſt accorde
               Beſt in thyne herte, where ſhe be
               Thynkyng in abſence is good to the
               whan any louer doth complayne
               And lyueth in diſtreſſe, and in payne
               Than ſwete thought ſhall come as blyue
               Awaye hys angre for to dryue
               It maketh louers to haue remembraunce
               Of comforte, and of hygh pleaſaunce
               That hope hathe hyght him for to wynne
               For thought anone than ſhall begynne
               As ferre god wotte, as he can fynde
               To make a myrrour of hys mynde
               For to beholde he wol not lette
               Her perſon he ſhall afore hym ſette
               Her laughyng eyen perſaunt and clere
               Her ſhappe, her forme, her goodly chere
               Her mouth, that is ſo gratious
               So ſwete, and eke ſo ſauerous
               Of all her feyters he ſhall take hede
               Her eyen wyth all her lymmes fede.
            
            
               Thus ſwete thynkynge ſhall aſwage
               The paynes of louers, and her rage
               Thy ioye ſhall double wythout geſſe
               whan thou thynkeſt on her ſymelyneſſe
               Or of her laughyng, or of her chere
               That to the made thy lady dere
               Thys comforte woll I that thou take
               And yf the nexte thou wolte forſake
               whiche is not leſſe ſauerous
               Thou ſhuldeſt not bene to daungerous.
            
            
               
                  THe ſeconde ſhall be ſwete ſpeche
               That hathe to manye on be leche
               To brynge hem oute of wo and were
               And helpe manye a bachelere
               And many a lady ſent ſuccour
               That haue loued paramour
               Through ſpekynge, whan they myght here
               Of her louers to hem ſo dere
               To me it voydeth al her ſmerte
               The whiche is cloſed in her herte
               In herte it maketh hem glad and lyght
               Speche whan they mowe haue ſyght
               
                  And therfore now it cōmeth to mynde
               In olde dayes as I fynde
               That clerkes wryten that her knewe
               Ther was a lady freſh of hewe
               which of her loue made a ſonge
               On hym for to remembre amonge
               In which ſhe ſayd whan that I here
               Speken of hym that is ſo dere
               To me it voydeth all ſmerte
               I wys he ſytteth ſo nere my herte
               To ſpeake of hym at eue or morowe
               It cureth me of all my ſorowe
               To me is none ſo hygh pleaſaunce
               As of his perſon dalyaunce
               She wyſt ful wel that ſwete ſpeakyng
               Comforteth in full moche thynge
               Her loue ſhe had full well aſſayde
               Of hym ſhe was full well apayde
               To ſpeke of hym her ioye was ſet
               Therfore I rede the that thou get
               A felowe that can wel concele
               And kepe thy counſayle, and wel hele
               To whome go ſhewe holly thyne hert
               Both well and wo, ioye and ſmerte
               To get comfort to hym thou go
               And priuyly bytwene you two
               Ye ſhall ſpeake of that goodly thyng
               That hath thyne hert in her kepynge
               Of her beautie and her ſemblaunce
               And of her goodly countenaunce
               Of al thy ſtate thou ſhalt hym ſay
               And aſke hym counſayle how thou maye
               Do any thyng that may her pleſe
               For it to the ſhall do great eſe
               That he may wete thou truſt hym ſo
               Bothe of thy wele and of thy wo
               And yf his het to loue be ſet
               His company is moche the bet
               For reſon wyll he ſhewe to the
               All vtterly his priuitie
               And what ſhe is he loueth ſo
               To the playnly he ſhall vndo
               without drede of any ſhame
               Bothe tell her renome and her name
               Than ſhall he farther ferre and nere
               And namely to thy lady dere
               In ſyker wyſe, yea euery other
               Shall helpen as his owne brother
               In trouth without doubleneſſe
               And kepen cloſe in ſykerneſſe
               For it is noble thynge in fay
               To haue a man thou darſt ſay
               Thy priuy counſayle euery dele
               For that wyll comfort the ryght wele
               And thou ſhalt holde the wel apayed
               whan ſuche a frende thou haſt aſſayed
            
            
               
                  THe thyrde good of greate comforte
               That yeueth to louers moſt diſporte
               Commeth of ſyght and beholdynge
               That cleped is ſwete lokyng
               The which maye none eſe do
               whan thou art ferre thy lady fro
               wherfore thou preſe alway to be
               In place, where thou mayeſt her ſe
               For it is thyng mooſt amerous
               Mooſt delytable and fauerous
               For to aſwage a mans ſorowe
               To ſene his lady by the morowe
               For it is a full noble thynge
               whan thyne eyen haue metyng
               with that relyke precyous
               wherof they be ſo deſyrous
               But all daye after ſoth it is
               They haue no drede to faren amys
               They dreden neyther wynde ne rayne
               Ne non other maner payne
               For when thyne eyen were thus in blyſſe
               Yet of her curteſye ywys
               Alone they can not haue her ioye
               But to the hert they conuoye
               Parte of her blyſſe to hym thou ſende
               Of all his harme to make an ende
               The eye is a good meſſangere
               which can to the hert in ſuche manere
               Tydynges ſende, that hath ſene
               To voyde hym of his paynes clene
               wherof the hert reioyſeth ſo
               That a great partye of his wo
               Is voyded and put awaye to flyght
               Ryght as the darkeneſſe of the nyght
               Is chaſed with clereneſſe of the mone
               Ryght ſo is al his wo full ſoone
               Deuoyded clene, whan that the ſyght
               Beholden may that freſh wyght
               That the herte deſyreth ſo
               That all his darkneſſe is ago
               For than the hert is all at eaſe
               whan they ſene that they hem pleaſe
               Now haue I declared the all out
               Of that thou were in drede and dout
               
                  For I haue tolde the faythfully
               what the may curen vtterly
               And all louers that wol be
               Faythfull and full of ſtabylitie
               Good hope alway kepe by thy ſyde
               And ſwete thought make eke abyde
               Swete lokyng and ſwete ſpeche
               Of all thyne harmes they ſhalbe leche
               Of euery thou ſhalt haue great pleaſaunce
               Yf thou canſt byde in ſuffraunce
               And ſerue well without fayntyſe
               Thou ſhalt be quyte of thyne empryſe
               with more guerdoun yf that thou lyue
               But all this tyme, this I the yeue
            
            
               
                  THe god of loue whan al the daye
               Had taught me as ye haue herde ſaye
               And enfourmed me compendouſly
               He vanyſhed away all ſodaynly
               And I alone left all ſole
               So full of complaynt and of dole
               For I ſawe noman there me by
               My woundes me greued wonderſly
               Me for to curen nothyng I knewe
               Saue the bothom bryght of hewe
               wheron was ſet holly my thought
               Of other comfort knewe I nought
               But it were through the god of loue
               I knewe not ele to my behoue
               That myght me eaſe or comfort gete
               But yf he wolde hym entermete
               The Roſer was withouten dout
               Cloſed with an hedge without
               As ye toforne haue herde me ſayne
               And faſt I buſyed and wolde fayne
               Haue paſſed the haye, yf I myght
               Haue getten in by any ſleyght
               Vnto the bothom ſo fayre to ſe
               But euer I drad blamed to be
               If men wolde haue ſuſpectioun
               That I wolde of ententioun
               Haue ſtole the roſes that there were
               Therfore to entre I was in fere
               But at the laſt as I bethought
               whether I ſhulde paſſe or nought
               I ſawe come with a glad chere
               To me a luſtye bachelere
               Of good ſtature and of good height
               And Bialacoil forſoth he hight
               Sonne he was to curteſy
               And he me graunted full gladly
               The paſſage of the vtter hay
               And ſayde, ſyr: how that ye maye
               Paſſe yf your wyll be
               The freſh Roſer for to ſe
               And ye the ſwete ſauour fele
               Your warrans may ryght wele
               So thou the kepe fro foly
               Shal no man do the vylany
               Yf I may helpe you in ought
               I ſhall not fayne, dredeth nought
               For I am bounde to your ſeruyſe
               Fully deuoyde of feyntyſe
               Than vnto Bialacoil ſayd I
               I thanke you ſyr full hertely
               And your beheſt take at gre
               That ye ſo goodly proffer me
               To you it cōmeth of great fraunchyſe
               That ye me profe your ſeruyſe
               Than after full delyuerly
               Through the breers anon went I
               whereof encombred was the haye
               I was well pleſed, the ſoth to ſaye
               To ſe the bothom, fayre and ſwote
               So freſh ſpronge out of the rote
            
            
               
                  And Bialacoil me ſerued wele
               whan I ſo nygh me myght fele
               Of the bothome the ſwete odour
               And ſo luſty hewed of colour
               But than a churle foule hym betyde
               Beſyde the roſes gan hym hyde
               To kepe the roſes of that Roſere
               Of whome the name was Daungere
               This churle was hyd there in the greues
               Couered with graſſe and with leues
               To ſpye and take whom that he fonde
               Vnto that Roſer put an honde
               He was not fole for there was mo
               For with hym were other two
               Of wicked maners, and euyl fame
               Than one was cleped by his name
               wycked tonge, god yeue hym ſorowe
               For neyther at eue ne at morowe
               He can of no man good ſpeake
               On many a iuſt man doth he wreke
               There was a woman eke that hyght
               Shame, that who can reken ryght
               Treſpaſſe was her fathers name
               
                  Her mother reaſon, and thus ſhame
               Brought of theſe ylke two
               And yet had treſpaſſe neuer ado
               with reſon, ne neuer laye her by
               He was ſo hydous and ſo vgly
               I meane this, that treſpaſſe hyght
               But reaſon conceyueth of a ſyght
               Shame of that I ſpake aforne
               And whan that ſhame was this borne
               It was ordayned that chaſtitie
               Shulde of the Roſer lady be
               which of the bothoms more and las
               with ſondrye folke aſſayled was
               That ſhe ne wyſt what to do
               For Venus her aſſayleth ſo
               That nyght and day from her ſhe ſtal
               Bothoms and Roſes ouer all
               To reaſon than prayeth Chaſtitie
               whom Venus hath flemed ouer the ſee
               That ſhe her doughter wolde her leue
               To kepe the Roſer freſh and grene
               Anon reaſon to chaſtitie
               Is fully aſſented, that it be
               And graunted her, at her requeſt
               That ſhame, bycauſe ſhe is honeſt
               Shal keper of the Roſer be
               And thus to kepe it, there were thre
               That none ſhulde hardy be ne bolde
               (were he yonge, or were he olde)
               Agayne her wyll away to bere
               Bothoms ne roſes, that there were
               I had well ſped, had I nat bene
               Awayted with theſe thre and ſene
               For Bialacoil, that was ſo fayre
               So gratious and debonayre
               Quytte hym to me full curteſly
               And me to pleaſe bad that I
               Shulde drawe me to the bothom nere
               Preſe in to touche the roſere
               which bare the roſes, he yafe me leue
               This graunt ne myght, but lytle greue
               And for he ſawe it lyked me
               Ryght nygh the bothom pulled he
               A leafe al grene, and yaue me that
               The which full nygh the bothom ſat
               I made of that leafe ful queynt
               And when I felte I was acquaynt
               with Bialacoil, and ſo pryue
               I wende all at my wyll had be
               Than wext I hardy for to tell
               To Bialacoil how me befell
               Of loue, that toke and wounded me
               And ſayd, ſyr ſo mote I the
               I maye no ioye haue in no wyſe
               Vpon no ſyde, but it ryſe
               For ſyth (yf I ſhall not feyne)
               In hert I haue had ſo great peyne
               So great anoy and ſuche affray
               That I ne wot what I ſhall ſaye
               I drede your wrath to deſerue
               Leuer me were, that knyues kerue
               My body ſhulde in peces ſmall
               Than in any wyſe it ſhulde fall
               That ye wrathed ſhulde ben with me
               Saye boldly thy wyll (quod he)
               I nyl be wroth yf that I maye
               For nought that thou ſhalt to me ſaye.
            
            
               
                  THan ſayde I ſyr, not you diſpleaſe
               To knowen of my greate vneaſe
               In whiche onelye loue hath me brought
               For paynes greate, diſeſe, and thought
               Fro day to day he doth me drye
               Suppoſeth not ſyr, that I lye
               In me fyue woundes dyd he make
               The ſore of which ſhall neuer ſlake
               But ye the bothom graunt me
               which is mooſt paſſaunt of beautie
               My lyfe my deth, and my martyre
               And treaſour, that I mooſt deſyre
               Than Bialacoil affrayed all
               Sayd ſyr, it may not fall
               That ye deſyre it maye not aryſe
               what wolde ye ſhende me in this wyſe
               A mokel foole than I were
               Yf I ſuffred you away to bere
               The freſh bothom, ſo fayre of ſyght
               For it were neyther ſkyll ne ryght
               Of the Roſer ye broke the rynde
               Or take the roſe aforne his kynde
               Ye are not curteys to aſke it
               Let it ſtyll on the Roſer ſyt
               And let it growe tyl it amended be
               And parfetly come to beautie
               I nolde not that it pulled were
               Fro the roſer that it bere
               To me it is ſo lefe and dere
               with that anon ſtert out daunger
               Out of the place where he was hydde
               His malyce in his chere was kydde
               Full great he was and blacke of hewe
               
                  Sturdy and hydous, whoſo hym knewe
               Lyke ſharpe vrchons his heer was growe
               His eyes red ſparklyng as the fyre glowe
               His noſe frounced full kyrked ſtode
               He come cryande as he were wood
               And ſayd, Bialacoil tell me why
               Thou bryngeſt hyther ſo boldly
               Hym that ſo nygh the roſere
               Thou worcheſt in a wronge manere
               He thynketh to diſhonour the
               Thou art well worthy to haue maugre
               To let hym of the Roſere wytte
               who ſerueth a felon is euyll quytte
               Thou woldeſt haue done great bountie
               And he with ſhame wolde quyte the
               Flye hence felowe I rede the go
               It wanteth lytle he wol the ſlo
               For Bialacoil ne knewe the nought
               whan the to ſerue he ſet his thought
               For thou wolt ſhame hym yf thou myght
               Both agayne reaſon and ryght
               I woll nomore in the affye
               That comeſt ſo ſlyghly for teſpye
               For it proueth wonder wele
               Thy ſleyght and trayſon euery dele
               I durſt nomore make there abode
               For the churle he was ſo wode
               So gan he thret and manace
               And through the hay he dyd me chace
               For feare of hym I trymbled and quoke
               So churlyſhly his heed he ſhoke
               And ſayd, yf eft he myght me take
               I ſhulde not from his hondes ſcape
               Than Bialacoil is fled and mate
               And I all ſole diſconſolate
               was left alone in payne and thought
               For ſhame to death I was nygh brought
               Than thought I on my hygh folly
               How that my body vtterly
               was yeue to payne and to martyre
               And therto hadde I ſo great yre
               That I ne durſt the hayes paſſe
               There was no hope, there was no grace
               I trowe neuer man wyſt of payne
               But he were laced in loues chayne
               Ne no man, and ſoth it is
               But yf he loue, what angre is
               Loue holdeth his heeſt to me ryght wele
               whan payne (he ſayd) I ſhulde fele
               No hert may thynke, ne tonge ſayne
               A quarter of my wo and payne
               I myght not with the angre laſt
               Myne hert in poynt was for to braſt
               whan I thought on the roſe that ſo
               was through daunger caſt me fro
               A longe whyle ſtode I in that ſtate
               Tyll that me ſawe ſo mad and mate
               The lady of the hygh warde
               which from her tower loked thytherwarde
            
            
               Reaſon men clepe that lady
               which from her tower delyuerly
               Come downe to me without more
               But ſhe was neyther yonge ne hore
               Ne hygh ne lowe, ne fat ne lene
               But beſt, as it were in a mene
               Her eyen two were clere and lyght
               As any candel, that brenneth bryght
               And on her heed ſhe had a crowne
               Her ſemed well an hygh perſon
               For rounde enuyron her crownet
               was full of ryche ſtones fret
               Her goodly ſemblaunt by deuyſe
               I trowe was made in paradyſe
               For nature had neuer ſuche a grace
               To forge a werke of ſuche compaſſe
               For certeyne, but yf the letter lye
               God hym ſelfe, that is ſo hye
               Made her after his ymage
               And yaue her ſythe ſuche auauntage
               That ſhe hath myght and ſegnorie
               To kepe men from all folly
               who ſo woll trowe her lore
               Ne may offenden neuermore
            
            
               And whyle I ſtode this darke and pale
               Reaſon began to me her tale
               She ſayde: alhayle my ſwete frende
               Foly and chyldhode wyll the ſhende
               which the haue put in great affraye
               Thou haſt bought dere the tyme of Maye
               That made thyne herte mery to be
               In euyll tyme thou wenteſt to ſe
               The garden wherof ydleneſſe
               Bare the keye and was maſtreſſe
               whan thou yedeſt in the daunce
               with her and had acquayntaunce
               Her acquayntaunce is peryllous
               Fyrſt ſoft, and after noyous
               She hath traſſhed without wene
               The god of loue had the nat ſene
               Ne had ydleneſſe the conueyde
               In the verger, where myrth hym pleyde
               Yf follye haue ſuppryſed the
               
                  Do ſo that it recouered be
               And be welware to take nomore
               Counſayle, that greueth after ſore
               He is wyſe, that wyll hym ſelfe chaſtyſe
               And though a yonge man in any wyſe
               Treſpaſſe amonge, and do folly
               Let hym not tary, but haſtely
               Let hym amende whatſo be mys
               And eke I counſayle the ywis
               The god of loue holly foryet
               That hath the in ſuche payne ſet
               And the in hert turmented ſo
               I can not ſene how thou muſt go
               Other wayes to garyſoun
               For daunger, that is ſo feloun
               Felly purpoſeth the to werrey
               which is full cruell the ſoth to ſey.
            
            
               
                  ANd yet of Daunger commeth no blame
               In rewarde of my doughter Shame
               which hath ye roſes in her ward
               As ſhe that maye be no muſarde
               And wycked tonge is with theſe two
               That ſuffreth no man thyther go
               For er a thyng be do he ſhal
               where that he cometh ouer all
               In fourty places yf it be ſought
               Say thing that neuer was don ne wrought
               So moche trayſon is in his male
               Of falſneſſe for to ſayne a tale
               Thou deleſt with angry folke ywys
               wherfore to the better is
               From theſe folke awaye to fare
               For they wol make the lyue in care
               This is the euyll that loue they call
               wherin there is but foly all
               For loue is folly euery dell
               who loueth, in nowyſe maye do well
               Ne ſetteth his though on no good werke
               His ſchole he leſeth, yf he be clerke
               Or other craft eke, yf that he be
               He ſhall not thryue therin, for he
               In loue ſhall haue more paſſyoun
               Than monke, hermyte, or chanoun
               This payne is herde out of meſure
               The ioye maye eke no whyle endure
               And in the poſſeſſyoun
               Is moche tribulatioun
               The ioye it is ſo ſhort laſtyng
               And but in happe is the gettyng
               For I ſe there many in trauayle
               That at laſt foule fayle
               I was nothyng thy counſayler
               whan thou were made the homager
               Of god of loue to haſtely
               There was no wyſdom but folly
               Thyne hert was ioly, but not ſage
               whan thou were brought in ſuche a rage
               To yelde the ſo redely
               And to loue of his great mayſtry.
            
            
               
                  I Rede the loue awaye to dryue
               That maketh the retche not of thy lyue
               The folly more fro day to day
               Shall growe, but thou it put awaye
               Take with thy teeth the brydle faſt
               To daunt thyne hert, and eke the caſt
               Yf that thou mayeſt to get the defence
               For to redreſſe thy fyrſt offence
               whoſo his hert alway wol leue
               Shall fynde amonge that ſhal hym greue.
            
            
               whan I her herde thus me chaſtyſe
               I anſwered in full angry wyſe
               I prayed her ceſſe of her ſpeche
               Eyther to chaſtyſe me or teche
               To byd me my thought refreyne
               which loue hath caught in his demeyne
               what wene ye loue woll conſent
               (That me aſſayleth with bowe bent)
               To drawe myne hert out of his honde
               which is ſo quyckly in his bonde
               That ye counſayle may neuer be
               For when he fyrſt areſted me
               He toke myne hert ſo ſore hym tyll
               That it is nothyng at my wyll
               He thought it ſo hym for to obey
               That it ſparred with a key
               I praye you let me be all ſtyll
               For ye may well, yf that ye wyll
               Your wordes waſte in ydleneſſe
               For vtterly wit houten geſſe
               Al that ye ſayne is but in vayne
               Me were leuer dye in the payne
               Than loue to mewarde ſhulde arette
               Falſhed or treſon on me ſette
               I wyll me get pryſe or blame
               And loue true to ſaue my name
               who that me chaſteſeth I hym hate
               
                  with that worde Reſon went her gate
               whan ſhe ſawe for no ſermonyng
               She myght me fro my foly brynge
               Than diſmayed I left all ſole
               Forwery, forwandred as a fole
               For I ne knewe no cheryſaunce
               Than fell into my remembraunce
               How loue bade me to puruey
               A felowe, to whom I myght ſey
               My counſel and my priuytie
               For that ſhulde moche auayle me
               with that bethought I me, that I
               Had a felowe faſt by
               True and ſyker, curteys and hende
               And he was called by name a frende
               A trewer felowe was no where non
               In haſte to hym I went anon
               And to hym all my wo I tolde
               From hym ryght nought I wold witholde
               I tolde hym all without were
               And made my compleynt on Daungere
               Nowe for to ſe he was hydous
               And to mewarde contrarious
               The which through his crueltie
               was in poynt to haue meymed me
               with Bialacoil whan heme ſey
               within the garden walke and pley
               Fro me he made hym for to go
               And I beleſte alone in wo
               I durſt no lenger with hym ſpeke
               For daunger ſayd he wolde be wreke
               whan that he ſawe howe I went
               The freſh bothom for to hent
               Yf I were hardy to come nere
               Bytwene the hay and the roſere.
            
            
               This frend when he wyſt of my thought
               He diſcomforted me ryght nought
               But ſayd felow, be not ſo mad
               Ne ſo abaſhed nor beſtad
               My ſelfe I knowe full well daungere
               And howe he is fers of chere
               At prime temps loue to manace
               Full oft I haue bene in his caſe
               A felon fyrſt though that he be
               After thou ſhalt hym ſouple ſe
               Of longe paſſed I knewe hym wele
               Vngoodly fyrſt though men hym fele
               He woll meke after in his bearynge
               Ben, for ſeruyce and obeyſynge
               I ſhal the tell what thou ſhalt do
               Mekely I rede thou go hym to
               Of herte praye hym ſpecyally
               Of thy treſpace to haue mercy
               And hote hym well here to pleſe
               That thou ſhalt neuer more hym diſpleſe
               who can beſt ſerue of flatery
               Shall pleaſe daunger moſt vtterly
            
            
               My frende hath ſayd to me ſo wele
               That he me eaſed hath ſomdele
               And eke alegged of my turment
               For through hym had I hardement
               Agayne to daunger for to go
               To preue if I myght meke hym ſo.
            
            
               
                  TO Daunger came I all aſſhamed
               The whiche aforne me had blamed
               Deſyrynge for to peaſe my woo
               But ouer hedge durſt I not go
               For he forbode me the paſſage
               I founde hym cruell in his rage
               And in his honde a great burdowne
               To hym I kneled lowe adowne
               Full meke of porte, and ſymple of chere
               And ſayde ſyr, I am comen here
               Onely to aſke of you mercy
               That greueth me full greatly
               That euer my lyfe I wrathed you
               But for to amenden I am come now
               with all my myght both loude and ſtyl
               To done ryght at your owne wyll
               For loue made me for to do
               That I haue treſpaſſed hytherto
               Fro whom I ne maye withdrawe we myne herte
               Yet ſhall I neuer for ioye ne ſmert
               (what ſo befall good or yll)
               Offende more agayne your wyll
               Leuer I haue endure diſeaſe
               Than do that ſhulde you diſpleaſe.
            
            
               
                  I You requyre, and pray that ye
               Of me haue mercy and pytye
               To ſtint your yre, that greueth ſo
               That I wol ſwere for euer mo
               To be redreſſed at your lykyng
               Yf I treſpaſſe in any thynge
               Saue that (I praye the) graunt me
               A thyng that may not warned be
               
                  That I maye loue all onely
               None other thynge of you aſke I
               I ſhall done all well ywis
               Yf of your grace ye graunt me thys
               And ye maye nat letten me
               For well wote ye, that loue is free
               And I ſhall louen ſuche that I wyll
               who euer lyke it well or yll
               And yet ne wolde I for all Fraunce
               Do thynge to do you diſpleſaunce.
            
            
               
                  THan Daungere fyll in hys entent
               For to foryeue hys male talent
               But all hys wrathe yet at laſt
               He hath releaſed, I prayde ſo faſt
               Shortely (he ſayd) thy requeſt
               Is nat to mokell diſhoneſt
               Ne I woll nat werne it the
               For yet nothynge engreueth me
               For though thou loue thus euermore
               To me is neyther ſofte ne ſore
               Loue where that the lyſt, what retcheth me
               So ferre fro my Roſes be
               Truſt nat on me for none aſſaye
               In any tyme to paſſe the haye
               Thus hath he graunted my prayere
               Than went I forthe withouten were
               Vnto my frende, and tolde hym all
               whyche was right ioyfull of my tale
               (He ſayd) nowe gothe well thyne affayre
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhall to the be debonayre
               Though he aforne was diſpitous
               He ſhall herafter be gratious
               If he were touched on ſome good veyne
               He ſhulde yet rewen on thy peyne
               Suffer I rede, and no booſt make
               Tyll thou at good mes mayſt hym take
               By ſufferaunce, and wordes ſofte
               A man maye ouercome ofte
               Hym, that aforne he had in drede
               In bokes ſothely as I rede
               Thus hath my frende with great comforte
               Auaunced me wyth hygh diſporte
               whyche wolde me good, as moche as I
               And than anone full ſodainly
               I toke my leaue, and ſtreight I went
               Vnto the haye, for great talent
               I hadde to ſene the freſhe bothom
               wherin laye my ſaluatioun
               And Daungere to kepe, yf that I
               kepe hym couenaunt trewly
               So ſore I dradde hys manaſyng
               I durſte nat breke hys byddyng
               For leſt that I were of hym ſhent
               I brake nat hys commaundement
               For to purchaſe hys good wyll
               It was for to come there tyll
               Hys mercy was to ferre behynde
               I kepte, for I ne myght it fynde
               I complayned and ſighed ſore
               And languyſhed euermore
               For I durſt nat ouer go
               Vnto the Roſe I loued ſo
               Throughout my demyng vtterly
               That he had knowlege certaynly
               Than Loue me ladde in ſuche a wyſe
               That in me there was no fentyſe
               Falſheed, ne no trechery
               And yet he full of villany
               Of diſdayne, and cruelte
               On me ne wolde haue pyte
               Hys cruel wyll for to refrayne
               Tho I wepte alwaye, and me complayne
            
            
               
                  ANd while I was in thys tourment
               were come of grace, by god ſent
               Fraunchyſe, and with her Pyte
               Fulfylde the Bothom of bounte
               They go to Daungere anon ryght
               To forther me wyth all her myght
               And helpe in worde and in dede
               For well they ſawe that it was nede
               Fyrſt of her grace dame Fraunchyſe
               Hath taken of thys empryſe
               She ſayd, Daungere great wronge ye do
               To worche thys man ſo moche wo
               Or pynen hym ſo angerly
               It is to you great villany
               I canne nat ſe, why ne how
               That he hath treſpaſſed agayne you
               Saue that he loueth, wherfore ye ſhulde
               The more in cherete of hym holde
               The force of loue maketh hym do thys
               who wolde hym blame he dyd amys
               He lefeth more than ye maye do
               Hys payne is harde, ye maye ſe lo
               And Loue in no wyſe wolde conſent
               That ye haue power to repent
               For though that quicke ye wolde hym ſlo
               Fro loue hys herte may nat go
               Nowe ſwete ſyr, it is your eaſe
               Hym for to angre or diſeaſe
               Alas, what maye it you auaunce
               To done to hym ſo great greuaunce
               
                  what worſhyppe is it agayne hym take
               Or on your man a werre make
               Sithe he ſo lowly euery wyſe,
               Is redy, as ye luſte deuyſe
               If Loue haue caught hym in hys lace
               You for to bey in euery caas
               And ben your ſubiecte at your wyll
               Shulde ye therfore wyllen hym yll
               Ye ſhulde hym ſpare more all out
               Than hym that is bothe proude and ſtout
               Curteſy woll that ye ſocure
               Hem, that ben meke vnder your cure
               Hys hert is harde that woll nat meke
               whan men of mekeneſſe hym beſeke.
            
            
               
                  THys is certayne, ſayd Pyte
               we ſe ofte that humylyte
               Bothe yre, and alſo felony
               Venquyſheth, and alſo melancoly
               To ſtonde forthe in ſuche dureſſe
               Thys cruelte and wyckedneſſe
               wherfore I pray you ſir Daungere
               For to mayntene no lenger here
               Suche cruell werre agayne your man
               As holly yours as euer he can
               Nor that ye worchen no more wo
               Vpon thys caytife, that languyſheth ſo
               whyche woll no more to you treſpace
               But put hym holly in your grace
               Hys offence ne was but lyte
               The god of Loue it was to wyte
               That he your thrall ſo greatly is
               And yf ye harme hym ye done amys
               For he hath had full harde penaunce
               Sythe that ye reſte hym thaqueyntaunce
               Of Bialacoil, hys moſte ioye
               whyche all hys paynes myght acoye
               He was before anoyed ſore
               But than ye doubled hym well more
               For he of blyſſe hath ben full bare
               Sythe Bialacoil was fro hym fare
               Loue hath to hym great diſtreſſe
               He hath no nede of more dureſſe
               Voydeth from hym your yre I rede
               Ye may not wynnen in thys dede
               Maketh Bialacoil repayre agayne
               And haueth pyte vpon hys payne
               For Franchyſe woll, and I Pyte
               That mercyfull to hym ye be
               And ſythe that ſhe and I accorde
               Haue vpon hym miſ
                     ••
                  icorde
               For I you pray, and eke mou
                     •
                  ſte
               Nought to refuſen our requeſte
               For he is harde, and fell of thought
               That for vs two woll do right nought
               Daunger ne might no more endure
               He meked hym vnto meſure.
            
            
               
                  I Wol in no wyſe, ſaythe Daungere
               Deny, that ye haue aſked here
               It were to great vncurteſye
               I woll ye haue the companye
               Of Bialacoil, as ye deuyſe
               I woll hym let in no wyſe
               To Bialacoil than went in hye
               Fraunchyſe, and ſayde full curteſlye
               Ye haue to longe be deignous
               Vnto thys louer, and daungerous
               Fro hym to withdrawe your preſence
               whyche hath do to hym great offence
               That ye not wolde vpon hym ſe
               wherfore a ſoroufull man is he
               Shape ye to paye hym, and to pleaſe
               Of my loue yf ye woll haue caſe
               Fulfyll hys wyll, ſythe that ye knowe
               Daunger is daunted and brought lowe
               Through helpe of me and of Pyte
               You dare no more aferde be
               I ſhall do right as ye wyll
               Saythe Bialacoil, for it is ſkyll
               Sythe Daunger woll that it ſo be
               Than Fraunchyſe hath hym ſent to me.
            
            
               
                  BYalacoil at the begynnyng
               Salued me in hys cōmyng
               No ſtraūgeneſſe was in him ſene
               No more thā he ne had wrathed bene
               As fayre ſemblaunt than ſhewed he me
               And goodly, as aforne dyd he
               And by the honde without done
               wythin the haye ryght all about
               He ladde me wyth right good chere
               All enuyron the vergere
               That Daunger hadde me chaſed fro
               Nowe haue I leaue ouer all to go
               Nowe am I rayſed at my deuyſe
               Fro hell vnto paradyſe
               Thus Bialacoil of gentylneſſe
               wyth all hys payne and beſyneſſe
               Hathe ſhewed me onely of grace
               The eftres of the ſwote place
               
                  I ſawe the Roſe whan I was nygh
               was greatter woxen, and more high
               Freſſhe, roddy, and fayre of hewe
               Of coloure euer yliche newe
               And whan I hadde it longe ſene
               I ſawe that through the leues grene
               The Roſe ſpredde to ſpaunyſhinge
               To ſene it was a goodly thynge
               But it ne was ſo ſprede on brede
               That men within myght knowe the ſede
               For it couert was and cloſe
               Bothe with the leues and with the roſe
               The ſtalke was euen and grene vpright
               It was theron a goodly ſyght
               And wel the better without wene
               For the ſeed was nat ſene
               Ful fayre it ſpradde the god of bleſſe
               For ſuche another, as I geſſe
               Aforne ne was ne more vermayle
               I was abawed for marueyle
               For euer the fayrer that it was
               The more I am bounden in loues laas
               Longe I abode there ſothe to ſaye
               Tyl Bialacoil I ganne to praye
               whan that I ſawe him in no wyſe
               To me warnen his ſeruyce
               That he me wolde graunt a thynge
               whiche to remembre is wel ſyttynge
               This is to ſayne, that of his grace
               He wolde me yeue leyſar and ſpace
               To me that was ſo deſyrous
               To haue a kyſſynge prectous
               Of the goodly freſhe Roſe
               That ſo ſwetely ſmelleth in my noſe
               For if you diſpleaſed nought
               I wolde gladly, as I haue ſought
               Haue a coſſe therof freely
               Of your yeft, for certainly
               I wol none haue, but by your leue
               So lothe me were you for to greue
            
            
               
                  HE ſayd, frende ſo god me ſpede
               Of Chaſtite I haue ſuche drede
               Thou ſhuldeſt nat warned be for me
               But I dare nat for Chaſtyte
               Agayne her dare I nat myſdo
               For alwaye byddeth ſhe me ſo
               To yeue no louer leaue to kyſſe
               For who therto maye wynnen ywiſſe
               He of the ſurplus of the praye
               My lyfe in hoope to gette ſome daye
               For who ſo kyſſynge maye attayne
               Of loues payne hath (ſothe to ſayne)
               The beſt and moſt auenaunt
               And erneſt of the remenaunt.
            
            
               
                  OF hys anſwere I ſighed ſore
               I durſt aſſaye him tho no more
               I hadde ſuche drede to greue hym aye
               A mā ſhuld nat to moche aſſaye
               To chafe hys frende out of meaſure
               Nor putte hys lyfe in auenture
               For no man at the fyrſt ſtroke
               Ne maye nat fel downe an oke
               Nor of the reyſyns haue the wyne
               Tyll grapes be rype and well a fyne
               Be ſore empreſſed, I you enſure
               And drawen out of the preſſure
               But I forpeyned wonder ſtronge
               Though that I abode right longe
               After the kyſſe, in payne and wo
               Sythe I to kyſſe deſyred ſo
               Tyll that rennynge on my diſtreſſe
               There come Venus the goddeſſe
               (whyche aye werryeth Chaſtite)
               Came of her grace to ſocour me
               whoſe myght is knowe ferre and wyde
               For ſhe is mother of Cupyde.
            
            
               
                  THe God of Loue, blynde as ſtone
               That helpeth louers manye one
               This lady brought in her right honde
               Of brennynge fyre a blaſyng bronde
               wherof the flame and hote fyre
               Hath many a lady in deſyre
               Of Loue brought, and ſore hette
               And in her ſeruyce her hert is ſette
               Thys lady was of good entayle
               Right wonderfull of apparayle
               By her atyre ſo bryght and ſhene
               Men myght perceyue well and ſene
               She was nat of Relygioun
               Nor I nyll make mencioun
               Nor of robe, nor of treſour
               Of broche, neyther of her riche attour
               Ne of her gyrdell about her ſyde
               For that I nyll nat longe abyde
               But knoweth well, that certaynly
               
                  She was arrayed richely
               Deuoyde of pride certayne ſhe was
               To Bialacoil ſhe went a paas
               And to hym ſhortely in a clauſe
               She ſayd, ſir: what is the cauſe
               Ye ben of porte ſo daungerous
               Vnto thys louer, and daynous
               To graunt hym nothyng but a kyſſe
               To warne it hym ye done amyſſe
               Sythe well ye wotte, howe that he
               Is loues ſeruaunt, as ye maye ſe
               And hath beaute, wherthrough is
               worthy of loue to haue the blys
               Howe he is ſemely beholde and ſe
               Howe he is fayre, howe he is free
               Howe he is ſwote, and debonayre
               Of age yonge, luſty, and fayre
               There is no lady ſo hawtayne
               Ducheſſe, counteſſe, ne chaſtelayne
               That I nolde holde her vngoodly
               For to refuce hym vtterly
               Hys brethe is alſo good and ſwete
               And eke hys lyppes roddy and mete
               Onely to playne, and to kyſſe
               Graunt hym a kyſſe of gentylnyſſe
               Hys teth arne alſo whyte and clene
               Me thynketh wronge withouten wene
               If ye nowe warne hym, truſteth me
               To graunt that a kyſſe haue he
               The laſſe ye helpe hym that ye haſte
               And the more tyme ſhull ye waſte
               whan the flame of the very bronde
               That Venus brought in her right honde
               Hadde Bialacoil with hys hete ſmete
               Anone he badde me withouten lete
               Graunt to me the roſe kyſſe
               Than of my payne I ganne to lyſſe
               And to the roſe anone went I
               And kyſſed it full faythfully
               There nede no man aſke, yf I was blythe
               whan the ſauour ſofte and lythe
               Stroke to myne hert without more
               And me allegged of my ſore
               So was I full of ioye and blyſſe
               It is fayre ſuche a floure to kyſſe
               It was ſo ſwote and ſauerous
               I myght nat be ſo anguyſſhous
               That I mote gladde and ioly be
               whan that I remembre me
               Yet euer amonge ſothly to fayne
               I ſuffre noye and moche payne.
            
            
               
                  THe ſee may neuer be ſo ſtyll
               That wyth a lytell wynde at wyll
               Ouerwhelme and tourne alſo
               As it were woode in wawes go
               After the calme the trouble ſonne
               Mote folowe, and chaunge as the moone
               Right ſo fareth Loue, that ſelde in one
               Holdeth hys ancre, for ryght anone
               whan they in eaſe wene beſt to lyue
               They ben wyth tempeſt all fordryue
               who ſerueth Loue, cannt tel of wo
               The ſtoundmele ioye mote ouergo
               Nowe he hurteth, and nowe he cureth
               For ſelde in o poynte Loue endureth.
            
            
               
                  NOwe is it ryght me to procede
               Howe Shame gan medle and take hede
               Through whom fel angres I haue hade
               And howe the ſtronge wall was made
               And the caſtell of brede and length
               That god of Loue wan wyth hys ſtrength
               All thys in Romaunce wyll I ſette
               And for no thyng ne wyll I lette
               So that it lykynge to her be
               That is the floure of beaute
               For ſhe maye beſt my labour quyte
               That I for her loue ſhall endyte
               Wycked tonge that the couyne
               Of euerye louer can deuyne
               worſte, and addeth more ſomdele
               (For wycked tonge ſaythe neuer wele)
               To mewarde bare he ryght great hate
               Eſpyenge me erly and late
               Tyll he hathe ſene the great chere
               Of Bialacoil and me yfere
               He myght not hys tonge wythſtonde
               worſe to reporte than he fonde
               He was ſo full of curſed rage
               It ſatte hym wele of hys lynage
               For hym an Iriſhe woman bare
               Hys tonge was fyled ſharpe and ſquare
               Poignaunt and ryght keruyng
               And wonder bytter in ſpekyng
               For whan that he me gan eſpye
               He ſwore (affyrmyng ſykerly)
               Bytwene Bialacoil and me
               was yuel aquayntaunce and pryue
               He ſpake therof ſo folilye
               
                  That he awaked Ielouſye
               whyche all afrayde in hys ryſyng
               whan that he herde ianglyng
               He ran anone as he were wode
               To Bialacoil there that he ſtode
               whyche had leuer in thys caas
               Haue ben at Reynes or Amyas
               For foote hote in hys felonye
               To hym thus ſayd Ielouſye
               Why haſte thou ben ſo neglygent
               To kepen, whan I was abſent
               Thys verger here left eyn thy warde?
               To me thou haddeſt no regarde
               To truſte (to thy confuſyon)
               Hym thus, to whom ſuſpection
               I haue ryght great, for it is nede
               It is well ſhewed by the dede
               Great faute in the nowe haue I founde
               By god anone thou ſhalt be bounde
               And faſte locken in a toure
               without refuyte or ſocoure.
            
            
               
                  FOr Shame to longe hath be the fro
               Ouer ſoone ſhe was ago
               Whan thou haſt loſt bothe drede and fere
               It ſemed well ſhe was nat here
               She was beſy in no wyſe
               To kepe the and chaſtice
               And for to helpen Chaſtite
               To kepe the Roſer, as thynketh me
               For than this boye knaue ſo boldly
               Ne ſhulde nat haue be hardy
               In this verge hadde ſuche game
               whyche nowe me tourneth to great ſhame.
            
            
               
                  BIalacoil nyſt what to ſaye
               Full fayne he wolde haue fledde away
               For frare haue hydde, nere that he
               All ſodaynly toke hym wyth me
               And whan I ſawe he had ſo
               Thys Ielouſye take vs two
               I was aſtoned, and knewe no rede
               But fledde away for very drede.
            
            
               
                  THan Shame came fortheful ſymply
               ſhe wende haue treſpaced ful greatly
               Hūble of her porte, & made it ſymple
               wearyng a vayle in ſtede of wymple
               As nonnes done in her abbey
               Bycauſe her herte was in affray
               She gan to ſpeke wythin a throwe
               To Ielouſye, right wonder lowe
               Fyrſt of hys grace ſhe befought
               And ſayd ſir, ne leueth nought
               wycked tonge, that falſe eſpye
               whyche is ſo glad to fayne and lye
               He hath you made, through flateryng
               On Bialacoil a falſe leaſyng
               Hys falſneſſe is not nowe a newe
               It is to longe that he hym knewe
               This is not the fyrſt daye
               For wycked tonge hath cuſtome aye
               Yonge folkes to bewrye
               And falſe leſynges on hem lye.
            
            
               
                  YEt neuertheleſſe I ſe amonge
               That the loigne it is ſo longe
               Of Bialacoil, hertes to lure
               In loues ſeruyce for to endure
               Drawyng ſuche folke hym to
               That he hath nothynge wyth to do
               But in ſothneſſe I trowe nought
               That Bialacoil had euer in thought
               To do treſpace or vilanye
               But for hys mother Curteſye
               Hathe taught hym euer to be
               Good of aqueyntaunce and pryue
               For he loueth none heuyneſſe
               But myrthe and play, and all gladneſſe
               He hateth all trechours
               Soleyne folke and enuyous
               For ye weten howe that he
               woll euer glade and ioyfull be
               Honeſtly wyth folke to pley
               I haue be neglygent in good fey
               To chaſtyſe hym, therfore nowe I
               Of herte I crye you here mercy
               That I haue ben ſo recheles
               To tamen hym wythouten lees
               Of my foly I me repente
               Nowe woll I hole ſet myne entente
               To kepe bothe lowe and ſtyll
               Bialacoyl to do youre wyll
               Shame Shame (ſayde Ielouſye)
               To be bytraſſhed great drede haue I
               Lecherye hathe clombe ſo hye
               That almoſte blered is myne eye
               No wonder is, yf that drede haue I
               Ouer all reygneth lechery
               whoſe myght groweth nyght and dey
               Bothe in cloyſtre and in abbey
               Chaſtyte is werreyed ouer all
               
                  Therfore I woll wyth ſyker wall
               Cloſe bothe roſes and roſere
               I haue to longe in thys manere
               Lefte hem vncloſed wylfully
               wherfore I am right inwardly
               Soroufull, and repente me
               But nowe they ſhall no lenger be
               Vncloſed and yet I drede ſore
               I ſhall repent ferthermore
               For the game gothe all amys
               Counſayle I muſt newe iwys
               I haue to longe truſted the
               But nowe it ſhall no lenger be
               For he may beſte in euery coſte
               Diſceyue, that men truſten moſte
               I ſe well that I am nyghe ſhent
               But yf I ſhette my full entent
               Remedye to puruey
               wherfore cloſe I ſhall the wey
               Fro hem that woll the roſe eſpye
               And come to waite me vilonye
               For in good faythe and in trouthe
               I woll not let for no ſlouthe
               To lyue the more in ſykerneſſe
               Do make anone a fortreſſe
               Than cloſe the roſes of good ſauour
               In myddes ſhall I make a tour
               To put Bialacoil in priſon
               For euer I drede me of treſon
               I trowe I ſhall hym kepe ſo
               That he ſhall haue no myght to go
               Aboute to make companye
               To hem that thynke of vilanye
               Ne to no ſuche as hath ben here
               Aforne, and founde in hym good chere
               whyche han aſſayled hym to ſhende
               And wyth her trowandyſe to blende
               A foole is eyth to begyle
               But may I lyue a lytell whyle
               He ſhall forthynke hys fayre ſemblaunt.
               And with that worde came Drede auaunt
               whyche was abaſhed, and in great fere
               whan he wyſte Ielouſye was there
               He was for drede in ſuche affray
               That not a worde durſte he ſaye
               But quakyng ſtode full ſtyll alone
               (Tyll Ielouſye hys way was gone)
               Saue Shame, that hym not forſoke
               Bothe Drede and ſhe full ſore quoke
               That at laſte Drede abrayde
               And to hys coſyn Shame ſayde
            
            
               
                  SHame (he ſayd) in ſothfaſtneſſe
               To me it is great heuyneſſe
               That the noyſe ſo ferre is go
               And the ſclaunder of vs two
               But ſythe that it is befall
               we may it not agayne call
               whan ones ſpronge is a fame
               For many a yere wythouten blame
               we haue ben, and many a day
               For many an Aprill, and many a May
               we han paſſed, not ſhamed
               
                  ❧ Tyll Ielouſye hath vs blamed
               Of myſtruſt and ſuſpection
               Cauſeleſſe, wythout encheſon
               Go we to Daunger haſtely
               And let vs ſhewe hym openly
               That he hath not a right wrought
               whan that he ſet not hys thought
               To kepe better the purpriſe
               In hys doyng he is not wyſe
               He hath to vs do great wronge
               That hath ſuffred nowe ſo longe
               Bialacoil to haue hys wyll
               All hys luſtes to fulfyll
               He muſte amende it vtterly
               Or els ſhall he vilaynouſly
               Exiled he out of thys londe
               For he the werre may not wythſtonde
               Of Ielouſye, nor the grefe
               Sythe Bialacoil is at miſchefe.
            
            
               
                  TO Daunger Shame & Drede anon
               The right way ben gon
               The chorle they foūd hē aforne
               Ligging vnder an hawethorne
               Vnder hys heed no pylowe was
               But in the ſtede a truſſe of gras
               He ſlombred, and a nappe he toke
               Tyll Shame pitouſly hym ſhoke
               And great manace on hym gan make
               Why ſlepeſt thou, whan thou ſhuld wake
               (Quod Shame) thou doeſt vs vilanye
               who truſteth the, he dothe folye
               To kepe roſes or bothoms
               whan they ben fayre in her ſeſons
               Thou arte woxe to famyliere
               where thou ſhulde be ſtraunge of chere
               Stoute of thy porte, redy to greue
               Thou doeſt great folye for to leue
               Bialacoil here inne to call
               The yonder man, to ſhenden vs all
               
                  Though that thou ſlepe, we maye here
               Of Ielouſye great noyſe here
               Arte thou nowe late, ryſe vp an hye
               And ſtoppe ſone and delyuerly
               All the gappes of the hay
               Do no fauoure, I the pray
               It falleth nothynge to thy name
               To make fayre ſemblant, where thou mayſt blame.
            
            
               
                  IF Bialacoil be ſwete and free
               Dogged and fell thou ſhuldeſt be
               Frowarde and outragious ywys
               A chorle chaūgeth that curtyſe is
               Thys haue I herde ofte in ſayenge
               That man may for no dauntynge
               Make a ſperhauke of a boſarde
               All men woll holde the for muſarde
               That debonayre haue founden the
               It ſytteth the nought curteys to be
               To do men pleaſaunce or ſeruyſe
               In the it is recreaundyſe
               Let thy werkes ferre and nere
               Be lyke thy name, whych is Daungere
               Then all abawed in ſhewynge
               Anone ſpake Drede, ryght thus ſayenge
               And ſayd, Daungyr I drede me
               That thou ne wolte beſy be
               To kepe that thou haſt to kepe
               when thou ſhuldeſh wake, thou arte a ſlepe
               Thou ſhalt be greued certaynly
               Yf the aſpye Ielouſye
               Or yf he fynde the in blame
               He hath to daye aſſayled ſhame
               And chaſed away, wyth great manace
               Bialacoil out of thys place
               And ſwereth ſhortly that he ſhall
               Encloſe hym in a ſturdy wall
               And all is for thy wyckedneſſe
               For that he fayleth ſtraungeneſſe
               Thyne herte I trowe be fayled all
               Thou ſhalt repent in ſpeciall
               Yf Ielouſye the ſothe knewe
               Thou ſhalt forthynke, and ſore rewe.
            
            
               Wyth yt the churle his clubbe gan ſhake
               Frownynge hys eyen gan to make
               And hydous chere, as man in rage
               For yre he brent in hys vyſage
               when that he herde hym blamed ſo
               He ſayd out of my wytte I go
               To be dyſcomfyte I haue great wronge
               Certes I haue nowe lyued to longe
               Syth I maye not thys cloſer kepe
               All quycke I woll be doluen depe
               Yf any man ſhall more repayre
               Into thys gardyn for foule or fayre
               Myne herte for yre gothe a fere
               That I lette any enter here
               I haue do folly nowe I ſe
               But nowe it ſhall amended be
               who ſetteth fote here any more
               Truly he ſhall repent it ſore
               For no man more into thys place
               Of me to entre ſhall haue grace
               Leuer I had wyth ſwerdes twayne
               Throughout myne herte, in euery vayne
               Perced to be, wyth many a wounde
               Then ſlouth ſhulde in me be founde
               From hence forth by nyght or daye
               I ſhall defende it yf I maye
               wythouten any excepcion
               Of eche maner condicion
               And yf I it any man graunt
               Holdeth me for recreaunt.
            
            
               
                  THen Daūger on hys fete gan ſtande
               And hente a burden in his hande
               wroth in hys yre ne left he nought
               But through the verger he hath ſought
               Yf he myght fynde hole or trace
               where through that me mote forth by pace
               Or any gappe, he dyd it cloſe
               That no man myght touche a roſe
               Of the Roſer all aboute
               He ſhytteth euery man wythout
               Thus daye by daye Daunger is wers
               More wonderfull and more dyuers
               And feller eke, then euer he was
               For hym full ofte I ſynge alas
               For I ne maye nought, through hys yre
               Recouer that I moſte deſyre
               Myne herte alas, woll braſt a two
               For Bialacoil I wrathed ſo
               For certaynly in euery membre
               I quake, when I remembre
               Of the bothom, whych I wolde
               Full ofte a daye ſene and beholde
               And when I thynke vpon the kyſſe
               And howe moche ioye and blyſſe
               I had through the ſauour ſwete
               For wante of it I grone and grete
               Me thynketh I fele yet in my noſe
               The ſwete ſauour of the roſe
               And nowe I wote that I mote go
               
                  So ferre the freſhe floures fro
               To me full welcome were the dethe
               Abſence therof (alas) me ſlethe
               For whylom wyth thys roſe, alas
               I touched noſe, mouth, and face
               But nowe the death I muſte abyde
               But Loue conſent an other tyde
               That ones I touche maye and kyſſe
               I trowe my payne ſhall neuer lyſſe
               Theron is all my couetyſe
               whych brent myne herte in many wyſe
               Nowe ſhall repayre agayne ſyghynge
               Longe watche on nyghtes, and no ſlepynge
               Thought in wyſhynge, turment, and wo
               wyth many a turnynge to and fro
               That halfe my payne I can not tell
               For I am fallen into hell
               From paradyſe and welth, the more
               My turment greueth more, and more
               Anoyeth nowe the bytterneſſe
               That I to forne haue felte ſwetneſſe
               And wycked tonge, through hys falſhede
               Cauſeth all me wo and drede
               On me he leyeth a pytous charge
               Bycauſe hys tonge was to large.
            
            
               
                  NOwe it is tyme ſhortly that I
               Tell you ſomthynge of Ielouſy
               That was in great ſuſpection
               Aboute hym ſelfe he no maſon
               That ſtone coulde laye, ne querrour
               He hyred hem to make a tour
               And fyrſt the roſes for to kepe
               Aboute hem made he a dyche depe
               Ryght wonder large, and alſo brode
               Vpon the whych alſo ſtode
               Of ſquared ſtone, a ſturdy wall
               whych on a cragge was founded all
               And ryght great thyckneſſe eke it bare
               Aboute it was founded ſquare
               An hundred fadome on euery ſyde
               It was all lych longe and wyde
               Leſt any tyme it were aſſayled
               Full well about it was batayled▪
               
               And rounde enuyron eke were ſette
               Full many a ryche and fayre tourette
               At euery corner of thys wall
               was ſet a toure full principall
               And eueryche had wythout fable
               A portcolyſe defenſable
               To kepe of enemyes, and to greue
               That there her force wolde preue
               And eke amydde thys purpryſe
               was made a toure of great mayſtryſe
               A fayrer ſaugh no man wyth ſyght
               Large and wyde, and of great myght
               They drad none aſſaut
               Of gynne, gonne, nor ſkaffaut
               The temprure of the mortere
               was made of lycoure wonder dere
               Of quycke lyme perſaunt and egre
               The whych was tempred wyth vynegre
               The ſtone was harde of adamant
               wherof they made the foundemant
               The toure was rounde made in compas
               In all thys worlde no rycher was
               Ne better ordayned there wythall
               Aboute the toure was made a wal
               So that betwyxt that and the toure
               Roſes were ſette of ſwete ſauoure
               wyth many roſes that they bere
               And eke wythin the caſtell were
               Spryngoldes, gonnes, bowes, and archers
               And eke about at corners
               Men ſeyne ouer the wall ſtonde
               Great engyns, who were nere honde
               And in the kernels here and there
               Of arblaſters great plentye were
               None armure myght her ſtroke wythſtonde
               It were foly to preace to honde
               wythout the dytche were lyſtes made
               wyth wall batayled large and brade
               For men and horſe ſhulde not attayne
               To nygh the dyche ouer the playne
               Thus Ielouſye hath enuyron
               Sette aboute hys garnyſon
               wyth walles rounde, and dyche depe
               Onely the Roſer for to kepe
               And Daunger erly and late
               The keyes kept of the vtter gate
               The whych openeth towarde the eeſt
               And he had wyth hym at leeſt
               Thurty ſeruauntes eche one by name
               That other gate kepte Shame
               whych opened, as it was couthe
               Towarde the parte of the ſouthe
               Sergeauntes aſſygned were her to
               Full many, her wyll for to do
               Then Drede had in her bayllye
               The kepynge of the coneſtablerye
               Towarde the north I vnderſtonde
               That opened vpon the lyfte honde
               The whych for nothynge may be ſure
               But yf ſhe do beſy cure
               
                  Erly on morowe, and alſo late
               Strongly to ſhette and barre the gate
               Of euery thynge that ſhe may ſe
               Drede is aferde, where ſo ſhe be
               For wyth a puffe of lytell wynde
               Drede is aſtonyed in her mynde
               Therfore for ſtealynge of the Roſe
               I rede her not the yate vncloſe
               A foules flyght woll make her fle
               And eke a ſhadowe yf ſhe it ſe.
            
            
               
                  THen wycked tonge ful of enuye
               wyth ſoudyours of Normandye
               As he that cauſeth all the bate
               was keper of the fourth gate
               And alſo to the tother thre
               He went full ofte for to ſe
               when hys lotte was to wake a nyght
               Hys inſtrumentes wolde he dyght
               For to blowe and make ſowne
               After then he hath encheſoune
               And walken ofte vpon the wall
               Corners and wyckettes ouer all
               Full narowe ſerchen and eſpye
               Though he nought fonde, yet wolde he lye
               Dyſcordaunt euer fro armonye
               And deſtoned from melodye
               Controue he wolde, and foule fayle
               wyth hornepypes of Cornewayle
               In floyres made he dyſcordaunce
               And in hys muſyke wyth myſchaunce
               He wolde ſeyne wyth notes newe
               That he fonde no woman trewe
               Ne that he ſawe neuer in hys lyfe
               Vnto her huſbonde a trewe wyfe
               Ne none ſo full of honeſte
               That ſhe nyll lauge and mery be
               when that ſhe hereth or maye eſpye
               A man ſpeaken of lecherye
               Eueryche of hem hath ſome vyce
               One is dyſhoneſt, another is nyce
               Yf one be full of vyllanye
               Another hath a lykerous eye
               Yf one be full of wantonneſſe
               Another is a chydereſſe.
            
            
               
                  THus wycked tonge, God yeue hym ſhame
               Can put hem euerychone in blame
               wythout deſerte and cauſeleſſe
               He lyeth, though they ben gyltleſſe
               I haue pyte to ſene the ſorowe
               That walketh both eue and morowe
               To innocentes doth ſuche greuaunce
               I praye God yeue hym yuell chaunce
               That he euer ſo beſye is
               Of any woman to ſeyne amys
               Eke Ielouſye, God confounde
               That hath made a toure ſo rounde
               And made aboute a garyſon
               To ſette Bealacoil in pryſon
               The whych is ſhette there in the tour
               Full longe to holde there ſoiour
               There for to lyue in penaunce
               And for to do hym more greuaunce
               whyche hath ordeyned Ielouſye
               An olde vecke for to eſpye
               The maner of hys gouernaunce
               The whych dyuell in her enfaunce
               Had lerned of loues arte
               And of hys pleys toke her parte
               She was except in hys ſeruyſe
               She knewe eche wrenche and euery gyſe
               Of Loue, and euery wyle
               It was harde her to begyle
               Of Bealacoil ſhe toke aye hede
               That euer he lyueth in wo and drede
               He kept hym koye, and eke pryne
               Leeſt in hym ſhe had ſe
               Any foly countenaunce
               For ſhe knewe all the olde daunce
               And after thys when Ielouſye
               Had Bealacoil in hys baillye
               And ſhette hym vp that was ſo fre
               For ſure of hym he wolde be
               He truſteth ſore in hys caſtell
               The ſtronge werke hym lyketh well
               He dradde not that no glotons
               Sulde ſteale hys roſes or bothoms
               The roſes weren aſſured all
               Defenced wyth the ſtronge wall
               Nowe Ielouſye full well maye be
               Of drede deuoyde in lyberte
               whether that he ſlepe or wake
               For of hys roſes maye none be take.
            
            
               BVt I (alas) nowe mourne ſhall
               Bycauſe I was wythout the wall
               Full moche doole and mone I made
               who had wyſt what wo I hadde
               I trowe he wolde haue had pete
               Loue to dere had ſolde me
               The good that of hys loue had I
               
                  I went about it all queyntly
               But nowe through doublynge of my payne
               I ſe he wolde it ſell agayne
               And me a newe bargayne lere
               The whych all out the more is dere
               For the ſolace that I haue lorne
               Then I had it neuer aforne
               Certayne I am full lyke in dede
               To hym that caſt in earth hys ſede
               And hath ioye of the newe ſprynge
               when it greneth in the gynnynge
               And is alſo fayre and freſhe of floure
               Luſty to ſene, ſwote of odoure
               But er he it in ſheues ſhere
               Maye fall a wether that ſhall it dere
               And make it to fade and fall
               The ſtalke, the greyne, and floures all
               That to the tyllers is fordone
               The hope that he had to ſone
               I drede certayne that ſo fare I
               For hope and trauayle ſykerly
               Ben me byraſte all wyth a ſtorme
               The floure nyll ſeden of my corne
               For Loue hath ſo auaunced me
               when I began my pryuyte
               To Bailacoil all for to tell
               whome I ne founde frowarde ne fell
               But toke agree all hole my playe
               But loue is of ſo harde aſſaye
               That all at ones he reued me
               when I wente beſt abouen to haue be
               It is of loue, as of fortune
               That chaungeth ofte, and nyll contune
               whych whylom woll on folke ſmyle
               And glombe on hem another whyle
               Nowe frende nowe foe ſhalt her fele
               For a twynclynge tourneth her whele
               She can wrythe her heed awaye
               Thys is the concourſe of her playe
               She can areyſt that doth mourne
               And whirle adowne and ouertourne
               who ſytteth hygheſt, but as her luſt
               A foole is he that woll her truſt
               For it is I that am come downe
               Through charge and reuolutioun
               Syth Bialacoil more fro my twyne
               Shette in the priſon yonde wythinne
               Hys abſence at myne herte I fele
               For all my ioye and all myne hele
               was in hym, and in the Roſe
               That but you woll, whych hym doth cloſe
               Open, that I maye hym ſe
               Loue woll not that I cured be
               Of the paynes that I endure
               Nor of my cruell auenture
            
            
               
                  AH, Bialacoil myne owne dere
               Though thou be nowe a priſonere
               Kepe at leeſt thyne herte to me
               And ſuffre not that it daunted be
               Ne let not Ielouſye in hys rage
               Putten thyne herte in no ſeruage
               All though he chaſtyce the wythout
               And make thy body vnto hym lout
               Haue herte as harde as diamaunt
               Stedfaſt, and naught plyaunt
               In priſon though thy body be
               At large kepe thyne herte free
               A trewe herte woll not plye
               For no manace that it maye drye
               If Ieloſye doth the payne
               Quyte hym hys whyle thus agayne
               To venge the at leeſt in thought
               Yf other waye thou mayſt nought
               And in thys wyſe ſubtelly
               worche, and wynne the mayſtry
               But yet I am in great affraye
               Leſt thou do not, as I ſaye
               I drede thou canſt me great maugre
               That thou enpryſoned arte for me
               But that not for my treſpas
               For through me neuer dyſcouered was
               Yet thynge, that ought by ſecret
               well more annoye is in me
               Then is in the of thys myſchaunce
               For I endure more harde penaunce
               Then any can ſayne or thynke
               That for the ſorowe almoſt I ſynke
               when I remembre me of my wo
               Full nyghe out of my wytte I go.
               Inwarde myne herte I fele blede
               For comfortleſſe the death I drede
               Owe I not well to haue dyſtreſſe
               when falſe, through her wyckedneſſe
               And traytours, that arne enuyous
               To noyen me, be ſo coragious
               Ah, Bialacoil full well I ſe
               That they hem ſhape to dyſceyue the
               To make the buxome to her lawe
               And wyth her corde the to drawe
               where ſo hem luſt, ryght at her wyll
               I drede they haue the brought there tyll
               wythout comforte, thought me ſlethe
               Thys game woll brynge me to my dethe
               
                  For yf I your good wyll leſe
               I more be deed I maye not cheſe
               And yf that thou foryete me
               Myne herte ſhall neuer in lykynge be
               Nor elſwhere fynde ſolace
               Yf I be put out of your grace
               As it ſhall neuer ben I hope
               Then ſhulde I fall in wanhope
               Alas, in wanhope: naye parde
               For I woll neuer dyſpeyred be
               Yf hope me fayle, then am I
               Vngratious and vnworthy
               In hope I woll conforted be
               For Loue, when he betaught her me
               Sayd, that hope where ſo I go
               Shulde aye be relees to my wo
               But what and ſhe my bales bete
               And be to me curteys and ſwete
               She is in nothynge full certayne
               Louers ſhe put in full great payne
               And maketh hem wyth wo to dele
               Her fayre beheſt dyſceyueth fele
               For ſhe woll behote ſykerly
               And faylen after vtterly
               Ah, that is a full noyous thynge
               For many a louer in louynge
               Hangeth vpon her, and truſteth faſt
               whych leſe her trauayle at the laſt
               Of thyng to cōmen ſhe wote ryght nought
               Therfore yf it be wyſely ſought
               Her counſayle foly is to take
               For many tymes, when ſhe woll make
               A full good ſylogyſme, I drede
               That afterwarde there ſhall in dede
               Folowe an yuell concluſyoun
               This put me in confuſioun
               For many tymes I haue it ſene
               That many haue begyled bene
               For truſte that they haue ſet in hope
               whych fell hem afterwarde a ſlope
            
            
               
                  BVt natheleſſe yet gladlye ſhe wolde
               That he that woll hym wyth her holde
               Had altymes her purpoſe clere
               wythout dyſceyte or any were
               That ſhe deſyreth ſykerly
               when I her blamed I dyd foly
               But what auayleth her good wyll
               when ſhe ne may ſtaunche my ſtounde yll
               That helpeth lytell that ſhe may do
               Outtake beheſt vnto my wo
               And heeſt certayne in no wyſe
               wythout yefte is not to prayſe.
            
            
               
                  WHen heeſt and dede a ſondre vary
               They done a great contrary
               Thus am I poſſed vp and downe
               wyth doole, thought, and confuſyoun
               Of my dyſeaſe there is no nombre
               Daungere and ſhame me encombre
               Drede alſo, and Ielouſye
               And wycked Tonge full of enuye
               Of whych the ſharpe and cruel Ire
               Full ofte me put in great martyre
               They haue my ioye fully lette
               Syth Bialacoil they haue beſhette
               Fro me in pryſon wyckedly
               whome I loue ſo entierly
               That it woll my bane be
               But I the ſooner maye hym ſe
               And yet more ouer worſt of all
               There is ſet to kepe, foule her befall
               A Rympled vecke ferre roune in rage
               Frownynge and yelowe in her vyſage
               whych in awayte lyeth daye and nyght
               That none of hem maye haue a ſyght.
            
            
               
                  NOwe mote my ſorow enforſed be
               Full ſoth it is that Loue yafe me
               Thre wonder yeftes of hys grace
               whych I haue lorne now in thys place
               Syth they ne may wythout drede
               Helpen but lytell who taketh hede
               For here auayleth no Swete thought
               And ſwete Speche helpeth ryght nought
               The thyrde was called Swete Lokynge
               That nowe is lorne wythout leſynge.
            
            
               
                  YEftes were fayre, but not for thy
               They helpe me but ſymply
               But Bialacoil looſed be
               To gone at large, and to be free
               For hym my lyfe lyeth all in doute
               But yf he come the rather oute
               Alas I trowe it woll not bene
               For howe ſhulde I euermore hym ſene?
               He maye not out, and that is wronge
               Bycauſe the Toure is ſo ſtronge
               Howe ſhulde he out, or by whoſe proweſſe
               Of ſo ſtronge a fortereſſe?
               By me certayne it nyll be do
               
                  God wotte I haue no wytte therto
               But well I wote I was in rage
               when I to Loue dyd homage
               who was in cauſe (in ſothfaſtneſſe)
               But her ſelfe dame Idelneſſe?
               whych me conueyd through fayre prayere
               To entre in to that fayre vergere
               She was to blame me to leue
               The whych nowe doth me ſore greue
               A fooles worde is nought to trowe
               Ne worthe an apple for to lowe
               Menne ſhulde hym ſnybbe bytterly
               At pryme temps of hys foly
               I was a foole, and ſhe me leued
               Through who I am ryght nought releued
               She accomplyſhed all my wyll
               That nowe me greueth wonder yll.
            
            
               
                  REaſon me ſayd what ſhulde fall
               A foole my ſelfe I maye well call
               That loue aſyde I had not layde
               And trowed that dame Reaſon ſayde
               Reaſon had both ſkyll and ryght
               when ſhe me blamed, wyth all her myght
               To medle of loue, that hath me ſhent
               But certayne nowe I woll repent.
            
            
               
                  ANd ſhulde I repente? naye parde
               A falſe traytour, then ſhulde I be
               The dyuels engyns wolde me take
               Yf I my loue wolde forſake
               Or Bialacoil falſly betraye
               Shulde I at myſchefe hate hym? naye
               Syth he nowe for hys curteſye
               Is in pryſon of Ielouſye
               Curteſye certayne dyd he me
               So moche, that it maye not yolden be
               when he the hay paſſen me lete
               To kyſſe the Roſe, fayre and ſwete
               Shulde I therfore con hym maugre
               Naye certaynly, it ſhall not be
               For Loue ſhall neuer yeue good wyll
               Here of me, through worde or wyll
               Offence or complaynt more or leſſe
               Neyther of Hope nor Idelneſſe
               For certes it were wronge that I
               Hated hem for her curteſye
               There is not els, but ſuffre and thynke
               And waken when I ſhulde wynke
               Abyde in hope, tyll Loue through chaunce
               Sende me ſocour or allegeaunce
               Expectant aye tyll I maye mete
               To getten mercy of that ſwete.
            
            
               
                  WHylom I thynke howe Loue to me
               Sayd he wolde take at gre
               My ſeruyce, yf vnpacience
               Cauſed me to done offence
               He ſayd, in thanke I ſhall it take
               And hygh mayſter eke the make
               Yf wyckedneſſe ne reue it the
               But ſoue I trowe that ſhall not be
               Theſe were hys wordes by and by
               It ſemed he loued me truely
               Nowe is there not but ſerue hym wele
               Yf that I thynke hys thanke to fele
               My good myne harme, lyeth hole in me
               In loue maye no defaute be
               For trewe loue ne fayled neuer man
               Sothly the faute mote nedes than
               As God forbyd, be founde in me
               And how it cōmeth, I can not ſe
               Nowe let it gone as it maye go
               whether Loue woll ſocoure me or ſlo
               He may do hole on me hys wyll
               I am ſo ſore bounde hym tyll
               From hys ſeruyce I maye not 
                     •
                  lene
               For lyfe and death wythouten wene
               Is in hys hande, I maye not cheſe
               He maye me do both wynne and leſt
               And ſyth ſo ſore he doth me greue
               Yet yf my luſte he wolde acheue
               To Bialacoil goodly to be
               I yeue no force what fell on me
               For though I dye, as I mote nede
               I praye Loue of hys goodlyhede
               To Bialacoil do gentylneſſe
               For whome I lyue in ſuche dyſtreſſe
               That I mote dyen for penaunce
               But fyrſt, wythout repentaunce
               I woll me confeſſe in good entent
               And make in haſt my teſtament
               As louers done that felen ſmerte
               To Bialacoil leaue I myne herte
               All hole, wythout departynge
               Or doubleneſſe of repentynge
            
            
               ¶Cōment Raiſon vient a Lamant.
               
                  
                  THus as I made my paſſage
               In complaynt and in cruell rage
               And I not where to fynde a leche
               That couthe vnto myne helpynge eche
               Sodaynly agayne comen doune
               Out of her tour I ſawe Reaſoun
               Diſcrete and wyſe, and full pleaſaunt
               And of her port full auenaunt
               The ryght waye ſhe toke to me
               which ſtode in great perplexitie
               That was poſſhed in euery ſyde
               That I nyſt where I myght abyde
               Tyll ſhe demurely ſad of chere
               Sayd to me as ſhe came nere
               Myne owne frende, art thou greued?
               Now is this quarel yet atcheued
               Of loues ſyde? anon tell me
               Haſt thou not yet of loue thy fyll?
               Art thou nat wery of thy ſeruyce?
               That the hath in ſuche wyſe
               what ioye haſt thou in thy louyng?
               Is it ſwete or bytter thyng
               Canſt thou yet cheſe, let me ſe
               what beſt thy ſocour myght be.
            
            
               
                  THou ſerueſt a full noble lorde
               That maketh the thrall for thy rewarde
               which aye returneth thy turment
               with foly ſo he hath the blent
               Thou fell in myſchefe thylke daye
               whan thou dyddeſt, the ſothe to ſaye
               Obeyſaunce, and eke homage
               Thou wroughteſt nothyng as the ſage
               whan thou became his liege man
               Thou dyddeſt a great foly than
               Thou wyſteſt nat what fell therto
               with what lorde thou hadſt to do
               yf thou haddeſt hym well knowe
               Thou hadſt nought be brought ſo lowe
               For yf thou wyſteſt what it were
               Thou woldeſt ſerue hym halfe a yere
               Nat a weke, nor halfe a daye
               Ne yet an houre without delaye
               Ne neuer I loued paramours
               His lordſhyp is ſo full of ſhours
               Knoweſt hym ought?
            
            
               Lamaunt.
               Yea dame pardye
            
            
               Reaſoun.
               Nay nay
            
            
               Lamaunt.
               Yes I
            
            
               Reaſoun.
               wherfore let ſe
            
            
               Lamaunt.
               Of that he ſayd I ſhulde be
               Glad to haue ſuche lorde (as he)
               And maſter of ſuche ſeignorie
            
            
               Reaſoun.
               Knoweſt hym nomore
            
            
               Lamaunt.
               Nay certes I
               Saue that ye yafe me rules there
               And went his way, I nyſt where
               And I abode bounde in balaunce
               Lo, there a noble conyſaunce.
            
            
               ¶Reaſoun.
               
                  BVt I woll that thou knowe hym nowe
               Gynnynge and ende, ſyth that thou
               Arte ſo anguyſhious and mate
               Diſfigured out of aſtate
               There maye no wretche haue more of wo
               Ne cautyfe none enduren ſo
               It were to euery man ſyttyng
               Of his lorde haue knowledgyng
               For yf thou knewe hym out of doubt
               Lyghtly thou ſhuldeſt eſcapen out
               Of thy pryſon that marreth the
            
            
               Lamaunt.
               Ye dame ſyth my lorde is he
               And I his man made with myne honde
               I wolde ryght fayne vnderſtonde
               To knowe of what kynde he be
               Yf any wolde enforme me.
            
            
               ¶Reaſoun
               
                  
                     I wolde (ſayde reaſon) the lere
                  Sith thou to lerne haſt ſuch de
                  And ſhew the wtoutē fable (ſire
                  A thyng yt is not demonſtrable
                  Thou ſhalt withouten ſcience
                  And knowe withouten experience
                  The thyng that may not knowen be
                  Ne wyſt ne ſhewed in no degree
                  Thou mayſt the ſoth of it nat wytten
                  Though in the it were wrytten
                  Thou ſhalt not knowe therof more
                  whyle thou art ruled by his lore
                  But vnto hym that loue woll flye
                  The knotte maye vncloſed be
                  which hath to the, as it is founde
                  So longe to knytte, and not vnbounde
                  Now ſette well thyne ententioun
                  To here of loue deſcriptioun.
               
               
                  
                  
                     LOue it is an hatefull pees
                  A free acquaintaunce without relees
                  And through the fret full of falſhede
                  A ſyckerneſſe all ſet in drede
                  In herte is a diſpayryng hope
                  And full of hope it is wanhope
                  wyſe woodneſſe, and voyde Reaſon
                  A ſwete peryl in to drowne
                  An heuy burthen lyght to beare
                  A wicked vawe awaye to weare
                  It is Carybdes perylous
                  Diſagreable and gratious
                  It is diſcordaunce that can accorde
                  And accordaunce to diſcorde
                  It is connyng without ſcience
                  wyſedome without ſapience
                  without diſcretioun
                  Hauoyre without poſſeſſyoun
                  It is lyke hele and hole ſyckneſſe
                  A truſt drowned and dronkeneſſe
                  And helthe ful of maladye
                  And charyte ful of enuye
                  And angre ful of habundaunce
                  And a gredye ſuffiſaunce
                  Delyte right ful of heuyneſſe
                  And dreried ful of gladneſſe
                  Bytter ſwetneſſe and ſwete errour
                  Right yuel ſauoured good ſauour
                  Sen that pardon hath within
                  And pardon ſpotted without ſynne
                  A payne alſo it is ioyous
                  And felony ryght pytious
                  Alſo playe that ſelde is ſtable
                  And ſtedfaſt ryght meuable
                  A ſtrength weyked to ſtande vpryght
                  And febleneſſe full of myght
                  wytte vnaduyſed, ſage follye
                  And ioye full of tourmentrye
                  A laughter it is wepyng aye
                  Reſt that trauayleth nyght and daye
                  Alſo a ſwete hell it is
                  And a ſorowfull paradys
                  A pleſaunt gayle and priſoun
                  And full of froſt ſomer ſeaſon
                  Pryme temps full of froſtes whyte
                  And Maye deuoyde of all delyte
                  with ſeer braunches bloſſoms vngrene
                  And newe frute fylled with wynter tene
                  It is a ſlowe maye not forbeare
                  Ragges rybaned with golde to weare
                  For all ſo well woll loue be ſette
                  Vnder ragges as ryche rochette
                  And eke as wel by amorettes
                  In mournyng blacke, as bryght burnettes
                  For none is of ſo mokel pryſe
                  Ne noman founden ſo wyſe
                  Ne none ſo hygh is of parage
                  Ne noman founde of wyt ſo ſage
                  No man ſo hardye ne ſo wyght
                  Ne no man of ſo mokell myght
                  None ſo fulfylled of bountie
                  That he with loue maye daynted be
                  All the worlde holdeth this waye
                  Loue maketh all to gone myſwaye
                  But it be they of euyll lyfe
                  whome Genius curſed man and wyfe
                  That wrongly werke agayne nature
                  None ſuche I loue, ne haue no cure
                  Of ſuche as loue ſeruauntes bene
                  And woll not by my counſayle flene
                  For I ne preyſe that louynge
                  wherthrough men at the laſt endyng
                  Shall call hem wretches full of wo
                  Loue greueth hem and ſhendeth ſo
                  But yf thou wolt well loue eſchewe
                  For to eſcape out of his mewe
                  And make all hole thy ſorowe to ſlake
                  No better counſayle mayſt thou take
                  Than thynke to fleen well ywys
                  Maye nought helpe els, for wyt thou this
                  yf thou flye it, it ſhall flye the
                  Folowe it, and folowen ſhall it the
               
            
            
               ¶Lamaunt.
               whan I had herde al Reaſon ſayne
               which had ſpylt her ſpeche in vayne
               Dame (ſayde I) I dare well ſaye
               Of this auaunt me well I maye
               That from your ſchole ſo deuiaunt
               I am, that neuer the more auaunt
               Ryght nought am I through your doctrine
               I dull vnder your diſciplyne
               I wot nomore than wyſt euer
               To me ſo contrary and ſo fer
               Is euery thynge that ye me lere
               And yet I can it al by partuere
               My hert foryeteth therof ryght nought
               It is ſo wrytten in my thought
               And depe grauen it is ſo tender
               That all myne hert I can it render
               And rede it ouer communely
               But to my ſelfe leudeſt am I
            
            
               
               
                  BVt ſyth ye loue diſcryuen ſo
               And lacke and preiſe it bothe two
               Defyneth it into this letter
               That I maye thynke on it the better
               For I herde neuer defyned here
               And wylfully I wolde it lere
               Yf loue be ſearched well and ſought
               It is a ſykneſſe of the thought
               Annexed and lined bytwyxt tweyne
               with male and female with o cheyne
               So frely that byndeth, that they ne twynne
               whether ſo therof they leſe or wynne
               The rote ſpryngeth through hote brenning
               Into diſordinate deſyryng
               For to kyſſen and embrace
               And at her luſt them to ſolace
               Of other thynge loue retcheth nought
               But ſetteth her hert and all her thought
               More for delectatioun
               Than any procreatioun
               Of other frute by engendrure
               which loue to god is nat pleaſure
               For of her body frute to get
               They yeue no forſe, they are ſo ſet
               Vpon delyte to play in fere
               And ſome haue alſo this manere
               To faynen hem for loue ſeke
               Suche loue I prayſe not at a leke
               For paramours they do but fayne
               To loue truly they diſdayne
               They falſen ladyes traytourſly
               And ſwerne hem othes vtterly
               with many a leſyng, & many a ſable
               And all they fynden diſceyuable
               And whan they han her luſt getten
               The hote ernes they all foryeten
               women the harme byen full ſore
               But men this thynken euermore
               That laſſe harme is ſo mote I the
               Diſceyue them, than diſceyued be
               And namely where they ne may
               Fynde none other meane way
               For I wot well in ſothfaſtneſſe
               That who doeth nowe his buſyneſſe
               with any woman for to dele
               For any luſt that he may fele
               But yf it be ſo for engendrure
               He doth treſpaſſe I you enſure
               For he ſhulde letten all his wyll
               To getten a lykely thyng hym tyll
               And to ſuſtayne yf he myght
               And kepe forth by kyndes ryght
               His owne lykeneſſe and ſemblable
               For bycauſe all is corumpable
               And fayle ſhulde ſucceſſyoun
               Ne were theyr generatioun
               Our ſectes ſterne for to ſaue
               whan father or mother arne in graue
               Her chyldren ſhulde, whan they ben bede
               Full diligent bene in her ſtede
               To vſe that warke on ſuche a wyſe
               That one may through another ryſe
               Therfore ſet kynde therin delyte
               For men therin ſhulde haue delyte
               And of that dede be not erke
               But oft ſythens haunt that werke
               For none wolde drawe therof a draught
               Ne were delyte which hath hym caught
               This had ſubtyl dame Nature
               For none goth ryght I the enſure
               Ne hath entent hole ne perfyte
               For her deſyre is for delyte
               The which fortened creaſe, and eke
               The playe of loue for oft ſeke
               And thrall hem ſelfe they be ſo nyſe
               Vnto the prince of euery vyce
               For of eche ſynne it is the rote
               Vnlefull luſt though it be ſote
               And of all euyll the racyne
               As Tullius can determyne
               which in his tyme was full ſage
               In a boke he made of age
               where that more he prayſeth elde
               Though he be croked and vnwelde
               And more of cōmendatioun
               Than youth in his deſcriptioun
               For youth ſet both man and wyfe
               In all paryll of ſoule and lyfe
               And parell is, but men haue grace
               The paryll of youth for to pace
               without any deth or diſtreſſe
               It is ſo full of wyldneſſe
               So oft it doth ſhame or domage
               To hym or to his lynage
               And ledeth man now vp nowe downe
               In mokell diſſolutioun
               And maketh hym loue well company
               And led his lyfe diſrulely
               And halte hym payde with none eſtate
               within hym ſelfe is ſuche debate
               He chaungeth purpoſe and entent
               And yalte into ſome couent
               
                  To lyuen after her empryſe
               And leſeth fredom and fraunchyſe
               That nature in hym had ſette
               The whiche agayne he may not gette
               Yf he there make his manſyon
               For to abyde profeſſyon
               Though for a tyme his hert abſent
               It maye not fayle he ſhall repent
               And eke abyde thylke daye
               To leaue his habyte, and gone his waye
               And leſeth his worſhyp and his name
               And dare not come agayne for ſhame
               But all his lyfe he doth ſo mourne
               Bycauſe he dare not home retourne
               Fredom of kynde ſo loſt hath he
               That neuer may recured be
               But that yf god hym graunt grace
               That he may or he hence pace
               Conteyne vnder obedience
               Through the vertue of patience
               For youth ſet man in all folye
               In vnthryft and in rybaudrye
               In lechery and in outrage
               So oft it chaungeth of corage
               Youth gynneth oft ſuche bargayne
               That may not ende without payne
               In great paryll is ſet youth hede
               Delyte ſo doth his brydell lede
               Delyte this hangeth, drede the nought
               Both mans body and his thought
               Onely through youthes chambere
               That to done euyll is cuſtomere
               And of naught els taketh hede
               But onely folkes for to lede
               In to diſporte and wyldeneſſe
               So is fro warde from ſadneſſe
               But elde draweth hem therfro
               who wote it not, he may wel go
               And mo of hem, that nowe arne olde
               That whylom youthe had in holde
               whiche yet remembreth of tender age
               Howe it hem brought in many arage
               And many a folly therin wrought
               But now yt elde hath hym through ſought
               They repent hem of her follye
               That youth hem put in ieopardye
               In paryll and in moche wo
               And made hem oft amyſſe to do
               And ſewen euyll companye
               Ryot and auoutryce.
            
            
               
                  BVt elde can agayne reſtrayne
               From ſuche folly, and refrayne
               And ſet men by her ordynaunce
               In good rule and in gouernaunce
               But euyll ſhe ſpendeth her ſeruyſe
               For noman woll her loue neyther preyſe
               She is hated, this wote I wele
               Her acquayntaunce wolde no man fele
               Ne han of elde company
               Men hate to be of her alye
               For no man wolde become olde
               Ne dye whan he is yonge and bolde
               And elde maruayleth ryght greatly
               whan they remembre hem inwardly
               Of many a peryllous empryſe
               which that they wrought in ſondry wyſe
               How euer they myght without blame
               Eſcape awaye without ſhame
               In youth without domage
               Or reprefe of her lynage
               Loſſe of membre, ſhedyng of bloude
               Parell of deth, or loſſe of good
               woſt thou not where youth abyt
               That men ſo preyſen in her wyt
               with delyte ſhe halte ſoiour
               For both they dwellen in o tour
               As longe as youth is in ſeaſon
               They dwell in one manſyon
               Delyte of youth woll haue ſeruyce
               To do what ſo he woll deuyſe
               And youth is redy euermore
               For to obeye for ſmerte of ſore
               Vnto delyte, and hym to yeue
               Her ſeruyce, whyle that ſhe maye lyue.
            
            
               
                  WHere elde habytte, I wol the tell
               Shortly, and no whyle dwel
               For thither behoueth yt to go
               Yf deth in youth the not ſlo
               Of this iourneye thou mayſt not fayle
               with her labour and trauayle
               Lodged ben with ſorowe and wo
               That neuer out of her courte go
               Payne and diſtreſſe, ſykneſſe and yre
               And melancoly that angry ſyre
               Bene of her paleys ſenatours
               Gronyng and grutchynge her harbegeours
               The daye and nyght her to tourment
               with cruell deth they her preſent
               And tellen her erlyche and late
               That deth ſtandeth armed at her gate
               
                  Than brynge they to her remembraunce
               The folly dedes of her enfaunce
               which cauſen her to mourne in wo
               That youth hath her begyled ſo
               which ſodaynly away is haſted
               She wepeth the tyme that ſhe hath waſted
               Complaynyng of the preterytte
               And the preſent, that nat abytte
               And of her olde vanitie
               That but aforne her ſhe maye ſe
               In the future ſome ſocour
               To leggen her of her dolour
               To graunt her tyme of repentaunce
               For her ſynnes to do penaunce
               And at the laſt ſo her gouerne
               To wynne the ioye that is eterne
               Fro which go bakwarde youth he made
               In vanitie to drowne and wade
               For preſent tyme abydeth nought
               It is more ſwyft than any thought
               So lytle whyle it doth endure
               That there nys compt ne meaſure
               But how that euer the game go
               who lyſt to loue, ioy and myrth alſo
               Of loue, be it he or ſhe
               Hye or lowe who it be
               In frute they ſhulde hem delyte
               Her parte they may not els quyte
               To ſaue hem ſelfe in honeſtie
               And yet full many one I ſe
               Of women, ſothly for to ſayne
               That deſyre, and wolde fayne
               The playe of loue, they be ſo wylde
               And not coueyte to go with chylde
               And yf with chylde they be perchaunce
               They wol it holde a great miſchaunce
               But what ſo euer wo they fele
               They woll not playne, but concele
               But yf it be any foole or nyce
               In whome that ſhame hath no iuſtyce
               For to delyte echone they drawe
               That haunt this worke both hye and lawe
               Saue ſuche that arne worth right nought
               That for moneye woll be bought
               Suche loue I prayſe in no wyſe
               whan it is gyuen for couetyſe
               I preyſe no woman, though ſo be woode
               That yeueth her ſelfe for any good
               For lytle ſhulde a man tell
               Of her that wyl her body ſell
               Be ſhe mayde, be ſhe wyfe
               That quycke wyll ſell her by her lyfe
               How fayre chere that euer ſhe make
               He is a wretche I vndertake
               That loued ſuche one, for ſwete or ſoure
               Though ſhe hym called her paramoure
               And laugheth on him, and maketh him feeſt
               For certaynly no ſuche beeſt
               To be loued is not worthy
               Or beare the name of drury
               Non ſhulde her pleaſe, but he were woode
               That woll diſpoyle hym of his good
               Yet natheleſſe I woll not ſaye
               That ſhe for ſolace and for playe
               Maye a iewell or other thyng
               Take of her louers free yeuyng
               But that ſhe aſke it in no wyſe
               For drede of ſhame, or couetyſe
               And ſhe of hers may hym certayne
               without ſlaunder yeuen agayne
               And ioyne her hertes togyther ſo
               In loue, and take and yeue alſo
               Trowe not that I woll hem twynne
               whan in her loue there is no ſynne
               I woll that they togyther go
               And don all that they han ado
               As curteys ſhulde and debonayre
               And in her loue beren hem fayre
               without vyce both he and ſhe
               So that alwaye in honeſtie
               Fro folly loue to kepe hem clere
               That brenneth hertes with his fere
               And that her loue in any wyſe
               Be deuoyde of couetyſe
               Good loue ſhulde engendred be
               Of true hert, iuſt and ſecree
               And not of ſuche as ſet her thought
               To haue her luſt, or els nought
               So are they caught in loues lace
               Truly for bodily ſolace
               Fleſhly delyte is ſo preſent
               with the, that ſet all thyne entent
               without more what ſhuld I gloſe
               For to get and haue the roſe
               which maketh the ſo mate and wood
               That thou deſyreſt none other good
               But thou art not an yuche the nerere
               But euer abydeſt in ſorowe and werre
               As in thy face it is to ſene
               It maketh the both pale and lene
               Thy myght, thy vertue goth awaye
               A ſory geſt in good faye
               Thou harboreſt in thyne Inne
               
                  The god of loue whan thou let in
               wherfore I rede thou ſhet hym out
               Or he ſhall greue the out of dout
               For to thy profyt it wyll turne
               Yf he nomore with the ſoiourne
               In great myſchefe and ſorowe ſonken
               Ben hertes that of loue arne dronken
               As thou peraduenture knowen ſhall
               whan thou haſt loſt the tyme all
               And ſpent by thought in ydleneſſe
               In waſte, and wofull luſtyneſſe
               Yf thou mayſt lyue the tyme to ſe
               Of loue for to delyuered be
               Thy tyme thou ſhalt bewepe ſore
               The which neuer thou mayeſt reſtore
               For tyme loſt, as men may ſe
               For nothyng may recouered be
               And yf thou ſcape, yet at laſt
               Fro loue that hath the ſo faſt
               Knytte and bounden in his lace
               Certayne I holde it but a grace
               For many one as it is ſeyne
               Haue loſt and ſpent alſo in veyne
               In his ſeruyce without ſocour
               Body and ſoule, good and treaſour
               wytte and ſtrength, and eke rycheſſe
               Of which they had neuer redreſſe.
            
            
               ¶Lamant
               
                  THus taught and preached hath Reaſon
               But loue ſpylte her ſermon
               That was ſo imped in my thought
               That her doctryne I ſet at nought
               And yet ne ſayd ſhe neuer a dele
               That I ne vnderſtode it wele
               worde by worde the mater all
               But vnto loue I was ſo thral
               which calleth ouer all his praye
               He chaſeth ſo my thought aye
               And holdeth myne hert vnder his ſeale
               As truſty and true as any ſtele
               So that no deuocion
               Ne had I in the ſermon
               Of dame Reaſon, ne of her rede
               It toke no ſoiour in myne heed
               For all yede out at one ere
               That in that other ſhe dyd lere
               Fully on me ſhe loſt her lore
               Her ſpeche me greued wonder ſore
            
            
               
                  THat vnto her for yre I ſayd
               For angre, as I dydde abrayde
               Dame, and is it your wyll algate
               That I not loue, but that I hate
               All men as ye me teche
               For yf I do after your ſpeche
               Syth that ye ſayne loue is not good
               Than muſt I nedes ſaye with mode
               Yf I it leue, in hatred aye
               Lyuen, and voyde loue alwaye
               From me a ſynfull wretche
               Hated of all that teche
               I maye not go none other gate
               For eyther muſt I loue or hate
               And yf I hate men of newe
               More than loue, it woll me rewe
               As by your prechyng ſemeth me
               For loue nothyng ne prayſeth the
               Ye yeue good counſayle ſykerly
               That precheth me al day, that I
               Shulde not loues lore alowe
               He were a foole wolde you not trowe
               In ſpeche alſo ye han me taught
               Another loue that knowen is nought
               which I herde you not repreue
               To loue eche other by your leue
               Yf ye I wolde diffyne it me
               I wolde gladly here to ſe
               At the leſt yf I may lere
               Of ſondry loues the manere.
            
            
               ¶Raiſon.
               
                  CErtes frende, a fole art thou
               whan that thou nothynge wolt alowe
               That I for thy profyte ſaye
               Yet woll I ſaye the more in ſaye
               For I am redy at the leeſt
               To acomplyſh thy requeſt
               But I not where it woll aueyle
               In vayne peraduenture I ſhall traueyle
               Loue there is in ſondry wyſe
               As I ſhall the here deuyſe.
               For ſome loue lefull is and good
               I mene nat yt which maketh the woode
               And bryngeth the in many a fytte
               And rauyſheth fro the all thy wytte
               It is ſo marueylous and queynt
               with ſuche loue be nomore acqueynt
            
            
               
               ¶Cōment Reaſon diffiniſt Aunſete.
               
                  LOue of frenſhyppe alſo there is
               whych maketh no man done amys
               Of wyl knytte betwyxte two
               That wol not breke for wele ne wo
               whych longe is lykely to contune
               whan wyl and goodes bene in commune
               Grounded by goddes orddinaunce
               Hoole wythout diſcordaunce
               wyth hem holdyng cōmunte
               Of al her good in charite
               That there be none exceptioun
               Through chaungyng of ententioun
               That eche helpe other at her nede
               And wyſely hele both worde and dede
               Trewe of meanyng, deuoyde of ſlouth
               For wytte is nought wythout trouth
               So that the tone dare al his thought
               Sayne to his frende, and ſpare nought
               As to him ſelfe without dredyng
               To be diſcouered by wreying
               For glad is that coniunction
               whan there is none ſuſpection
               whom they wolde proue
               That trewe and parfyte weren in loue
               For no man may be amiable
               But yf he be ſo ferme and ſtable
               That fortune chaunge hym nat ne blynde
               But that hys frende alwaye him fynde
               Both poore and ryche in o ſtate
               For yf hys frende through any gate
               wol complayne of his pouerte
               He ſhulde nat byde ſo longe, tyl he
               Of hys helpyng hym requyre
               For good dede done through prayere
               Is ſolde and bought to dere ywys
               To herte that of great valure is
               For hert fulfylled of gentylneſſe
               Can yuel demeaue his diſtreſſe
               And man that worthy is of name
               To aſken often hath great ſhame
               A good man brenneth in his thought
               For ſhame whan he aſketh ought
               He hath great thought, and dredeth aye
               For hys diſeaſe whan he ſhal praye
               His frende leſt that he warned be
               Tyl that he preue his ſtabilite
               But whan that he hath founden one
               That truſtye is and trewe as ſtone
               And aſſayed him at al
               And founde him ſtedfaſt as a wal
               And of hys frenſhyp be certayne
               He ſhal him ſhewe, both ioye and payne
               And al that dare thynke or ſaye
               wythout ſhame, as he wel maye
               For howe ſhulde he a ſhamed be
               Of ſuch one as I tolde the
               For whan he wotte hys ſecrete thought
               The thyrde ſhal know therof ryght nought
               For twey in nombre is bette than thre
               In euery counſayle and ſecree
               Repreue he dredeth neuer a dele
               who that beſette his wordes wele
               For euery wyſe man out of drede
               Can kepe hys tonge tyll he ſe nede
               And fooles can nat holde her tonge
               A fooles belle is ſone ronge
               Yet ſhal a trewe frende do more
               To helpe his felowe of hys ſore
               And ſuccour him whan he hath nede
               In al that he may done in dede
               And gladder that he hym pleaſeth
               Than his felowe that he eaſeth
               And yf he do not his requeſt
               He ſhal as much him moleſt
               As hys felowe, for that he
               Maye not fulfyl hys volunte
               Fully as he hath requyred
               If both the hertes loue hath fyred
               Ioye and wo they ſhal departe
               And take euenly eche hys parte
               Halfe his anoye he ſhall haue aye
               And comfort what that he maye
               And of thys blyſſe parte ſhal he
               If loue wol departed be.
            
            
               
                  ANd whylom of thys vnite
               Spake Tulllius in a dyte
               And ſhulde maken hys requeſt
               Vnto his frende, that is honeſt
               And he goodly ſhulde it fulfyl
               But it the more were out of ſkyl
               And otherwyſe not graunt therto
               Excepte only in cauſes two
               If men his frende to dethe wolde dryue
               Let hym be beſy to ſaue hys lyue
               Alſo yf men wollen hym aſſayle
               Of hys worſhyp to make hym fayle
               And hyndren hym of his renoun
               Let him wyth ful ententioun
               his deuer done in eche degre
               
                  That hys frende ne ſhamed be
               In thys two caſe wyth hys myght
               Takyng no kepe to ſkyl nor ryght
               As ferre as loue maye hym excuſe
               Thys ought no man to refuſe
               Thys loue that I haue tolde the
               Is nothyng contrary to me
               Thys wol I that thou folowe wele
               And leaue the tother euery dele
               Thys loue to vertue al entendeth
               The tother fooles blent and ſhendeth.
            
            
               Another loue alſo there is
               That is contrary vnto thys
               whych deſyre is ſo conſtrayned
               That is but wyl fayned
               Awaye fro trouth it doth ſo varye
               That to good loue it is contrarye
               For it maymeth in many wyſe
               Syke hertes wyth couetyſe
               Al in wynnynge and in profyte
               Suche loue ſetteth his delyte
               Thys loue ſo hangeth in balaunce
               That yf it leſe hys hope parchaunce
               Of luere, that he is ſet vpon
               It wol fayle, and quenche anon
               For no man may be amorous
               Ne in hys lyuyng vertuous
               But he loue more in moode
               Men for hem ſelfe, than for her goode
               For loue that profyte doth abyde
               Is falſe and bydeth not in no tyde
               Loue cometh of dame fortune
               That lytle whyle wyl contune
               For it ſhall chaungen wonder ſoone
               And take eclyps ryght as the moone
               whan he is from vs lette
               Through erth, that betwyxt is ſette
               The ſunne and her, as it may fal
               Be it in partie, or in al
               The ſhadowe maketh her bemes merke
               And her hornes to ſhewe derke
               That parte, where ſhe hath loſt her lyght
               Of Phebus fully, and the ſyght
               Tyl whan the ſhadowe is ouerpaſt
               She is enlumyned agayne as faſt
               Through the bryghtneſſe of the ſūne bemes
               That yeueth to her agayne her lemes
               That loue is ryght of ſuch nature
               Nowe is fayre, and nowe obſcure
               nowe bryght, nowe clipſy of manere
               And whylom dymme, and whylom clere
               As ſone as pouerte gynneth take
               wyth mantel and weedes blake
               Hydeth of loue the lyght away
               That in to nyght it turneth day
               It may not ſe ryches ſhyne
               Tyl the blacke ſhadowes fyne
               For whan rycheſſe ſhyneth bryght
               Loue recouereth ayen his lyght
               And whan it fayleth, he wol flyt
               And as ſhe greueth, ſo greueth it
               Of thys loue here what I ſaye
               The ryche men are loued aye
               And namely tho that ſparande bene
               That wol nat waſhe her hertes clene
               Of the fylth nor of the byce
               Of gredy brennyng auaryce
               The ryche man ful fonde is ywys
               That weneth that he loued is
               If that hys herte it vnderſtode
               It is not he, it is hys good
               He may wel weten in his thought
               Hys good is loued, and he ryght nought
               For yf he be a nygarde eke
               Men wyl not ſet by hym a leke
               But haten hym, thys is the ſoth
               Lo what profyte hys catel doth
               Of euery man that may hym ſe
               It getteth hym nough but cumyte
               But he amende hym ſelfe of that vyce
               And knowe hym ſelfe he is not wyſe
               Certes he ſhulde aye frendly be
               To gette hym loue alſo bene fre
               Or els he is not wyſe ne ſage
               No more than is a gote ramage
               That he not loueth, his dede proueth
               whan he hys rycheſſe ſo wel loueth
               That he wol hyde it aye and ſpare
               Hys poore frendes ſene forfare
               To kepen aye hys purpoſe
               Tyl for drede hys eyen cloſe
               And tyl a wycked death hym take
               Hym had leuer a ſondre ſhake
               And let al hys lymmes a ſondre ryue
               Than leaue his rycheſſe in his lyue
               He thynketh to parte it wyth no man
               Certayne no loue is in him than
               Howe ſhulde loue wythin hym be
               whan in hys hert is no pyte
               That he treſpaſeth wel I wate
               For eche man knoweth hys eſtate
               For wel hym ought to be reproued
               That loueth nought, ne is not loued
               
                  But ſyth we arne to fortune comen
               And hath our ſermon of her nomen
               A wonder wyl I tel the nowe
               Thou hardeſt neuer ſuch one I trowe
               I not where thou me leuen ſhal
               Though ſothfaſtneſſe it be al
               As it is writen: and is ſoth
               That vnto men more profyte doth
               The frowarde fortune and contraire
               Than the ſwote and debonaire
               And yf the thynke it is doutable
               It is through argument prouable
               For the debonayre and ſofte
               Falſeth and begyleth ofte
               For lyche a mother, ſhe can cheryſhe
               And mylken as doth a norice
               And of her good to hym deles
               And yeueth him part of her to weles
               with great rycheſſe and degnite
               And hem ſhe hoteth ſtabilyte
               In a ſtate that is not ſtable
               But chaungyng aye and variable
               And fedeth him wyth glory vayne
               And worldly blyſſe noncertayne
               whan ſhe hym ſetteth on her whele
               Than wene they to be right wele
               And in ſo ſtable ſtate wythall
               That neuer they wene for to fall
               And whan they ſette ſo hygh be
               They wene to haue in certeynte
               Of hertly frendes to great nombre
               That nothynge myght her ſtate encombre
               They truſte hem ſo on euery ſyde
               wenyng wyth hym they wolde abyde
               In euery parel and miſchaunce
               wythout chaunge or variaunce
               Both of catel and of good
               And alſo for to ſpende her blood
               And al her membres for to ſpyll
               Onely for to fulfyl her wyll
               They maken it hole in many wyſe
               And hoten hem her full ſeruyſe
               Howe ſore that it do hem ſmerte
               In to her very naked ſherte
               Herte and alſo hole they gyue
               For the tyme that they may lyue
               So that wyth her flatterye
               They maken fooles glorifye
               Of her wordes ſpekyng
               And han chere of a reioyſyng
               And trowe hem as the Euangyle
               And it is al falſheed and gyle
               As they ſhal afterwarde ſe
               whan they arne fallen in pouerte
               And bene of good and catel bare
               Than ſhul they ſene who frendes ware
               For of an hundrede certaynly
               Nor of a thouſande ful ſcarſly
               Ne ſhal they fynde vnnethes one
               whan pouerte is comen vpon
               For thus fortune that I of tell
               wyth men whan her luſt to dwell
               Maketh hem to leſe her conyſaunce
               And noriſheth hem in ignoraunce
            
            
               But frowarde fortune and peruerſe
               whan hygh eſtates ſhe doth reuerſe
               And maketh hem to tomble doune
               Of her whele wyth ſodayne tourne
               And from her rycheſſe doch hem flye
               And plongeth hem in pouerte
               As a ſtepmother enuyous
               And layeth a playſtre dolorous
               Vnto her hertes wounded egre
               whych is not tempred wyth vynegre
               But wyth pouerte and indigence
               For to ſhewe by experience
               That ſhe is fortune verylye
               In whom no man ſhulde affye
               Nor in her yeftes haue fyaunce
               She is ſo full of varyaunce
               Thus can ſhe maken hye and lowe
               whan they from rycheſſe arne throwe
               Fully to knowen without were
               Frende of affecte, and frende of chere
               And whych in loue weren trewe and ſtable
               And whych alſo weren varyable
               After fortune her goddeſſe
               In pouerte eyther in rycheſſe
               For all that yeueth here out of drede
               Vnhappe bereueth it in dede
               For in fortune let not one
               Of frendes, whan fortune is gone
               I meane tho frendes that wyll fle
               Anone as entreth pouerte
               And yet they woll not leaue hem ſo
               But in eche place where they go
               They cal hem wretche, ſcorne, and blame
               And of her miſhappe hem diffame
               And namely ſuch as in rycheſſe
               Pretendeth mooſt of ſtableneſſe
               whan that hey ſawe hym ſet on lofte
               And weren of hym ſocoured ofte
               And mooſt yholpe in al her nede
               
                  But nowe they take no maner hede
               But ſeyne in voyce of flatery
               That nowe appereth her foly
               Ouer al where ſo they fare
               And ſynge, go farewel feldefare
               Al ſuch frendes I beſhrewe
               For of trewe there be to fewe
               But ſothfaſt frendes, what ſo betyde
               In euery fortune wollen abyde
               They han her hertes in ſuch nobleſſe
               That they nyl loue for no rycheſſe
               Nor for that fortune may hem ſende
               They wollen hem ſocour and defende
               And chaunge for ſofte ne for ſore
               For who is frende loueth euermore
               Though men drewe ſwerde hys frend to ſlo
               He may not hewe her loue a two
               But in caſe that I ſhal ſay
               For pride and ire leſe it he may
               And for reproue by nycete
               And diſcoueryng of priuite
               wyth tonge woundyng, as felon
               Through venemous detraction
               Frende in thys caſe wol gon hys way
               For nothyng greue him more ne may
               And for nought els wol he fle
               If that he loue in ſtabylyte
               And Certayne he is wel begone
               Amonge a thouſande that fyndeth one
               For there maye be no rycheſſe
               Ayenſt frendſhyp of worthyneſſe
               For it ne may ſo hygh attayne
               As may the valure, ſoth to ſayne
               Of hym that loueth trewe and wel
               Frendſhyp is more than is catel
               For frende in courte aye better is
               Than peny in purſe certis
               And fortune miſhappyng
               whan vpon men ſhe is fablyng
               Though miſturnyng of her chaunce
               And caſt hem out of balaunce
               She maketh through her aduerſite
               Men ful clerely for to ſe
               Hym that is frende in exiſtence
               From hym that is by apparence
               For in fortune maketh anone
               To knowe thy frendes fro thy fone
               By experience ryght as it is
               The whych is more to prayſe ywys
               Than is much rycheſſe and treſour
               For more depe profyte and valour
               Pouerte, and ſuch aduerſyte
               Before than doth proſperite
               For that one yeueth conyſaunce
               And the tother ignoraunce
            
            
               And thys pouerte is in dede
               Troth declared fro falſhede
               For faynt frendes it wol declare
               And trewe alſo what wey they fare
               For whan he was in hys rycheſſe
               Theſe frendes ful of doubleneſſe
               Offred hym in many wyſe
               Herte and body, and ſeruyce
               what wold he thā haue you to haue bought
               To knowen openly her thought
               That he nowe hath ſo clerely ſene
               The laſſe begyled he ſhulde haue bene
               And he had than perceyued it
               But rycheſſe nolde not let hym wytte
               wel more auantage doth hym than
               Syth that maketh hym a wyſe man
               The great miſchefe that he perceyueth
               Than doth rycheſſe that hym deceyueth
               Rycheſſe riche ne maketh nought
               Hym that on treſour ſette hys thought
               For rycheſſe ſtoute in ſuffyſaunce
               And nothynge in habundaunce
               For ſuffyſaunce al onely
               Maketh men to lyue rychly.
            
            
               
                  FOr he that hathe mytches tweyne
               Ne value in hys demayne
               Lyueth more at eaſe, & more is ryche
               Than doth he that is chiche
               And in hys berne hath ſoth to ſayne
               An hundrede mauys of where grayne
               Though he be chapman or marchaunt
               And haue of golde many beſaunt
               For in the gettynge he hath ſuch wo
               And in the kepynge drede alſo
               And ſette euermore hys beſyneſſe
               For to encreaſe, and not to leſſe
               For to augment and multyplye
               And thoughe on heapes that lye hym by
               Yet neuer ſhal make hys rycheſſe
               Aſſeth vnto hys gredyneſſe
               But the poore that recheth nought
               Saue of his lyuelode in hys thought
               whych that he getteth wyth hys traueyle
               He dredeth naught that it ſhal feyle
               Though he haue lytle worldes goode
               
                  Meate and drynke, and eaſy foode
               Vpon hys traueyle and lyuyng
               And alſo ſuffyſaunt clothyng
               Or yf in ſyckeneſſe that he fall
               And loth meate and drynke wythall
               Though he haue nat his me
                     •••
                   to bye
               He ſhal bethynke hym haſt
                     •
                  ly
               To put hym out of al daungere
               That he of meate hath no miſtere
               Or that he may wyth lytle eke
               Befounden, whyle that he is ſeke
               Or that men ſhul hym berne in haſte
               To lyue tyl hys ſyckeneſſe be paſte
               To ſome May ſondewe beſyde
               He caſte nought what ſhal hym betyde
               He thynketh nought that euer he ſhal
               In to any ſyckeneſſe fal.
            
            
               
                  ANd though it fal, as it maye be
               That al be tyme ſpare ſhal he
               As mokel as ſhal to hym ſuffyce
               why
                     •
                  e he is ſycke in any wyſe
               He doth for that he wol be
               Content wyth his pouerte
               wythout nede of any man
               So much in lytle haue he can
               He is apayed wyth hys fortune
               And for he nyl be importune
               Vnto no wyght ne onerous
               Nor of her goodeſſe coueytous
               Therfore he ſpareth, it may wel bene
               hys pore eſtate for to ſuſtene.
            
            
               
                  OR yf hym luſte not for to ſpare
               But ſuffreth forthe, as not ne ware
               At laſte it hapneth as it maye
               Ryght vnto hys laſt daye
               And take the worlde as it wolde be
               For euer in hert thynketh he
               The ſooner that deth hym ſlo
               To paradyſe the ſooner go
               He ſhall, there for to lyue in blyſſe
               where that he ſhal no good myſſe
               Thyder he hopeth god ſhal him ſende
               After hys wretched lyues ende
               Pythagoras hym ſelfe reherſes
               In a boke that the golden verſes
               Is cleped, for the nobylite
               Of the honorable dyte
               Than whan thou goſt thy body fro
               Free in the heyre thou ſhalt vp go
               And leauen al humanyte
               And purely lyue in deite
               He is a foole wythouten were
               That troweth haue hys countrey here
               In erth is not our countre
               That may theſe clerkes ſeyne and ſe
               In Boece of conſolation
               where it is maked mention
               Of our countre playne at the eye
               By techyng of phyloſophye
               where leude men mygh lere wyt
               who ſo that wolde tranſlaten it
               If he be ſuch that can well lyue
               After hys rent, maye hym yeue
               And not deſyreth more to haue
               Than may fro pouerte hym ſaue
               A wyſe man ſayd, as we may ſene
               Is no man wretched, but he it wene
               Be he kynge, knyght, or rybaude
               And many a rybaude is mery and baude
               That ſwynketh, & bereth both day & nyght
               Many a burthen of great myght
               The whych doth hym laſſe offence
               For he ſuffreth in pacience
               They laugh and daunce, tryppe and ſynge
               And lay nought vp for her lyuyng
               But in the tauerne all diſpendeth
               The wynnyng that god hem ſendeth
               Than goth he fardels for to bere
               wyth as good chere as he dyd ere
               To ſwynke and trauayle he not fayneth
               For to robben he diſdayneth
               But right anon, after hys ſwynke
               He goeth to the tauerne for to drynke
               Al theſe are ryche in abundaunce
               That can thus haue ſuffiſaunce
               wel more than can an vſurere
               As god wel knoweth, wythout were
               For an vſurer, ſo god me ſe
               Shal neuer for rycheſſe ryche be
            
            
               But euermore poore and indigent
               Scare and gredy in hys entent.
               For ſoth it is, whom it diſpleſe
               There may no marchaunt lyue at eſe
               Hys herte in ſuch a where is ſet
               That it quycke brenneth to get
               Ne neuer ſhal, though he hath geten
               Though he hath golde in garners yeten
               For to be nedy he dredeth ſore
               wherfore to getten more and more
               
                  He ſet hys hert and hys deſyre
               So hote he brenneth in the fyre
               Of couetyſe, that maketh hym wood
               To purchaſe other mennes good
               He vnderfongeth a great payne
               That vndertaketh to drynke vp Sayne
               For the more he drynketh aye
               The more he leaueth, ſoth to ſaye
               Thus is thurſt of falſe gettyng
               That laſt euer in coueytyng
               And the anguyſhe and diſtreſſe
               wyth the fyre of gredyneſſe
               She fyghteth with hym aye, and ſtryueth
               That his herte aſonder ryueth
               Suche gredyneſſe hym aſſayleth
               That whan he moſt hath, moſte he ſayleth
               Phyſiciens, and aduocates
               Gone ryght by the ſame yates
               They ſel her ſeyence for wenyng
               And haunt her craft for great gettyng
               Her wenyng is of ſuche ſwetneſſe
               That yf a man fall in ſyckneſſe
               They are full glad for her encraſe
               For by her wyl, without leaſe
               Eueryche man ſhulde be ſeke
               And though they dye they ſet not a l
                     •
                  ke
               After whan they the golde haue take
               Ful lytle care for hem they make
               They wolde that fourty were ſycke at ones
               Yea two hundred in fleſhe and bones
               And yet two thouſande, as I geſſe
               For to encreſen her rycheſſe
               They wol not worchen in no wyſe
               But for luere and couetyſe
               For phyſycke gynneth fyrſt by (phy)
               The phiſycien alſo ſothly
               And ſythen it gothe fro fye to fye
               To truſt on hem it is folye
               For they nyl in no maner gre
               Do ryght nought for charite
               Eke in the ſame ſect are ſette
               Al tho that prechen for to gette
               worſhyps, honour, and rycheſſe
               Her hertes arne in great diſtreſſe
               That folke lyue not holyly
               But abouen al ſpecially
               Such as prechen veynglory
               And towarde god haue no memory
               But forth as ypocrites trace
               And to her ſoules deth purchace
               And outwarde ſhewyng holyneſſe
               Though they be ful of curſedneſſe
               Nat lyche to the apoſtles twelue
               They diſceyue other and hem ſelue
               Begyled is the gyler than
               For preachyng of a curſed man
               Thoughe to other may profyte
               Hym ſelfe it aueyleth not amyte
               For ofte good predicatioun
               Cometh of y
                     •
                  el ententioun
               To hym nat vayleth hys preachyng
               Al helpe he other wyth hys teachyng
               For where they good enſample take
               There is he wyth vayn glorye ſhake
               But lette vs leuen theſe preachours
               And ſpeke of hem that in her tours
               Heape vp her golde, and faſt ſhette
               And ſore theran her herte ſette
               They neyther loue God ne drede
               They kepe more than it is nede
               And in her bagges ſore it bynde
               Out of the ſunne, and of the wynde
               They put vp more than nede ware
               whan they ſene pore folke forfare
               For hungre dye, and for colde quake
               God can wel vengeaunce therof take
               The great miſcheues hem aſſayleth
               And thus in gadryng aye trauayleth
               wyth much payne they wynne rycheſſe
               And drede hem holdeth in diſtreſſe
               To kepe that they gather faſte
               wyth ſorowe they leaue it at the laſte
               wyth ſorowe they both dye and lyue
               That vnto rycheſſe her hertes yeue
               And in defaute of loue it is
               As it ſheweth ful wel ywis
               For yf theſe gredy, the ſoth to ſayne
               Loueden and were loued agayne
               And good loue reygned ouer al
               Suche wyckedneſſe ne ſhulde fal
               But he ſhulde yeue, that mooſt good had
               To hem that weren in nede beſtade
               And lyue wythout falſe vſure
               For charyte, ful clene and pure
               If they hem yeue to goodneſſe
               Defendyng hem fro ydleneſſe
               In al thys worlde than poore none
               we ſhude fynde I trowe not one
               But chaunged is thys worlde vnſtabale
               For loue is ouer al vendable
               we ſe that no man loueth nowe
               But for wynnyng and for prowe
               And loue is thralled in ſeruage
               whan it is ſolde for auauntage
               
                  yet women woll her bodyes ſell
               Suche ſoules goeth the dyuell of hell.
            
            
               
                  WHen Loue had tolde hem hys entent
               The baronage to coūſayle went
               In many ſentences they fyll
               And dyuerſly they ſayd her wyll
               But after dyſcorde they accorded
               And her acorde to Loue recorded
               Syr ſayden they, we ben atone
               By euen accorde of euerychone
               Out take Rycheſſe all onely
               That ſworne hath full hauteynly
               That ſhe the caſtell nyll not aſſayle
               N
                     •
                  ūn
                     •
                  te a ſtroke in thys batayle
               wyth darte ne mace, ſpeare, ne knyfe
               For man that ſpeaketh, or beareth the lyfe
               And blameth your empryſe ywys
               And from our hoſte departed is
               At leeſt waye, as in thys plyte
               So hath ſhe thys man in dyſpyte
               For ſhe ſayeth he ne loued her neuer
               And therfore ſhe woll hate hym euer
               For he woll gather no treaſore
               He hath her wrath for euermore
               He agylte her neuer in other caas
               Lo here all holy hys treſpas
               She ſayeth well, that thys other daye
               He aſked her leaue to gone the waye
               That is clypped to moche yeuynge
               And ſpake full fayre in hys prayenge
               But when he prayed her, poore was he
               Therfore ſhe warned hym the entre
               Ne yet is he not thryuen ſo
               That he hath getten a peny or two
               That quytely is hys owne in holde
               Thus hath Rycheſſe vs all tolde
               And when Rycheſſe vs thys recorded
               wythouten her we ben accorded.
            
            
               
                  ANd we fynde in our accordaunce
               That falſe Semblant and Abſtinaunce
               wyth all the folke of her batayle
               Shull at the hynder gate aſſayle
               That wycked Tonge hath in kepynge
               wyth hys Normans full of ianglynge
               And with hem Curteſy and Largeſſe
               That ſhull ſhewe her hardyneſſe
               To the olde wyfe that kepte ſo harde
               Fayre welcomynge wythin her warde
               Then ſhall Delyte and well Helynge
               Fonde, Shame adowne to brynge
               wyth all her hooſt early and late
               They ſhull aſſaylen that ylke gate
               Agaynſt Drede ſhall Hardyneſſe
               Aſſayle, and alſo Sykerneſſe
               wyth all the folke of her leadynge
               That neuer wyſt what was fleynge
            
            
               
                  FRaunchyſe ſhall fyght and eke Pyte
               with Daūgere ful of cruelte
               Thus is your hooſt ordeyned wele
               down ſhal ye caſtel euery dele
               Yf eueryche do hys entent
               So that Venus be preſent
               Your mother full of veſſelage
               That canne ynough of ſuche vſage
               wythouten her maye no wyght ſpede
               Thys werke, neyther for worde ne dede
               Therfore is good ye for her ſende
               For through her maye thys worke amende.
            
            
               
                  LOrdynges, my mother the goddeſſe
               That is my lady, and my mayſtreſſe
               Nys not al at my wyllyng?
               Ne doth not al my deſyryng?
               Yet canne ſhe ſomtyme done labour
               when that her luſte in my ſocour
               As my nede is for to atcheue
               But nowe I thynke her nat to greue
               My mother is ſhe, and of chylde hede
               I both worſhyp her, and eke drede
               For who that dredeth ſyre ne dame
               Shall it abye in body or name
               And natheleſſe, yet conne we
               Sende after her yf nede be
               And were ſhe nygh ſhe cōmen wolde
               I trowe that nothynge myght her holde
            
            
               
                  MY mother is of great proweſſe
               She hath tane many a fortereſſe
               That coſt hath many a poūd er this
               There I nas not preſent ywys
               And yet men ſayd it was my dede
               But I come neuer in that ſtede
               Ne me ne lyketh ſo mote I the
               That ſuche toures ben take wyth me
               
                  For why? My thynketh that in no wyſe
               It maye be cleped but marchaundyſe.
            
            
               
                  GO bye a courſer blacke or whyte
               And paye therfore, then arte yu quyte
               The marchaūt oweth ye right noght
               Ne thou hym when thou it bought
               I woll not ſellynge clepe yeuynge
               For ſellynge aſketh no guerdonynge
               Here lyeth no thanke, ne no meryte
               That one goeth from that other all quyte
               But thys ſellynge is not ſemblable
               For when hys horſe is in the ſtable
               He maye it ſelle agayne parde
               And wynnen on it, ſuche happe maye be
               All maye the manne not leſe ywys
               For at the leeſt the ſkynne is hys
               Or els, yf it ſo betyde
               That he woll kepe hys horſe to ryde
               Yet is he lorde aye of hys horſe
               But thylke chaffare is well worſe
               There Venus entremeteth ought
               For who ſo ſuche chaffare hath bought
               He ſhall not worchen ſo wyſely
               That he ne ſhall leſe all vtterly
               Both hys money, and hys caffare
               But the ſeller of the ware
               The pryſe and profite haue ſhall
               Certayne the byer ſhall leſe all
               For he ne can ſo dere it bye
               To haue lordſhyppe, and full mayſtry
               Ne haue power to make lettynge
               Neyther for yefte ne for preachynge
               That of hys chaffare maugre hys
               Another ſhall haue as moche ywys
               Yf he woll yeue as moche as h
                     •
                  
               
               Of what countrey ſo that he be
               Or for ryght nought ſo happe maye
               Yf he can flatter her to her paye
               Ben then ſuche marchauntes wyſe?
               No, but fooles in euery wyſe
               when they bye ſuche thynge wylfully
               There as they leſe her good folyly
               But natheleſſe, thys dare I ſaye
               My mother is not wonte to paye
               For ſhe is neyther ſo foole ne nyce
               To entremete her of ſuche vyce
               But truſt well, he ſhall paye all
               That repent of hys bargayne ſhall
               when pouerte putte hym in dyſtreſſe
               All were the ſcholer to Rycheſſe
               That is for me in great yernynge
               when ſhe aſſenteth to my wyllynge.
            
            
               
                  BVt my mother ſaynt Venus
               And by her father Saturnus
               That her engendred by hys lyfe
               But not vpon hys wedded wyfe
               Yet woll I more vnto you ſwere
               To make thys thynge the ſurere
               Nowe by that fayth, and that beaute
               That I owe to all my brethren free
               Of whych there nys wyght vnder heuen
               That can her fathers names neuen
               So dyuers and ſo many there be
               That wyth my mother haue be pryue
               Yet wolde I ſwere for ſyckerneſſe
               The Pole of helle to my wytneſſe
               Nowe drynke I not thys yere clarre
               Yf that I lye, or forſworne be
               For of the goddes the vſage is
               That who ſo hym forſweareth amys
               Shall that yere drynke no clarre
               Nowe haue I ſworne ynough parde
               Yf I forſwere me then am I lorne
               But I woll neuer be forſworne
               Syth Rycheſſe hath me ſayled here
               She ſhall abye that treſpas full dere
               At leeſtwaye but her arme
               wyth ſwerde, or ſparth, or gyſarme
               For certes ſyth ſhe loueth not me
               Fro thylke tyme that ſhe maye ſe
               The caſtell and the toure to ſhake
               In ſorye tyme ſhe ſhall awake
               Yf I maye grype a ryche manne
               I ſhall ſo pulle hym, yf I canne
               That he ſhall in a fewe ſtoundes
               Leſe all hys markes, and hys poundes
               I ſhall hym make hys pens out ſlynge
               But they in hys garner ſprynge
               Our maydens ſhall eke plucke hym ſo
               That hym ſhall neden fethers mo
               And make hym ſell hys lande to ſpende
               But he the bette conne hym defende.
            
            
               
                  POore men han made her lorde of me
               All thoughe they not ſo myghtye be
               That they maye fede me in delyte
               I woll not haue hem in dyſpyte
               No good man hateth hem, as I geſſe
               For chynche and feloun is rycheſſe
               That ſo can chaſe hem and dyſpyſe
               
                  And hem defoule in ſondrye wyſe
               They louen ful bette, ſo god me ſpede
               Than dothe the riche chynchy grede
               And bene (in good faythe) more ſtable
               And trewer, and more ſeruyable
               And therfore it ſuffyſeth me
               Her good herte, and her beaute
               They han on me ſette all her thought
               And therfore I foryet hem nought
               I woll hem brynge in great nobleſſe
               If that I were god of Rycheſſe
               As I am god of Loue ſothely
               Suche routh vpon her playnt haue I
               Therfore I muſte hys ſocour be
               That payneth hym to ſeruen me
               For yf he deyde for loue of thys
               Then ſemeth in me no loue ther is
            
            
               
                  SIr ſayd they, ſoth is euery dele
               That ye reherce, & we wot wele
               Thylke oth to hold is reſonable
               For it is good and couenable
               That ye on rych mē han ſworne
               For ſyr, thys wote we well beforne
               Yf ryche men done you homage
               That is as fooles done outrage
               But ye ſhull not forſworne be
               Ne let therfore to drynke clarre
               Or pyment maked freſhe and newe
               Ladyes ſhull hem ſuche pepyr brewe
               Yf that they fall in to her laas
               That they for wo mowe ſayne alas
               Ladyes ſhullen euer ſo curteys be
               That they ſhall quyte your othe all free
               Ne ſeketh neuer other vycayre
               For they ſhall ſpeake wyth hem ſo fayre
               That ye ſhall holde ye payde full wele
               Though ye you medle neuer a dele
               Late ladyes worche wyth her thynges
               They ſhall hem tell ſo fele tydynges
               And moue hem eke ſo many requeſtes
               By ſlatery, that not honeſt is
               And therto yeue hem ſuche tankynges
               what wyth kyſſynge, and wyth thalkynges
               That certes yf they trowed be
               Shall neuer leaue hem londe ne fee
               That it nyll as the moeble fare
               Of whych they fyrſt delyuered are
               Nowe maye ye tell vs all your wyll
               And we your heſtes ſhall fulfyll
            
            
               
                  BVt Falſe ſēblant dare not for drede
               Of you ſyr, medle hym of thys dede
               For he ſayeth, that ye ben hys fo
               He not, yf ye wol worche hym wo
               wherfore we praye you all beauſyre
               That ye forgyue hym nowe your yre
               And that he maye dwell as your man
               wyth Abſtinence hys dere lemman
               Thys our acorde and our wyll nowe
               Parfey ſayd Loue, I graunt it you
               I woll well holde hym for my man
               Nowe let hym come, and he forth ran
               Falſe ſemblant (ꝙ Loue) in thys wyſe
               I take the here to my ſeruyce
               That thou our frendes helpe alwaye
               And hyndreth hem neyther nyght ne daye
               But do thy myght hem to releue
               And eke our enemyes that thou greue
               Thyne be thys myght, I graunt it the
               My kynge of harlotes ſhalte thou be
               we woll that thou haue ſuche honour
               Certayne thou arte a falſe traytour
               And eke a thefe, ſyth thou were borne
               A thouſande tymes thou arte forſworne
               But natheleſſe in our herynge
               To put our folke out of doutynge
               I bydde the teche hem, woſt thou howe?
               By ſome generall ſygne nowe
               In what place thou ſhalt founden be
               Yf that men had myſter of the
               And howe men ſhall the beſt eſpye
               For the to knowe is great mayſtrye
               Tell in what place is thyne hauntynge
               Syr I haue full dyuers wonnynge
               That I kepe not reherſed be
               So that ye wolde reſpyten me
               For yf that I tell you the ſothe
               I maye haue harme and ſhame bothe
               Yf that my felowes wyſten it
               My tales ſhulden me be quyt
               For certayne they wolde hate me
               Yf euer I knewe her cruelte
               For they wolde ouer all holde hem ſtyll
               Of trouth, that is agayne her wyll
               Suche tales kepen they not here
               I myght eftſone bye it full dere
               Yf I ſayd of hem any thynge
               That ought dyſpleaſeth to her herynge
               For what worde that hem prycke or byteth
               In that worde none of hem delyteth
               All were it goſpell the euangyle
               That wolde reproue hem of her gyle
               
                  For they are cruell and hautayne
               And thys thynge wote I well certayne
               Yf I ſpeake ought to payre her loos
               Your court ſhall not ſo well be cloos
               That they ne ſhall wyte it at laſt
               Of good men am I nought agaſt
               For they woll taken on hem nothynge
               when that they knowe all my meanynge
               But he that woll it on hem take
               He woll hym ſelfe ſuſpecious make
               That he hys lyfe let couertly
               In gyle and in Ipocriſy
               That me engendred and yaue foſtrynge
               They made a full good engendrynge
               (Quod Loue) for who ſo ſothly tell
               They engendred the dyuell of hell.
            
            
               
                  BVt nedely, howe ſo euer it be
               (Quod loue) I wyll & charge ye
               
               To tel anon thy wōning places
               Hearynge eche wyght that in thys place is
               And what lyfe that thou lyueſt alſo
               Hyde it no lenger nowe, wherto?
               Thou muſt dyſcouer all thy worchynge
               Howe thou ſerueſt, and of what thynge
               Though yt thou ſhuldeſt for thy ſoth ſawe
               Ben all to beaten and to drawe
               And yet arte thou not wonte parde
               But natheleſſe, though thou beaten be
               Thou ſhalt not be the fyrſt that ſo
               Hath for ſothſawe ſuffred wo.
            
            
               
                  SYr, ſyth that it maye lyken you
               Thoughe that I ſhulde be ſlayne ryght nowe
               I ſhal done your cōmaūdement
               For therto haue I great talent
            
            
               
                  WYthoutē wordes mo, ryght than
               Falſe Sēblant hys ſermō began
               And ſayd hem thus in audience
               Barons take hede of my ſentēce
               ye wyght yt lyſt to haue knowing
               Of falſe ſemblant, full of flateryng
               He muſt in worldly folke hym ſeke
               And certes in the cloyſters eke
               I wone no where, but in hem twey
               But not lyke euen, ſoth to ſay
               Shortly I woll herberowe me
               There I hope beſt to hulſtred be
               And certaynly, ſykereſt hydynge
               Is vnderneth humbleſt clothynge
               Religious folke ben full couerte
               Seculer folke ben more apperte
               But natheleſſe, I wyll not blame
               Religious folke, ne hem dyffame
               In what habyte that euer they go
               Religyon humble, and trewe alſo
               woll I not blame, ne dyſpyſe
               But I nyll loue it in no wyſe
               I meane of falſe religious
               That ſtoute ben, and malicious
               That wollen in an habyte go
               And ſetten not her herte therto.
            
            
               
                  REligious folke ben all pytous
               Thou ſhalt not ſene one dyſpytous
               They louen no pryde, ne no ſtryfe
               But humbly they woll lede her lyfe
               wyth whych folke woll I neuer be
               And yf I dwell, I fayne me
               I maye well in her habyte go
               But me were leuer my necke a two
               Then lette a purpoſe that I take
               what couenaunt that euer I make
               I dwell wyth hem that proude be
               And full of wyles and ſubtelte
               That worſhyp of thys worlde coueyten
               And great nede connen expleyten
               And gone and gadren great pitaunces
               And purchace hem the acqueyntaunces
               Of men that myghty lyfe may leden
               And fayne hem poore, and hem ſelfe feden
               wyth good morcels delicious
               And drynken good wyne precious
               And preche vs pouert and dyſtreſſe
               And fyſhen hem ſelfe great rycheſſe
               wyth wyly nettes, that they caſte
               It woll come foule out at the laſte
               They ben fro clene religion went
               They make the worlde an argument
               That hath a foule concluſyon
               I haue a robe of religion
               Then am I all religious
               Thys argument is all roignous
               It is not worth a croked brere
               Habyte ne maketh neyther monke ne frere
               But clene lyfe and deuocion
               Maketh good men of religion
               Natheleſſe, there can none anſwere
               Howe hygh that euer hys heed he ſhere
               wyth raſour whetted neuer ſo kene
               That gyle in braunches cutte thurtene
               There can no wyght dyſtyncte it ſo
               
                  That he dare ſaye a worde therto.
               But what herberowe that euer I take
               Or what ſemblaunt that euer I make
               I meane but gyle, and folowe that
               For ryght no more then gybbe our cat
               (That awayteth myce & rattes to kyllen)
               Ne entende I but to begylen
               Ne no wyght may, by my clothynge
               wete wyth what folke is my dwellynge
               Ne by my wordes yet parde
               So ſoft and ſo pleaſaunt they be
               Beholde the dedes that I do
               But thou be blynde thou oughteſt ſo
               For varye her wordes fro her dede
               They thynke on gyle wythout drede
               what maner clothynge that they were
               Or what eſtate that euer they bere
               Leted or leude, lorde or lady
               Knyght, ſquyer, burgeys, or bayly.
            
            
               
                  RYght thus whyle Falſe ſemblant ſermoneth
               Eft ſones Loue hym areſoneth
               And brake hys tale in hys ſpeakynge
               As though he had hym tolde leaſynge
               And ſayd: what deuell is that I here?
               what folke haſt thou vs nempned here?
               Maye men fynde religion
               In worldly habitacion?
               Yea ſyr, it foloweth not that they
               Shulde lede a wycked lyfe parfey
               Ne not therfore her ſoules leſe
               That hem to worldly clothes cheſe
               For certes it were great pyte
               Menne maye in ſeculer clothes ſe
               Floryſhen holy religioun
               Full many a ſaynt in felde and towne
               wyth many a virgyn glorious
               Deuoure, and full religious
               Han dyed, that cōmen cloth aye beren
               Yet ſayntes neuertheleſſe they weren
               I coude recken you many a ten
               Yea, welnygh all theſe holy wemen
               That menne in churches herry and ſeke
               Both maydens, and theſe wyues eke
               That baren full many a fayre chylde here
               weared alwaye clothes ſeculere
               And in the ſame dydden they
               That ſayntes weren, and ben alwaye
               ¶The .xi. thouſande maydens dere
               That bearen in heuen her cierges clere
               Of whych men rede in church and ſynge
               were take in ſeculer clothynge
               when they receyued martyrdome
               And wonnen heuen vnto her home
               Good herte maketh the good thought
               The clothynge yeueth ne reueth nought
               The good thought and the worchynge
               That maketh the religion flourynge
               There lyeth the good religioun
               After the ryght ententioun
            
            
               
                  WHo ſo toke a wethers ſkynne
               And wrapped a gredy wolfe therinne
               For he ſhuld go with lābes whyte
               weneſt thou not he wolde hem byte?
               Yes: neuertheleſſe, as he were wode
               He wolde hem wirry, and drynke the blode
               And well the rather hem dyſceyue
               For ſyth they coude not perceyue
               Hys tregette, and hys cruelte
               They wolde hym folowe all tho he flye.
            
            
               
                  IF there be wolues of ſuche hewe
               Amonges theſe apoſtles newe
               Thou holy church thou mayſt bewayled
               Syth that thy cyte is aſſayled
               Through knyghtes of thyne owne table
               God wote thy lordſhyp is doutable
               Yf they enforſe it to wyn
               That ſhulde defende it fro wythin
               who myght defence ayenſt hem make
               wythout ſtroke it mote be take
               Of trepeget or mangonell
               wythout dyſplayenge of penſell
               And yf god nyll done it ſocoure
               But let renne in thys coloure
               Thou muſte thy heeſtes letten be
               Then is there nought, but yelde the
               Or yeue hem trybute doutles
               And holde it of hem to haue pees
               But greater harme betyde the
               That they all mayſter of it be
               well conne they ſcorne the wythall
               By day ſtuffen they the wall
               And all the nyght they mynen there
               Naye, thou planten muſte els where
               Thyne ympes, yf thou wolt fruyte haue
               Abyde not there thy ſelfe to ſaue.
            
            
               BVt now peace, here I turne agayne
               I woll nomore of thys thynge ſayne
               Yf I maye paſſen me hereby
               
                  I myght maken you wery
               But I woll heten you alwaye
               To helpe your frendes what I maye
               So they wollen my company
               For they be ſhent all vtterly
               But yf ſo fall, that I be
               Ofte wyth hem, and they wyth me
               And eke my lemman mote they ſerue
               Or they ſhull not my loue deſerue
               Forſoth I am a falſe traytour
               God iuged me for a thefe trechour
               Forſworne I am, but well nygh none
               wote of my gyle, tyll it be done
            
            
               
                  TThrough me hath many one death receaued
               That my treget neuer aperceyued
               And yet receyueth, and ſhall receyue
               That my falſneſſe ſhall neuer apperceyue
               But who ſo doth, yf he wyſe be
               Hym is ryght good beware of me
               But ſo ſlyghe is the aperceyuynge
               That all to late cometh knowynge
               For Protheus that coude hym chaunge
               In euery ſhappe, homely and ſtraunge
               Coude neuer ſuche gyle ne treaſoune
               As I, for I come neuer in towne
               There as I myght knowen be
               Though men me both myght here and ſe
               Full well I can my clothes chaunge
               Take one, and make another ſtraunge
               Nowe am I knyght, nowe chaſtelayne
               Nowe prelate, and nowe chapelayne
               Nowe preeſt, nowe clerke, and nowe foſtere
               Nowe am I mayſter, nowe ſcholere
               Nowe monke, nowe chanon, nowe bayly
               what euer myſter man am I
               Nowe am I prynce, nowe am I page
               And can by herte euery langage
               Somtyme am I hoore and olde
               Nowe am I yonge, ſtoute, and bolde
               Nowe am I Robert, nowe Robyn
               Nowe Frere mynor, nowe Iacobyn
               And wyth me foloweth my loteby
               To done me ſolace and company
               That hyght dame Abſtinence, and raygned
               In many a queynt arraye fayned
               Ryght as it cometh to her lykynge
               I fulfyll all her deſyrynge
               Somtyme a womans cloth take I
               Nowe am I a mayde, nowe lady
               Somtyme I am religious
               Nowe lyke an anker in an hous
               Somtyme am I prioreſſe
               And nowe a nonne, and nowe abbeſſe
               And go through all regiouns
               Sekynge all religiouns
               But to what order that I am ſworne
               I take the ſtrawe and beate the corne
               To ioly folke I enhabyte
               I aſke no more but her habyte
               what woll ye more in euery wyſe
               Ryght as me lyſt I me dyſgyſe?
               well can I beare me vnder wede
               Vnlyke is my worde to my dede
               Thus make I into my trappes fall
               The people, through my priuyleges all
               That bene in chriſtendome a lyue
               I maye aſſoyle, and I maye ſhryue
               That no prelate maye let me
               All folke, where euer they founde be
               I not no prelate maye done ſo
               But I onlye, and no mo
               That made thylke eſtablyſhynge
               Nowe is not thys a propre thynge?
               But were my ſleyghtes aperceyued
               As I was wonte, and woſte thou why?
               For I dyd hem a tregetry
               But therof yeue I a lytell tale
               I haue the ſyluer and the male
               So haue I preached and eke ſhryuen
               So haue I take, ſo haue I yeuen
               Through her foly, huſbande and wyfe
               That I lede ryght a ioly lyfe
               Through ſympleſſe of the prelacye
               They knowe not all my tregettrye.
            
            
               
                  BVt for as moche as a man and wyfe
               Shulde ſhewe her peryſhe preeſt her lyfe
               Ones a yere, as ſaythe the boke
               Er any wyght hys houſel toke
               Then haue I priuyleges large
               That maye of moche thynge dyſcharge
               For he maye ſaye ryght thus parde
               Syr preeſt, in ſhryfte I tell it the
               That he to whome that I am ſhryuen
               Hath me aſſoyled, and me yeuen
               Penaunce ſothly for my ſyn
               whych that I fonde me gylty in
               Ne I ne haue neuer entencion
               To make double confeſſyon
               Ne reherce efte my ſhryft to the
               
                  O ſhrift is ryght ynough to me
               Thys ought the ſuffyſe wele
               Ne be not rebell neuer a dele
               For certes, though thou haddeſt it ſworne
               I wote no preeſt ne prelate borne
               That may to ſhrift efte me conſtrayne
               And yf they done I woll me playne
               For I wote where to playne wele
               Thou ſhalt not ſtreyne me a dele
               Ne enforce me, ne not me trouble
               To make my confeſſyon double
               Ne I haue none affection
               To haue double abſolution
               The fyrſt is right ynough to me
               Thys latter aſſoylyng quyte I the
               I am vnbounde, what mayſt thou fynde
               More of my ſynnes me to vnbynde
               For he that myght hath in hys honde
               Of all my ſynnes me vnbonde
               And yf thou wolte me thus conſtrayne
               That me mote nedes on the playne
               There ſhall no iuge imperyall
               Ne byſhop, ne offyciall
               Done iugement on me, for I
               Shall gone and playne me openly
               Vnto my ſhriftfather newe
               That hyght Frere wolfe vntrewe
               And he ſhall chuſe hym for me
               For I trowe he can hamper the
               But lorde he wolde be wrothe wythall
               If men hym wolde Frere wolfe call
               For he wolde haue no pacience
               But done all cruell vengience
               He wolde hys myght done at the leeſt
               Nothyng ſpare for goddes heeſt
               And god ſo wyſe be my ſocour
               But thou yeue me my ſauyour
               At Eeſter, whan it lyketh me
               wythout preaſyng more on the
               I woll forthe, and to hym gone
               And he ſhall houſell me anon
               For I am out of thy grutchyng
               I kepe not deale wyth the nothyng
               Thus may he ſhryue hym, that forſaketh
               Hys paryſhe preeſt, and to me taketh
               And yf the preeſt woll hym refuſe
               I am full redy hym to accuſe
               And hym puniſhe and hamper ſo
               That he his churche ſhall for go.
            
            
               
                  BVt who ſo hath in hys felyng
               The conſequence of ſuch ſhryuyng
               Shall ſene, that preeſt maye neuer haue myght
               To knowe the conſcience a right
               Of hym, that is vnder hys cure
               And thys is ayenſt holy ſcripture
               That byddeth euery heerd honeſt
               Haue very knowyng of hys beeſt
               But poore folke that gon by ſtrete
               That haue no golde, ne ſommes grete
               Hem wolde I let to her prelates
               Or let her preeſtes knowe her ſtates
               For to me right nought yeue they
               And why it is, for they ne may
               They ben ſo bare, I take no kepe
               But I woll haue the fatte ſhepe
               Let paryſhe preeſtes haue the lene
               I yeue not of her harme a bene
               And yf that prelates grutche it
               That oughten woth be in her wyt
               To leſe her fatte beeſtes ſo
               I ſhall yeue hem a ſtroke or two
               That they ſhall leſen wyth force
               Ye, bothe her mytre and her croce
               Thus iape I hem, and haue do longe
               My priuileges ben ſo ſtronge.
            
            
               
                  FAlſe Semblaunt wolde haue ſtynted here
               But Loue ne made hym no ſuche chere
               That he was werye of hys ſawe
               But for to make hym glad and fawe
               He ſayd, T
                     •
                  ll on more ſpecially
               Howe tha
                     •
                   thou ſerueſt vntruely
               Tell 
                     •
                  orthe, and ſhame the neuer a dele
               For as 
                     •
                  hyne h
                     •
                  oyt ſheweth wele
               Thou ſerueſt an holy Heremyte
               Sothe is, but I am but an Ypocryte
               Thou goſt and precheſt pouerte?
               Ye ſyr, but rycheſſe hath poſte
               Thou precheſt abſtynence alſo
               Syr, I woll fyllen ſo mote I go
               My paunche, of good meate and wyne
               As ſhulde a maiſter of diuyne
               For thowe that I me poore fayne
               Yet all poore folke I diſdayne.
            
            
               
                  I Loue better the acqueyntaunce
               Ten tymes of the kyng of Fraunce
               Than of a poore mā of mylde mode
               Though that hys ſoule be alſo good
               For whan I ſe beggers quakyng
               
                  Naked on myxins all ſtynkyng
               For hongre crye, and eke for care
               I entremet not of her fare
               They ben ſo poore, and full of pyne
               They myght not ones yeue me a dyne
               For they haue nothyng but her lyfe
               what ſhulde he yeue that lycketh hys knyfe?
               It is but folly to entremete
               To ſeke in houndes neſt fatte mete
               Lette beare hem to the ſpyttle anone
               But for me, comforte gette they none
               But a ryche ſycke vſurere
               wolde I viſyte and drawe nere
               Hym woll I comforte and rehete
               For I hoope of hys golde to gete
               And yf that wycked dethe hym haue
               I woll go wyth hym to hys graue
               And yf there any reproue me
               why that I lette the poore be
               woſt thou howe I not aſcape
               I ſaye and ſwere hym full rape
               That riche menne han more tetches
               Of ſynne, than han poore wretches
               And hanne of counſayle more myſter
               And therfore I wolde drawe hem ner
               But as great hurte, it maye ſo be
               Hath a ſoule in right great pouerte
               As ſoule in great richeſſe forſothe
               Al be it that they hurten bothe
               For richeſſe and mendicitees
               Bene cleped two extremytees
               The meane is cleped Suffyſaunce
               There lyeth of vertue the aboundaunce
               For Salomon full well I wote
               In hys Parables vs wrote
               As it is knowe of many a wyght
               In hys thrittene chapiter ryght
               God thou me kepe for thy poſte
               Fro rycheſſe and mendycite
               For yf a ryche manne hym dreſſe
               To thynke to moche on rycheſſe
               Hys herte on that ſo ferre is ſette
               That he hys creatour dothe foryette
               And hym that beggeth woll aye greue
               Howe ſhulde I by hys worde hym leue
               Vnneth that he nys a mycher
               Forſworne, or els goddes lyer
               Thus ſaythe Salomon ſawes
               Ne we fynde written in no lawes
               And namely in our chriſten laye
               who ſo ſaythe yea, I dare ſay naye
               That Chriſt, ne hys apoſtels dere
               while that they walked in erthe here
               were neuer ſeen herbred beggyng
               For they nolden beggen for nothyng
               And right thus were men wont to teche
               And in thys wyſe wolde it preche
               The mayſters of dyuinyte
               Somtyme in Parys the cyte.
            
            
               
                  ANd yf men wold there gayne appoſe
               The naked texte and lette the gloſe
               It myght ſoone aſſoyled be
               For menne may wel yt ſoth ſe
               That pardie they myght aſke a thynge
               Playnly forthe wythout beggynge
               For they weren goddes heerdes dere
               And cure of ſoules hadden here
               They nolde nothyng begge her foode
               For after Chryſt was done on rodde
               wyth theyr proper hondes they wrought
               And wyth traueyle, and els nought
               They wonnen all her ſuſtenaunce
               And lyueden forthe in her penaunce
               And the remenaunt yaf awaye
               To other poore folkes alwaye
               They neyther bylden towre ne halle
               But they in houſes ſmall wyth alle
               A mighty man that canne and maye
               Shulde wyth hys honde and body alwaye
               Wynne hym hys foode in laboryng
               If he ne haue rent or ſuche a thyng
               All though he be relygious
               And god to ſeruen curyous
               Thus mote he done, or do treſpas
               But yf it be in certayne caas
               That I can reherce, yf myſter be
               Ryght well, whan the tyme Iſe.
            
            
               
                  SEke the boke of ſaynt Auſtyne
               Be it ī paper or perchmyne
               There as he writte of theſe worchynges
               Thou ſhalt ſene that none excuſynges
               A parfyte man ne ſhulde ſeke
               By wordes, ne by dedes eke
               All though he be religyous
               And god to ſeruen curyous
               That he ne ſhall, ſo mote I go
               Wyth propre hondes, and body alſo
               
                  Get hys fode in laboryng
               If he ne haue proprete of thyng
               Yet ſhulde he fell all hys ſubſtaunce
               And with hys ſwynke haue ſuſtenaunce
               If he be parfyte in bounte
               Thus han the bookes tolde me
               For he that woll gone ydelly
               And vſeth it aye beſyly
               To haunten other mennes table
               He is a trechour full of fable
               Ne he ne may by good reaſon
               Excuſe hym by hys oriſon
               For men behoueth in ſome gyſe
               Ben ſomtyme in goddes ſeruyſe
               To gone and purchaſen her nede
               Men mote eaten, that is no drede
               And ſlepe, and eke do other thyng
               So longe may they leaue prayeng
               So may they eke her prayer blynne
               whyle that they werke her meate to wynne
               Seynt Auſtyn woll therto accorde
               In thylke boke that I recorde
               Iuſtinian eke, that made lawes
               Hath thus forboden by olde ſawes.
            
            
               
                  NO man, vp payne to be deed
               Mighty of body, to begge hys breed
               If he may ſwynke it for to gete
               Men ſhuld hym rather mayme or bete
               Or done of hym aperte iuſtyce
               Than ſuffren hym in ſuche malyce
               They done not well ſo mote I go
               That taken ſuche almeſſe ſo
               But yf they haue ſomme priuilege
               That of the payne hem woll alege
               But howe that is, can I not ſe
               But yf the prynce diſceyued be
               Ne I ne wene not ſykerly
               That they may haue it ryghtfully
               But I woll not determyne
               Of princes power, ne defyne
               Ne by my worde comprehende iwys
               If it ſo ferre may ſtretche in thys
               I woll not intremete a dele
               But I trowe that the boke ſaythe wele
               who that taketh almeſſes, that be
               Dewe to folke that men may ſe
               Lame, feble, wery, and bare
               Poore, or in ſuche maner care
               That conne wynne hem neuer mo
               For they haue no power therto
               He eateth hys owne dampnyng
               But yf he lye, that made all thyng
               And yf ye ſuche a truaunt fynde
               Chaſtyſe hym well, yf ye be kynde
               But they wolde hate you parcaas
               If ye fyllen in her laas
               They wolde eftſones do you ſcatche
               If that they might, late or rathe
               For they be not full pacient
               That han the worlde thus foule blent
               And weteth well, that god bad
               The good man ſell all that he had
               And folowe hym, and to poore it yeue
               He wolde not therfore that he lyue
               To ſeruen hym in mendience
               For it was neuer hys ſentence
               But he had werken, whan that nede is
               And folowe hym in good dedes
               Saynt Poule, that loued all holy churche
               He bade the apoſtels for to wurche
               And wynnen her lyue lode in that wyſe
               And hem defended truandyſe
               And ſayd, werketh wyth your honden
               Thus ſhulde the thyng be vnderſtonden
               He nolde iwys haue byd hem beggyng
               Ne ſellen goſpell, ne prechyng
               Leſt they berafte, wyth her aſkyng
               Folke of her catell or of her thyng
               For in thys worlde is many a man
               That yeueth hys good, for he ne can
               werne it for ſhame, or els he
               wolde of the aſker delyuered be
               And for he hym encombreth ſo
               He yeueth hym good to let hym go
               But it can hym no thyng profyte
               They leſe the yefte and the meryte
               The good folke that Poule to preched
               Profred hym ofte, whan he hem teched
               Some of her good in charyte
               But therfore right nothyng toke he
               But of hys hondewerke wolde he gete
               Clothes to wryne hym, and hys mete.
            
            
               
                  TEll me than howe a man may lyuen
               That al his good to poore hath yeuen
               And woll but onely bydde hys bedes
               And neuer wyth hondes labour hys nedes
               Maye he do ſo? Ye ſyr: And howe?
               Syr, I woll gladly tell you
            
            
               
               
                  SEynt Auſten ſaith, a man may be
               In houſes that han properte
               As templers, and hoſpytelers
               And as theſe chanons regulers
               Or whyte monkes, or theſe blake
               I woll no mo enſamples make
               And take therof hys ſuſteynyng
               For therin lythe no beggyng
               But otherwayes not ywis
               Yet Auſtyn gabbeth not of thys
               And yet full many a monke laboureth
               That god in holy churche honoureth
               For whan her ſwynkyng is agon
               They rede and ſynge in churche anon.
            
            
               
                  ANd for there hath ben great diſcorde
               As manye a wyght may beare recorde
               Vpon the eſtate of mendicience
               I woll ſhortly in your preſence
               Tel howe a man may begge at nede
               That hath not wherwith hym to fede
               Maugre hys felowes iangelynges
               For ſothfaſtneſſe woll none hydynges
               And yet parcaſe I may abey
               That I to you ſothly thus ſey.
            
            
               
                  LO here the caſe eſpeciall
               If a man be ſo beſtyall
               That he of no crafte hath ſcience
               And nought deſyreth ignorence
               Thā may he go a begging yerne
               Tyll he ſome maner crafte can lerne
               Through whyche wythout truandyng
               He may in trouthe haue hys lyuyng
               Or yf he may done no labour
               For elde, or ſickneſſe, or langour
               Or for hys tendre age alſo
               Than may he yet a beggyng go
               Or yf he haue perauenture
               Through vſage of hys noriture
               Lyued ouer delyciouſly
               Than oughten good folke comenly
               Han of hys miſchefe ſome pyte
               And ſuffren hym alſo, that he
               May gon aboute and begge hys breed
               That he be not for honger deed
               Or yf he haue of crafte connyng
               And ſtrength alſo, and deſyryng
               To worchen, as he had what
               But he fynde neyther thys ne that
               Than may he begge tyll that he
               Haue getten hys neceſſyte
               Or yf hys wynnyng be ſo lyte
               That hys labour woll not acquyte
               Suffyciantly all hys lyuyng
               Yet may he go hys breed beggyng
               Fro doore to doore, he may go trace
               Tyll he the remenaunt may purchace
               Or yf a man wolde vndertake
               Any empriſe for to make
               In the reſcous of our lay
               And it defenden, as he may
               Be it with armes, or lettrure
               Or other couenable cure
               If it be ſo he poore be
               Than may he begge, tyll that he
               May fynde in trouthe for to ſwynke
               And get hym clothe, meate, and drynke
               Swynke he wyth hys hondes corporell
               And not wyth hondes eſpyrituell.
            
            
               
                  IN all this caſe, and in ſemblables
               If that there ben mo reſonables
               He may begge, as I tell you here
               And els not, in no manere
               As willyam ſeynt Amour wolde preche
               And ofte wolde diſpute and teche
               Of thys mater all openly
               At Parys full ſolemply
               And alſo god my ſoule bleſſe
               As he had in thys ſtedfaſtneſſe
               The accorde of the vniuerſyte
               And of the people, as ſemeth me.
            
            
               
                  NO good man ought it to refuſe
               Ne ought hym therof to excuſe
               Be wrothe or blythe, who ſo be
               For I woll ſpeke, and tel it the
               All ſhulde I dye, and be put doun
               As was ſeynt Poule in derke priſoun
               Or be exiled in thys caas
               wyth wronge, as mayſter william was
               That my mother Hypocriſe
               Banyſſhed for her great enuye.
            
            
               
                  MY mother flemed hym Seynt Amour
               Thys noble dyd ſuche labour
               To ſuſteyne euer the loyalte
               That he to moche agylte me
               
                  He made a boke, and let it write
               wheryn hys lyfe he dyd all write
               And wolde yche renyed beggyng
               And lyued by my traueylyng
               If I ne had rent ne other good
               what weneth he that I were wood?
               For labour might me neuer pleſe
               I haue more wyll to ben at eſe
               And haue well leuer, ſothe to ſaye
               Before the people pattre and pray
               And wrye me in my foxerye
               Vnder a cope of papelardie.
            
            
               
                  Q(Vod Loue) what dyuell is this that I here
               What wordes telleſt yu me here
               What ſir Falſneſſe that apert is
               Than dredeſt thou not god? No certis▪
               
               For ſelde in great thyng ſhall he ſpede
               In this worlde, that god woll drede
               For folke that hem to vertue yeuen
               And truely on her owne lyuen
               And hem in goodneſſe aye coutene
               On hem is lytell thrifte yſene
               Suche folke drinken great miſeſe
               That lyfe may me neuer pleſe
               But ſe what golde han vſurers
               And ſyluer eke in garners
               Tayla
                     ••
                  ers, and theſe monyours
               Bayliff
                     •
                  s, bedels, prouoſt, countours
               Theſe lyuen well nygh by rauyne
               The ſmale people hym mote enclyne
               And they as wolues wol hem eten
               Vpon the poore folke they geten
               Full moche of that they ſpende or kepe
               Nys none of hem that he nyll ſtrepe
               And w
                     •
                  yne hem ſelfe well at full
               wythout ſcaldyng, they hem pull
               The ſtronge the feble ouergothe
               But I that weare my ſymple clothe
               Robbe bothe robbyng and robbours
               And gyle gylyng, and gylours
               By my treget, I gather and threſt
               The great treſour in to my cheſte
               That lyeth wyth me ſo faſte bounde
               Myne hygh paleys do I founde
               And my delytes I fulfyll
               wyth wyne at feeſtes, at my wyll
               And tables full of entremees
               I woll no lyfe, but eaſe and pees
               And wynne golde to ſpende alſo
               For whan the great bagge is go
               It cometh ryght with my iapes
               Make I not well tomble myne apes
               To wynnen is alway myne entent
               My purchace is better than my rent
               For though I ſhulde beten be
               Ouer all I entremet me
               Without me may no wight dure
               I walke ſoules for to cure
               Of all the worlde cure haue I
               In brede and length boldly
               I woll bothe preche, and eke counſaylen
               with hondes wyll I not trauaylen
               For of the Pope I haue the bull
               I ne holde not my wyttes dull
               I woll not ſtynten in my lyue
               Theſe Emperours for to ſhriue
               Of kynges, dukes, and lordes grete
               But poore folke all quyte I lete
               I loue no ſuche ſhryuyng parde
               But it for other cauſe be
               I recke not of poore men
               Her aſtate is not worthe an hen
               Where fyndeſt thou a ſwynker of labor
               Haue me vnto hys confeſſour?
               But Empreſſes, and ducheſſes
               Theſe quenes, and eke counteſſes
               Theſe abeſſes, and eke bygyns
               Theſe great ladyes palaſyns
               Theſe iolye knyghtes, and bayliues
               Theſe nonnes, and theſe burgeys wyues
               That ryche ben, and eke pleſyng
               And theſe maydens welfaryng
               where ſo they clad or naked be
               Vncounſayled gothe there none fro me
               And for her ſoules ſauete
               At lorde and lady, and her meyne
               I aſke, whan they hem to me ſhriue
               The proprete of all her lyue
               And make hem trowe, bothe moſte and leeſt
               Her paryſſhe preeſt nys but a beeſt
               Ayens me and my company
               That ſhrewes ben, as great (as I)
               For whyche I woll not hyde in holde
               No pryuite that me is tolde
               That I by worde or ſigne ywis
               Ne woll make hem knowe what it is
               And they wollen alſo tellen me
               They hele fro me no pryuite
               And for to make you hem perceyuen
               That vſen folke thus to diſceyuen
               I woll you ſayne withouten drede
               
                  what menne maye in the Goſpell rede
               Of ſaynt Mathue the goſpelere
               That ſaythe, as I ſhall you ſaye here.
            
            
               
                  VPon the chayre of Moyſes
               Thus it is gloſed doutlees
               (That is the olde Teſtament
               For therby is the chayre ment)
               Sytte Scribes and Pharyſen
               That is to ſayne, the curſed men
               whyche that we hypocrites call
               Dothe that they preche I rede you all
               But dothe nat as they done a dele
               That bene nat wery to ſaye wele
               But to do well, no wyll haue they
               And they wolde bynde on folke alwaye
               That bene to begyled able
               Burdons that ben importable
               On folkes ſhulders thynges they couchen
               That they nyll wyth her fyngers touchen
               And why woll they nat touche it why?
               For hem ne lyſte nat ſykerly
               For ſadde burdons that men taken
               Make folkes ſhulders aken
               And yf they do ought that good be
               That is for folke it ſhulde ſe
               Her burdons larger maken they
               And make her hemmes wyde alwaye
               And louen ſeates at the table
               The fyrſte, and moſt honorable
               And for to hanne the fyrſte chayris
               In ſynagogges, to hem full dere is
               And wyllen that folke hem loute and grete
               whan that they paſſen through the ſtrete
               And wollen be cleped mayſter alſo
               But they ne ſhulde nat wyllen ſo
               The goſpell is there agaynſt I geſſe
               That ſheweth well her wyckedneſſe.
            
            
               
                  ANother cuſtome vſe we
               Of hem that wol ayenſt vs be
               we hate hī deedly euerichone
               & we wol werrey him, as one
               Hym ye one hateth, hate we al
               And cōiecte, how to done him fal
               And yf we ſene hym wynne honour
               Rycheſſe or preyſe, through hys valour
               Prouende, rente, or dignyte
               Full faſte ywis compaſſen we
               By what ladder he is clomben ſo
               And for to maken hym downe to go
               with trayſon we woll hym defame
               And done hym leſe hys good name
               Thus from hys ladder we hym take
               And thus hys frendes foes we make
               But worde ne wete ſhall he noon
               Tyll all hys frendes bene hys foon
               For yf we dyd it openly
               we myght haue blame redily
               For hadde he wyſte of our malyce
               He hadde hym kepte, but he were nyce.
            
            
               
                  ANother is thys, that yf ſo fall
               That ther be one amōge vs al
               That doth a good tourne, out of drede
               We ſayne it is our alder dede
               Ye ſikerly, though he it famed
               Or that hym lyſte, or that hym dayned
               A manne through hym auaunced be
               Therof all parceners be we
               And tellen folke, where ſo we go
               That manne through vs is ſprongen ſo
               And for to haue of menne preyſyng
               we purchace through our flatterynge
               Of ryche menne of great poſte
               Letters, to wytneſſe our bounte
               So that manne weneth that maye vs ſe
               That all vertue in vs be
               And alwaye poore we vs fayne
               But howe ſo that we begge or playne
               we bene the folke without leaſyng
               That all thynge haue wythout hauyng
               Thus be we dradde of the people ywis
               And gladly my purpoſe is thys.
               ¶I deale wyth no wyght, but he
               Haue golde and treaſour great plente
               Her acqueyntaunce well loue I
               Thys is moche my deſyre ſhortely
               I entremete me of brocages
               I make peace, and mariages
               I am gladly executour
               And many tymes a procuratour
               I am ſomtyme meſſagere
               That falſeth nat to my myſtere
               And many tymes I make enqueſte
               For me that offyce is nat honeſt
               To deale with other mennes thynge
               That is to me a great lykynge
               And yf that ye haue ought to do
               In place that I repeyre to
               I ſhall it ſpeden through my wyt
               As ſoone as ye haue tolde me it
               So that ye ſerue me to paye
               
                  My ſeruyce ſhalbe yours alwaye
               But who ſo wol chaſtyce me
               Anone my loue loſt hath he
               For I loue no man in no gyſe
               That wol me repreue, or chaſtyce
               But I wolde al folke vndertake
               And of no wyght no teachyng take
               For I that other folke chaſty
               wol not be taught fro my foly
            
            
               
                  I Loue none Hermytage more
               Al deſertes, and holtes hoore
               And greate woodes euerychone
               I Let them to the Baptiſte Iohn
               I queth hym quyte and hym releſſe
               Of Egypte al the wylderneſſe
               To ferre were al my manſions
               Fro al cities and good towns
               My paleys and myne houſe make I
               There menne may renne in openly
               And ſaye that I the worlde forſake
               But al amydde I bylde and make
               My houſe, and ſwymme and playe therinne
               Bette than a fyſhe doth wyth hys fynne.
            
            
               
                  OF Antechriſtes menne am I
               Of whiche that Chriſte ſayeth openly
               They haue habyte of holyneſſe
               And lyuen in ſuch wyckedneſſe
               To the copye, yf hym talent toke
               Of the Euangeliſtes boke
               Ther myght he ſe by great trayſon
               Ful many falſe compariſon
               As moche as though hys greate myght
               Be it of heate or of lyght
               The ſunne ſurmounteth the moone
               That troubler is, and chaungeth ſoone
               And the nutte kyrnel the ſhelle
               I ſkorne not that I you telle
               Ryght ſo wythouten any gyle
               Surmounteth thys noble Euangyle
               The worde of any Euangeliſt
               And to her tytel they token Chriſt
               And many ſuch comparyſoun
               Of whyche I make no mencioun
               Myght men in that booke fynde
               who ſo coulde of hem haue mynde.
            
            
               The vniuerſyte that tho was a ſlepe
               Gan for to brayde, and taken kepe
               And at the noyſe, the heed vp caſt
               Ne neuer ſythen ſlepte it faſt
               But vp it ſterte, and armes tooke
               Ayenſt thys falſe horrible booke
               All redy batayle for to make
               And to the iuge the boke they take
               But they that broughten the boke there
               Hent it anone away for fere
               They nolde ſhewe it no more a dele
               But than it kepte, and kepen wele
               Tyl ſuch a tyme that they may ſe
               That they ſo ſtronge woxen be
               That no wyght maye hem wel wythſtonde
               For by that boke they durſt nat ſtonde
               Awaye they gonne it for to bere
               For they ne durſt nat anſwere
               By expoſitioun no gloſe
               To that that clerkes wol appoſe
               Ayenſt the curſedneſſe ywys
               That in that boke wrytten is
               Now wotte I nat, ne I can nat ſe
               what maner ende that there ſhall be
               Of al thys that they hyde
               But yet algate they ſhal abyde
               Tyl that they may it bette defende
               Thys trowe I beſt woll be her ende.
            
            
               Thus Antechriſt abyden we
               For we bene al of hys meyne
               And what man that wol not be ſo
               Ryght ſoone he ſhal hys lyfe for go
               Outwarde Lamben ſemen we
               Ful of goodneſſe and of pyte
               And inwarde we wythouten fable
               Bene gredy wolues rauyſable
               we enuyroun both lande and ſee
               wyth al the worlde werryen we
               we wol ordayne of al thyng
               Of folkes good, and her lyuyng.
            
            
               If there be caſtel or citye
               wherin that any bougerons be
               Al though that they of Myllayne were
               For therof bene they blamed there
               Or yf a wyght out of meaſure
               wolde leane her golde, and take vſure
               For that he is ſo coueytous
               Or yf he be to lecherous
               Or theſe that haunten Simonye
               Or prouoſt ful of trechery
               Or Prelate lyuyng iolyly
               Or preeſt that halte hys queyn hym by
               
                  Or olde hoores hoſtylers
               Or other baudes or bordellers
               Or els blamed of any vyce
               Of whyche men ſhulden done iuſtyce
               By al the ſayntes that we prey
               But they defende them wyth lamprey
               wyth luce, wyth elys, wyth ſamons
               wyth tendre gees, and with capons
               wyth tartes, or wyth cheffes fatte
               wyth deyntye flaunes, brode and flatte
               wyth caleweys, or wyth pullayle
               wyth conynges, or fyne vytayle
               That we vnder our clothes wyde
               Maken through our golet glyde
               Or but he wol do come in haſte
               Roe venyſon bake in paſte
               whether ſo that he loure or groyne
               He ſhal haue of a corde a loygne
               wyth whiche men ſhal hym bynde and lede
               To brenne hym for hys ſynful dede
               That men ſhulde here hym crye and rore
               A myle waye aboute and more
               Or els he ſhal in priſon dye
               But yf he wol hys frendſhyp bye
               Or ſmerten that, that he hath do
               More than hys gylte amounteth to
               But and he couth, through hys ſleyght
               Do make vp a toure of heyght
               Nought rought I, wheder of ſtone or tre
               Or erth, or turnes though it be
               Though it were of no vounde ſtone
               wrought wyth ſquyre and ſcantilone
               So that the toure were ſtuffed wel
               wyth al rycheſſe temporel
               And than that he wolde vp dreſſe
               Engyns, both more and leſſe
               To caſt at vs by euery ſyde
               To bere hys good name wyde
               Such ſleyghtes I ſhal you neuen
               Barels of wyne, by ſyxe or ſeuen
               Or golde in ſackes greate plente
               He ſhulde ſone delyuered be
               And yf he haue no ſuch pytences
               Let hym ſtudy in equipolences
               And let lyes, and fallaces
               If that he wolde deſerue our graces
               Or we ſhal beare hym ſuch wytneſſe
               O
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  nne, and of hys wretchedneſſe
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   done hys loſe ſo wyde renne
               That al quicke we ſhulde hym brenne
               Or els yeue hym ſuch penaunce
               That is wel worſe than the pytaunce
               For thou ſhalt neuer for nothyng
               Con knowen a ryght by her clothyng
               The traitours ful of trecherye
               But thou her werkes can aſpye
               And ne had the good kepyng be
               whylom of the vniuerſite
               That kepeth the key of chriſtendome
               we had bene turmented al and ſome
               Such bene the ſtynkyng prophetis
               Nys none of hem, that good prophete is
               For they through wycked entention
               The yere of the incarnation
               A thouſande, and two hundred yere
               Fyue and fyfty, ferther ne nere
               Broughten a boke, wyth ſory grace
               To yeue enſample in comune place
               That ſayd thus, though it were fable
               Thys is the goſpel pardurable
               That fro the holy ghoſt is ſent
               wel were it worth to bene brent
               Entytled was in ſuch manere
               Thys boke of whyche I tel here
               There nas no wyght in al Parys
               Beforne our lady at parnys
               That they ne myght the booke by
               The ſentence pleaſed hem well trewly.
               But I wol ſtynte of thys matere
               For it is wonder longe to here
               But had that ylke boke endured
               Of better eſtate I were enſured
               And frendes haue I yet parde
               That han me ſet in great degre
            
            
               
                  OF al thys worlde is Emperour
               Gyle my father, the trechour
               And Empreſſe my mother is
               Maugre the holy ghoſt ywys
               Our myghty lynage, and our route
               Reygneth in euery reygne aboute
               And wel is worthy we mayſtres be
               For al thys worlde gouerne we
               And can the folke ſo wel diſceyue
               That none our gyle can perceyue
               And though they done, they dare not ſay
               The ſoth dare no wyght bewray
               But he in Chriſtes wrath hym ledeth
               That more than Chriſt my brethern dredeth
               He nys no ful good champion
               That dredeth ſuch ſimilacion
               Nor that for payne wol refuſen
               Vs to correcte and accuſen
               He wol not entremete by ryght
               
                  Ne haue god in hys eye ſyght
               And therfore ſhal god hym punyce
               But me ne recketh of no vyce
               Sythen men vs louen comunably
               And holden vs for ſo worthy
               That we may folke repreue echone
               And we nyl haue reprefe of none
               whom ſhulden folke worſhypen ſo
               But vs that ſtynten neuer mo
               To patren, whyle that folke may vs ſe
               Though it not ſo behynde hem be.
            
            
               
                  ANd where is more woode foly
               Than to enhaunce chiualry
               And loue noble men and gaye
               That ioly clothes weren alwaye
               If they be ſuch folke as they ſemen
               So clene, as men her clothes demen
               And that her wordes folowe her dede
               It is great pyte out of drede
               For they wol be none hypocritis
               Of hem me thynketh great ſpyte is
               I can not loue hem on no ſyde
               But beggers wyth theſe hoodes wyde
               wyth ſleygh and pale faces leane
               And graye clothes nat ful cleane
               But fretted ful of tatarwagges
               And hygh ſhoes knopped wyth dagges
               That frouncen lyke a quayle pype
               Or bootes ryuelyng as a gype
               To ſuch folke, as I you deuyſe
               Shulde princes and theſe lordes wyſe
               Take al her landes and her thynges
               Both warre and peace in gouernynges
               To ſuch folke ſhulde a prince hym yeue
               That wolde hys lyfe in honour leue
            
            
               And yf they be nat as they ſeme
               That ſeruen thus the worlde to queme
               There wolde I dwelle to diſceyue
               The folke, for they ſhal not parceyue
               But I ne ſpeke in no ſuche wyſe
               That men ſhulde humble habytte diſpyſe
               So that no pride there vnder be
               No man ſhulde hate, as thynketh me
               The poore man in ſuch clothyng
               But god ne preyſeth hym nothyng
               That ſayeth he hath the worlde forſake
               And hath to worldly glory hym take
               And wol of ſuch delyces vſe
               who maye that begger wel excuſe?
               That papelarde, that hym yeldeth ſo
               And wol to worldly eaſe go
               And ſayth that he the worlde hath lefte
               And gredyly it grypeth efte
               He is the hounde, ſhame is to ſayne
               That to hys caſtyng goth agayne
            
            
               
                  BVt vnto you dare I not lye
               But myght I felen or eſpye
               That ye perceyued it nothyng
               Ye ſhulde haue a ſtarke leaſyng
               Ryght in your hande thus to begynne
               I nolde it let for no ſynne
               The god loughe at the wonder tho
               And euery wyght ganne laughe alſo
               And ſayd: Lo here a man aryght
               For to be truſty to euery wyght.
            
            
               
                  FAlſe ſemblant (ꝙ Loue) ſaye to me
               Sythe I thus haue auaunced the
               That in my courte is thy dwellyng
               And of rybaudes ſhalt be my kyng
               wolte thou wel holden my forwardes?
               Yee ſir, from hence forwardes
               we wol people vpon hym areyſe
               And through our gyle, done hym ceyſe
               And hym on ſharpe ſpeares ryue
               Or other wayes brynge hym fro lyue
               But yf that he wol folowe ywys
               That in our boke written is
            
            
               
                  THus muche wol our boke ſignyfye
               That whyle Peter hath maſtrye
               Maye neuer Iohn ſhewe wel hys myght
               Nowe haue I you declared ryght
               The meanyng of the barke and rynde
               That maketh the ententions blynde
               But nowe at erſt I wol be gyn
               To expowne you the pythe wythin
               And the ſeculers comprehende
               That Chriſtes lawe wol defende
               And ſhulde it kepen and mayntenen
               Ayenſt hem that al ſuſteynen
               And falſly to the people teachen
               That Iohan betoketh hem to prechen
               That there nys lawe couenable
               But thylke goſpell pardurable
               
                  That fro the holy ghoſt was ſent
               To turne folke that bene myſwent
            
            
               The ſtrength of Iohan they vnderſtonde
               The grace in whych they ſay they ſtonde
               That doth the ſynful folke conuerte
               And hem to Ieſu Chriſt reuerte
               Ful many an other horriblete
               Maye men in that booke ſe
               That bene commaunded douteleſſe
               Ayenſt the lawe of Rome expreſſe
               And al wyth Antechriſt they holden
               As men may in the boke beholden
               And than commaunden they to ſleen
               Al tho that wyth Peter been
               But they ſhall neuer haue that myght
               And god to forne, for ſtryfe to fyght
               That they ne ſhal ynough fynde
               That Peters lawe ſhal haue in mynde
               And euer beholde, and ſo mayntene
               That at the laſt it ſhal be ſene
               That they ſhall al come therto
               For aught that they can ſpeke or do
               And thylke lawe ſhal not ſtonde
               That they by Ihon haue vnderſtonde
               But maugre hem, it ſhal doun
               And hem brought to confuſioun
               Had neuer your father here beforne
               Seruaunt ſo trewe, ſyth he was borne
               That is ayenſt al nature
               Sir, put you that in auenture
               For though ye borowes take of me
               The ſykerer ſhal ye neuer be
               For hoſtages, ne ſykerneſſe
               Or charters for to bere wytneſſe
               I take your ſelfe to recorde here
               That men ne maye in no manere
               Teren the wolfe out of hys hyde
               Tyl he be ſlayne, backe and ſyde
               Though men hym beate and al defyle
               what wene ye that I wol begyle?
               For I am clothed mekely
               There vnder is al my trechery
               Myne hert chaungeth neuer the mo
               For none habyt, in whych I go
               Though I haue chere of ſimpleneſſe
               I am not wery of ſhreudneſſe
               My lemman, ſtrayned abſtenaunce
               Hath miſter of my purueyaunce
               She had ful longe ago be dede
               Nere my counſayle and my rede
               Let her alone, and you and me
               And loue anſwerde, I truſt the
               wythout borowe, for I woll none
               And falſe ſemblaunt the thefe anone
               Ryght in that ylke ſame place
               That had of treſon al his face
               Ryght blacke wythin, and whyte wythout
               Thankyng hym, gan on hys knees lout
            
            
               Than was there nought, but euerye man
               Nowe to aſſaute, that ſaylen can
               (Quod Loue) and that ful hardely
               Than armed they hem comenly
               Of ſuch armoure, as to hem fell
               whan they were armed, fyers and fel
               They went hem forth al in aroute
               And ſet the caſtel al aboute
               They wyl not away for no drede
               Tyl it ſo be that they bene dede
               Or tyl they haue the caſtel take
               And foure batels they gan make
               And partid hem in foure anone
               And toke her way, and forth they gone
               The foure gates for to aſſayle
               Of whych the kepers woll not fayle
               For they bene neyther ſycke ne dede
               But hardy folke, and ſtronge in dede
            
            
               Nowe wol I ſayne the countenaunce
               Of falſe ſemblaunt, and abſtinaunce
               That bene to wycked tonge went
               But fyrſt they helde her parlyment
               whether it to done were
               To maken hem knowen there
               Or els walken forth dyſgyſed
               But at the laſte they deuyſed
               That they wolde gone in tapynage
               As it were in a pylgrymage
               Lyke good and holy folke vnfeyned
               And dame abſtinence ſtreyned
               Toke on a robe of camelyne
               And gan her gratche as a bygyne
               A large couercheife of threde
               She wrapped al aboute her hede
               But ſhe forgate not her pſaltere
               A payre of beedes eke ſhe bere
               Vpon a lace al of whyte threde
               On whych that ſhe her beades bede
               But ſhe ne bought hem neuer a dele
               For they were gyuen her, I wote wele
               God wote of a ful holy frere
               That ſayd he was her father dere
               To whom ſhe had ofter went
               
                  Than any frere of hys couent
               And he vyſited her alſo
               And many a ſermon ſayd her to
               He nolde let for man on lyue
               That he ne wolde her ofte ſhryue
               And wyth ſo great deuotion
               They made her confeſſion
               That they had ofte for the nones
               Two heedes in one hode at ones
               Of fayre ſhappe, I deuyſed her the
               But pale of face ſomtyme was ſhe
               That falſe traytoureſſe vntrewe
               was lyke that ſalowe horſe of hewe
               That in the Apocalips is ſhewed
               That ſignyfyeth to folke beſhrewed
               That bene al ful of trecherye
               And pale, through hypocriſye
               For on that horſe no colour is
               But onely deed and pale ywys
               Of ſuch a colour enlangoured
               was abſtinence ywys coloured
               Of her eſtate ſhe her repented
               As her vyſage repreſented
               She had a burdowne al of thefte
               That gyle had yeue her of hys yefte
               And a ſkryppe of faynte diſtreſſe
               That ful was of elengeneſſe
               And forth ſhe walked ſobrely
               And falſe ſemblaunt ſaynt, ie vous die
               And as it were for ſuch miſtere
               Done on the cope of a frere
               wyth chere ſymple, and full pytous
               Hys lokyng was not diſdeynous
               Ne proude, but meke and ful peſyble
               About hys necke he bare a Byble
               And ſquierly, forth gan he gon
               And for to reſt hys lymmes vpon
               He had of treaſon a potent
               As he were feble, hys way he went
               But in hys ſleue he gan to thryng
               A raſoure ſharpe, and wel bytyng
               That was forged in a forge
               whyche that men clepen Coupe Gorge
               So longe forth her waye they nomen
               Tyl they to wycked tonge comen
               That at hys gate was ſyttyng
               And ſawe folke in the way paſſyng
               The pylgrymes ſawe he faſte by
               That beren hem ful mekely
               And humbly they wyth hym mette
               Dame abſtinence fyrſt hym grette
               And ſyth hym falſe ſemblant ſalued
               And he hem, but he not remeued
               For he ne dred hem not a dele
               For whan he ſawe her faces wele
               Alwaye in herte, hym thought ſo
               He ſhulde knowe hem both two
               For wele he knewe dame abſtynaunce
               But he ne knewe not Conſtreynaunce
               He ne knewe nat that ſhe was conſtreyned
               Ne of her theues lyfe fayned
               But wende ſhe come of wyll al fre
               But ſhe come in another degre
               And yf of good wyl ſhe beganne
               That wyl was fayled her thanne.
            
            
               
                  ANd falſe ſemblant had he ſayne alſe
               But he knewe nat that he was falſe
               Yet falſe was he, but his falſeneſſe
               Ne coulde he not eſpye, nor geſſe
               For ſemblant was ſo ſlye wrought
               That falſeneſſe he ne eſpyed nought
               But haddeſt thou knowen hym beforne
               Thou woldeſt on a boke haue ſworne
               whan thou hym ſaugh in thylke araye
               That he that whylome was ſo gaye
               And of the daunce Ioly Robyn
               was tho become a Iacobyn
               But ſothly what ſo men hym call
               Frere preachours bene good men all
               Her order wyckedly they beren
               Such minſtrels, yf they weren
               So bene Auguſtyns, and Cordylers
               And Carmes, and eke ſacked freers
               And al freres ſhodde and bare
               Though ſome of hem bene great and ſquare
               Ful holy men, as I hem deme
               Eueryche of hem wolde good man ſeme
               But ſhalt thou neuer of apparence
               Sene conclude good conſequence
               In none argument ywys
               If exiſtence all fayled is
               For men may fynde alwaye ſopheme
               The conſequence to eueneme
               who ſo that hath had the ſubtelte
               The double ſentence for to ſe.
            
            
               whan the pylgrymes comen were
               To wycked tonge that dwelled there
               Her harneys nygh hem was algate
               By wycked tonge adowne they ſate
               That badde hem nere hym for to come
               
                  And of tidynges telle hym ſome
               And ſayde hem: what caſe maketh you
               To come to this place nowe:
            
            
               
                  SIr ſayde Strayned Abſtinaunce
               we for to drye our penaunce
               with hertes pytous deuoute
               Are cōmen, as pylgrimes gon aboute
               wel nyght on fote alway we go
               Ful doughty ben our heeles two
               And thus bothe we ben ſent
               Throughoute this worlde that is myſwent
               To yeue enſample, and preche alſo
               To fyſhen ſynfull menne we go
               For other fyſhynge, ne fyſhe we
               And ſyr, for that charite
               As we be wont, herborowe we craue
               Your lyfe to amende Chriſt it ſaue
               And ſo it ſhulde you nat diſpleaſe
               we wolden, yf it were your caſe
               A ſhorte ſermon vnto you ſayne
               And wicked tonge anſwered agayne
               The houſe (quod he) ſuch (as ye ſe)
               Shal not be warned you for me
               Say what you lyſt, and I wol here
               Graunt mercy ſwete ſyr dere.
            
            
               (Quod alder firſt) dame abſtynence
               And thus began ſhe her ſentence
               Sir the fyrſt vertue certayne
               The greateſt and mooſt ſouerayne
               That may be founde in any man
               For hauyng, or for wytte he can
               That is hys tonge to refrayne
               Therto ought euery wyght hym payne
               For it is better ſtyl be
               Than for to ſpeken harme parde
               And he that herkeneth it gladly
               He is no good man ſykerly
               And ſir, abouen al other ſynne
               In that arte thou mooſt gylty inne
               Thou ſpake a iape, not longe ago
               And ſir, that was ryght yuel do
               Of a yonge man, that here repayred
               And neuer yet thys place apayred
               Thou ſaydeſt he awayted nothynge
               But to deceyue fayre welcomyng
               Ye ſayd nothyng ſoth of that
               But ſir, ye lye, I tel you plat
               He ne cometh no more, ne goth parde
               I trowe ye ſhal hym nen
                     ••
                   ſe
               Fayre welcomynge in priſon is
               That ofte hath played wyth you er thys
               The fayreſt games that he coulde
               wythout fylth ſtyl or loude
               Nowe dare ſhe not her ſelfe ſolace
               ye han alſo the man to chace
               That he dare neyther come ne go
               what meueth you to hate hym ſo?
               But properly your wycked thought
               That many a falſe leaſyng hath thought
               That meueth youre foole eloquence
               That iangleth euer in audience
               And on the folke areyſeth blame
               And doth hem d
                     •
                  ſhonour and ſhame
               For thyng that maye haue no preuyng
               But lykelyneſſe, and contryuyng.
            
            
               For I dare ſayne, that reaſon demeth
               It is not al ſoth thynge that ſemeth
               And it is ſynne to controue
               Thyng that is to reproue
               Thys wote ye wele, and ſyr: therfore
               Ye arne to blame the more
               And nathleſſe, he recketh lyte
               He yeueth nat nowe therof a myte
               For yf he thought harme parfaye
               He wolde come and gone al daye
               He coulde him ſelfe not abſtene
               Nowe cometh he not, and that is ſene
               For he ne taketh of it no cure
               But yf it be through auenture
               And laſſe than other folke algate
               And thou her watcheſt at the gate
               wyth ſpeare in thyne areſt alwaye
               There muſe muſarde al the daye
               Thou wakeſt nyght and daye for thought
               Iwys thy traueyle is for nought
               And Ieloſy wythouten fayle
               Shal neuer quyte the thy trauayle
               And ſkath is, that fayre welcomyng
               wythout any treſpaſſyng
               Shal wrongfully in priſon be
               There wepeth and languyſheth he
               And though thou neuer yet ywys
               Agylteſt man no more but thys
               Take not a grefe it were worthy
               To put the out of thys bayly
               And afterwarde in priſon lye
               And fettre the tyl that thou dye
               For thou ſhalt for thys ſynne dwelle
               Ryght in the dyuels arſe of helle
               But yf that thou repent the
               
                  Mafaye, thou lyeſt falſely (quod he)
               what, welcome with miſchaunce now
               Haue I therfore herbered you
               To ſaye me ſhame, and eke reproue
               with ſory hap to your behoue
               Am I today your harbegere
               Go herber you els where, than here
               That han a lyer called me
               Two tregeturs art thou and he
               That in myne houſe, do me this ſhame
               And for my ſothe ſawe ye me blame
               Is this the ſermon that ye make
               To all the deuyls I me take
               Or els god thou me confounde
               But er men dydden this caſtell founde
               It paſſeth not ten dayes or twelue
               But it was tolde ryght to my ſelue
               And as they ſayd, ryght ſo tolde I
               He kyſt the roſe priuyly
               Thus ſayd I now, and haue ſayd yore
               I not where he dyd any more
               why ſhulde men ſaye me ſuch a thynge
               Yf it had ben gabbynge
               Ryght ſo ſayd I, and woll ſay yet
               I trowe I lyed not of it
               And with my bemes I woll blowe
               To all neyghbours arowe
               How he hath both cōmen and gone
               Tho ſpake falſe ſemblaunt ryght anon
               All is not goſpell out of dout
               That men ſayne in the towne about
               Laye no deefe ere to my ſpeakyng
               I ſwere you ſyr, it is gabbyng
               I trowe ye wot well certaynly
               That no man loueth hym tenderly
               That ſayth hym harme, yf he wote it
               All be he neuer ſo poore of wyt
               And ſothe is alſo ſykerly
               This knowe ye ſyr, as well as I
               That louers gladly woll vyſiten
               The places there her loues habyten
               This man you loueth, and eke honoureth
               This man to ſerue you laboureth
               And clepeth you his frende ſo dere
               And this man maketh you good chere
               And euery where that you meteth
               He you ſalweth, and he you greteth
               He preſeth not ſo oft as ye
               Ought of his commyng encombred be
               There preſen other folke on you
               Full ofter than he doth nowe
               And yf his hert hym ſtrayned ſo
               Vnder the Roſe for to go
               Ye ſhulde hym ſene ſo oft nede
               That ye ſhulde take hym with the dede
               He coude his commyng not forbeare
               Though he hym thrilled with a ſpeare
               It nere nat than, as it is nowe
               But truſteth well, I ſwere it you
               That it is clene out of his thought
               Syr, certes he ne thynketh it nought
               Nomore ne doth Fayre welcomyng
               That ſore abyeth all this thynge
               And yf they were of one aſſent
               Full ſoone were the Roſe hent
               The maugre yours wolde be
               And ſyr of o thyng herkeneth me
               Syth ye this man, that loueth you
               Han ſayd ſuche harme, and ſhame now
               wytteth well, yf he geſſed it
               Ye maye well demen in your wyt
               He noulde nothynge loue you ſo
               Ne callen you his frende alſo
               But nyght and daye he wol wake
               The caſtel to deſtroye and take
               Yf it were ſoth as ye deuyſe
               Or ſome man in ſome maner wyſe
               Myght it warne hym euery dele
               Or by hym ſelf perceyue wele
               For ſyth he myght not come and gone
               As he was whylom wont to done
               He myght it ſoone wyte and ſe
               But nowe all otherwyſe wot he
               Than haue we ſyr all vtterly
               Deſerued hell, and iolyly
               The deth of hell doutleſſe
               That thrallen folke ſo gyltleſſe
            
            
               
                  FAlſe ſemblaunte ſo proueth this thynge
               That he canne none anſwerynge
               And ſeeth alwaye, ſuche apparaunce
               That nygh he fell in repentaunce
               And ſayd hym, ſyr: it maye well be
               Semblaunt, a good man ſemen ye
               And Abſtinence, full wyſe ye ſeme
               Of o talent you both I deme
               what counſayle woll ye to me yeuen?
               Ryght here anon thou ſhalt be ſhryuen
               And ſay thy ſynne, without more
               Of this ſhalt thou repent ſore
               
                  For I am preſt, and haue poſte
               To ſhryue folke of mooſt dignitie
               That ben as wyde as worlde may dure
               Of al this worlde I haue the cure
               And that had neuer yet perſoun
               Ne vicarie of no maner toun
               And god wot I haue of the
               A thouſande tymes more pytye
               Than hath thy preſt parochial
               Though thy frende be ſpecyall
               I haue auauntage in o wyſe
               That your prelates ben not ſo wyſe
               Ne halfe ſo lettred (as am I)
               I am lycenced boldly
               In diuinitie for to rede
               And to confeſſen out of drede
               Yf ye woll you nowe confeſſe
               And leaue your ſynnes more and leſſe
               without abode, knele downe anon
               And you ſhall haue abſolucion.
            
            FINIS.
            ¶Here endeth the Romaunt of the Roſe: And here foloweth the boke of Troylous and Creſeyde.
         
         
            
            ¶Troylus and Creſeyde.
            
               
                  
                     THe double ſorow of Troilus to tellen
                  That was kynge Priamus ſonne of Troy
                  In louyng, how his aduentures fellen
                  From woo to wele, and after out of ioye
                  My purpoſe is, er that I parte froye
                  Thou Theſiphon thou helpe me for tendite
                  Theſe woful verſes, that wepen as I write
               
               
                  To the I clepe, thou goddeſſe of tourment
                  Thou cruel furye, ſorowyng euer in payne
                  Helpe me that am the ſorowful inſtrument
                  That helpeth louers, as I can complayue
                  For well ſyt it, the ſoth for to ſayne
                  I woful wyght to haue a drerie fere
                  And to a ſorouful tale a ſorye 
                        •
                     here
               
               
                  For I that god of loues ſeruauntes ſerue
                  Ne dare to loue, for myne vnlykelyneſſe
                  Prayen for ſpede, al ſhulde I therfore ſterue
                  So farre am I fro his helpe in derkeneſſe
                  But natheleſſe, if this maye done gladneſſe
                  To any louer, and his cauſe aueyle
                  Haue he my thāke, and myne be the trauyle
               
               
                  But ye louers that bathen in gladneſſe
                  Yf any drope of pytie in you be
                  Remembreth you of paſſed heuyneſſe
                  That ye haue felte, and on the aduerſitie
                  Of other folke, and thynketh how that ye
                  Han felt that loue durſt you diſpleaſe
                  Or ye han won hym with to great an eaſe
               
               
                  And prayeth for hem that ben in the caſe
                  Of Troylus, as ye maye after heare
                  That he hem brynge in heuen to ſolace
                  And eke for me prayeth to god ſo dere
                  That I haue might to ſhew in ſom manere
                  Such payne and wo, as loues folke endure
                  In Troylus vnſely aduenture.
               
               
                  And byddeth eke for hem yt ben diſpeyred
                  In loue, that neuer wyl recouered be
                  And eke for hem that falſely ben apeyred
                  Through wycked tonges, be it he or ſhe
                  Thus byddeth god for his benignitie
                  ſo graūt hem ſone out of this world to pace
                  That ben diſpayred out of loues grace.
               
               
                  And byddeth eke for hem that bene at eaſe
                  that God hem graūt aye good perſeueraūce
                  And ſende hem grace her loues for to pleaſe
                  That it to loue be worſhyp and pleaſaunce
                  For ſo hope I my ſelfe beſt to auaunce
                  To praye for hem yt loues ſeruauntes be
                  And wryte her wo, and lyue in charitie
               
               
                  And for to haue of hem compaſſyoun
                  As though I were her owne brother dere
                  Now herkeneth with a good ententioun
                  For now wyll I go ſtreyght to my matere
                  In which ye maye the double ſorowes here
                  Of Troylus, in louyng of Creſeyde
                  And how that ſhe forſoke him er yt ſhe dyed.
               
               
                  
                     IT is well wyſt, how that the Grekes ſtronge
                  In armes with a thouſande ſhyppes went
                  To Troye wardes, and the cytie longe
                  Beſiegeden nygh ten yeres er they ſtent
                  And in dyuers wyſe, and one entent
                  The rauyſhyng to wreke of quene Heleyne
                  By Parys don, they wroughtē al her peyne.
               
               
                  Now fell it ſo, that in ye towne there was
                  Dwellyng a Lorde of great authoritie
                  A great diuyne that cleped was Calcas
                  That in that ſcience ſo expert was, that he
                  Knewe wel that Troye ſhulde deſtroyed be
                  By anſwere of his god that hyght thus
                  Dan Phebus, or Apollo Delphicus
               
               
                  So whā this Calcas knewe by calculing
                  And eke by the anſwere of this god Apollo
                  That grekes ſhulde ſuch a people bryng
                  Thorowe which that Troye muſt be fordo
                  He caſt anon out of the towne to go
                  For wel he wyſt by ſort, that Troye ſholde
                  Deſtroyed be, yea wolde who ſo nolde.
               
               
                  
                  wherfore to departen ſoftely
                  Toke purpoſe ful this for knowyng wyſe
                  And to the Grekes hoſt full priuyly
                  He ſtale anon, and they in curteys wyſe
                  Dyd hym both worſhyp and ſeruyce
                  In truſt that he hath connyng hem to rede
                  In euery peryll, which that was to drede.
               
               
                  Great rumour roſe whā it was fyrſt eſpyed
                  In all the towne, and openly was ſpoken
                  That Calcas traytour fled was and alyed
                  To hem of Grece, & caſt was to be wroken
                  On hym, that falſly hath his fayth broken
                  And ſayd: he and all his kynne atones
                  were worthy to be brent both fel & bones.
               
               
                  Now had Calcas lefte in this miſchaūce
                  Vnwyſt of this falſe and wycked dede
                  A doughter, whiche was in great penaunce
                  And of her lyfe ſhe was ful ſore in drede
                  And wyſt neuer what beſt was to rede
                  And as a wyddowe was ſhe, and al alone
                  And nyſt to whō ſhe myght make her mone.
               
               
                  Creſeyde was this ladyes name aryght
                  As to my dome, in al Troyes cytie
                  Moſt fayreſt lady, fer paſſynge euery wight
                  So angelyke ſhone her natyle beautie
                  That no mortall thyng ſemed ſhe
                  And therwith was ſhe ſo parfyte a creature
                  As ſhe had be made in ſcornyng of nature
               
               
                  This lady that all daye herde at eare
                  Her fathers ſhame falſhed, and trayſoun
                  (Full nigh out of her wit for ſorowe & feare
                  In widowes habite large of ſamite brown)
                  Before Hector on knees ſhe fyl adowne
                  Her mercy bad her ſelfe excuſyng
                  with pitious voyce, & tenderly wepynge
               
               
                  Now was this Hector pytious of nature
                  And ſawe, that ſhe was ſorowful begone
                  And that ſhe was ſo fayre a creature
                  Of his goodneſſe he gladded her anon
                  And ſayd: let your fathers trayſon gone
                  Forthwith miſchaūce, & ye your ſelfe in ioye
                  Dwelleth with vs, whyle you lyſt in Troye
               
               
                  And all yt honour yt men may do you haue
                  As ferforth as thogh your father dwel there
                  Y
                        •
                      ſhull haue, and your body ſhull men ſaue
                  As for as I may ought enquyre and here
                  And ſhe him thāked with ful humble chere
                  And ofter wolde and it had ben his wyll
                  Toke her leaue, went home, & held her ſtyll.
               
               
                  And in her houſe ſhe abode wt ſuche meynye
                  As tyll her honour nede was to holde
                  And whyle ſhe was dwellyng in that cytie
                  She kept her eſtate, & of yonge and olde
                  Full welbeloued, and well men of her tolde
                  But whether that ſhe chyldren had or none
                  I rede it nat, therfore I let it gone
               
               
                  ¶The thynges fellen as they done of werre
                  Betwyxen hem of Troye and grekes ofte
                  For ſom day boughtē they of Troye it derre
                  And eft the grekes founden nothyng ſofte
                  The folke of Troye: & thus Fortune alofte
                  And vnder eft gan hem to whelmen both
                  After her courſe, aye whyle that they were wroth
               
               
                  But how this towne came to diſtruction
                  Ne falleth not to purpoſe me to tell
                  For it were a longe digreſſyon
                  Fro my mater, and you to longe to dwell
                  But the Troyan ieſtes, as they fell
                  In Omer, or in Dares, or in Dyte
                  who ſo yt can, may reden hem as they wryte
               
               
                  But though ye grekes hem of Troy ſhetten
                  And her citye beſieged all about
                  Her olde vſages nolde they not letten
                  As to honouren her goddes full deuoute
                  But aldermoſt in honour out of dout
                  They had a relyke hyght Palladion
                  That was her truſt abouen euerychon
               
               
                  And ſo befyll whan cōmen was the tyme
                  Of April, whan clothed is the mede
                  with newe grene, of luſty veer the pryme
                  And ſwete ſmellyng floures whyte and red
                  In ſondry wyſe ſhewed as I rede
                  The folke of Troy, theyr obſeruaunces olde
                  Palladions feeſt went for to holde
               
               
                  Vnto the temple in all theyr beſt wyſe
                  Generallye there went many a wyght
                  To herken of Palladions ſeruyce
                  And namely many a iuſtye knyght
                  And many a lady freſh, and mayden bright
                  Full wele arayed both moſt and leeſt
                  Both for the ſeaſon and the hye feeſt.
               
               
                  
                  Amonge theſe other folke was Creſeyda
                  In wydowes habyt blacke: but natheleſſe
                  Ryght as our fyrſt letter is nowe an A
                  In beautie fyrſt ſo ſtode ſhe makeleſſe
                  Her goodly lokyng gladded all the prees
                  Nas neuer ſene thyng to be prayſed derre
                  Nor vnder cloude blacke ſo bryght a ſterre.
               
               
                  As was Creſeyd, they ſayden euerychone
                  That her behelde in her blacke wede
                  And yet ſhe ſtode full lowe and ſtyl alone
                  Behynde other folke in lytle brede
                  And nyt the dore vnder ſhames drede
                  Symple of attyre, and debonayre of chere
                  with full aſſured lokyng an
                        •
                      manere
               
               
                  This Troylus, as he was wont to guyde
                  His yonge knyghtes lad hem vp & downe
                  In thylke large temple on euery ſyde
                  Beholdyng aye the ladyes of the towne
                  Now here now there, for no deuocioun
                  Had he to none, to reuen hym his reſt
                  But ganne to prayſe and lacke whom hym leſt.
               
               
                  And in his walke ful faſt he gan to wayten
                  Yf knyght or ſquyre of his company
                  Gan for to ſyke, or let his eyen bayten
                  Of any woman, that he coude eſpye
                  He wolde ſmyle, and holde it a folye
                  And ſaye hem thus: O Lord ſhe ſlepeth ſoft
                  For loue of the whan thou turneſt full ofte.
               
               
                  I haue herde tel pardieux of your lyuynge
                  Ye louers, and eke your leude obſeruaunces
                  And which a labour folke haue in winnyng
                  Of loue, and in kepynge ſuche doutaunces
                  And whā your pray is loſt, wo & penaūces
                  O very fooles, blynde and nyce be ye
                  There is not one can ware by another be
               
               
                  And with ye worde he gan caſt vp the browe
                  Aſcaunces lo, is this not well yſpoken
                  At which the god of loue gan loken rowe
                  Ryght for deſpyte, and ſhope hym to be wroken
                  He kyd anon his bowe was nat broken
                  For ſodaynly he hyt hym at the full
                  And yet as proude a peckoke gan he pull
               
               
                  O blynde worlde, o blynde ententioun
                  How often falleth all theffect contrayre
                  Of ſurquedie and foule preſumtioun
                  For caught is proude, & caught is debonair
                  This Troylus is clomben on the ſtayre
                  And lytel weneth, that he mote diſcenden
                  But al day fayleth that fooles wenden
               
               
                  As proude bayarde begynneth for to ſkyp
                  Out of the waye, ſo prycketh hym his corne
                  Tyl he a laſh haue of the longe whyppe
                  Thā thinketh he, though I praūce al beforn
                  Fyrſt in the tracie, ful fat & newe yſhorne
                  Yet am I but an horſe, and horſes lawe
                  I muſt endure, and with my feeres drawe.
               
               
                  So fared it by this fiers and proud knight
                  Though he a worthy kynges ſonne were
                  And wende nothynge had had ſuche myght
                  Ayenſt his wyl, that ſhulde his hert ſtere
                  Yet with a loke his hert woxe on fyre
                  That he that now was moſt in pride aboue
                  woxe ſodaynly moſt ſubiect vnto loue.
               
               
                  For thy enſample taketh of this man
                  Ye wyſe, proude, and worthy folkes all
                  To ſcornen loue, which that ſo ſone can
                  The 
                        ••
                     edom of your hertes to hym thrall
                  For euer it was, and euer it be ſhall
                  That loue is he that all thyng may bynde
                  For no man may fordo the lawe of kynde
               
               
                  That this be ſoth, hath preued, & doth yet
                  For this (
                        ••
                     owe I) ye knowe all and ſome
                  Men reden nat that folke han greater wyt
                  Thā they, yt han ben moſt with loue ynome
                  And ſtrengeſt folke b
                        •
                     n therwith ouercome
                  The worthyeſt and greateſt of degre
                  This was and is, and yet men ſhall it ſe.
               
               
                  And trulych that ſytte well to be ſo
                  For alder wyſeſt han therwith ben pleſed
                  And they that han ben aldermoſt in wo
                  with loue han ben comforted moſt and eſed
                  And oft it hath the cruell hert apeſed
                  And worthy folke made worthyer of name
                  And cauſeth mooſte to dreaden vyce and ſhame
               
               
                  Now ſyth it may not goodly be withſtonde
                  And is a thyng ſo vertuous in kynde
                  Refuſeth nought to loue, for to ben bonde
                  Syth as hym ſeluen lyſt he may you bynde
                  
                     The yerde is bet that bowen woll & wynde
                  Than that ye breſt, and therfore I you reed
                  Nowe foloweth hym, that ſo well can you lede
               
               
                  But for to tellen forth in ſpecyall
                  As of this kynges ſon of which I tolde
                  And leuen other thyng collaterall
                  Of hym thynke I my tale forth to holde
                  Both of his ioye, and of his cares colde
                  And his werke as touchyng this matere
                  For I it gan, I wol therto refere
               
               
                  within the tēple he went him forth playīg
                  This Troylus, of euery wyght about
                  On this lady, and now on that lokyng
                  where ſo ſhe were of towne, or of without
                  And vpon caſe befell, that through a rout
                  His eye perced, and ſo depe it went
                  Tyll on Creſeyde it ſmote, and there it ſtent
               
               
                  And ſodaynly for wonder wext aſtoned
                  And gan her bet beholde in thryfty wyſe
                  o very god thouȝt he, wher haſt thou wōned
                  That art ſo fayre, and goodly to deuyſe
                  Therwith his hert gan to ſprede and ryſe
                  And ſoft ſyghed, leſt men myght hym here
                  And caught ayen his fyrſt playing chere.
               
               
                  She nas nat with the moſt of her ſtature
                  But all her lymmes ſo wel anſwering
                  weren to womanhode, that creature
                  was neuer laſſe mannyſh in ſemyng
                  And eke the pure wyſe of her meanyng
                  Shewed wel, that men myght in her geſſe
                  Honour, eſtate, and womanly nobleſſe.
               
               
                  Tho Troylus, ryght wonder wel withall
                  Gan for to lyke her meanynge and her chere
                  which ſomdele deignous was, for ſhe let fal
                  Her loke alyte aſyde, in ſuche manere
                  Aſcaunces, what maye I not ſtonden here
                  And after that her lokyng gan ſhe lyght
                  That neuer thouȝt hym ſene ſo good a ſight
               
               
                  And of her loke to him there gan to quyckē
                  
                  So great deſyre and ſuche affection
                  That in his hertes botom gan to ſtycken
                  Of her his fyxe and depe impreſſyon
                  And though he erſt had pored vp & doune
                  Than was he glad his hornes in to ſhrynke
                  Vnethes wyſt he how to loke or wynke
               
               
                  Lo, he that lete hym ſeluen ſo connyng
                  And ſcorned hem that loues paynes dryen
                  was full vnware ye loue had his dwellyng
                  within the ſubtyll ſtremes of her eyen
                  That ſodaynly hy
                        •
                      thought he felt dyen
                  Ryght with her loke, the ſpyrite in his herte
                  Bleſſed be loue that thus can folke conuerte
               
               
                  She this in blacke lykyng to Troylus
                  Ouer al thyng he ſtode for to beholde
                  But his deſyre, ne whefore he ſtode thus
                  He neyther chere made, ne worde tolde
                  But from a ferre, his maner for to holde
                  On other thyng ſomtyme his loke he caſt
                  And eftte on her, whyle that the ſeruyce laſt
               
               
                  And after this, not fully
                        •
                     h all a whaped
                  Out of the temple all eſ
                        •
                     lyche he went
                  Repentyng hym that he had euer iaped
                  Of loues folke, leſt fully the diſcent
                  Of ſcorne fyl on him ſelfe but what he ment
                  Leſt it were wyſt on any maner ſyde
                  His wo he gan dyſſimulen and hyde
               
               
                  whan he was fro this tēple thus departed
                  He ſtreyght anon vnto his pallayes turneth
                  Right with her loke, thrugh ſhottē & darted
                  Al fayneth he in luſt that he ſoiourneth
                  And al his chere & ſpeche alſo he bourneth
                  And aye of loues ſeruauntes euery whyle
                  Hym ſelfe to wrie al hem he gan to ſmyle.
               
               
                  And ſayd lorde, ſo they lyue all in luſt
                  Ye louers for the conyngeſt of you
                  That ſerueth mooſt ententiflyche and beſt
                  Hym tyte as often harme therof as prowe
                  Your hyre is quyte ayen, yea god wot how
                  not wele for wele, but ſcorn for good ſeruice
                  In fayth your ordre is ruled in good wyſe
               
               
                  In no certayne bene your obſeruaunces
                  But it a ſely fewe poyntes be
                  Ne nothyng a reth ſo great atendaūces
                  As doth your laye, and that knowe all ye
                  But that is not the worſt, as mote I the
                  But tolde I you the worſt poynt, I leue
                  All ſayde I ſoth, ye wolden at me greue
               
               
                  But take this, that ye louers oft eſhewe
                  
                     Or els done of good entention
                  Full ofte thy lady wol it myſſe conſtrewe
                  And deme it harme in her opynion
                  And yet yf ſhe for other encheſon
                  Be wroth, thā ſhalt thou haue a groin anone
                  Lorde, wel is him that maye ben of you one
               
               
                  But for al this, whā that he ſeeth his tyme
                  He held his pees, non other bote him gayned
                  For loue began his fethers ſo to lyme
                  That wel vnneth vnto his folke he fayned
                  That other beſy nedes hym diſtrayned
                  So wo was hym, that what to done he nyſt
                  But bad his folke to gon where as hem lyſt
               
               
                  And whan that he in chambre was alone
                  He downe on his beddes fete hym ſette
                  And fyrſt he gan to ſyke, and efte to grone
                  And thought aye on her ſo withouten lette
                  That as he ſatte and woke, his ſpyrite mette
                  That he her ſaugh, and temple & all ye wyſe
                  Ryght of her loke, and gan it newe auyſe
               
               
                  Thus gā he make a myrrour of hys mynde
                  In whiche he ſaugh al holy her fygure
                  And that he wel coude in hys herte fynde
                  It was to him a right good auenture
                  To loue ſuche one, and yf he dyd hys cure
                  To ſeruen her, yet myght he fall in grace
                  Or els, for one of her ſeruauntes pace
               
               
                  Imaginyng, that traueyle nor grame
                  Ne myght, for ſo goodly one be lorne
                  As ſhe, ne hym for hys deſyre no ſhame
                  Al were it wyft, but in priſe and vp borne
                  Of al louers, wel more than beforne
                  This argumented he, in hys gynnyng
                  Full vnauyſed of hys wo commyng
               
               
                  Thus toke he purpoſe louers crafte to ſewe
                  And thought he wolde worken priuely
                  Fyrſt to hyde his deſyre in mewe
                  From euery wight yborne, al ouerly
                  But he myght aught recouered ben therby
                  Remēbryng him, that loue to wyde yblowe
                  Yelte bytter fruit, though ſwete ſede be ſowe
               
               
                  And ouer al this, ful mokel more he thought
                  what for to ſpeke, and what to holden inne
                  And what to arten, her to loue he ſought
                  And on a ſonge anon right to begynne
                  And gan loude on hys ſorowe for to wynne
                  For with good hope, he gan fully aſſente
                  Creſeyde for to loue, and nought repente
               
               
                  And of his ſonge not onely his ſentence
                  As writte myne auctour called Lollius
                  But playnly ſaue our tonges difference
                  I dare wel ſay, in all that Troylus
                  Said in his ſong, lo euery worde right thus
                  As I ſhall ſayne, and who ſo lyſte it here
                  Lo next this verſe, he may it fynde here.
               
               
                  ¶The ſonge of Troylus.
                  
                     IF no loue is, o god what fele I ſo
                  And yf loue is, what thīg and whiche is he
                  If Loue be good, frome whēce cometh my wo
                  If it be wycke, a wonder thynketh me
                  Whan euery turment and aduerſyte
                  That cometh of him, may to me ſauory thīke
                  For aye thurſt I the more that yche it drinke
               
               
                  And yf that at myne owne luſt I brenne
                  Frō whēce cometh my wayling & my pleynte
                  If harme agree me, wherto playn I thenne
                  I not, ne why, vnwery that I feynte
                  O quicke dethe, o ſwete harme ſo queynte
                  Howe may of the in me, be ſuche quantyte
                  But yf that I conſente that it ſo be
               
               
                  And yf that I conſente, I wrongfully
                  Complayne ywis, thus poſſed to and fro
                  Al ſtereleſſe within a bote am I
                  A mydde the ſee, atwyxen wyndes two
                  That in contrarie ſtonden euer mo
                  Alas, what is thys wonder maladye?
                  For heate of colde, for colde of heate I dye
               
               
                  And to the god of loue thus ſayd he
                  wyth pytous voyce, O lorde nowe yours is
                  My ſpyrite, whiche that ought yours be
                  You thanke I lorde, ye hā me brought to this
                  But whether goddeſſe or woman ywis
                  She be, I not whiche, that ye do me ſerue
                  But as her man I wol aye lyue and ſterue
               
               
                  Ye ſtonden in her eyen mightyly
                  As in a place to your vertue digne
                  
                     wherfore lorde, yf my ſeruyce or I
                  May lyken you, ſo beth to me benigne
                  For myne eſtate royall here I reſigne
                  In to her honde, and with full humble chere
                  Become her man, as to my lady dere
               
               
                  In hym ne deigned ſparen bloode royall
                  The fyre of loue, wherfro god me bleſſe
                  Ne hym forbare in no degre for all
                  Hys vertue, or his excellent proweſſe
                  But helde hym as his thrall lowe in diſtreſſe
                  And brende him ſo in ſondrie wyſe aye newe
                  That ſixty tymes a day he loſt his hewe
               
               
                  So mochel day fro day hys own thought
                  For luſte to her, gan quicken and increaſe
                  That eueryche other charge he ſet at nought
                  For thy full ofte, hys hotte fyre to ceaſe
                  To ſene her goodly loke he gan to preaſe
                  For therby to ben eaſed well he wende
                  And aye the nere he was, the more he brende
               
               
                  For aye the nere the fyre the hotter is
                  This (trowe I) knoweth all this companye
                  But were he ferre or nere, I dare ſay thys
                  By nyght or day, for wyſedom or folye
                  His herte, whyche that is his breſtes eye
                  was aye on her, that fayrer was to ſene
                  Than euer was Heleyne, or Polixene
               
               
                  Eke of the day there paſſed not an houre
                  That to him ſelfe a thouſande tyme he ſeyde
                  God goodly, to whom I ſerue and laboure
                  As I beſt can, nowe wolde god Creſeyde
                  Ye wolden on me rewe, er that I deyde
                  My dere herte alas, myne heele and hewe
                  And lyfe is loſte, but ye woll on me rewe
               
               
                  Al other dredes weren from hym fledde
                  Bothe of thaſſiege, and hys ſauacion
                  Ne in deſyre non other fownes bredde
                  But argumentes to hys concluſyon
                  That ſhe on hym wolde han compaſſyon
                  And he to ben her man, whyle he may dure
                  Lo here hys lyfe, and from his dethe his cure
               
               
                  The ſharpe ſhoures fell, of armes preue
                  That Hector or hys other bretherne dydden
                  Ne made hym only therfore ones meue
                  And yet washe, where ſo mē went or rydden
                  Founde one ye beſte, and lengeſt tyme abyden
                  There peryl was, and dyd eke ſuch trauayle
                  In armes, that to thynke it was meruayle
               
               
                  But for none hate he to the grekes had
                  Ne alſo for the reſcous of the toun
                  Ne made hym thus in armes for to mad
                  But onely lo, for thys concluſyoun
                  To lyken her the bette for hys renoun
                  Fro day to day in armes ſo he ſpedde
                  That the Grekes as the dethe hym dredde
               
               
                  And fro this forth to reſte him loue his ſlepe
                  And made his meate his foe, & eke his ſorow
                  Gan multiplye, that who ſo toke kepe
                  It ſhewed in his hewe both eue and morow
                  Therfore a tytle he gan hym for to borowe
                  Of other ſickneſſe, leſte men of hym wende
                  That the hotte fyre of loue hym brende
               
               
                  And ſayd he had a feuer, and fared amys
                  But were it certayne I can nat ſay
                  If that hys lady vnderſtode nat thys
                  Or fayned her ſhe nyſte, one of the twey
                  But well rede I, that by no maner wey
                  Ne ſemed it, that ſhe on hym rought
                  Or of hys payne, what ſo euer he thought
               
               
                  But than felte this Troylus ſuche wo
                  that he was wel nigh wode, for aye his drede
                  was this, that ſhe ſome wyght loued ſo
                  That neuer of hym ſhe wolde han takē hede
                  For which him thought he felt his hert blede
                  Ne of hys wo ne durſt he nought begynne
                  To tellen her, for all thys worlde to wynne
               
               
                  But whan he had a ſpace from his care
                  Thus to hym ſelfe full ofte he gan to playne
                  He ſayd, o foole nowe arte thou in the ſnare
                  That whylom iapedeſt at loues payne
                  Now art yu hēt, now gnaw thyn own chayn
                  Thou were aye woned eche louer reprehēde
                  Of thing fro which thou canſt yt not defende
               
               
                  What wol nowe euery louer ſayne of the
                  If this be wyſt▪ but euer in thyne abſence
                  Laughen in ſcorne, & ſayne lo there gothe he
                  That is the man of great ſapience
                  That helde vs louers leſte in reuerence
                  Now thāked be god, he may gon on ye daūce
                  Of hem that loue lyſte febly auaunce
               
               
                  But o thou wofull Troylus, god wolde
                  Syth thou muſt louen, through thy deſtyne
                  
                     That thou beſet were on ſuche one, yt ſholde
                  Knowe all thy wo, all lacked her pyte
                  But alſo colde in loue towardes the
                  Thy lady is, as froſte in wynter moone
                  And thou fordo, as ſnowe in fyre is ſoone
               
               
                  God wolde I were aryued in the porte
                  Of dethe, to whiche my ſorowe wol me lede
                  Ah lorde, to me it were a great comforte
                  Than were I quyt of languyſſyng in drede
                  For be my hyd ſorowe yblowe in brede
                  I ſhall beiaped ben a thouſande tyme
                  More than ye foole, of whoſe folye men ryme
               
               
                  But now helpe god, and ye ſwete, for whō
                  
                  I playne, ycaught ye neuer wight ſo faſte
                  O mercy dere herte, and helpe me from
                  The dethe, for I, while yt my lyfe may laſte
                  More than my ſelfe wol loue you to my laſte
                  And with ſome frēdly loke gladeth me ſwete
                  Though neuer more thyng ye me byhete
               
               
                  ¶Theſe wordes, & ful many an other mo
                  He ſpake, and called euer in hys compleynte
                  Her name, for to tellen her hys wo
                  Tyll nyghe that he in ſalte teeres dreynte
                  Al was for naught, ſhe herde not his pleynte
                  And whan that he bethought on that folye
                  A thouſande folde hys wo gan multiplye
               
               
                  Bewaylyng in hys chambre thus alone
                  A frende of hys, that called was Pandare
                  Came ones in vnware, and herde him grone
                  And ſawe hys frende in ſuche diſtreſſe & care
                  Alas (ꝙ he) who cauſeth all thys fare?
                  O mercy god, what vnhap may this mene?
                  Han nowe thus ſone grekes made you lene?
               
               
                  Or haſte thou ſome remorce of cōſcience?
                  And arte nowe fall in ſome deuocioun
                  And wayleſt for thy ſynne and thyne offence
                  And haſt for ferde caught a contricioun
                  God ſaue hem, that beſieged han our toun
                  That ſo can lay our iolyte on preſſe
                  And brynge our luſty folke to holyneſſe
               
               
                  Theſe wordes ſayd he for the nones all
                  That wt ſuch thing he miȝt him angry makē
                  
                  And with his anger don his ſorowe fal
                  As for a tyme, and hys corage awaken
                  But wel wyſte he, as ferre as tonges ſpaken
                  There nas a man of gretter hardyneſſe
                  Than he, ne more deſyred worthyneſſe
               
               
                  ¶what cas (ꝙ Troylus) or what auenture
                  Hath gyded the to ſene me languyſſyng
                  That am refuſe of euery creature?
                  But for the loue of god, at my prayeng
                  Go hence away, for certes my deyeng
                  woll the diſeſe, and I mote nedes dey
                  Therfore go way, there nys no more to ſey
               
               
                  But yf thou wene I be thus ſycke for drede
                  It is nat ſo, and therfore ſcorne nought
                  There is an other thyng I take of hede
                  well more thā aught ye grekes hā yet wrouȝt
                  which cauſe is of my deth for ſorow & thouȝt
                  But though that I nowe tell it the ne leſte
                  Be thou not wrothe, I hyde it for the beſte
               
               
                  This Pādare, ye nygh molte for wo & routh
                  Ful often ſayd alas, what may this be
                  Nowe frende (ꝙ he) yf euer loue or trouthe
                  Hath ben er this betwyxen the and me
                  Ne do thou neuer ſuche a cruelte
                  To hyden fro thy frende ſo great a care
                  woſte thou nat well that I am Pandare?
               
               
                  I woll parten with the all thy payne
                  If it ſo be I do the no comforte
                  As it is frendes right, ſothe for to ſayne
                  To enterparten wo, as glad diſporte
                  I haue and ſhall, for trewe or falſe reporte
                  In wronge and right yloued the al my lyue
                  Hyde nat thy wo fro me, but tell it blyue
               
               
                  Than gan this ſoroufull Troylus to ſyke
                  And ſaid him thus, God leue it be my beſt
                  To tellen the, for ſythe it may the lyke
                  Yet wol I tell it, though my herte breſt
                  And well wote I, thou mayſte do me no reſt
                  But leſte thou deme I truſte nat to the
                  Nowe herke frend, for thus it ſtant with me
               
               
                  Loue, ayenſt the whych who ſo defendeth
                  Hym ſeluen moſte, hym alder leeſt auayleth
                  with diſpeyre ſo ſoroufully me offendeth
                  That ſtreight vnto ye deth myne hert ſayleth
                  Therto deſyre, ſo brennyngly me aſſayleth
                  That to ben ſlayne it were a greater ioye
                  To me, than kyng of Grece be and of Troye
               
               
                  Suffyſeth this, my full frende Pandare
                  That I haue ſaid, for now woſt thou my wo
                  
                     And for the loue of god my colde care
                  So hyde it well, I tolde it neuer to mo
                  For harmes myghten folowen mo than two
                  If it were wyſt, but be thou in gladneſſe
                  And let me ſterue vnknowe of my diſtreſſe
               
               
                  Howe haſt thou thus vnkyndly & longe
                  Hyd this fro me, thou fole? (ꝙ Pandarus)
                  Parauenture thou mayſt after ſuch one lōge
                  That myn auyſe anon may helpen vs
                  This were a wonder thyng (ꝙ Troylus)
                  Thou couldeſt neuer in loue thy ſelfen wyſſe
                  How dyuel mayſt thou bringen me to blyſſe?
               
               
                  ¶Yea Troylus, now herke (ꝙ Pandare)
                  Though I be nyce, it happeth often ſo
                  That one that axes dothe full yuell fare
                  By good coūſayle can kepe his frende therfro
                  I haue my ſelfe ſeyne a blynde man go
                  There as he fell, that coude loken wyde
                  A foole may eke a wyſe man ofte gyde
               
               
                  A whetſtone is no keruyng inſtrument
                  But yet it maketh ſharpe keruyng tolis
                  And ther yu woſt that I haue aught miſwent
                  Eſchue thou that, for ſuche thyng to ſchole is
                  This often wyſe men ben ware by foolis
                  If thou ſo do, thy wyt is well bywared
                  By his contrarye is euery thyng declared
               
               
                  For how might euer ſwetneſſe haue be know
                  To hym, that neuer taſted bytterneſſe?
                  Ne no man wote what gladneſſe is I trow
                  That neuer was in ſorowe, or ſome diſtreſſe
                  Eke white by blacke, by ſhāe eke worthineſſe
                  Eche ſet by other, more for other ſemeth
                  As men may ſene, and ſo the wyſe it demeth
               
               
                  Sythe thus of two contraries is o lore
                  I that haue in loue ſo ofte aſſayed
                  Greuaunces, ought connen well the more
                  Counſaylen the, of that thou arte diſmayed
                  And eke the ne ought nat ben yuell apayed
                  Though I deſyre wyth the for to bere
                  Thyne heuy charge, it ſhall the laſſe dere
               
               
                  I wote well that it fared thus by me
                  As to thy brother Parys, an hierdeſſe
                  whyche that cleped was Oenone
                  wrote in a complaynte of her heuyneſſe
                  Ye ſawe the letter that ſhe wrote, I geſſ
                        •
                     
                  
                  Nay neuer yet iwys (ꝙ Troylus)
                  Nowe (ꝙ Pandare) herkeneth it was thus
               
               
                  Phebus, that fyrſt fonde arte of medicyne
                  (Quod ſhe) and coude in euery wightes care
                  Remedy and rede, by hertes he knewe fyne
                  Yet to hym ſelfe hys connyng was ful bare
                  For loue had hym ſo bounden in a ſnare
                  Al for the doughter of the kyng Admete
                  That all hys craft ne coude hys ſorowe bete
               
               
                  Right ſo fare I, vnhappy for me
                  I loue one beſt, and that me ſmerteth ſore
                  And yet parauenture can I reden the
                  And nat my ſelfe, repreue me no more
                  I haue no cauſe I wot well for to ſore
                  As dothe an hauke, that lyſteth for to play
                  But to thyne helpe, yet ſomwhat can I ſay
               
               
                  And of o thyng, right ſyker mayſt thou be
                  That certayne, for to dyen in the payne
                  That I ſhall neuer mo diſcouer the
                  Ne by my trouhe, I kepe not reſtreyne
                  The fro thy loue, all though it were Heleyne
                  That is thy brothers wyfe, yf yche it wyſte
                  Be what ſhe be, and loue her as the lyſt
               
               
                  Therfore, as frendfullyche in me aſſure
                  And tell me platte, what is thyn encheſon
                  And fynall cauſe of wo, that ye endure
                  For douteth nothyng, myne entencion
                  Nas nat to you of reprehenſyon
                  To ſpeke as nowe, for no wight may byreue
                  A man to loue, tyll that hym lyſt to leue
               
               
                  And weteth wel, that both two ben vycis
                  Myſtruſten all, or elles all leue
                  But well I wot, the meane of it no vyce is
                  As for to truſten ſome wight is a preue
                  Of trouth, and for thy wold I fayne remeue
                  Thy wronge cōceyte, & do yt ſom wight truſt
                  Thy wo to tell, and tell me yf the luſt
               
               
                  The wyſe eke ſayth, wo hym that is alone
                  For and he fall, he hath none helpe to ryſe
                  And ſythe thou haſte a felowe, tell thy mone
                  For thys nys nought certayne the next wyſe
                  To wynnen loue, as techen vs the wyſe
                  To walowe and wepe, as Niobe the quene
                  whoſe teeres yet in marble ben yſene
               
               
                  Let be thy wepyng, and thy dreryneſſe
                  And let vs lyſſen wo, wyth other ſpeche
                  
                     So may thy wofull tyme ſeme leſſe
                  Delyte naught in wo, thy wo to ſeche
                  As don theſe fooles, that her ſorowes eche
                  wyth ſorowe, whan they han miſauenture
                  And luſten nought to ſechen other cure
               
               
                  Men ſayne to wretche is conſolacion
                  To haue another felawe in his payne
                  That ought well ben our opinyon.
                  For bothe thou and I of loue playne
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      full of ſorowe am I ſothe to ſayne
                  That certainly, no more harde grace
                  May ſyt on me, for why there is no ſpace
               
               
                  If god woll, thou art nought agaſt of me
                  L
                        •
                     ſte I wolde of thy lady the begyle
                  Thou woſt thy ſelfe, whō that I loue parde
                  As I beſt can, gon ſythen longe whyle
                  And ſythen thou woſt, I do it for no wyle
                  And ſythe I am he, that thou truſteſt moſte
                  Crime ſomwhat, ſens al my wo thou woſte
               
               
                  ¶Yet Troylus, for al thys no word ſayde
                  But longe he lay ſtyll, as he deed were
                  And after thys, wyth ſykyng he abrayde
                  And to Pandarus voyce he lente hys eere
                  And vp his ayen caſte he, and than in ſeere
                  was Pandarus, leſte that in frenſeye
                  He ſhulde fall, or els ſone deye
               
               
                  And ſaid a wake, ful wonderlyche & ſharpe
                  what ſlombreſt thou as in a lytargye?
                  Or arte thou lyke an aſſe to the harpe
                  That hereth ſoun, whā men yt ſtringes ply?
                  But in hys mynde, of that no melodye
                  Maye ſynke him to gladen, for that he
                  So dull is, in hys beſtyalite
               
               
                  And with this, Pādare of his wordes ſtent
                  But Troylus to hym no thyng anſwerde
                  For why, to tel was nought hys entent
                  Neuer to no man, for whom that he ſo ferde
                  For it is ſayd, men maken ofte a yerde
                  wyth whiche the maker is hym ſelfe ybeten
                  In ſondrie maner, as theſe wyſe treten
               
               
                  And namelyche in hys counſayle tellyng
                  That toucheth loue, that ought ben 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     re
                  For of hym ſelfe it woll ynough out ſpryng
                  But yf that it the bet gouerned be
                  Eke ſomtyme it is crafte to ſeme ſlee
                  For thyng, whiche in effecte men huntē faſte
                  All this gan Troylus in hys herte caſte
               
               
                  But natheleſſe, whā he had herde him cry▪
                  
                  A wake he gan, and ſyke wonder ſore
                  And ſayd frende, though that I ſtyll lye
                  I nam nat deefe, nowe peace & crye no more
                  For I haue herde thy wordes, and thy lore
                  But ſuffre me my fortune to bewaylen
                  For thy prouerbes may nought me auaylen
               
               
                  Nor other cure canſt thou none for me
                  Eke I nyl not ben cured, I woll dey
                  what knowe I of the quene Niobe?
                  Let be thyne olde enſamples, I the prey
                  No frende (ꝙ Pandarus) therfore I ſey
                  Suche is delyte of fooles to bewepe
                  Her wo, but ſeken boote they ne kepe
               
               
                  Nowe knowe I that reſon in the fayleth
                  But tell me, yf I wyſte what ſhe were
                  For whom that the all miſauenture ayleth
                  Durſte thou that I tolde it in her eere
                  Thy wo, ſith thou darſt not thy ſelf for feere
                  And her beſought, on the to han ſome routhe
                  why nay (ꝙ he) by God and by my trouthe
               
               
                  What, not as beſily (ꝙ Pandarus)
                  As though myne owne lyfe lay in this nede
                  why no parde ſir (ꝙ thys Troylus)
                  And why? for that thou ſhuldeſt neuer ſpede
                  woſte thou that well? ye that is out of drede
                  (ꝙ Troylus) for al that euer ye conne
                  She wol to no ſuch wretche as I be wonne
               
               
                  (ꝙ Pandarus) alas what may this be
                  That thou diſpayred arte, thus cauſeleſſe
                  what, lyueth nat thy lady, benedicite
                  Howe woſt thou ſo, that thou arte graceleſſe
                  Suche yuel is not alwaye boteleſſe
                  why put nat impoſſible thus thy cure
                  Sythe thyng to come is ofte in auenture
               
               
                  I graunt wel that thou endureſt wo
                  As ſharpe as dothe he Teſiphus in hel
                  whoſe ſtomake foules tyren euer mo
                  That hyghten vultures, as bokes tell
                  But I may not endure that thou dwell
                  In ſo vnſkylfull an opinyon
                  That of thy wo nys no curacion
               
               
                  But ones nyll thou, for thy cowarde herte
                  And for thyne ire, & folyſhe wylfulneſſe
                  
                     For wantruſt tellen of thy ſorowes ſmerte
                  Ne to thyne owne helpe, do beſyneſſe
                  As moche as ſpeke a worde, ye more or leſſe
                  But lyeſt as he that of lyfe nothyng retche
                  what woman coude loue ſuche a wretche
               
               
                  what may ſhe demen other of thy dethe
                  If thou thus dye, and ſhe not why it is
                  But that for feare, is yolden vp thy brethe
                  For grekes han beſieged vs ywis
                  Lorde which a thāke ſhalt yu haue thā of this
                  Thus woll ſhe ſayne, & all the towne atones
                  The wretche is deed, ye diuel haue his bones
               
               
                  Thou mayſt alone here wepe, crye, & knele
                  But loue a woman that ſhe wote it nought
                  And ſhe wol quite it that thou ſhalte nat fele
                  Vnknowe vnkyſt, and loſt that is vnſought
                  what many a man hath loue full dere abouȝt
                  Twenty wynter that hys lady ne wyſte
                  That neuer yet hys ladys mouth he kyſte
               
               
                  what, ſhuld he therfore fallen in diſpayre?
                  Or be recreaunt for hys owne tene
                  Or ſlayne hym ſelfe, all be hys lady fayre
                  Nay nay: but euer in one be freſh and grene
                  To ſerue and loue, hys dere hertes quene
                  And thynke it is a guerdone her to ſerue
                  A thouſande parte more, than he can deſerue
               
               
                  And of that worde toke hede Troylus
                  And thought anone, what folye he was in
                  And howe that ſothe hym ſayde Pandarus
                  That for to ſleen him ſelf, might he nat wyn
                  But bothe done vnmanhode and a ſyn
                  And of hys dethe hys lady nought to wyte
                  For of hys wo, god wote ſhe knewe full lyte
               
               
                  And with ye thought, he gan full ſore ſyke
                  And ſayd, Alas: what is me beſt to do
                  To whom Pandare ſayd, yf the lyke
                  The beſt is, that thou tell me thy wo
                  And haue my trouth, but yf thou fynde it ſo
                  I be thy bote, or it be full longe
                  To peces do me drawe, and ſythen honge
               
               
                  Ye, ſo ſayſt thou (ꝙ Troylus) alas?
                  But god wote it is naught the rather ſo
                  Full harde it were to helpen in thys caas
                  For well fynde I, that fortune is my foe
                  Ne all the men that ryde conne or go
                  May of her cruell whele the harme withſtōd
                  For as her lyſt, ſhe playeth wyth fre & bonde
               
               
                  (ꝙ Pandarus) thā blameſt thou fortune
                  For thou arte wroth, ye nowe at erſt I ſe
                  woſt thou nat well that fortune is cōmune
                  To euery maner wight, in ſome degree
                  And yet thou haſt thys comforte, lo parde
                  That as her ioyes moten ouergone
                  So mote her ſorowes paſſen euerichone
               
               
                  For yf her whele ſtynt, any thyng to tourn
                  Than ceſſeth ſhe fortune anone to be
                  Now ſith her whele by no way may ſoiourn
                  what woſte thou yf her mutabylite
                  Right as thy ſeluen luſt woll don by the
                  Or that ſhe be nought ferre fro thyn helping
                  Parauenture thou haſte cauſe for to ſynge
               
               
                  And therfore woſte thou what, I yu beſeche
                  Let be thy wo, and turnyng to the grounde
                  For who ſo lyſt haue healyng of hys leche
                  To hym byhoueth firſt vnwrie hys wounde
                  To Cerberus in hell aye be I bounde
                  were it for my ſuſter all thy ſorowe
                  By my wyl ſhe ſhulde be thyn to morowe
               
               
                  Loke vp I ſay, and tel me what ſhe is
                  Anon, that I may gon aboute thy nede
                  Know y
                        •
                     h her aught, for my loue tel me this
                  Than wolde I hope rather for to ſpede
                  Tho gan the veyne of Troylus to blede
                  For he was hyt, and woxe all reed for ſhame
                  A ha (ꝙ Pandare) here begynneth game
               
               
                  And with yt worde, he gā him for to ſhake
                  And ſayd theſe, thou ſhalte her name tell
                  But tho gan ſely Troylus for to quake
                  As though men ſhulde han had him in to hel
                  And ſayd alas, of all my wo the well
                  Than is my ſwete foe called Creſcyde
                  And wel nigh wt the word for feare he deyde
               
               
                  And whā ye Pādare herde her name neuen
                  Lorde he was glad, and ſayd, frende ſo dere
                  Nowe fare a ryght, for Iones name in heuē
                  
                  Loue hath beſet the wel, be of good chere
                  For of good name, & wyſedom, and manere
                  She hath ynough, and eke of gentylleſſe
                  If ſhe be fayre, thou woſte thy ſelfe I geſſe
               
               
                  Ne neuer ſey a more bounteous
                  Of her eſtate, ne a gladder: ne of ſpeche
                  
                     A frendlyer, ne more gracious
                  For to do well, ne laſſe had nede to ſeche
                  what for to done, and all thys bet to eche
                  In honour, to as farre as ſhe maye ſtretche
                  A kynges herte ſemeth by hers a wretche
               
               
                  And for thy loke of good comforte thou be
                  For certaynly the fyrſt poynt is thys
                  Of noble corage, and well ordayne the
                  A man to haue peace wyth hym ſelfe ywys
                  So oughteſt thou, for nought but good it is
                  To louen well, and in a worthy place
                  The ought not clepe it happe, but grace
               
               
                  And alſo thynke, and therwyth glad the
                  That ſyth thy lady vertuous is all
                  So foloweth it, that there is ſome pyte
                  Amonges all theſe other in generall
                  And for they ſe that thou in ſpeciall
                  Requyre nought, that is ayen her name
                  For vertue ſtretcheth not hym ſelfe to ſhame
               
               
                  But well is me that euer I was borne
                  That thou beſet arte in ſo good a place
                  For by my troth ī loue I durſt haue ſworne
                  Thou ſhuld neuer haue tyde ſo fayre a grace
                  And woſt yu why▪ for yu were wont to chace
                  At loue in ſcorne, and for dyſpyte hem call
                  Saynt Idiote, lorde of theſe foles all
               
               
                  Now often haſt thou made thy nyce iapes
                  And ſayd, that loues ſeruauntes euerychone
                  Of nycete, ben very goddes apes
                  And ſome wolde monch her meate alone
                  Lyggynge a bedde, & make hem for to grone
                  And ſome thou ſaydeſt had a blaūche feuere
                  And praydeſt god, they ſhulde neuer keuere
               
               
                  And ſome of hem, toke on hem for ye colde
                  More then ynough, ſo ſaydeſt thou full ofte
                  And ſome han fayned ofte tyme and tolde
                  Howe that they waken, when they ſlepe ſoft
                  And thus they wold haue ſet hem ſelfe aloft
                  And natheleſſe were vnder at the laſt
                  Thus ſaydeſt thou, and 
                        •
                     apedeſt full faſt
               
               
                  Yet ſaydeſt thou, that for the more parte
                  Theſe louers wolde ſpeake in generall
                  And thoughten it was a ſyker arte
                  For faylynge for to aſſayen ouer al
                  Nowe maye I iape of the, yf that I ſhall
                  But natheles, though that I ſhulde dey
                  Thou arte none of tho, I dare well ſey
               
               
                  Nowe bete thy breſt, & ſay to god of Loue
                  Thy grace lorde, for nowe I me repent
                  Yf I myſpake, for nowe my ſelfe I loue
                  Thus ſaye wt all thyne herte, in good entent
                  (Quod Troylus) ah lorde, I me conſent
                  And pray to the, my iapes thou foryeue
                  And I ſhal neuer more whyle I lyue
               
               
                  Thou ſayſt wel, ꝙ Pādare, & nowe I hope
                  That thou the goddes wrath haſt al apeſed
                  And ſyth thou haſte wepten many a drope
                  And ſaid ſuch thīg, wherwt thy god is pleſed
                  Nowe wolde neuer god, but yu were eaſed
                  And thyncke wel ſhe, of whom ryſt al thy wo
                  Here after may thy comforte ben alſo
               
               
                  For thylke groūde, yt beareth ye wedes wycke
                  Beareth eke theſe holſome herbes, as ful ofte
                  Next the foule nettle, rough and thycke
                  The roſe wexeth, ſoote, ſmoth, and ſofte
                  And Next the valey ys the hyll a lofte
                  And next the derke nyght the glad morowe
                  And alſo ioye is next the fyne of ſorowe
               
               
                  Nowe loke that attempre be thy brydelle
                  And for the beſt aye ſuffre to the tyde
                  Or els all our labour is on ydell
                  He haſteth well, that wyſely can abyde
                  Be dyligent and trewe, and aye well hyd
                  Be luſty, free, perſeuer in thy ſeruyſe
                  And all is well, yf thou werke in thys wyſe
               
               
                  But he that departed is in euery place
                  Is no where hole, as writen clerkes wyſe
                  what wonder is, if ſuche one haue no grace
                  Eke woſt thou how it fareth of ſome ſeruyſe
                  As plante a tre or herbe, in ſondrie wyſe
                  And on the morowe pull it vp as blyue
                  No wonder is, though it may neuer thriue
               
               
                  And ſyth ye god of loue hath the beſtowed
                  In place digne vnto thy worthyneſſe
                  Stonde faſt, for to good porte haſt yu rowed
                  And of thy ſelfe, for any heueneſſe
                  Hope alwaye well, for but yf dreryneſſe
                  Or ouerhaſt our both labour ſhende
                  I hope of thys to maken a good ende
               
               
                  And woſt yu why, I am the laſſe afered
                  Of thys mater, wyth my nece trete
                  
                     For thys haue I herde ſaye of wyſe lered
                  was neuer man of woman yet beyete
                  That was vnapte to ſuffre loues hete
                  Celeſtiall, or els loue of kynde
                  For the ſome grace I hope in her to fynde
               
               
                  And for to ſpeake of her in ſpeciall
                  Her beauty to bethynken, and her youth
                  It ſyt her nought, to ben celeſtiall
                  As yet, though that her lyſt both and kouth
                  And truely it ſyt her well ryght nouth
                  A worthy knyght to louen and cheryce
                  And but ſhe do, I holde it for a vyce
               
               
                  wherfore I am, and woll ben aye redy
                  To payne me to do you thys ſeruyce
                  For both you to pleaſe, thys hope I
                  Here after, for ye ben both wyſe
                  And conne it counſayle kepe in ſuche a wyſe
                  That no man ſhall the wyſer of it be
                  And ſo we maye ben gladed all thre
               
               
                  And by my trouth I haue ryght nowe of the
                  A good conceyt, in my wytte as I geſſe
                  And what it is, I woll nowe that thou ſe
                  I thynke that ſyth Loue of hys goodneſſe
                  Hath the conuerted out of wyckedneſſe
                  That thou ſhalt ben the beſt poſt I leue
                  Of all hys laye, and moſte hys foes greue
               
               
                  Enſample why, ſe now theſe great clerkes
                  That erren aldermoſt ayen a lawe
                  And ben conuerted from her wycked werkes
                  Through grace of god, yt leſt hem to wtdraw
                  Then arne they folke yt han moſt god in awe
                  And ſtrengeſt faythed ben I vnderſtande
                  And conne an errour alderbeſt wythſtonde
               
               
                  whē Troylus had herde Pandare aſſented
                  To ben hys helpe, in louynge of Creſeyde
                  wext of hys wo, as who ſayeth vnturmēted
                  But hotter wext hys loue, and then he ſayd
                  wyth ſobre chere, as though hys hert playde
                  Nowe blyſful Venus helpe, er that I ſterue
                  Of ye Pandare, I mowe ſome thāke deſerue
               
               
                  But dere frende, howe ſhal my wo be leſſe
                  Tyll thys be done, and good eke tel me thys
                  How wylt thou ſayne of me & of my dyſtreſe
                  Leſt the be wrothe, thys drede I moſt ywys
                  Or woll not heren all, howe it is
                  All thys drede I, and eke for the manere
                  Of the her eme, ſhe nyll no ſuche thynge here
               
               
                  (Quod Pandarus) yu haſt a full great care
                  Leſt the chorle maye fall out of the moone
                  why lorde? I hate of the the nyce fare
                  why, entremete of that thou haſt to doone
                  For goddes loue, I bydde the a boone
                  So let me alone, and it ſhalbe thy beſte
                  why frende (ꝙ he) then done ryght as ye leſte
               
               
                  But herke Pandare o worde, for I nolde
                  That thou in me wendeſt ſo great foly
                  That to my lady I deſyren ſhulde
                  That toucheth harme, or any vylany
                  For dredleſſe me were leuer dye
                  Then ſhe of me ought els vnderſtood
                  But that, that myght ſownen into good
               
               
                  Tho lough this Pādarus, & anon anſwerde
                  And I thy borow, fye no wyght doth but ſo
                  I raught not though ſhe ſtode and herde
                  Howe yt thou ſayeſt, but fare well I woll go
                  A dieu, be glad, god ſpede vs both two
                  Yeue me thys labour, and thys buſyneſſe
                  And of my ſpede, be thyne all the ſwetneſſe
               
               
                  Tho Troylus gan downe on knees to fal
                  And Pandare in hys armes hente faſte
                  And ſayd, nowe fye on the grekes all
                  Yet parde, god ſhall helpen at laſte
                  And dredleſſe, yf that my lyfe maye laſte
                  And god to forne, lo ſome of hem ſhall ſmerte
                  And yet me athinketh yt this auaūt maſterte
               
               
                  Nowe Pandare, I can no more ſay
                  Thou wyſe, thou woſt, thou mayſt, yu art all
                  My lyfe, my death, hole in thyne hōde I lay
                  Help me now (ꝙ he) yes by my trouth I ſhal
                  God yelde the frende, & thys in ſpecyall
                  (Quod Troylus) that thou me recōmaunde
                  To her that maye me to the death cōmaunde
               
               
                  ¶Thys Pandarus tho, deſyrous to ſerue
                  Hys full frende, he ſayd in thys manere
                  Farewell, & thynke I wol yt thāke deſerue
                  Haue here my trouth, & that thou ſhalt here
                  And went his way, thynking on this matere
                  And how he beſt might beſechen her of grace
                  And fynde a tyme therto, and a place
               
               
                  For euery wight that hath a houſe to foūde
                  He renneth not the worke for to begynne
                  
                     wyth rakel hande, but he woll byde a ſtoōde
                  And ſende hys hertes lyne out fro wythin
                  Alderfyrſt hys purpoſe for to wynne
                  All thys Pandare in hys herte thought
                  And caſt his werke ful wiſely er he wrought
               
               
                  But Troylus lay tho no lenger downe
                  But anone vpon hys ſtede baye
                  And in the felde he played the lyoun
                  wo was ye greke, yt wyth hym met that daye
                  And in the towne, his maner tho forth aye
                  So goodly was, and gat hym ſo in grace
                  That eche hym loued, that loked in hys face
               
               
                  For he bycame the frendlyeſt wyght
                  The gentyleſt, and eke the moſte fre
                  The thryftyeſt, and one the beſt knyght
                  That in hys tyme was, or myght be
                  Deed were hys iapes and hys cruelte
                  Hys hygh porte, and hys maner ſtraunge
                  And eche of hem, gan for a vertue chaunge
               
               
                  Nowe let vs ſtynte of Troylus a ſtounde
                  That fareth lyke a man, that hurte is ſore
                  And is ſomedele of akynge of hys wounde
                  Yleſſed well, but healed no dele more
                  And as an eaſy pacient the lore
                  Abyte, of hym that goeth aboute hys cure
                  And thus he dryueth forth hys auenture
               
               ¶Explicit liber primus.
            
            
               
                  
                     OVt of theſe black wawes for to ſayle
                  O wynde, the weder gynneth clere
                  For in thys ſee, the bote hath ſuche trauayle
                  Of my connynge, that vnneth I it ſtere
                  Thys ſee clepe I the tempeſtous matere
                  Of dyſpayre, that Troylus was in
                  But nowe of hope the kalendes begyn
               
               
                  O lady myne that called arte Cleo
                  Thou be my ſpede fro thys forth, & my muſe
                  To ryme well thys boke tyll I haue do
                  Me nedeth here none other arte to vſe
                  For why, to euery louer I me excuſe
                  That of no ſentement I thys endyte
                  But out of latyn, in my tonge it wryte
               
               
                  wherfore I nyl haue neither thāke ne blame
                  Of all thys worke, but pray you mekely
                  Dyſblameth me, yf any worde be lame
                  For as myne auctour ſayd, ſo ſay I
                  Eke though I ſpake of loue vnfelyngly
                  No wonder is, for it no thynge of newe is
                  A blynde man can not iugen well in hewis
               
               
                  I knowe yt in forme of ſpeche is chaunge
                  wythin a thouſande yere, and wordes tho
                  That haddē pryſe, now wōder nyce & ſtrāge
                  Thynketh hem, and yet they ſpake hem ſo
                  And ſpedde as well in loue, as men nowe do
                  Eke for to wynnen loue, in ſondrye ages
                  In ſondrye londes, ſondrye ben vſages
               
               
                  And for thy, yf it happe in any wyſe
                  That here be any louer in thys place
                  That herkeneth, as the ſtory woll deuyſe
                  Howe Troylus came to hys ladyes grace
                  And thynketh, ſo nolde I not loue purchace
                  Or wondreth on hys ſpeche or hys doynge
                  I not, but it is to me no wondrynge
               
               
                  For euery wight, which that to Rome went
                  Halte not o path, ne alwaye o manere
                  Eke in ſome lande were all the gamen ſhent
                  Yf that men farde in loue, as men done here
                  As thus, in open doynge or in chere
                  In vyſityng, in forme, or ſayd our ſawes
                  For thy mē ſayne, ech coūtre hath his lawes
               
               
                  Eke ſcarſely ben there in thys place thre
                  That haue in loue ſayd lyke, and done in all
                  For to thys purpoſe thys maye lyken the
                  And the ryght nought, yet all is done or ſhall
                  Eke ſome mē graue in tre, ſome in ſtone wall
                  As it betyde, but ſyth I haue begonne
                  Myne authour ſhal I folowe, as I konne.
               
               ¶Explicit prohemium.
            
            
               
                  
                     IN May that mother is of monthes glade
                  That freſhe floures, blewe, whyte, and rede
                  Ben quycke ayen, that wynter deed made
                  And full of baume is fletynge euery mede
                  whē Phebus doth her bryght beames ſprede
                  Ryght in the whyte Bole, it ſo betydde
                  As I ſhal ſynge, on Mayes daye the thrydde
               
               
                  
                  That Pandarus for all hys wyſe ſpeche
                  Felte eke hys parte of loues ſhottes kene
                  That coude he neuer ſo wel of louyng preche
                  It made hys hewe a daye full ofte grene
                  So ſhope it, that hym fyll that daye a tene
                  In loue, for whych in wo to bedde he wente
                  And made er it were daye full many a wente
               
               
                  The ſwalowe Proigne, with a ſorowful lay
                  whē morow come, gan make her waimēting
                  why ſhe forſhapen was, and euery lay
                  Pandare a bedde, halfe in a ſlomberyng
                  Tyl ſhe ſo nygh hym made her waymētyng
                  Howe Thereus gan forth her ſuſter take
                  That wyth the noyſe of her he gan a wake
               
               
                  And to call, and dreſſe hym vp to ryſe
                  Remēbrynge hym, hys arande was to done
                  From Troylus, and eke hys great empryſe
                  And caſt, & knewe in good plyte was ye mone
                  To done voyage, and toke hys way full ſone
                  Vnto hys neces paleys, there beſyde
                  Nowe Ianus god of entre, thou hym gyde
               
               
                  when he was come vnto hys neces place
                  where is my lady, to her folke (quod he)
                  And they him tolde, and in forth he gan pace
                  And founde two other ladyes ſyt and ſhe
                  wythin a paued parlour, and they thre
                  Herden a mayden hem reden the geſte
                  Of the ſiege of Thebes, whyle hem leſte
               
               
                  (Quod Pandarus) madame god you ſe
                  wyth your boke, and all the companye
                  Eygh vncle myne, welcome ywys (quod ſhe)
                  And vp ſhe roſe, and by the honde in hye
                  She toke hym faſte, & ſayd, thys nyght thrye
                  To good mote it turne, of you I mette
                  And wt that word, ſhe down on bēch him ſet
               
               
                  Yea nece, ye ſhul faren well the bet
                  Yf God woll all thys yere (quod Pandarus)
                  But I am ſory that I haue you let
                  To herken of your boke ye prayſen thus
                  For goddes loue what ſayeth it, tel it vs
                  Is it of loue, or ſome good ye me lere
                  Vncle (ꝙ ſhe) your mayſtreſſe is not here
               
               
                  wyth yu they gonnen laugh, & tho ſhe ſeyde
                  Thys romaunce is of Thebes, that we rede
                  And we haue herd how ye kyng Layus deyde
                  Through Edippus hys ſonne, & al the deede
                  And here we ſtynten, all theſe letters reede
                  Howe the byſhop, as the boke can tell
                  Amphiorax, fyl through the grounde to hell
               
               
                  (Quod Pādarus) al thys knowe I my ſelue
                  And all thaſſiege of Thebes, and the care
                  For herof ben there maked bokes twelue
                  But let be thys, and tell me howe ye fare
                  Do way your barbe, & ſhewe your face bare
                  Do way your boke, ryſe vp & let vs daunce
                  And let vs done to May ſome obſeruaunce
               
               
                  Eygh, god forbyd (ꝙ ſhe) be ye mad
                  Is that a wydowes lyfe, ſo god you ſaue
                  By god ye maken me ryght ſore adrad
                  Ye ben ſo wylde, it ſemeth as ye raue
                  It ſate me well bet aye in a caue
                  To byde, and rede in holy ſayntes lyues
                  Let maydens gone to daūce, & yonge wyues
               
               
                  As euer thryue I (quod thys Pandarus)
                  Yet coulde I tell a thynge, to done you playe
                  Nowe vncle dere (quod ſhe) tell it vs
                  For goddes loue, is then thaſſiege aweye
                  I am of grekes ferde, ſo that I deye
                  Nay nay (ꝙ he) as euer mote I thryue
                  It is a thynge well bet then ſuche lyue
               
               
                  Yea holy god (ꝙ ſhe) what thynge is that
                  what bet then ſuche fyue? eygh nay ywys
                  For al thys worlde, ne can I reden what
                  It ſhulde ben, ſome iape I trowe it is
                  And but your ſeluen tell vs what it is
                  My wyt is for to arede it all to leene
                  As helpe me god, I not what that ye meene
               
               
                  And I your borowe, ne neuer ſhall (ꝙ he)
                  This thing be told to you, as mote I thryue
                  And why vncle myne, why ſo (ꝙ ſhe)
                  By god (ꝙ he) that woll I tell as blyue
                  For prouder woman is there none on lyue
                  And ye it wyſte, in al the towne of Troye
                  I iape not, ſo euer haue I ioye
               
               
                  Tho gan ſhe wondren more then before
                  A thouſande folde, & downe her eyen caſte
                  For neuer ſyth the tyme that ſhe was bore
                  To knowen thynge, deſyred ſhe ſo faſte
                  And wyth a ſyke, ſhe ſayd hym at the laſte
                  Nowe vncle myne, I nyll you not dyſpleſe
                  Nor aſken more, that may do you dyſeſe
               
               
                  
                  So after thys, wyth many wordes glade
                  And frendly tales, and wyth mery chere
                  Of thys & that they ſpeake, & gonnen wade
                  In many an vnkouth glad & depe matere
                  As frendes done, when they bethe yfere
                  Tyll ſhe gan aſken hym howe Hector ferde
                  That was the townes wall, & grekes yerde
               
               
                  Ful wel I thanke it god, ſayd Pandarus
                  Saue in hys arme he hath a lytel wounde
                  And eke hys freſhe brother Troylus
                  The wyſe worthy Hector the ſeconde
                  In whome that euery vertue lyſt habounde
                  As all trouth, and all gentylneſſe
                  wyſedome, honoure, fredom, & worthyneſſe
               
               
                  In good fayth eme (ꝙ ſhe) that lyketh me
                  They faren well, god ſaue hem both two
                  For truelych, I holde it great deynte
                  A kynges ſonne in armes well to do
                  And be of good condicions therto
                  For great power, and morall vertue here
                  Is ſelde yſene in one perſone yfere
               
               
                  In good fayth that is ſoth (ꝙ Pandarus)
                  But by my trouth, ye kinge hath ſonnes twey
                  That is to meane, Hector and Troylus
                  That certaynly though that I ſhulde dey
                  They ben as voyde of vyces, dare I ſey
                  As any men that lyuen vnder ſonne
                  Her might is wide yknow, & what they cōne
               
               
                  Of Hector nedeth it nomore for to tell
                  In all this worlde, there nys a better knight
                  Then he that is of worthynes the well
                  And he well more vertue hath then myght
                  Thys knoweth many a wiſe & worthy kniȝt
                  The ſame pryſe of Troylus I ſey
                  God helpe me ſo, I knowe not ſuche twey
               
               
                  By god (ꝙ ſhe) of Hector that is ſoth
                  Of Troylus the ſame thynge trowe I
                  For dredeleſſe, men telleth that he doth
                  In armes daye by daye, ſo worthely
                  And beareth hym here at home ſo gentilly
                  To euery wyght, that all pryſe hath he
                  Of hem that me were leueſt prayſed be
               
               
                  Ye ſay ryght ſoth ywys (ꝙ Pandarus)
                  For yeſterday, who ſo had wyth hym ben
                  Myght haue wondred vpon Troylus
                  For neuer yet ſo thycke a ſwarme of been
                  Ne flewe, as grekes fro hym gan fleen
                  And through the feld in euery wyghtes eere
                  There was no crye, but Troylus is there
               
               
                  Now here, now there, he hunted hem ſo faſt
                  There nas but grekes blode, and Troylus
                  Nowe hem he hurte, & hym al downe he caſt
                  Aye where he went it was arayed thus
                  He was her dethe, and ſhelde & lyfe for vs
                  That as yt day, there durſt him none wtſtōde
                  whyle yt he helde hys blody ſwerde in honde
               
               
                  Vherto he is the frendlyeſt man
                  Of great eſtate, that euer I ſawe my lyue
                  And where hym lyſt, beſt felowſhyp ran
                  To ſuche as hym thynketh able for to thryue
                  And wyth ye worde, tho Pandarus as blyue
                  He toke hys leaue, and ſayd I woll gon hen
                  Nay, blame haue I vncle (ꝙ ſhe then)
               
               
                  what ayleth you to be thus wery ſoone
                  And namelyche of women, woll ye ſo?
                  Naye ſytteth downe, by god I haue to done
                  wyth you, to ſpeake of wyſedome er ye go
                  And euery wyght that was about hem tho
                  That herde that, gan ferre awaye to ſtonde
                  whyle they two had al that hem lyſt in hōde
               
               
                  when yt her tale al brought was to an ende
                  Of her eſtate, and of her gouernaunce
                  (Quod Pandarus) now tyme is yt I wende
                  But yet I ſay, aryſeth let vs daunce
                  And caſt your wydowes habyt to miſchaūce
                  what lyſt you thus your ſelfe to dyſfygure
                  Syth you is tydde ſo glad an aduenture
               
               
                  But well bethought, for loue of god (ꝙ ſhe)
                  Shall I not weten what ye meane of thys
                  No, thys thyng aſketh leyſer tho (ꝙ he)
                  And eke me wolde moche greue ywys
                  Yf I it tolde, and ye it toke amys
                  Yet were it bet my tonge to holde ſtyll
                  Then ſaye a ſoth, yt were ayenſt your wyll
               
               
                  For nece, by the goddeſſe Mynerue
                  And Iupiter, that maketh the thōder rynge
                  And the blyſfull Venus, that I ſerue
                  Ye ben the woman in thys worlde lyuynge
                  wythouten paramours, to my wetynge
                  That I beſt loue, and lotheſt am to greue
                  And that ye weten well your ſelfe I leue
               
               
                  
                  Iwys myne vncle (quod ſhe) graūt mercy
                  Your frendſhyp haue I founden euer yet
                  I am to no man holden truely
                  So moche as you, and haue ſo lytell quyt
                  And wyth the grace of god, emforth my wyt
                  As in my gylte, I ſhall you neuer offende
                  And yf I haue er thys I woll amende
               
               
                  But for the loue of god, I you beſeche
                  As ye be he, that I loue moſte and tryſte
                  Let be to me your fremed maner ſpeche
                  And ſaye to me your nece, what ye lyſte
                  And wyth yt worde, her vncle anone her kyſt
                  And ſayd, gladly my leue nece dere
                  Take it for good, that I ſhall ſaye you here
               
               
                  wyth that ſhe gan her eyen downe to caſt
                  And Pandarus to cough gan a lyte
                  And ſayd: Nece alwaye lo, to the laſte
                  Howe ſo it be, that ſome men hem delyte
                  wyth ſubtel arte her tales for tendyte
                  Yet for all that in her entencioun
                  Her tale is all for ſome concluſioun
               
               
                  And ſyth thende is euery tales ſtrength
                  And thys mater is ſo behouely
                  what ſhulde I paynt, or drawen on length
                  To you that ben my frende ſo faythfully
                  And with that word he gan ryght inwardly
                  Beholden her, and loken in her face
                  And ſayd, on ſuche a myrrour good grace
               
               
                  Then thought he thus, yf I my tale endyte
                  Aught harde, or make a proceſſe any whyle
                  She ſhall no ſauour haue therin but lyte
                  And trowe I wolde her in my wyll begyle
                  For tendre wyttes wenen all be wyle
                  where as they can not playnlych vnderſtōde
                  For thy her wyt to ſeruen woll I fonde
               
               
                  And loked on her in a beſy wyſe
                  And ſhe was ware that he behelde her ſo
                  Ah lorde (ꝙ ſhe) ſo faſt ye me auyſe
                  Sawe ye me neuer er now, what ſay ye no?
                  Yes yes (ꝙ he) and bet woll er I go
                  But by my trouth I thought nowe, yf ye
                  Be fortunate, for nowe men ſhall it ſe
               
               
                  For euery wyght, ſome goodly auenture
                  Somtyme is ſhape, yf he it can receyuen
                  But yf he nyll take of it no cure
                  when that it cometh, but wilfully it weyuen
                  Lo, neyther caſe nor fortune hym deceyuen
                  But ryght hys owne ſlouth & wretchydneſſe
                  And ſuch a wyght is for to blame I geſſe
               
               
                  Good auenture, O belle nece haue ye
                  Full lyghtly founden, and ye conne it take
                  And for the loue of god, and eke of me
                  Catche it anone, leſt auenture flake
                  what ſhulde I lenger proceſſe of it make
                  Yeue me your hōde for in this world is none
                  Yf that you lyſt a wyght ſo well begone
               
               
                  And ſyth I ſpeake of good ententioun
                  As I to you haue tolde well here beforne
                  And loue as well your honour and renoun
                  As any creature in all the worlde yborne
                  By all the othes that I haue you ſworne
                  And ye be wroth therfore, or wene I lye
                  Ne ſhall I neuer ſene you efte wyth eye
               
               
                  Beth not agaſt, ne quaketh not, wherto
                  Ne chaungeth not for feare ſo your hewe
                  For hardely the worſt of thys is do
                  And though my tale as now be to you newe
                  Yet truſt alwaye, ye ſhall me fynde trewe
                  And were it thynge yt me thought vnſyttyng
                  To you wolde I no ſuche tales bryng
               
               
                  Nowe my good eme, for goddes loue I pray
                  (Quod ſhe) come of and tell me what it is
                  For both I am agaſt what ye woll ſay
                  And eke me longeth it to wete ywys
                  For whether it be well, or be amys
                  Say on, let me not in thys feare dwell
                  So woll I done, nowe herkeneth I ſhal tel
               
               
                  Nowe nece myne, the kynges dere ſonne
                  The good wyſe worthy, freſhe and free
                  whych alwaye for to done wel is his wonne
                  The noble Troylus ſo loueth the
                  That but ye helpe it woll hys barte be
                  Lo here is all, what ſhulde I more ſey
                  Doth what you lyſt, to make him lyue or dey
               
               
                  But yf ye let hym dye, I woll ſteruen
                  Haue here my trouth, nece I nyl not lyen
                  Al ſhuld I with thys knyfe my throte keruē
                  
                  wyth that the teeres burſt out of hys eyen
                  And ſayd, yf that ye done vs both dyen
                  Thus gyltleſſe, then haue ye fyſhed fayre
                  what mende ye, though yt we both apayre
               
               
                  
                  Alas, he which that is my lorde ſo dere
                  That true man, that noble gentle knyght
                  That nought deſyreth, but your frendlye chere
                  I ſe him dyen, there he goth vpright
                  And haſteth hym with al his full myght
                  For to ben ſlayne, yf hys fortune aſſent
                  Alas that god you ſuche a beautye ſent
               
               
                  Yf it be ſo, that ye ſo cruell be
                  That of his deth you lyſteth nought to rech
                  That is ſo true and worthy as we ſe
                  Nomore than of a iaper or a wretche
                  Yf ye be ſuche, your beautie may not ſtretch
                  To make a mendes of ſo cruell a dede
                  Auyſement is good before the nede.
               
               
                  wo worth the fayre Geme vertuleſſe
                  wo worth that herbe alſo that doth no bote
                  wo worth the beautie that is routhleſſe
                  wo worth ye wyght yt trede eche vnder fote
                  And ye that ben of beautye crop and rotte
                  Yf therwithall in you ne be no routh
                  Than is harme ye lyuen by my trouth
               
               
                  And alſo thynke wel, that this is no gaude
                  For me were leuer, thou I and he
                  wer hāged, than I ſhuld be his baude
                  As hygh as men myght on vs all yſe
                  I am thyne Eme, the ſhame were to me
                  As well as the, yf that I ſhulde aſſent
                  Thrugh myne abet, that he thyne honoure ſhent
               
               
                  Now vnderſtōd, for I you nought requyre
                  To bynde you to hym through no beheſt
                  Saue only that ye make hym better chere
                  Than ye han done er this, & more feeſt
                  So that his lyfe ſaued at the leeſt
                  This all and ſome, and playnly our entent
                  God helpe me ſo, I neuer other ment
               
               
                  Lo, this requeſt is nought but ſkyll iwys
                  Ne dout of reſon parde is there none
                  I ſet the worſt, that ye dreden this
                  Men wold wōdre to ſene hym come & gone
                  Therayenſt anſwer I this anon
                  That euery wight, but he be foole of kynde
                  wol deme it loue of frēdſhip in his mynde
               
               
                  what, who woll demen though he ſe a man
                  To temple gon, that he the ymages eeteth
                  Thynke eke, howe wel and wyſely yt he can
                  Gouerne hym ſelfe, yt he nothinge foryeteth
                  That where he cōmeth he pris & thōk hī getteth
                  And eke therto he ſhal com here ſo ſeld
                  what force were it, though all the towne be helde.
               
               
                  Such loue of frendes reigneth al this toun
                  And wrye you in that mantell euermo
                  And god ſo wys be my ſauacion
                  As I haue ſayd, your beſt is to do ſo
                  But good nece alway to ſtynt his wo
                  So let your daunger, ſugred ben alyte
                  That of his death ye be nat all to wyte
               
               
                  ¶Creſeyde which yt herd hym in this wyſe
                  Thought, I ſhal felē what he meneth iwis
                  Now Eme (ꝙ ſhe) what wolde ye deuyſe?
                  what is your rede, I ſhulde done of this?
                  That is well ſayd (ꝙ he) certayne beſt is
                  That ye hym loue ayen for his louyng
                  As loue for loue is ſkylfull guerdonynge
               
               
                  Thynke eke how elde waſteth euery houre
                  In eche of you a parte of beautye
                  And therfore er that age the deuoure
                  Go loue, for olde there woll no wyght of ye
                  
                  Let this prouerbe, a lore vnto you be
                  To late yware, ꝙ bautie, whan it paſt
                  And elde counteth daunger at the laſt
               
               
                  The kynges foole is wont to crye loude
                  whā yt him thinketh a womā bereth her hye
                  So longe mote ye loue, and all proude
                  Tyll crowes feet growe vnder your eye
                  And ſend you than a myrrour in to prye
                  In which yt ye maye ſe your face a morowe
                  Nece, I byd wyſh you nomore ſorowe
               
               
                  with this he ſtynt, and caſt downe the heed
                  And ſhe began to breſt a wepe anon
                  And ſayd alas for wo, why nere I deed
                  For of this worlde, the fayth is all agone
                  Alas, what ſhulden ſtraunge to me done
                  whan he that for my beſt frende I wende
                  Rate me to laue, and ſhulde it me defende.
               
               
                  Alas, I wolde haue truſted doutleſſe
                  That yf that I, thrugh my diſaduenture
                  Had loued eyther hym or Achilles
                  Hector, or any maner creature
                  Ye nolde haue had no mercy ne meaſure
                  On me, but alwaye had me in repreue
                  This falſe worlde alas who may it leue?
               
               
                  
                  what? is this all the ioye and all the feeſt?
                  Is this your rede? is this my blyſful caas?
                  Is this the very mede of your beheſt?
                  Is all this paynted proceſſe ſayd (alas)
                  Ryght for this fyne, O lady myne Pallas
                  Thou in this dredefull caſe for me purueye
                  For ſo aſtonyed am I, that I dye.
               
               
                  with that ſhe gan full ſorowfully to ſyke
                  Ne may it be no bet (quod Pandarus)
                  By god I ſhal nomore come here this weke
                  And god toforne, that am myſtruſted thus
                  I ſe well nowe, ye ſetten lyght of vs
                  Or of our death, alas I wofull wretche
                  Myght he yet lyue, of me were nought to retche.
               
               
                  O cruell god, O diſpytous Marte
                  O ſuries thre of hell, on you I crye
                  So let me neuer out of this houſe departe
                  Yf that I ment harme or vyllanye
                  But ſyth I ſe my lorde mote nedes dye
                  And I with hym here I me ſhryue and ſey
                  That wyckedly ye done vs both dey
               
               
                  But ſyth it lyketh you that I be deed
                  By Neptunus that god is of the ſee
                  Fro this forth ſhall I neuer eten breed
                  Tyll I myne owne hert bloude maye ſe
                  For certayne I woll dye as ſone as he
                  And vp he ſtert, & on his waye he raught
                  Tyll ſhe agayne hym by the lappe caught.
               
               
                  Creſeyde, which ye welnygh ſtarfe for feare
                  So as ſhe was the fearfulleſt wyght
                  That might be and herde eke with her care
                  And ſawe the ſorowful erneſt of the knight
                  And in his prayer ſawe eke none vnryght
                  And for the harme eke that might fall more
                  She gan to rewe, & dred her wonder ſore
               
               
                  And thought this, vnhappes fallen thycke
                  All day for loue, and in ſuche maner caas
                  As men ben cruell in hem ſelfe and wicke
                  And yf this man ſlee here hym ſelfe alaas
                  In my preſence, it nyl be no ſolace
                  what men wolde of it deme, I can nat ſaye
                  It nedeth me ful ſlyghly for to playe
               
               
                  And with a ſorowfull ſygh ſhe ſayd thrye
                  Ah lorde, what me is tyd a ſory chaunce
                  For myne aſtate lyeth in a ieopardye
                  And eke myne emes lyfe lyeth in balaunce
                  But natheleſſe, with gods gouernaunce
                  I ſhall ſo done, myne honour ſhal I kepe
                  And eke his lyfe, and ſtynt for to wepe
               
               
                  Of harmes two, the leſſe is for to cheſe
                  Yet had I leuer maken hym good chere
                  In honour, than myne emes lyfe to leſe
                  Ye ſayne ye nothyng els me requere?
                  No wys (ꝙ he) myne owne nece dere
                  Now wel (ꝙ ſhe) & I wyll do my payne
                  I ſhal myne hert ayen my luſt conſtrayne
               
               
                  But yt I nyll nat holden hym in honde
                  Ne loue a man, that can I nought ne maye
                  Ayenſt my wyll, but els wol I fonde
                  Myn honor ſaue, pleſē him from day today
                  Therto nolde I nat ones haue ſayde naye
                  But that I dred, as in my fantaſye
                  But ceſſe cauſe, aye ceſſeth maladye.
               
               
                  But here I make a proteſtation
                  That in his proceſſe yf ye deper go
                  That certaynly, for no ſauacion
                  Of you, though that ye ſteruen both two
                  Though all the worlde on a day be my ſo
                  Ne ſhall I neuer on hym haue other routh
                  I graūt wel (ꝙ Pandare) by my trouth.
               
               
                  But maye I truſt wel to you (quod he)
                  That of this thyng yt ye han hyght me here
                  Ye woll it holde truly vnto me
                  yea doutleſſe (quod ſhe) myne vncle dere
                  Ne that I ſhal haue cauſe in this matere
                  (Quod he) to playne, or ofter you to preche
                  why no parde, what nedeth more ſpeche.
               
               
                  Tho fyll they in other tales glade
                  Tyll at the laſt, O good eme (quod ſhe tho)
                  For loue of god which that vs both made
                  Tell me how fyrſt ye wyſten of his wo
                  wot none of it but ye, he ſayd no
                  Can he wel ſpeke of loue (ꝙ ſhe) I prey
                  Tel me, for I the bet me ſhal puruey
               
               
                  Tho Pandarus a lyte gan to ſmyle
                  And ſayd: By my trouth I ſhall now tell
                  This other daye nat gone full longe whyle
                  within the paleyes garden by a well
                  Gan he and I, well halfe a daye to dwell
                  Ryght for to ſpeken of an ordinaunce
                  How we the Grekes mitghten diſauaunce.
               
               
                  
                  Soone after that we gone for to lepe
                  And caſten with our dartes two and fro
                  Tyll at the laſt he ſayd, he wolde ſlepe
                  And on the graſſe adowne, he layd him tho
                  And I after gan to romen to and fro
                  Tyll that I herde, as I walked alone
                  How he began full wofully to grone
               
               
                  Tho gan I ſtalke hym ſoftly behynde
                  And ſekerly the ſoth for to ſayne
                  As I can clepe ayen now to my mynde
                  Right thus to loue he gan hym for to playn
                  He ſayde lorde, haue routh vpon my payne
                  All haue I ben rebell in myne entent
                  Nowe (Men culpa) Lorde I me repent
               
               
                  O god, that at thy diſpoſition
                  Ledeſt the fyne, by iuſt purueyaunce
                  Of euery wyght, my lowe confeſſion
                  Accept in gree, & ſende me ſuche penaunce
                  As lyketh the, but from diſeſperaunce
                  That may my gooſt depart alway fro the
                  Thou be my ſhylde for thy benignitie.
               
               
                  For certes lord ſo ſore hath ſhe me woūded
                  That ſtode in black: with lokyng of her eyē
                  
                  That to my hertes botom it is yfounded
                  Thrugh which I wot yt I mot nedes dyen
                  This is ye worſt, I dar me nought bewreyē
                  
                  And well the hoter ben the gledes red
                  That men hem wren wt aſhen pale & deed.
               
               
                  with that he ſmot his heed adowne anon
                  And gan to muttre, I nat what truly
                  And I with that gan ſtyll away to gone
                  And let thereof, as nothyng wyſt had I
                  And came agayne anon & ſtode hym by
                  And ſayd awake, ye ſlepen all to longe
                  It ſemeth nought yt loue doth you wronge.
               
               
                  That ſlepen ſo, that nomā may you awake
                  whoſey euer or this, ſo dull a man
                  Ye frende (quod he) do ye your heedes ake
                  For loue, and let me lyuen as I can
                  But lord that he for wo was pale and wan
                  Yet made he tho as freſh a countenaunce
                  As though he ſhuld haue led the new daūce
               
               
                  This paſſed forth, tyll now this other daye
                  It fell that I come runnyng all alone
                  Into his chāber, & founde how yt he laye
                  Vpon his bed: but man ſo ſore grone
                  Ne herde I neuer and what was his mone
                  Ne wyſt I nought, for as I was cōmynge
                  Al ſodaynly, he left his complaynyng
               
               
                  Of which I toke ſomwhat ſuſpectioun
                  And nere I come, & founde hym wepe ſore
                  And god ſo wyſe be my ſauatioun
                  As neuer of thyng had I no routh more
                  For neyther wyth engyn, ne with no lore
                  Vnnethes myght I fro the deth hym kepe
                  That yet fele I myne hert for hym wepe
               
               
                  And god wot neuer ſyth that I was borne
                  was I ſo buſy noman for to preche
                  Ne neuer was to wyght ſo depe ſworne
                  Er he tolde who myght ben his leche
                  But now to you reherſen all his ſpech
                  Or al his wofull wordes for to ſowne
                  Ne bid me nouȝt, but ye woll ſe me ſwon
               
               
                  But for to ſaue his lyfe, and els nought
                  And to non harm of you, thus am I driuen
                  And for ye loue of god that vs hath wrouȝt
                  Such chere him doth, that he & I may liuē
                  
                  Now haue I plat to you myne hert ſhryuē
                  
                  And ſyth ye wot that myne entent is clene
                  Take hede therof, for none euyll I mene
               
               
                  And riȝt good thrift, I pray to god haue ye
                  That han ſuch one ycaught withouten net
                  And be ye wyſe, as ye be fayre to ſe
                  wel in the rynge, than is the Ruby ſet
                  There were neuer two ſo well ymet
                  whan ye ben his all hole, as he is your
                  Ther mighty god yet graūt vs ſe that hour
               
               
                  Nay therof ſpake I nat: Aha (quod ſhe)
                  As helpe me god, ye ſhenden euery dele
                  A mercy dere nece, anon (quod he)
                  whatſo I ſpake I ment nought but wele
                  By Mars the god, that helmed is of ſtele
                  Now beth not wroth my blod, my nece dere
                  Nowe well (quod ſhe) foryeuen be it here.
               
               
                  with this he toke his leue, & home he wēt
                  yea lord how he was glad, and wel bygon
                  Creſeyde aroſe, and lenger ſhe ne ſtent
                  But ſtreyght into her cloſet went anon
                  And ſet her downe, as ſtyll as any ſtone
                  And euery worde gan vp & down to wynde
                  That he had ſayd, as it came her to mynde.
               
               
                  
                  And woxe ſomdele aſtoned in her thought
                  Ryght for the newe caſe, but whan yt ſhe
                  was ful auyſed, tho founde ſhe ryght nouȝt
                  Of peryll, why that ſhe ought aferde be
                  For man maye loue of poſſibilitie
                  A woman ſo his hert may to breſt
                  And ſhe nat loue ayen, but if her leſte
               
               
                  But as ſhe ſate alone, and thought thus
                  Thaſcrye aroſe at ſcarmoche al without
                  And men cryed in the ſtrete, ſe Troylus
                  Hath right now put to flyght yu grekes rout
                  with that gonne al her meyne for to ſhoute
                  A, go we ſe, caſt vp the yates wyde
                  For through this ſtrete he mot to palys ryde
               
               
                  For other waye is fro the yates none
                  Of dardanus there open is the cheyne
                  with that come he, and al his folke anone
                  An eaſy pace rydyng, in routes tweyne
                  Right as his happy day was ſothe to ſeyne
                  For whiche men ſayth may nat diſturbed be
                  That ſhal betyde of neceſſyte
               
               
                  This Troylus ſate on his baye ſtede
                  Al armed ſaue his heed, ful ry
                        ••
                     ely
                  And wounded was his horſe, & gan to blede
                  On whiche he rode a pace ful ſoftely
                  But ſuche a knyghtly ſyght trewly
                  As was on him, was nat withouten fayle
                  To loke on Mars, that god is of batayle
               
               
                  So lyke a man of armes, and a knyght
                  He was to ſene, fulfylled of hygh proweſſe
                  For bothe he had a body, and myght
                  To don that thyng, as wel as hardyneſſe
                  And eke to ſene him in his geare dreſſe
                  So freſhe, ſo yonge, ſo weldy ſemed he
                  It was an heuen vpon him for to ſe
               
               
                  His helme to hewen was in twenty places
                  That by a tyſſue honge, his backe behynde
                  His ſhelde to daſſhed wt ſwerdes & wt maces
                  In whiche men myght many an arowe fynd
                  That thyrled had horne, nerfe and rynde
                  And aye the people cried here cometh our ioy
                  And next his brother, holder vp of Troye
               
               
                  For whiche he wext a lytel reed for ſhame
                  whan he ſo herd the people vpon him cryen
                  That to be holde, it was a noble game
                  How ſobrelych he caſt adowne his eyen
                  Creſceyde anon gan all his chere eſpyen
                  And let it ſo ſofte in her hert ſynke
                  That to her ſelfe ſhe ſayde, who yaue me drynke?
               
               
                  For al her owne thought, ſhe wore all red
                  Remembryng her ryght thus, lo this is be
                  which yt myne vncle ſwereth he mot be deed
                  But I on hym haue mercy and pytie
                  And with yt thought for pure aſhamed ſhe
                  Gan in her heed to pull, and that as faſt
                  whyle he and all the people forth by paſt
               
               
                  And gan to caſt, and rollen vp and downe
                  within her thought his excellent proweſſe
                  And his eſtate, and alſo his renowne
                  His wyt, his ſhap, and eke his gentylleſſe
                  But moſt her fauour was for his diſtreſſe
                  was al for her, & thought it were a routh
                  To ſleen ſuche one, yf that he ment trouthe.
               
               
                  ¶Now myght ſome enuyous iangle thus
                  This was a ſodayn loue, how might it be
                  That ſhe ſo lyghtly loued Troylus
                  Ryght for the fyrſt ſyght: yea parde
                  Now whoſo ſayd ſo, mote he neuer the
                  For euery thynge a gynnyng hath it nede
                  Er al be wrought, withouten any drede
               
               
                  For I ſaye nat, that ſhe ſo ſodaynly
                  Yafe hym her loue, but that ſhe gan enclyne
                  To lyken hym tho, & I haue tolde you why
                  And after that, his manhod and his pyne
                  Made that loue within her gan to myne
                  For which by proceſſe, and by good ſeruyce
                  He wan her loue, and in no ſodayne wyſe.
               
               
                  And alſo blyſfull Venus wele arayed
                  Sat in her ſeuenth houſe of heuen tho
                  Diſpoſed wele, and with aſpectes payed
                  To helpe ſely Troylus of his wo
                  And ſoth to ſayne, ſhe nas nat al a fo
                  To Troylus in his natiuitie
                  God wote, that wele the ſooner ſped he
               
               
                  Now let vs ſtynt of Troylus a throwe
                  That rydeth forth, and let vs turne faſt
                  Vnto Creſeyde, yt henge her heed full lowe
                  There as ſhe ſat alone, and gan to caſt
                  wheron ſhe wolde apoynt her at the laſt
                  If it ſo were, her Eme ne wolde ceſſe
                  For Troylus, vpon her for to preſſe
               
               
                  
                  And lorde ſo ſhe gan in her thought argue
                  In this matter of which I haue you tolde
                  And what to don beſt wer, & what to eſchue
                  That plyted ſhe full oft in many ſolde
                  Now was her hert warme, now was it cold
                  And what ſhe thought, ſōwhat ſhal I write
                  As myne autor lyſteth for tendyte
               
               
                  She thought fyrſt, that Troylus perſone
                  She knewe by ſyght, & eke his gentelneſſe
                  And thus ſhe ſayd, al wer it nought to don
                  To graūt him loue, yet for his worthynes
                  It wer honour with play & with gladneſſe
                  In honeſtie, with ſuche a lorde to dele
                  For myne eſtate, and alſo for his heale
               
               
                  Eke wel wot I, my kynges ſonne is he
                  And ſyth he hath to ſe me ſuche delyte
                  Yf I wolde vtterlyche his ſyght flye
                  Peraduenture he might haue me in deſpite
                  Through which I miȝt ſtōd in worſe plyte
                  Now were I wyſe, me bate to purchace
                  without nede, there I may ſtonde in grace.
               
               
                  In euery thyng, I wot there lyeth meſure
                  For though a man forbyd dronkeneſſe
                  He nought forbyddeth that euery creature
                  Be d
                        ••
                     nleſſe for alwaye as I geſſe
                  Eke ſyth I wot for me is his diſtreſſe
                  I ne ought nat for that thyng hym deſpyſe
                  Syth it is ſo, he meaneth in good wyſe
               
               
                  And eke I knowe, of longe tyme agone
                  His thewes good, and that he nys nat nyce
                  No vauntour ſayne men, certayn he is non
                  To wyſe is he, to done ſo great a vyce
                  Ne als I nyl hym neuer ſo cherice
                  That he ſhall make auaunt by iuſt cauſe
                  He ſhall me neuer bynde in ſuche a clauſe
               
               
                  Now ſet I caſe, the hardeſt is iwys
                  Men myght demen that he loueth me
                  what diſhonour were it vnto me this?
                  May iche him let of that, why nay parde?
                  I knowe alſo, and alwaye here and ſe
                  Men louen women al this towne about
                  Be they the werſe▪ why nay without dout?
               
               
                  I thynke eke how, he worthy is to haue
                  Of al this noble towne the thryftyeſt
                  That woman is, yf ſhe her honour ſaue
                  For out and out he is the worthyeſt
                  Saue onely Hector, which that is the beſt
                  And yet his lyfe lyeth al nowe in my cure
                  But ſuche is loue, and eke myne auenture.
               
               
                  Ne me to loue a wondre is it nought
                  For well wot I my ſelfe ſo god me ſpede
                  All woll I that none wyſt of this thought
                  I am one the fayreſt out of drede
                  And goodlyeſt, whoſo that taketh hede
                  And ſo men ſayne in al the towne of Troye
                  what wōder is: though he of me haue ioye.
               
               
                  I am myne owne woman well at eaſe
                  I thanke it god, as after myne eſtate
                  Right yonge, & ſtond vntyed in luſty leſe
                  withouten ielouſye and ſuche debate
                  Shal no huſbond ſayne to me checke mate
                  For eyther they ben full of ielouſye
                  Or maſterfull, or louen nouelry
               
               
                  what ſhal I don? to what fyne lyue I thus
                  Shal I nat loue, in caſe yf that me leſt?
                  what pardieux I am not religious
                  And though that I myne hert ſet at reſt
                  Vpon this knyght that is the worthyeſt
                  And kepe alway myne honour & my name
                  By all ryght it may do me no ſhame
               
               
                  But right as whan the ſon ſhyneth bright
                  In Marche, yt chaungeth oft tyme his face
                  And that a cloude is put wt wynde to flight
                  which ouerſprat the ſonne, as for a ſpace
                  A cloudy thought gā through her ſoul pace
                  That ouerſprad her bryght thoughtes all
                  So that for feare almooſt ſhe gan to fall
               
               
                  That thouȝt was this: Alas ſyth I am fre
                  Sulde I now loue, and put in ieopardye
                  My ſykerneſſe, and thrallen lybertye
                  Alas, how durſt I thynken that follye?
                  May I not well in other folke aſpye
                  Her dredful ioy, her conſtreynt & her payne
                  There loueth non, that ſhe ne hath waye to playne.
               
               
                  For loue is yet the moſt ſtormy lyfe
                  Ryght of hym ſelfe, that euer was begon
                  For euer ſome myſtruſt, or nyce ſtryfe
                  There is in loue ſome cloude ouer the ſun
                  Therto we wretched womē nothing cō
                  
                  whan vs is wo, but wepe and ſyt & thynke
                  Our wrech is this, our owne wo to drynke
               
               
                  
                  Alſo wycked tonges bene ſo preſt
                  To ſpeke vs harme, eke men be ſo vntrue
                  That ryght anon as ceſſed is her leſt
                  So ceſſeth loue, and forth to loue anewe
                  But harme ydo is done, whoſo it rewe
                  For thouȝ theſe mē for loue hem firſt to rēde
                  Full ſharpe begynnyng breketh oft at ende
               
               
                  How ofte tyme maye men rede and ſene
                  The treſon that to women hath be do?
                  To what fyne is ſuche loue I can not ſene
                  Or where becommeth it, whan it is go
                  There is no wyght that wote I trowe ſo
                  wher it becōmeth, lo, no wiȝt on it ſporneth
                  That erſt was nothynge, into nought tourneth
               
               
                  How beſy (yf I loue) eke muſt I be
                  To pleſen hem, that iangle of loue, & demen
                  And coyen hem, that they ſay no harm of me
                  For though ther be no cauſe, yet hem ſemen
                  Al be for harme yt folke her frendes quemen
                  And who may ſtoppen euery wycked tonge
                  Or ſowne of bels whyle yt they ben ronge?
               
               
                  And after that her thought gan for to clere
                  And ſayd, he which yt nothyng vndertaketh
                  Nothyng acheueth, be hym loth or dere
                  And wt an other though her hert quaketh
                  Thā ſlepeth hope, and after drede awaketh
                  Now hote now cold but thus betwixē twey
                  She ryſle her vp, and went her to pley
               
               
                  Adowne the ſtayre anonryght tho ſhe went
                  Into her gardyn with her neces thre
                  And vp and downe they madē many a went
                  Flexippe & ſhe, Tarbe, and Antigone
                  To playen, that it ioye was to ſe
                  And other of her women a great route
                  Her folowed in the garden all about.
               
               
                  This yerd was large, & rayled all the aleyes
                  & ſhaddowed wel, wt bloſomy bowes grene
                  And benched newe, and ſōded al the wayes
                  In which ſhe walketh arm in arme betwene
                  Tyll at the laſt Antigone the ſhene
                  Gan on a Troyan ſonge to ſyngen clere
                  That it an heuen was her voyce to heare
               
               
                  She ſaid: O loue, to whom I haue, & ſhall
                  Ben humble ſubiect, trewe in myne entent
                  As I beſt can, to you lorde yeue yche all
                  For euermore my hertes luſt to rent
                  For neuer yet thy grace no wyght ſent
                  So blyſfull cauſe as me, my lyfe to lede
                  In al ioye and ſuretie out of drede.
               
               
                  The blyſful god hath me ſo wel beſet
                  In loue iwys, that all that bereth lyfe
                  Ymagynen ne coulde how to be bet
                  For lorde withouten ielouſye or ſtryfe
                  I loue one, which that mooſt is ententyfe
                  To ſeruen wel, vntweryly or vnfayned
                  That euer was & leſt with harme diſtayned
               
               
                  As he that is the well of worthyneſſe
                  Of trouth ground, myrrour of godlyheed
                  Of wyt Apollo, ſtone of ſykerneſſe
                  Of vertue roote, of luſt fynder and heed
                  Through which is all ſorowe fro me deed
                  Ywys I loue hym beſt, ſo doth he me
                  Now good thrift haue he, wherſoeuer he be
               
               
                  whom ſhulde I thāken but you god of loue
                  Of all this blyſſe, in which to bath I gynne
                  And thanked be ye lorde, for that I loue
                  This is the ryght lyfe that I am in
                  To flemen al maner vyce and ſynne
                  This doth me ſo to vertue for to entende
                  That daye by day I in my wyll amende
               
               
                  And who that ſayth ye for to loue is vyce
                  Or thraldome, though he felt in it diſtreſſe
                  He eyther is enuyous, or ryght nyce
                  Or is vnmyghty for his ſhreudneſſe
                  To louen, for ſuche maner folke I geſſe
                  Diffamen loue, as nothyng of him knowe
                  They ſpeken, but they bent neuer his bowe
               
               
                  what is the ſonne worſe of kynde ryght?
                  Though yt a man for febleneſſe of his eyen
                  May nat endure on it to ſe for bryght
                  Or loue the worſe, that wretches on it cryen
                  No wele is worth, yt may no ſorowe dryen
                  And for thy, who that hath a heed of verre
                  Fro caſt of ſtones ware hym in the werre
               
               
                  But with al myne hert and al my myght
                  As I haue ſayde, wol loue vnto my laſt
                  My dere hert, and all myne owne knyght
                  In which myne hert growen is ſo faſt
                  And his in me, that it ſhall euer laſt
                  All dredde I fyrſt loue hym to begyn
                  Now wot I well there is no peryll in.
               
               
                  
                  And of her ſonge right wt the worde ſhe ſtent
                  And therwithal, nowe nece (ꝙ Creſeyde)
                  who made this ſong, now wt ſo good entent
                  Antygone anſwerde anone, and ſayde
                  Madame ywys the goodlyeſt mayde
                  Of great eſtate in al the towne of Troye
                  And led her lyfe in mooſt honour and ioye
               
               
                  For ſoth ſo ſemeth it by her ſonge
                  Quod tho Creſeyde, & gan therwtih to ſike
                  And ſaid: Lorde is there ſuch blyſſe amonge
                  Theſe louers, as they can fayre endite
                  Yea wyſſe quod freſhe Antygone the whyte
                  For al the folke that haue or bene on lyue
                  Ne conne wel the blyſſe of loue diſcryue
               
               
                  But wene ye that euery wretche wote
                  The parfyte blyſſe of loue, why nay ywys
                  They wenen al be loue, yf one be hote
                  Do way do way, they wote nothing of this
                  Menne mote aſken of ſayntes, yf it is
                  Ought faire in heuē, & why? for they can tell
                  And aſke fendes, yf it be foule in hell
               
               
                  Creſeide vnto the purpoſe naught anſwerde
                  But ſayd, ywys it wol be nyght as faſte
                  But euery word, which that ſhe of her herde
                  She gan to printen in her herte faſte
                  And aye gan loue her laſſe for to agaſte
                  Than it dyd erſt, and ſynken in her herte
                  That ſhe waxe ſomwhat able to conuerte
               
               
                  The dayes honour, and the heuens eye
                  The night foe, al thys clepe I the ſunne
                  Gan weſtren faſt, & downwarde for to wrie
                  As he that had hys dayes courſe yrunne
                  And whyte thinges woxen dymme & donne
                  For lacke of lyght, and ſterres for to apere
                  That ſhe and al her folke in went yfere
               
               
                  So whan it lyked her to gone to reſte
                  And voyded weren they that voyden oughte
                  She ſayd, that to ſlepen well her leſte
                  Her women ſone tyl her bed her broughte
                  whā al was huſt, thā lay ſhe ſtyl & thoughte
                  Of al thys thynge the maner and the wyſe
                  Reherce it nedeth nat, for ye bene wyſe
               
               
                  A nyghtyngale vpon a Cedre grene
                  Vnder the chamber wal, there as ſhe lay
                  Ful loude ſonge ayen the mone ſhene
                  Parauenture in hys byrdes wyſe a lay
                  Of loue, that made her herte freſhe and gaye
                  That herkened ſhe ſo longe in good entente
                  Tyl at the laſt the deed ſlepe her hente
               
               
                  And as ſhe ſlept, anon ryght tho her mette
                  Howe that an Egle fethered white as bone
                  Vnder her breſt hys longe clawes ſette
                  And out her hert he rent, and that anone
                  And dyd his hert in to her breſt to gone
                  of which ſhe nought agroſe, ne nothīg ſmert
                  And forthe he flyeth, with hert lefte for herte
               
               
                  Nowe let her ſlepe, & we our tales holde
                  Of troylus, that is to paleys rydden
                  Fro the ſcarmyſhe of whych I tolde
                  And in hys chambre ſate, and hath abydden
                  Tyl two or thre of his meſſangers yeden
                  For Pandarus, and ſoughten him ful faſt
                  Tyl they him found, & brought him at ye laſt
               
               
                  Thys Pandarus came leapyng in at ones
                  And ſayd thus, who hath bene wel ybete
                  To daye wyth ſwerdes, and ſlonge ſtones
                  But Troylus, that hath caught him an hete
                  And gan to iape, & ſayd, Lorde ye ſweete
                  But ryſe and let vs ſoupe, and go to reſte
                  And he anſwerde him, do we as the leſte
               
               
                  wyth al the haſt goodly as they myght
                  They ſpedde hem fro the ſouper, & to bedde
                  And euery wyght out of the dore him dyght
                  And whyder him lyſt, vpō his way him ſped
                  But Troylus thought that his herte bledde
                  For wo, tyl that he herde ſome tydynge
                  And ſayd frende, ſhall I now wepe or ſynge
               
               
                  (Quod Pandarus) be ſtyll and let me ſlepe
                  And do on thyne hoode, thy nedes ſpedde be
                  And cheſe yf thou wolt ſyng, daunce, or lepe
                  At ſhort wordes thou ſhalte trowe me
                  Sir, my nece wol done wel by the
                  And loue the beſte, by god & by my trouthe
                  But lacke of purſute make it in thy ſlouthe
               
               
                  For thus forforth I haue thy werke begon
                  Fro day to daye, tyl this day by the morowe
                  Her loue of frendſhyp haue I to the won
                  and therfore hath ſhe laid her faith to borow
                  Algate a foote is hameled of thy ſorowe
                  what ſhulde I lenger ſermon of it holde
                  As ye haue herde before, al he him tolde
               
               
                  
                  But right as floures through the colde of night
                  I cloſed, ſtoupen in her ſtalkes low
                  Redreſſen hem ayen the ſunne bryght
                  And ſpreden in her kynde courſe by rowe
                  Ryght ſo gan tho his eyen vp to throwe
                  Thys Troylus, and ſayd: O Venus dere
                  Thy myght thy grace, yheryed be it here
               
               
                  And to Pādarus he helde vp both his hōdes
                  And ſayd, lorde al thyne be that I haue
                  For I am hole, and broſten ben my bondes
                  A thouſande Troyes, who ſo that me yaue
                  Eche after other, god ſo wys me ſaue
                  Ne might me ſo gladen, lo myne herte
                  It ſpredeth ſo for ioye it wol to ſterte
               
               
                  But lord how ſhall I don? how ſhal I lyuen
                  whan ſhal I next my dere herte ſe?
                  Howe ſhal this longe time away be dryuen?
                  Tyl that thou be ayen at her fro me
                  Thou mayſt anſwere, abyde abyde: but he
                  That hangeth by the necke: ſoth to ſayne
                  In great diſeaſe abydeth for the payne
               
               
                  Al eaſely nowe, for the loue of Marte
                  (ꝙ Pādarus) for euery thynge hath tyme
                  So longe abyde, tyll that the nyght departe
                  For al ſo ſyker as thou lyeſt here by me
                  And god to forne, I wol be there at prime
                  And for thy werke ſomwhat, as I ſhal ſaye
                  Or on ſome other wyght thys charge laye
               
               
                  For parde god wot, I haue euer yet
                  Ben redy the to ſerue, and this night
                  Haue I nat fayned, but emforth my wyt
                  Done al thy luſt, and ſhal with al my might
                  Do nowe as I ſhal ſayne, and fare aryght
                  And yf thou nylt, wyte al thy ſelfe thy care
                  On me is naught alonge thyne yuel fare
               
               
                  wote wel that thou wyſer art than I
                  A thouſande folde: but yf I were as thou
                  God helpe me ſo, as I wolde vtterly
                  Right of myne owne hande write her nowe
                  A lettre, in whiche I wolde her tellen howe
                  I farde amyſſe, and her beſeche of routh
                  Nowe helpe thy ſelfe, & leaue it for no ſlouth
               
               
                  And I my ſelfe ſhal therwyth to her gon
                  And whā thou woſte yt I am with her there
                  worth thou vp on a courſer ryght anon
                  Yee hardely, ryght in thy beſte gere
                  And ride forth by yt place, as naught ne were
                  And thou ſhalt fynde vs (if I may) ſyttyng
                  At ſome wyndowe, in to the ſtrete lokyng
               
               
                  And if the lyſt, than mayſt thou vs ſalue
                  And vpon me make thou thy countenaunce
                  But by thy lyfe beware, and faſte eſchue
                  to taryen ought, god ſhyld vs fro miſchaūce
                  Ride forth thy waye & holde thy gouernaūce
                  And we ſhall ſpeke of the ſomwhat I trowe
                  whan thou art gone, to do thyn ceres glowe
               
               
                  Touchyng thy lettre thou arte wyſe ynough
                  I wot thou nylte it deignelyche endyte
                  As maketh it with theſe argumentes tough
                  Ne ſcryueynyſhe or craftely thou it write
                  Bebiotte it with thy teeres eke alyte
                  And thou write a goodly worde al 
                        •
                     ofte
                  Though it be good, reherce it not to ofte
               
               
                  For though the beſt harpour vpon lyue
                  wolde on the beſte ſowned ioly harpe
                  That euer was, wyth al hys fyngers fyue
                  Touch aye o ſtrynge, or aye o warble harpe
                  were hys nayles poynted neuer ſo ſharpe
                  It ſhulde make euery wyght to dull
                  To here his gle, and of his ſtrokes full
               
               
                  Ne iombre eke no diſcordans thing y
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     e
                  As thus, to vſen termes of phyſyke
                  In loues termes holde of thy matere
                  The forme alway, and do that it be lyke
                  For yf a peyntour wolde paynte a pyke
                  wyth aſſes fete, and heeded as an ape
                  It cordeth nat, ſo were it but a iape
               
               
                  This counſayle, lyked wel vnto Troylus
                  But as a dredeful louer, he ſayd thys
                  Alas my dere brother Pandarus
                  I am aſhamed for to write ywys
                  Leſte of myne innocence I ſayd amys
                  Or that ſhe nolde it for diſpyte receyue
                  thā were I deed, ther might nothing weyue
               
               
                  To that Pandare anſwerde, yf the leſt
                  Do that I ſaye, and let me therwyth gon
                  For by that lorde that formed eeſt and weſt
                  I hope of it to brynge anſwere anon
                  Right of her hande, & yf that thou nylt non
                  Let be, and ſory mote he ben hys lyue
                  Ayenſt thy luſt, that helpeth the to thryue
               
               
                  
                  (Quod Troylus) depardieur yche aſſent
                  Syth that the lyſt, I wol aryſe and write
                  And blyſful god pray yche with good entent
                  The vyage and the lettre I ſhal endyte
                  So ſpede it, and thou Mynerua the white
                  Yeue thou me wyt, my lettre to deuyſe
                  & ſet him down, & wrote right in this wyſe
               
               
                  Fyrſt he gan her his right lady caſt
                  His hertes lyfe, his luſt, his ſorowes leche
                  His blyſſe, and eke theſe other termes all
                  That in ſuch caſe ye louers al ſeche
                  And in ful humble wyſe, as in his ſpeche
                  He gan hym recōmaunde vnto her grace
                  To tel al howe, it aſketh mokel ſpace
               
               
                  And after thys full lowly he her prayde
                  To be nought wroth, though he of hys folye
                  So hardy was to her to write, and ſayde
                  That loue it made, or els muſt he dye
                  And pitouſly gan mercy for to crye
                  And after that he ſayd, and lyed full loude
                  Him ſelfe was lytle worth, & laſſe he coulde
               
               
                  And that ſhe wolde haue his cōning excuſed
                  That lytle was and eke he drede
                        •
                     h: 
                        •
                     o
                  And his vnworthyneſſe aye he acu
                        ••
                     d
                  And after that than gan he tel his wo
                  But that was endeleſſe wythouten ho
                  And ſaid, he wold in trouth alwey him hold
                  And redde it ouer, and gan the lettre fold
               
               
                  And with his ſalte teeres gan he bath
                  The Ruby in his Signet, and it ſette
                  Vpon the were deliuerlyche and rath
                  Therwith a thouſande tymes, er he lette
                  He kyſte tho the lettre that he ſhette
                  And ſayd, lettre a blyſful deſtyne
                  The ſhapen is, my lady ſhal the ſe
               
               
                  Thys Pandare toke the lettre, & that betime
                  A morowe, and to hys neces paleys ſterte
                  And faſt he ſwore, that it was paſſed prime
                  And gan to iape, and ſa
                        •
                     d: ywys myne herte
                  So freſhe it is, although it ſore ſmerte
                  I may nat ſlepe neuer a Mayes morowe
                  I haue a ioly wo, a luſty ſorowe
               
               
                  Creſeyde, whan that ſhe her vncle herde
                  wyth dredeful herte, and deſyrous to here
                  The cauſe of his cōmyng, thus anſwerde
                  Now by your fayth my
                        ••
                     e vncle (ꝙ ſhe) dere
                  what maner wyndes gydeth you nowe here
                  Tel vs your ioly wo, and your penaunce
                  Howe ferforth be ye put in loues daunce
               
               
                  By god (ꝙ he) I hope alwaye behynde
                  And to laugh, it thought her herte breſt
                  (Quod Pādarus) loke alway that ye fynde
                  Game in myn hood, but herkeneth if you leſt
                  Ther is ryght now come in to ye town a geſt
                  A greke eſpye, and telleth newe thynges
                  For whych I come to tel you new tydynges
               
               
                  In to the gardyn go we, and ye ſhal here
                  Al preuely of thys a longe ſermoun
                  with that they wentē arme in arme yfere
                  In to the gardyn fro the chambre doun
                  And whan he was ſo farre, that the ſoun
                  Of that he ſpake, no man heren myght
                  He ſayd her thus, and out the lettre plyght
               
               
                  Lo, he that is al hooly yours free
                  Him recōmendeth lowly to your grace
                  And ſent you this lettre here by me
                  Auyſeth you on it, whan ye han ſpace
                  And of ſome goodly anſwere you purchace
                  Or helpe me god ſo, playnly for to ſayne
                  He may not longe lyuen for his payne
               
               
                  Ful dredefully tho gan ſhe ſtande ſtyll
                  And toke it not, but al her humble chere
                  Gan for to chaunge, and ſayd ſcripte nor byl
                  For loue of god, that toucheth ſuch matere
                  Ne brynge me none, and alſo vncle dere
                  To myne eſtate haue more regarde I pray
                  Than to his luſt, what ſhulde I more ſay
               
               
                  And loketh nowe yf this be reaſonable
                  And letteth not for fauour ne for ſlouth
                  To ſayne a ſoth, nowe it is couenable
                  To myne eſtate, by god and by my trouth
                  To take it, or to haue of him routh
                  In harmyng of my ſelfe, or in repreue
                  Beare it ayen, for him that ye on leue
               
               
                  This Pandarus gan on her for to ſtare
                  And ſayd, nowe is this the greateſt wonder
                  That euer I ſawe, let be this nyce fare
                  To deth mote I ſmytten be with thonder
                  If for the citye, whych ſtandeth yonder
                  wolde I a lettre vnto you brynge or take
                  To harm of you: what lyſt you thus it make
               
               
                  
                  But thus ye faren wel nyghe al and ſome
                  That he that moſte deſyreth you to ſerue
                  Of him ye retche leſt where he become
                  And whether that he leue, or els ſterue
                  But for al that, that euer I may deſerue
                  Refuſe it nat (ꝙ he) and hente her faſt
                  And in her boſom ye letter dwone he tharſte
               
               
                  And ſayd her, nowe caſte it away anon
                  That folke may tene, & gaurne on vs twey
                  (Quod ſhe) I can abyde tyl they be gon
                  And gan to ſmyle, & ſayd him, eme I pray
                  Suche anſwere as you liſt your ſelfe puruey
                  For trewly I wol no lettre write
                  No than wol I (quod he) ſo ye endyte
               
               
                  Therewith ſhe lough, and ſayd go we dyne
                  And he gan at him ſelfe iape faſte
                  And ſayd nece, I haue ſo great a pyne
                  For loue, that eueryche other day I faſte
                  And gan his beſte iapes forthe to caſte
                  And made her ſo to laugh at his folye
                  That ſhe for laughter wende for to dye
               
               
                  And whan that ſhe was comen in to the hall
                  Nowe eme (ꝙ ſhe) we wol go dyne anon
                  And gan ſome of her women to her call
                  And ſtreyght in to her chambre gan ſhe gone
                  But of her beſyneſſes this was one
                  Amonges other thynges, out of drede
                  Ful priuely this lettre for to rede
               
               
                  Auyſed worde by worde in euery lyne
                  And foūde no lacke, ſhe thought he coude his goode
                  And vp it put & went her in to dyne
                  And Pandarus, that in a ſtodye ſtoode
                  Er he was ware, ſhe toke him by the hoode
                  And ſayd, ye were caught er that ye wyſte
                  I voucheſafe (quod he) do what you lyſte
               
               
                  Tho wyſſhen they, and ſet hem downe & ete
                  And after noone ful ſlyghly Pandarus
                  Gā drawe him to ye wyndowe nye the ſtrete
                  And ſayd nece, who hath arayed thus
                  The yonder houſe, that ſtante aforyeue vs
                  which houſe (ꝙ ſhe) and gan for to beholde
                  And knewe it wel, & who it was him tolde
               
               
                  And fellen forth in ſpeche of thynges ſmale
                  And ſaten in the wyndowe both twey
                  whan Pandarus ſawe tyme vnto his tale
                  And ſawe wel that her folke were al away
                  Nowe nece myne tel on (quod he) I pray
                  Howe lyke you the letttre that ye wote
                  Can he theron, for by my trouth I not
               
               
                  Therwyth al roſy hewed tho woxe ſhe
                  And gan to hym, and ſayd, ſo I trowe
                  Aquyte him wel for goddes loue (ꝙ he)
                  My ſelfe to medes wol the lettre ſowe
                  And helde his handes vp, and ſate on know
                  Nowe good nece, be it neuer ſo lyte
                  Yeue me the labour, it to ſowe and plyte
               
               
                  Yea, for I can ſo writen (ꝙ ſhe) tho
                  And eke I not what I ſhulde to hym ſay
                  Nay nece (ꝙ Pandare) ſay nat ſo
                  Yet at the leſt, thonketh him I pray
                  Of his good wyl: O, doth hym not to dey
                  Nowe for the loue of me my nece dere
                  Refuſeth not at this tyme my prayere
               
               
                  Depardieux (ꝙ ſhe) god leue all be wele
                  God helpe me ſo, this is the fyrſt lettre
                  That euer I wrote, yee al or any dele
                  And in to a cloſet for to aduyſe her bettre
                  She w
                        •
                     nt alone, and gan her hert vn
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     tte
                  Out of 
                        ••
                     daynes priſon, but a lyte
                  And ſe
                        ••
                     e downe, and gan a lettre write
               
               
                  Of which to tell in ſhort is myne entent
                  Theffecte, as ferre as I can vnderſtonde
                  She thanked him, of al that he wel ment
                  Towardes her, but holden him in honde
                  She wolde not make her ſeluen bonde
                  In loue, but as his ſyſter him to pleſe
                  She wold aye ſame, to done his hert an eſe
               
               
                  She ſhette it, and to Pandare in to gon
                  There as he ſate, and loked in to ſtrete
                  And downe ſhe ſette her by him on a ſtone
                  Of iaſpre, vpon a quyſhen of golde ybete
                  And ſayde, as wyſely helpe me god the gret
                  I neuer dyd a thyng wyth more payne
                  Than write this, to which ye me cōſtrayne
               
               
                  And toke it hym: He thanked her, and ſayd
                  God wote of thyng ful often loth begonne
                  Cometh ende good and nece mine Creſeyde
                  That ye to him of harde nowe bene ywonne
                  Ought he be glad, by god and yonder ſonne
                  For why, men ſayth impreſſions lyght
                  Full lyghtly ben aye redy to the flyght
               
               
                  
                  But ye han played the tyraunt al to longe
                  And harde was it your herte for to graue
                  Nowe ſtynt that ye no lenger on it honge
                  Al wolden ye the forme of daunger ſaue
                  But haſteth you to done hym ioye haue
                  For truſteth wel, to longe ydone hardneſſe
                  Cauſeth diſpyte ful often for diſtreſſe
               
               
                  And ryght as they declared thys matere
                  Lo Troylus, right at the ſtretes ende
                  Came rydyng wyth his tenthe ſōme yfere
                  Al ſoftely, and thyderwarde gan bende
                  Ther as they ſat, as was his way to wend
                  To paleys ward, And Pandare him aſpide
                  And ſayd, nece I ſe who cometh here ryde
               
               
                  O, flye nat in, he ſethe vs I ſuppoſe
                  Leſte he maye thynken that ye hym eſchue
                  Nay nay (ꝙ ſhe) & woxe as redde as roſe
                  wyth that he gan her humbly ſalue
                  wyth dredful chere, and oft hys hewes mue
                  And vp hys loke debonairly he caſte
                  And becked on Pandare, & forthe by paſte
               
               
                  God wot yf he ſate on his horſe aryght
                  Or goodly was beſene that ylke daye
                  God wot wher he were lyke a māly knyght
                  what ſhulde I dretche, or tell of his aray
                  Creſeyde, which that all theſe thynges ſay
                  To tel in ſhorte, her lyked al yfere
                  Hys perſon, hys aray, his loke, his chere
               
               
                  His goodly maner, and his gentylleſſe
                  So wel, that neuer ſyth that ſhe was borne
                  Ne had ſhe ſuch routh of his diſtreſſe
                  And how ſo, ſhe hath hard ben here beforne
                  to god hope I, ſhe hath now caught a thorn
                  She ſhal not pul it out this next wyke
                  God ſende mo ſuch thornes on to pyke
               
               
                  Pandare, whyche that ſtode her faſte by
                  Felte yron hotte, and he beganne to ſmyte
                  And ſayd, nece I pray you hertely
                  Tel me that I ſhal aſken you alyte
                  A woman that were of hys deth to whyte
                  withoutē his gift, but for her lacke of routh
                  were it wel done (ꝙ ſhe) nay by my trouth
               
               
                  God help me ſo (ꝙ he) ye ſay me ſoth
                  Ye felen wel your ſelfe that I naught lye
                  Lo, yonder he rydeth (ꝙ ſhe) ye ſo he doth
                  wel ꝙ Pandare, as I haue tolde you thrie
                  Let be your nyee ſhame, and your folye
                  And ſpeke with him, in eyſyng of his herte
                  Let nycete not do you both ſmerte
               
               
                  But theron was to heauen and to done
                  Conſydryng althyng, it may nat be
                  And why? for ſhame, and it were eke to ſone
                  To graunten him ſo great a liberte
                  For playnly her entent, as (ſayd ſhe)
                  was for to loue hym vnwyſt, yf ſhe myght
                  And guerdon him wt nothīg but with ſyght
               
               
                  But Pandare thought, it ſhall not be ſo
                  If that I may, thys nyce opinyon
                  Shal not ben holden fully yeres two
                  what ſhuld I make of thys a long ſermon?
                  He muſte aſſent on that concluſion
                  As for the tyme, and whan that it was eue
                  And al was wel, he roſe and toke hys leue
               
               
                  And on his way faſte homwarde he ſped
                  And ryght for ioye he felt his herte daunce
                  And Troylus he founde alone abed
                  That lay, as done theſe louers in a traunce
                  Betwixen hope and derke diſeſperaunce
                  But Pandare, ryght at hys in comyng
                  He ſong as who ſaith, lo, ſomwhat I bring
               
               
                  And ſayd, who is in his bed ſo ſone
                  yburyed thus? it am I frende (ꝙ he)
                  who Troylus? nay, helpe me ſo the moone
                  (ꝙ Pandarus) thou ſhalt vp ryſe and ſe
                  A charme that was ſent ryght nowe to the
                  The which can healen the of thyne axeſſe
                  If thou do forthwith al thy beſyneſſe
               
               
                  Ye through the myght of god (ꝙ Troylus)
                  And Pandarrus gan him the lettre take
                  And ſayde, parde god hath holpen vs
                  Haue here a lyght, and loke on al theſe blake
                  But ofte gan the hert glade and quake
                  Of Troylus, whyle he it gan to rede
                  So as the wordes yaue him hope or drede
               
               
                  But finally he toke al for the beſte
                  That ſhe him wrote for ſomwhat he beheld
                  on which he thought he might hys hert reſt
                  Al couered ſhe the wordes vnder ſhelde
                  Thus to the more worthy parte he helde
                  That what for hope, & Pādarus beheſte
                  His great wo foryede he at the leſte
               
               
                  
                  But as we may al day our ſeluen ſe
                  Through wood or coole the more fyre
                  Ryght ſo encreaſe of hoope, of what it be
                  Therwyth he full ofte encreaſeth eke deſyre
                  Or as an oke cometh of a lytle ſpyre
                  ſo through this lettre, whiche yt ſhe him ſent
                  Encreaſen gan deſyre of which he brent
               
               
                  wherfore I ſay alway, that day & nyght
                  This Troylus gan to deſyren, more
                  Than he dyd erſte through hoope, & did his myght
                  To preaſō on, as by Pādarus lore
                  And writen to her of his ſorowes ſore
                  Fro day to day, he lete it nought refreyde
                  That by Pādare he ſomwhat wrote or ſeid
               
               
                  And dyd alſo his other obſeruaunces
                  That tyll a louer longeth in thys caas
                  And after that his dyce turned on chaunces
                  So was he eyther glad, or ſayd alas
                  And helde after hys geſtes aye his paas
                  And after ſuch anſwers, as he had
                  So were his dayes ſory eyther glad
               
               
                  But to Pādare was alwaye his recours
                  And pytouſly gan aye on him to playne
                  And him beſought of rede, & ſome ſocours
                  And Pādarus, that ſaw his wode payne
                  wert wel nygh deed for routh, ſoth to ſayne
                  And beſyly with al his herte caſte
                  Some of his wo to ſleen, and that as faſte
               
               
                  And ſayd, Lorde & frende, & brother dere
                  God wote that thy diſeaſe doth me wo
                  But wylt thou ſtynten al this woful chere
                  And by my trouth, er it be dayes two
                  And god to forne, yet ſhal I ſhape it ſo
                  That thou ſhalt come in to a certayne place
                  Ther as yu maiſt thy ſelfe prayen for grace
               
               
                  And certaynly I not yf thou it woſte
                  But they that bene experte in loue, it ſay
                  It is one of the thynges forthereth moſte
                  A man to haue a leyſer for to pray
                  And ſyker place, his wo for to bewray
                  for in good hert it mote ſome routh impreſſe
                  To here and ſe the gyltleſſe in diſtreſſe
               
               
                  Parauēture thinkeſt thou, though it be ſo
                  That kinde wolde her done for to begynne
                  To haue a maner routh vpon my wo
                  Sayth daūger nay, yu ſhalt me neuer winne
                  So ruleth her hertes goſte within
                  That though ſhe bende, yet ſhe ſtont on rote
                  what in effecte is thys vnto my bote
               
               
                  Thinke here ayen, whan that the ſturdy oke
                  On which men hacketh ofte for the nones
                  Receyued hath the happy fallyng ſtroke
                  The great ſweyght doth it come all at ones
                  As done theſe rockes, or theſe mylne ſtones
                  for ſwyfter courſe cometh thīg yt is of wight
                  whan it diſcendeth, than done thinges light.
               
               
                  But rede that boweth down for euery blaſt
                  Ful lyghtly ceſſe wynde, it wol aryſe
                  But ſo nyl not an oke, whan it is caſt
                  It nedeth me nought longe the forbyſe
                  Men ſhal reioyſen of a great empryſe
                  Atcheued wel, and ſtant withouten dout
                  Al haue men ben the lenger there about
               
               
                  But Troylus, nowe tell me yf the leſt
                  A thyng, which that I ſhal aſken the
                  which is thy brother, that thou loueſt beſt▪
                  
                  As in thy very hertes preuyte
                  I wys my brother Diephebus, tho (ꝙ he)
                  Now (ꝙ Pādare) er houres twyſe twelue
                  He ſhal the caſe, vnwyſt of it him ſelue
               
               
                  Nowe let me alone, and worken as I maye
                  (Quod he) and to Deiphebus went he tho
                  which had his lord, & great frende bene aye
                  Saue Troylus no man he loued ſo
                  To tel in ſhorte, without wordes mo
                  (Quod Pandarus) I pray you that ye be
                  Frende to a cauſe, which that toucheth me
               
               
                  Yes parde (ꝙ Deiphebus) wel thou woſt
                  Al that euer I may, and god to fore
                  Al nere it but for the man I loue moſte
                  My brother Troylus, but ſay wherfore
                  It is, for ſyth the day that I was bore
                  I nas, ne neuer mo to bene I thynke
                  Ayenſt a thyng that myght the forthynke
               
               
                  Pādare gan him thanke, and to him ſeyd
                  Lo ſir, I haue a lady in thys towne
                  That is my nece, and called is Creſeyd
                  which ſome men wolde done oppreſſioun
                  And wrongfully haue her poſſeſſioun
                  wherfore I of your lordſhyp you beſeche
                  To bene our frende, withouten more ſpeche
               
               
                  
                  Deiphebus hym anſwerde: O, is not thys
                  That thou ſpeakeſt of to me thus ſtraūgely
                  Creſeyde my frende? He ſayd hym yes
                  Then nedeth (ꝙ Deiphebus) hardely
                  Nomore of this to ſpeke, for truſteth wel yt I
                  woll be her champion wyth ſpore and yerde
                  I ne rought not though al her foes it herde
               
               
                  But tel me howe, for thou woſt thys matere
                  I myght beſt auaylen, nowe let ſe
                  (Quod Pandarus) yf ye my lorde ſo dere
                  wolden 
                        •
                     s now do thys honour to me
                  To prayen her to morowe, lo that ſhe
                  Came vnto you, her playntes to deuyſe
                  Her aduerſaryes wolde of it agryſe
               
               
                  And yf I more durſt praye as nowe
                  And chargen you to haue ſo great trauayle
                  To haue ſome of your brethrē here with you
                  That myghten to her cauſe bet auayle
                  Then wote I well ſhe myght neuer fayle
                  For to ben holpen, what at your inſtaunce
                  what wyth her other frendes gouernaunce
               
               
                  Deiphebus whych yt comen was of kynde
                  To all honoure and bounte to conſente
                  Anſwerde, it ſhalbe done: And I can fynde
                  Yet greater helpe to thys in myne entent
                  what woldeſt yu ſayne, yf for Heleyne I ſent
                  To ſpeake of thys, I trowe it be the beſt
                  For ſhe maye leden Parys as her leſt
               
               
                  Of Hector, whych yt is my lorde my brother
                  It nedeth not to praye hym frende to be
                  For I haue herde hym, o tyme and eke other
                  Speken of Creſeyde ſuch honour, that he
                  May 
                        •
                     ayne no bet, ſuch hap to hym hath ſhe
                  It nedeth not hys helpes more craue
                  He ſhalbe ſuche, ryght as we wol hym haue
               
               
                  Speake thou thy ſelfe alſo to Troylus
                  On my behalfe, and pray hym with vs dyne
                  Syr, all thys ſhalbe done (ꝙ Pandarus)
                  And toke hys leaue, and neuer gan to fyne
                  But to hys neces houſe as ſtreyght as lyne
                  He came, & founde her fro the meate aryſe
                  And ſet hī downe, & ſpake ryght in this wyſe
               
               
                  He ſayd, O very God, ſo haue I ronne
                  Lo nece myne, ſe ye not howe I ſwete
                  I not where ye the more thanke me conne
                  Be ye not ware howe falſe Poliphete
                  Is nowe aboute eftſones for to plete
                  And brynge on you aduocacies newe?
                  I, no (ꝙ ſhe) and chaunged al her hewe
               
               
                  what is he more about me to dretche
                  And done me wronge, what ſhal I don, alas
                  Yet of hym ſelfe nothynge wolde I retche
                  Nere it for Antenor and Eneas
                  That ben hys frendes in ſuch maner caas
                  But for the loue of god, myne vncle dere
                  No force of that, let hym haue all yfere
               
               
                  wythouten that, I haue ynough for vs
                  Nay (ꝙ Pandare) it ſhall nothynge be ſo
                  For I haue ben ryght nowe at Deiphebus
                  At Hector, and myne other lordes mo
                  And ſhortly maked eche of hem hys foe
                  That by my thryfte, he ſhall it neuer wynne
                  For ought he can, when ſo that he begynne
               
               
                  And as they caſten what was beſt to done
                  Deiphebus, of hys owne curteſye
                  Came her to praye, in hys propre perſone
                  To holde hym on the morowe companye
                  At dyner, whych ſhe nolde not denye
                  But goodly gan to hys prayer obey
                  He thanked her, and wente vpon hys wey
               
               
                  when thys was done, thys Pādare anone
                  To tell in ſhorte, and forth he gan to wende
                  To Troylus, as ſtyll as any ſtone
                  And al thys thyng he tolde him word & ende
                  And howe that he Deiphebus gan to blende
                  And ſayd hym, nowe is tyme yf yt ye conne
                  To beare the well to morowe, & al is wonne
               
               
                  Now ſpeke, now pray, now pitouſly cōplain
                  Let not for nyce ſhame, drede, or ſlouthe
                  Somtyme a man mote tell hys owne payne
                  Beleue it, and ſhe woll haue on the routhe
                  Thou ſhalt ben ſaued by thy fayth in trouth
                  But well wote I, thou nowe arte in a drede
                  And what it is, I lay that I can arede
               
               
                  Thou thinkeſt now, how ſhuld I don al this
                  For by my cheres muſten folke aſpye
                  That for her loue is, that I fare amys
                  Yet had I leuer vnwyſt for ſorowe dye
                  Nowe thynke not ſo, for thou doeſt gret foly
                  For I ryght nowe haue founden a manere
                  Of ſleyght, for to coueren all thy chere
               
               
                  
                  Thou ſhalt gone ouernight, & that bylyue
                  Vnto Deiphebus houſe, as the to play
                  Thy maladye away the bet to dryue
                  For whych thou ſemeſt ſycke ſoth for to ſaye
                  Sone after that, in thy bedde the laye
                  And ſaye thou mayſt no lenger vp endure
                  And lye ryght there, and byde thyne auēture
               
               
                  Say that thy feuer is wōte the for to take
                  The ſame tyme, and laſte tyl a morowe
                  And let ſe nowe how wel thou ranſt it make
                  For parde ſycke is he that is in ſorowe
                  Go now farewell, & Venus here to borowe
                  I hope and thou thys purpoſe holde ferme
                  Thy grace ſhe ſhall fully there conferme
               
               
                  (Quod Troylus) ywys thou nedeleſſe
                  Counſayleſt me, that ſycklyche I me fayne
                  For I am ſycke in erneſt doutleſſe
                  So that well nygh I ſterue for the payne
                  (ꝙ Pandarus) thou ſhalte the better playne
                  And haſte the leſſe nede to counterfete
                  For hym demeth mē hote, yt ſeeth hem ſwete
               
               
                  Lo, holde the at thy tryſte cloſe, and I
                  Shall well the deere vnto thy bowe dryue
                  Therwyth he toke hys leaue al ſoftely
                  And Troylus to paleys went blyue
                  So glad ne was he neuer in all hys lyue
                  And to Pandarus rede gan all aſſente
                  And to Deiphebus houſe at nyght he wente
               
               
                  what nedeth it you to tellen all the chere
                  That Deiphebus vnto hys brother made
                  Or hys axis, or hys ſycklyche manere
                  Howe men gon hym with clothes for to lade
                  whē he was layd, & how mē wold him glade
                  But al for nought, he held forth aye the wyſe
                  That ye han herde Pandare er thys deuyſe
               
               
                  But certayne is, er Troylus hym leyde
                  Deiphebus had prayde hym ouernyght
                  To ben a frende, and helpynge to Creſeyde
                  God wote that he graunted anone ryght
                  To ben her full frende wyth all hys myght
                  But ſuch a nede was it to pray hym thenne
                  As for to bydde a woode man to renne
               
               
                  The morow came, & neyghen gan ye tyme
                  Of meal
                        •
                     yde, that the fayre quene Heleyne
                  Shope her to be an houre after pryme
                  wyth Deiphebus, to whom ſhe nolde fayne
                  But as hys ſuſter, homely ſoth to ſayne
                  She came to dyner, in her playne entente
                  But god & Pādare wyſt al what this mente
               
               
                  Came eke Creſeyde all innocent of thys
                  Antygone her nece, and Tarbe alſo
                  But ſlye we nowe prolixite beſt is
                  For loue of god, and let vs faſt go
                  Ryght to theffecte wythouten tales mo
                  why all thys folke aſſembled in thys place
                  And let vs of her ſaluynges pace
               
               
                  Great honour dyd hem Deiphebus certayne
                  And fedde hem wel, wyth al that myght lyke
                  But euermo alas, was hys refrayne
                  My good brother Troylus the ſyke
                  Lyth yet, and therwythall he gan to ſyke
                  And after that he payned hym to glade
                  Hem as he myght, and chere good he made
               
               
                  Complayned eke Heleyne of hys ſyckneſſe
                  So faythfully that it pyte was to here
                  And euery wyght gan wexen for axes
                  A leche anone, and ſayd in thys manere
                  Men curen folke, thys charme I woll ye lere
                  But there ſate one, all lyſte her not to teche
                  That thought, yet beſt could I ben his leche
               
               
                  After cōplaynt hym gonnē they to prayſe
                  As folk don yet whē ſome wyght hath begō
                  
                  To prayſe a mā, and wyth prayſe hym rayſe
                  A thouſande folde yet hygher thē the ſon
                  He is, he can, that fewe lordes kon
                  And Pandarus of that they wolde afferme
                  He nought forgat her prayſynge to conferme
               
               
                  Herde al thys thyng Creſeyd wel ynough
                  And euery worde gan for to notifye
                  For whych wyth ſobre chere her herte lough
                  For who is that ne wolde her glorifye
                  To mowen ſuche a knyght done lyue or dye
                  But all paſſe I, leſt ye to longe dwell
                  But for to fyne is all that euer I tell
               
               
                  The tyme came fro dyner for to ryſe
                  And as hem ought, aryſen euerychone
                  And gone a whyle of thys and that deuyſe
                  But Pandarus brake all thys ſpeche anone
                  And ſayd to Deiphebus, woll ye gone
                  Yf your wyll be, as I you prayde
                  To ſpeake of the nedes of Creſeyde
               
               
                  
                  Heleyne, whych that by ye honde her helde
                  Toke fyrſt the tale and ſayd, go we blyue
                  And goodly on Creſeyde ſhe behelde
                  And ſayd, Ioues let hym neuer thryue
                  That doth you harme, & ryue hym ſone of lyue
                  And ye me ſorowe, but he ſhall it rue
                  Yf that I maye, and all folke be true
               
               
                  Tel thou thy neces caſe (quod Deiphebus)
                  To Pandarus, for thou canſt beſt it tell
                  My lordes and my ladyes, it ſtante thus
                  what ſhulde I lenger (ꝙ he) do you dwell
                  He ronge hem out a proces lyke a bell
                  Vpon her foe, that hyght Poliphete
                  So heynous, that men myght on it ſpete
               
               
                  Anſwerd of this eche worſe of hem thē other
                  And Poliphete they gonnen thus to waryen
                  An honged be ſuche one, were he my brother
                  And ſo he ſhall, for it ne maye nought varien
                  what ſhulde I lenger in thys tale taryen
                  P
                        •
                     aynlyche all at ones they her hyghten
                  To ben her frēde, in all yt euer they myghten
               
               
                  Spake then Heleyne, and ſayd Pandarus
                  wote aught my lord my brother of thys mater
                  I meane Hector, or wote it Troylus
                  He ſayd yea, but woll ye me nowe here
                  Me thinketh thus, ſyth that Troilus is here
                  It were good, yf that ye wolde aſſent
                  She tolde hym her ſelfe all thys er ſhe went
               
               
                  For he woll haue the more her grefe at herte
                  Bycauſe lo, that ſhe a lady is
                  And by your wyl, I woll but in ryght ſterte
                  And do you wete, and that anone ywys
                  Yf that he ſlepe, or woll ought here of thys
                  And in he lepte, and ſayd hym in hys eere
                  God haue thy ſoule, brought haue I thy bere
               
               
                  To ſmylen of thys gan tho Troylus
                  And Pandarus wythouten rekenynge
                  Out went anone to Heleyne & Deiphebus
                  And ſayd hem, ſo there be no taryenge
                  Ne more preaſe, he woll well that ye brynge
                  Creſeyde my lady, that is here
                  And as he maye enduren, he wol her here
               
               
                  But well ye wote the chambre is but lyte
                  And fewe folke may lyghtly make it warme
                  Nowe loketh ye, for I woll haue no wyte
                  To bryng in preaſe, yt might don him harme
                  Or hym dyſeaſen, for my better arme
                  Yet were it bet ſhe bydde tyll eftſoonis
                  Nowe loke ye that knowen what to done is
               
               
                  I ſaye for me beſt is, as I can knowe
                  That no wyght in ne wende, but ye twey
                  But it were I, for I can in a throwe
                  Reherce her caſe, vnlyke that ſhe can ſey
                  And after thys ſhe maye ones hym prey
                  To ben good lorde in ſhorte, & take her leue
                  Thys maye not mokell of hys eaſe hym reue
               
               
                  And eke for ſhe is ſtraūge, he woll forbere
                  Hys eaſe, whych that hym dare not for you
                  Eke other thynge that toucheth not to her
                  He woll it tell, I wote it well ryght nowe
                  That ſecrete is, and for the townes prowe
                  And they that knewe nothyng of hys entent
                  wythout more, to Troylus in they went
               
               
                  Heleyne in all her goodly ſofte wyſe
                  Gan hym ſalue, and womanly to playe
                  And ſayd ywys, ye mote algate aryſe
                  Nowe fayre brother be all hole I praye
                  And gan her arme ryght ouer his ſholder lay
                  And hym wyth all her wyt to recomforte
                  As ſhe beſt coulde, ſhe gan hym to dyſporte
               
               
                  So after thys (ꝙ ſhe) we you beſeke
                  My dere brother Deiphebus and I
                  For loue of God, and ſo doth Pandare eke
                  To ben good lorde and frende ryght hertely
                  Vnto Creſeyde, whych that certaynly
                  Receiueth wrōge, as wote wel here Pādare
                  That can her caſe well bet then I declare
               
               
                  This Pādarus gan new his tonge affyle
                  And all her caſe reherce, and that anone
                  when it was ſayd, ſone after a whyle
                  (Quod Troylus) as ſone as I may gone
                  I wol ryght fayne, with al my might bē one
                  Haue god my trouth, her cauſe to ſuſtene
                  Now good thryft haue ye (ꝙ Heleyne) the quene
               
               
                  (Quod Pandarus) and it your wyll be
                  That ſhe maye take her leaue, er that ſhe go
                  O, els god forbyd it (tho ꝙ he)
                  Yf that ſhe vouchſafe for to do ſo
                  And wyth that worde (ꝙ Troylus) ye two
                  Deiphebus, and my ſyſter lefe and dere
                  To you haue I to ſpeake of a matere
               
               
                  
                  To ben aduyſed by your rede the better
                  And founde (as hap was) at his beddes heed
                  The copye of a treatyſe, and a lettre
                  That Hector had hym ſent, to aſken reed
                  Yf ſuche a man was worthy to ben deed
                  wote I nought who, but in a gryſly wyſe
                  He prayde hem anone on it auyſe
               
               
                  Deiphebus gan thys lettre for to vnfolde
                  In erneſt great, ſo dyd Heleyne the quene
                  And romynge outward, faſt it gone beholde
                  Downewarde a ſteyre, into an herber grene
                  Thys ylke thynge redden hem bytwene
                  And largely the mountenaūce of an houre
                  They gonne on it to reden and to pore
               
               
                  Nowe let hem rede, and turne we anone
                  To Pandarus, that gan full ſofte prye
                  That all was well, and out he gan to gone
                  Into the great chambre, and that in hye
                  And ſayd, god ſaue all thys companye
                  Come nece myne, my lady quene Heleyne
                  Abydeth you, and eke my lordes tweyne
               
               
                  Ryſe, take wyth you your nece An
                        •
                     igone
                  Or whome you lyſt, or no force hardely
                  The laſſe preaſe yt bet, come forth wyth me
                  And loke that ye thanken humbly
                  Hem all thre, and when ye maye goodly
                  Your tyme yſe, taketh of hem your leue
                  Leſt we to longe hys reſtes hym byreue
               
               
                  All innocent of Pandarus entente
                  (Quod tho Creſeyde) go we vncle dere
                  And arme in arme, inwarde wt him ſhe wēte
                  Auyſynge well her wordes and her chere
                  And Pandarus, in erneſtfull manere
                  Sayd, all folke for goddes loue I praye
                  Stynteth ryght here, and ſoftely you playe
               
               
                  Auyſeth you what folke bene here wythin
                  And in what plyte one is, god hym amende
                  And inwarde thus full ſoftely begyn
                  Nece I coniure, and hyghly you defende
                  On hys halfe, whych that ſoule vs al ſende
                  And in the vertue of corownes twayne
                  Slee not thys mā, yt hath for you this payne
               
               
                  Fye on the deuell, thynke whych one he is
                  And in what plyte he lyeth, come of anone
                  Thynke all ſuche taryed tyde but loſt it nys
                  That woll ye both ſayne, when ye ben one
                  Secondly, there yet deuyneth none
                  Vpon you two, come of nowe yf ye conne
                  whyle folke is blent, lo, all the tyme is wōne
               
               
                  In tyterynge and purſute, and delayes
                  The folke deuyne, at waggynge of a tree
                  And though ye wolde han after mery dayes
                  Then dare ye not, and why? for ſhe and ſhe
                  Spake ſuche a worde, thus loked he and he
                  Leſt tyme be loſt, I dare not wyth you dele
                  Come of therfore, and bryngeth hym to hele
               
               
                  But nowe to you, ye louers that ben here
                  was Troylus not in a cankedorte
                  That lay, & might ye whyſpryng of hem here
                  And thought o lorde, ryght now rēneth my ſorte
                  Fully to dye, or haue anone comforte
                  And was the fyrſt tyme he ſhulde her pray
                  Of loue, O myghty god what ſhall he ſaye
               
               ¶Explicit liber ſecundus.
            
            
               
                  
                     O Blyſfull lyght, of which the bemes clere
                  Adorneth all the thyrde heuen fayre
                  O ſonnes leſe, o Ioues doughter dere
                  Pleaſaunce of loue, o goodly debonayre
                  In gentyll hertes aye redy to repayre
                  O very cauſe of heale and of gladneſſe
                  Yheryed be thy myght and thy goodneſſe
               
               
                  In heauen and hell, in erthe, and ſalte ſee
                  Is felte thy myght, yf that I well dyſcerne
                  As man, beeſt, fyſhe, herbe, and grene tree
                  The fele in tymes wyth vapour eterne
                  God loueth, and to loue woll naught werne
                  And in thys worlde no lyues creature
                  wythouten loue is worth, or maye endure
               
               
                  Ye Ioues fyrſt, to thylke affectes glade
                  Through whych that thynges lyuen al, & be
                  Cōmenden, and amorous hem made
                  On mortall thynge, and as you lyſt aye ye
                  Yeue hem in loue, eaſe, or aduerſyte
                  And in a thouſand formes downe hym ſente
                  For loue in erth, & whom you lyſte he hente
               
               
                  
                  Ye fyrce Marce apeaſen of hys yre
                  And as you lyſt, ye maken hertes dygne
                  Algates hem that ye woll ſet afyre
                  They dreden ſhame, and vyces they reſygne
                  Ye done hem curteys be, freſhe, & benigne
                  And hye or lowe, after a wyght entendeth
                  The ioyes yt he hath, your myght it ſendeth
               
               
                  Ye holden reygne and houſe in vnite
                  Ye ſoth faſt cauſe of frendſhyp ben alſo
                  Ye knewen all thylke couered qualyte
                  Of thynges, whych that folke wondren ſo
                  when they can not conſtrue howe it may go
                  She loueth hym, or why he loueth here
                  As why this fyſhe & not that cometh to were
               
               
                  Ye folke a lawe haue ſet in vniuerſe
                  And thys knowe I by hem that louers be
                  That who ſo ſtryueth wt you hath ye werſe
                  Nowe lady bryght, for thy benignite
                  At reuerence of hem that ſeruen the
                  whoſe clerke I am, ſo techeth me deuyſe
                  Some ioye of that is felt in thy ſeruyce
               
               
                  Yea, in my naked herte ſentement
                  I hylde, and do me ſhewe of thy ſwetneſſe
                  Cal
                        •
                     ope, thy voyce be nowe preſent
                  For 
                        ••
                     we is nede, ſeeſt thou not my dyſtreſſe
                  Howe I mote tell anone ryght the gladneſſe
                  Of Troylus, to Venus heriynge
                  To whych who nede hath, god hym brynge.
               
            
            
               ¶Incipit liber tertius.
               
                  
                     LAy all thys meane whyle Troylus
                  Recordynge hys leſſon in thys manere
                  Mafey thought he, thus wol I ſay and thus
                  Thus woll I playne vnto my lady dere
                  That worde is good, & thys ſhalbe my chere
                  Thys nyll I not foryeten in no wyſe
                  God lene hym werken as he can deuyſe
               
               
                  And lorde ſo that hys herte gan to quappe
                  Herynge her come, and ſhorte for to ſyke
                  And Pandarus that ledde her by the lappe
                  Came nere, and gan in at the curteyn pyke
                  And ſayd, god do bote on all ſyke
                  Se who is here, you comen to vyſyte
                  Lo, here is ſhe that is your death to wyte
               
               
                  Therwyth it ſemed as he wepte almoſte
                  A, a, (quod Troylus) ſo routhfully
                  where me be wo, o myghty god thou woſte
                  who is all there, I ſe not truly
                  Syr (ꝙ Creſeyde) it is Pandare and I
                  Ye ſwete herte alas, I maye not ryſe
                  To knele, and do you honoure in ſome wyſe
               
               
                  And dreſſed hym vpwarde, & ſhe ryght tho
                  Gan both her hondes ſofte vpon hym ley
                  O for the loue of god, do ye not ſo
                  To me (quod ſhe) ey what is thys to ſey
                  Syr, comen am I to you for cauſes twey
                  Fyrſt you to thanke, and of your lordſhyp eke
                  Continuaunce I wolde you beſeke
               
               
                  Thys Troylus that herde hys lady praye
                  Of lordſhip, him woxe neither quicke ne deed
                  Ne myght o worde for ſhame to it ſaye
                  All though men ſhulden ſmyten of hys heed
                  But lorde ſo he woxe ſodeynlyche reed
                  And ſyr, hys leſſon that he wende conne
                  To prayen her, is through hys wyt yronne
               
               
                  Creſeyde all thys aſpyed well ynough
                  For ſhe was wyſe, & loued hym neuer yt laſſe
                  All nere he in all aperte, or made it tough
                  Or was to bolde, to ſynge a foole a maſſe
                  But when hys ſhame gan ſomwhat to paſſe
                  hys reſons, as I may my rymes holde
                  I woll you tell, as techen bokes olde
               
               
                  In chaūged voyce, ryght for hys very drede
                  whych voyce eke quoke, & therto hys manere
                  Goodly abaſht, and nowe hys hewes rede
                  Nowe pale, vnto Creſeyde hys lady dere
                  wyth loke downe caſt, & humble iyoldē chere
                  Lo, the alderfyrſt worde that hym after
                  was twyſe, mercy, mercy ſwete herte
               
               
                  And ſtynt a while, & whē he might out bring
                  The next worde was, god wote for I haue
                  As faythfully as I haue had konnynge
                  Ben yours all, god ſo my ſoule ſaue
                  And ſhal, tyl that I wofull wyght be graue
                  And though I dare ne can vnto you playne
                  Iwys I ſuffre not the laſſe payne
               
               
                  Thus moch as nowe, ah, womālyche wyfe
                  I maye out brynge, and yf thys you dyſpleſe
                  
                     That ſhall I wreke vpon myne owne lyfe
                  Ryght ſone I trowe, and do your hert an eſe
                  Yf wyth my death, your herte maye apeſe
                  But ſens that ye han herde me ſomwhat ſey
                  Nowe retche I neuer howe ſone that I dey
               
               
                  Therwyth hys manly ſorowe to beholde
                  It myght haue made an hert of ſtone to rew
                  And Pandare wept as he to water wolde
                  And poked euer hys nece newe and new
                  And ſayd, wo begon ben hertes trewe
                  For loue of god, make of thys thinge an ende
                  Or ſlee vs both at ones, er that ye wende
               
               
                  I, what (ꝙ ſhe) by God and by my trouth
                  I not nat what ye wylne that I ſey
                  Ey, what (ꝙ he) that ye haue on hym routh
                  For goddes loue, and doth hym not to dey
                  Nowe then thus (ꝙ ſhe) I wolde hym prey
                  To tell me the fyne of hys entente
                  Yet wyſt I neuer well what that he mente
               
               
                  what that I meane, O ſwete herte dere
                  (Quod Troylus) o goodly freſhe free
                  That wyth the ſtremes of your eyen clere
                  Ye wolden ſomtyme frendly on me ſe
                  And then agreen that I may ben he
                  wythouten braunche of vyce, on any wyſe
                  In trouth alwaye, to do you my ſeruyſe
               
               
                  As to my lady ryght, and chefe reſorte
                  wyth all my wytte and all my diligence
                  And to haue ryght as you lyſt comforte
                  Vnder your yerde egall to myne offence
                  As death, yf that I breake your defence
                  And that ye deygne me ſo moche honour
                  Me to cōmaunden aught in any hour
               
               
                  And I to ben your very humble trewe
                  Secrete, and in my paynes pacient
                  And euer to deſyren freſhly newe
                  To ſeruen, and to ben aye ylike dilygent
                  And with good herte, al holy your talent
                  Receyuen wel, howe ſore that me ſmerte
                  Lo, this meane I, myne owne ſwete hert
               
               
                  (Quod Pandarus) lo here an hard requeſt
                  And reaſonable, a lady for to warne
                  Nowe nece myne, by Natall Ioues feeſte
                  were I a god, ye ſhulde ſterue as yerne
                  That heren wel this man wol nothyng yern
                  But your honour, & ſene him almoſt ſterue
                  And ben ſo lothe to ſuffre him you to ſerue
               
               
                  wyth that ſhe gan her eyen on him caſt
                  Full eaſely, and full debonairly
                  Auyſyng her, and hyed not to faſt
                  wyth neuer a worde, but ſayd hym ſoftely
                  Myn honour ſafe, I wolde wel truly
                  And in ſuch forme, as I can now deuyſe
                  Receyuen him fully to my ſeruice
               
               
                  Beſechyng hym for goddes loue, that he
                  wolde in honour of trouthe and gentelleſſe
                  As I wel meane, eke meanen wel to me
                  And myn honour, with wit and beſyneſſe
                  Aye kepe, and if I maye done him gladneſſe
                  From hence forthe, iwys I nyl nat fayne
                  Nowe bethe al hole, no lenger ye ne playne
               
               
                  But natheleſſe, this warne I you (ꝙ ſhe)
                  A kynges ſonne although ye be ywis
                  Ye ſhal no more haue ſoueraynte
                  Of me in loue, than right in that caſe is
                  Ne nyl forbeare if that ye done amys
                  To wrathe you, and whyle that ye me ſerue
                  Cheryſſhen you, right after that ye deſerue
               
               
                  And ſhortly dere hert, and al my knyght
                  Beth glad, and draweth you to luſtyneſſe
                  And I ſhal trewly, with al my ful myght
                  your bytter turnen al to ſweteneſſe
                  If I be ſhe, that may do you gladneſſe
                  For euery wo ye ſhal recouer a blyſſe
                  And him in armes toke, and gan him kyſſe
               
               
                  Fyl Pandarus on knees, and vp his eyen
                  To heuen threw, and helde his hondes hye
                  Immortal god (ꝙ he) that mayſt nat dyen
                  Cupide I meane, of this mayſte glorifye
                  And venus, thou mayſte maken melodye
                  withouten honde, me ſemeth that in towne
                  For this myracle yche here eche bell ſowne
               
               
                  But ho, no more nowe of this matere
                  For why? this folke wol comen vp anone
                  That haue the lettre redde, lo I hem here
                  But I coniure the Creſeyde, and one
                  And two, thou Troylus whā yu mayſt gone
                  That at myn houſe ye ben at my warnyng
                  For I ful wel ſhal ſhapen your cōmyng
               
               
                  And eaſeth there your hertes right ynough
                  And let ſe whiche of you ſhal beare the bel
                  
                     To ſpeke of loue aright, & therwith he lough
                  For there haue I a leyſer for to tell
                  (Quod Troylus) howe long ſhal I dwell
                  Er this ben done: ꝙ he, whē thou maiſt ryſe
                  This thyng ſhal be right as you liſt deuyſe
               
               
                  with that Heleyne, and alſo deiphebus
                  Tho comen vpward, right at ye ſtayres ende
                  And lorde ſo tho gan gronen Troylus
                  His brother and his ſyſter for to blende
                  (ꝙ Pandarus) it tyme is that we wende
                  Take nece myn your leaue at al thre
                  And let hem ſpeake, & cometh forth with me
               
               
                  She toke her leaue at hem ful thryftely
                  As ſhe wel coulde: & they her reuerence
                  Vnto the ful dydden hardely
                  And wonder wel ſpeaken in her abſence
                  Of her, in prayſyng of her excellence
                  Her gouernaunce, her wyt, and hyr manere
                  Comendeden, that it ioye was to here
               
               
                  Nowe let her wende vnto her owne place
                  And turne we to Troylus agayne
                  That gan ful lightly of the lettre pace
                  That deiphebus had in the gardyn ſeyne
                  And of Heleyne and hem he wolde feyne
                  Deleuered ben, and ſayd that hem leſte
                  To ſlepe, and after tales haue a reſte
               
               
                  Heleyne him kyſte, and toke her leue blyue
                  Deiphebus eke, & home wente euery wight
                  And Pandarus, as faſte as he may driue
                  To Troylus tho came, as lyne ryght
                  And on a paillet, al that gladde nyght
                  By Troylus he lay, with mery chere
                  To tale, & wel was hem they were yfere
               
               
                  whē euery wight was voyded, but they two
                  And al the dores weren faſte yſhette
                  To tel in ſhorte, without wordes mo
                  This Pandarus, without any lette
                  Vp roſe, and on his beddes ſyde him ſette
                  And gan to ſpeaken in a ſobre wyſe
                  To Troylus, as I ſhal you deuyſe
               
               
                  Myn alderleueſt lorde, and brother dere
                  God wot and thou, that it ſate me ſo ſore
                  whan I the ſawe ſo languyſſhyng to here
                  For loue of which thy wo woxe alway more
                  That I with al my might, and al my lore
                  Haue euer ſythen done my beſyneſſe
                  To bringe the to ioye out of diſtreſſe
               
               
                  And haue it brouȝt to ſuch plyte as yu woſte
                  So yt through me thou ſtondeſt now in way
                  To faren wel, I ſay it for no boſte
                  And woſte thou why, but ſhame it is to ſay
                  For the haue I begon a gamen play
                  whiche that I neuer done ſhal efte for other
                  Al tho he were a thouſande folde my brother
               
               
                  That is to ſay, for the am I becomen
                  Betwyxen game and erneſt, ſuche a mene
                  As maken women vnto men to comen
                  Al ſay I nat, thou woſte well what I mene
                  For the haue I my nece, of vyces clene
                  So fully made thy gentylleſſe tryſt
                  That all ſhal ben, ryght as thy ſelfe lyſte
               
               
                  But god, yt al wotteth take I to wytneſſe
                  That neuer I thys for couetyſe wrought
                  But onely for to abredge that diſtreſſe
                  For which wel nye thou dydeſt, as me thouȝt
                  But good brother, do nowe as the ought
                  For goddes loue, and kepe her out of blame
                  Sens thou art wyſe, & ſaue alway her name
               
               
                  For wel thou woſt, the name as yet of her
                  Amōges ye people, as (who ſayd) halowed is
                  For that man is vnbore I dare wel ſwere
                  That euer wyſte that ſhe dyd amys
                  But wo is me, that I that cauſe al thys
                  May thynken that ſhe is my nece dere
                  And I her eme, and traytour eke yfere
               
               
                  And were it wyſte yt I through myn engyn
                  Had in myne nece yput this fantaſye
                  To done thy luſt, and holly to be thyn
                  why? al the worlde wolde vpon it crye
                  And ſay, that I the worſte trecherye
                  Dyd in thys caſe, that euer was begonne
                  And ſhe fordone, & thou right naught ywōne
               
               
                  Wherfore er I wol ferther gone or paas
                  Yet efte I the beſeche, and fully ſay
                  That priuyte go with vs in thys caas
                  That is to ſayne, that thou vs neuer wray
                  And be nat wrothe, though I the ofte pray
                  To holden ſecre ſuche an hygh matere
                  For ſkylfull is (thou woſte well) my prayere
               
               
                  And thinke, what wo ther hath betyd er this
                  For makyng of auauntes, as men rede
                  
                     And what myſchaunce in this worlde yet is
                  Fro day to day, right for that wycked dede
                  For whiche theſe wyſe clerkes that ben dede
                  Haue euer thys prouerbed to vs yonge
                  That the fyrſt vertue is to kepe the tonge
               
               
                  And nere it that I wylne as now abredge
                  Diffuſyon of ſpeche, I coulde almoſt
                  A thouſande olde ſtories the aledge
                  Of women loſte, through falſe & fooles boſte
                  Prouerbes canſte thy ſelfe ynowe, & woſte
                  Ayenſt that vyce for to ben a blabbe
                  Al ſayd men ſothe, as often as they gabbe
               
               
                  O tonge alas, ſo often here beforne
                  Haſte thou made many a lady bright of hewe
                  Sayd, welaway the day that I was borne
                  And many a maydens ſorowe for to newe
                  And for the more parte al is vntrewe
                  That mē of yelpe, & it were brought to preue
                  Of kynde, none auauntour is to leue
               
               
                  Auauntour and a lyer, al is one
                  As thus: I poſe a woman graunt me
                  Her loue, and ſayth that other woll ſhe none
                  And I am ſworne to holden it ſecre
                  And after I tel it two or thre
                  Iwys I am auauntour at the leeſt
                  And lyer eke, for I breke my beheeſt
               
               
                  Now loke thā, if they be nat to blame
                  Suche maner folke, what ſhall I clepe hem what
                  That hem auaunte of women, and by name
                  That yet behyght hem neuer this ne that
                  Ne knowe hem more than myne olde hat
                  No wonder is, ſo god me ſende heele
                  Though womē dreden with vs men to deele
               
               
                  I ſay nat thys for no miſtruſt of you
                  Ne for no wyſe men, but for fooles nyce
                  And for the harme that in ye worlde is nowe
                  As wel for folye ofte, as for malyce
                  For wel wote I, in wyſe folke that vyce
                  No woman dredeth, yf ſhe be well auyſed
                  For wyſe ben by fooles harme chaſtyſed
               
               
                  But nowe to purpoſe, leue brother dere
                  Haue all this thyng yt I haue ſayd in mynde
                  And kepe the cloſe, and be now of good chere
                  For all thy dayes thou ſhalt me trewe fynde
                  I ſhall thy proceſſe ſet in ſuche a kynde
                  And god toforne, that it ſhall the ſuffyſe
                  For it ſhall be, right as thou wolte deuyſe
               
               
                  For wel I wote, thou meaneſt well parde
                  Therfore I dare this fully vndertake
                  Thou woſte eke, what thy lady graunted the
                  And day is ſet the chartres to make
                  Haue now good night, I may no lēger wake
                  And byd for me, ſyth thou arte now in blyſſe
                  That god the ſende dethe, or ſoone lyſſe
               
               
                  Who might tellen halfe the ioye or feeſt
                  whych that the ſoule of Troylus tho felte
                  Heryng theffect of Pandarus beheeſt
                  His olde wo, that made his herte ſwelte
                  Gan tho for ioye waſten, and to melte
                  And all the richeſſe of his ſyghes ſore
                  At ones fledde, he felte of hem no more
               
               
                  But right ſo as theſe holtes, & theſe hayis
                  That han in wynter deed ben and drie
                  Reueſten hem in grene, whan that may is
                  whan euery luſty lyſteth to play
                  Right in that ſelfe wyſe, ſothe to ſay
                  woxe ſodainly his herte full of ioye
                  That gladder was there neuer mā in Troye
               
               
                  And gan his loke on Pandarus vp caſte
                  Ful ſoberly, and frendly on to ſe
                  And ſayd, frende, in April the laſte
                  As well thou woſte, yf it remembre the
                  Howe nyghe yt dethe for wo thou founde me
                  And howe thou dyddeſt all thy beſyneſſe
                  To knowe of me the cauſe of my diſtreſſe
               
               
                  Thou woſte how longe I it forbare to ſay
                  To the, that arte the man that I beſt tryſt
                  And peryll none was it to the to bewray
                  That wyſt I well: but tel me yf the lyſte
                  Sythe I ſo loth was, that thy ſelfe it wyſte
                  Howe durſte I mo tellen of this matere?
                  That quake nowe, & no wight may vs here
               
               
                  But natheleſſe, by that god I the ſwere
                  That as him lyſt may al this world gouerne
                  And yf I lye, Achylles wyth his ſpere
                  Myne herte cleaue, al were my lyfe eterne
                  As I am mortal, yf I late or yerne
                  wolde it bewray, or durſt, or ſhulde conne
                  For al the good that god made vnder ſonne
               
               
                  That rather dye I wolde, and determyne
                  As thynketh me nowe, ſtocked in priſon
                  
                     In wretchydneſſe, in fylthe, and in vermyne
                  Captyfe to cruell kyng Agamenon
                  And this in all the temples of this towne
                  Vpon the goddes all, I woll the ſwere
                  To morowe day, yf that the lyketh here
               
               
                  And that thou haſte ſo moche ydon for me
                  That I ne may it neuer more deſerue
                  This know I well, all might I now for the
                  A thouſande tymes on a morowe ſterue
                  I can no more, but that I woll the ſerue
                  Ryght as thy ſlaue, whyther ſo thou wende
                  For euer more, vnto my lyues ende
               
               
                  But here with al myn herte I the beſeche
                  That neuer in me thou deme ſuche folye
                  As I ſhall ſayne, me thought by thy ſpeche
                  That this whiche thou me doeſt for cōpanye
                  I ſhulde wene it were a baudrye
                  I am nat woode, all yf I leude be
                  It is nat ſo, that wot I well parde
               
               
                  But he that gothe for golde, or for rycheſſe
                  On ſuche meſſages, call him what ye lyſte
                  And this that thou doeſt, call it gentylneſſe
                  Compaſſyon, and felawſhyp, and tryſte
                  Departe it ſo, for wyde where is wyſte
                  Howe that there is dyuerſyte required
                  Betwixen thynges lyke, as I haue lered
               
               
                  And yt thou knowe I thynke nat ne wene
                  That thys ſeruyce a ſhame be or iape
                  I haue my fayre ſuſter Polixene
                  Caſſandre, Heleyne, or any of the frape
                  Be ſhe neuer ſo fayre, or well yſhape
                  Tel me, whiche thou wylte of euerychone
                  To haue for thyne, and let me than alone
               
               
                  Buth ſyth yt thou haſt done me this ſeruyce
                  My lyfe to ſaue, and for non hope of mede
                  So for the loue of god, this great empriſe
                  Parfourme it out, nowe is the moſte nede
                  For hygh and lowe, withouten any drede
                  I wol alway thyne heſtes al kepe
                  Haue nowe good nyght, & let vs bothe ſlepe
               
               
                  Thus helde hem eche of other well apayde
                  That all the worlde ne might it bet amende
                  And on the morowed whā they were arayde
                  Eche to hys owne nedes gan entende
                  But Troylus, though as the fyre he brende
                  For ſharpe deſyre of hope, and of pleaſaunce
                  He nat forgate his good gouernaunce
               
               
                  But in him ſelfe, wt māhode gan reſtreyne
                  Eche rakel dede, and eche vnbridled chere
                  That all that lyuen ſothe to ſayne
                  Ne ſhulde haue wyſt, by word or by manere
                  what that he mente, as touching this matere
                  From euery wyght, as ferre as is the cloude
                  He was ſo wyſe, and wel diſſymulen coulde
               
               
                  And al ye whyle which that I now deuyſe
                  Thys was hys lyfe, with all his full myght
                  By day he was in Martes hyghe ſeruyce
                  That is to ſayne, in armes as a knyght
                  And for the more parte the longe nyght
                  He lay and thought how that he might ſerue
                  His lady beſt, her thanke for to deſerue
               
               
                  Nyll I nat ſweare, all though he lay ſofte
                  That in his thought he nas ſomwhat diſeſed
                  Ne that he turned on his pillowes ofte
                  And wolde of that him miſſed haue ben eaſed
                  But in ſuche caſe, men be nat alwaye pleaſed
                  For naught I wot, no more than was he
                  That can I deme of poſſibylyte
               
               
                  But certayne is, to purpoſe for to go
                  That in this whyle, as written is in geſte
                  He ſawe his lady ſomtyme, and alſo
                  She wyth him ſpake, whā yt ſhe durſt & leſte
                  And by her bothe auyſe, as was the beſte
                  Apoynteden ful warely in this nede
                  So as they durſte, howe they wold procede
               
               
                  But it was ſpoken in ſo ſhorte a wyſe
                  In ſuche awayte alway, and in ſuche fere
                  Leſte any wight deuynen or deuyſe
                  wolde of hem two, or to it lay an eere
                  That all this worlde ſo lefe to hem ne were
                  As that Cupyde wolde hem grace ſende
                  To maken of her ſpeche right an ende
               
               
                  But thylke lytel that they ſpake or wrought
                  Hys wyſe goſte toke aye, of all ſuche hede
                  It ſemed her he wyſte what ſhe thought
                  withouten worde, ſo that it was no nede
                  To bydde hym aught to dō, or aught forbede
                  For which ſhe thought yt loue, al come it late
                  Of al ioye, had opened her the yate
               
               
                  And ſhortly of thys proceſſe for to pace
                  So wel his werke and wordes he beſette
                  
                     That he ſo ful ſtode in his ladys grace
                  TWenty thouſande tymes er ſhe lette
                  She tonked god ſhe euer with hym mette
                  So coulde he hym gouerne in ſuche ſeruyce
                  That al the worlde ne might it bet deuyſe
               
               
                  For ſhe founde him ſo diſcrete in all
                  So ſecrete, and of ſuche obeyſaunce
                  That well ſhe felte he was to her a wall
                  Of ſteele, and ſhelde of euery diſpleſaunce
                  That to ben in hys good gouernaunce
                  So wyſe he was, ſhe was nomore afered
                  I meane as ferre as ought ben required
               
               
                  And Pandarus to quicke alway the fyre
                  was euer ylyke preſt and dyligent
                  To eaſe his frende was ſet al hys deſyre
                  He ſhone aye on, he to and fro was ſent
                  He letters bare whan Troylus was abſent
                  That neuer man, as in hys frendes nede
                  Ne bare hym bet than he, withouten drede
               
               
                  But now parauēture ſom mā waytē wold
                  That euery worde or ſonde, loke or chere
                  Of Troylus, that I rehercen ſhulde
                  In all this whyle, vnto hys lady dere
                  I trowe it were a longe thyng for to here
                  Or of what wight yt ſtante in ſuche diſioynte
                  His wordes al, or euery loke to poynte
               
               
                  For ſothe I haue nat herde it done er this
                  In ſtorye none, ne no man here I wene
                  And though I wolde, I coulde nat ywys
                  For there was ſome epyſtel hem betwene
                  That wold (as ſaith myn auctour) wel cōtene
                  Nye half this boke, of which hī lyſt nat write
                  Howe ſhulde I than a lyue of it endyte
               
               
                  But to the great effecte, than ſay I thus
                  That ſtondyng in concorde and in quyete
                  Thys ylke two, Creſeyde and Troylus
                  As I haue tolde, and in this tyme ſwete
                  Saue onely often might they nat mete
                  Ne leyſer haue, her ſpeches to fulfell
                  That it befyl, ryght as I ſhall you tel
               
               
                  That Pandarus, that euer dyd his might
                  Right for the fyne that I ſhall ſpeke of here
                  As for to bryngen to his houſe ſome nyght
                  His fayre nece, and Troylus yfere
                  where as at leyſer al thys hygh matere
                  Touchyng her loue, were at ye ful vp bounde
                  Had out of doute a tyme to it founde
               
               
                  For he with great delyberation
                  Had euery thyng that therto might auayle
                  Forne caſte, and put in execution
                  And neyther lefte for coſte ne for trauayle
                  Come yf hem lyſte, hem ſhuld nothyng fayle
                  And for to ben in aught aſpyed there
                  That wyſte he wel an inpoſſyble were
               
               
                  Dredeleſſe it clere was in the wynde
                  Of euery pye, and euery let game
                  Nowe all is wel, for al the worlde is blynde
                  In this mater, bothe fremed and tame
                  This tymber is al redy vp to frame
                  Vs lacketh naught, but that weten wolde
                  A certayne houre, in which ſhe comen ſhulde
               
               
                  And Troylus, that all this purueyaunce
                  Knewe at the full, and wayted on it aye
                  And here vpon eke made great ordynaunce
                  And founde hys cauſe, & therwith his aray
                  If that he were myſſed nyght or day
                  There whyle he was aboute this ſeruyce
                  That he was gone to done hys ſacrifyce
               
               
                  And muſte at ſuche a temple alone wake
                  Anſwered of Apollo for to be
                  And fyrſt to ſene the holy laurer quake
                  Er that Apollo ſpake out of the tree
                  To tell hym next whan grekes ſhulde flye
                  And for thy let hym no man god forbede
                  But pray Apollo helpe in thys nede
               
               
                  Nowe is there lytell more for to done
                  But Pandare vp, and ſhortly for to ſayne
                  Right ſone vpon the chaungyng of ye moone
                  whā lightleſſe is ye world a night or twayne
                  And that the welken ſhope hym for to rayne
                  He ſtreyght a morowe vnto hys nece wente
                  Ye haue well herde the fyne of hys entente
               
               
                  Whā he was comē, he gan anon to playe
                  As he was wonte, and of hym ſelfe to iape
                  And fynally he ſwore, and gan her ſay
                  By this and that, ſhe ſhulde hym nat eſcape
                  No lenger done hym after her to cape
                  But certaynly, ſhe muſte by her leue
                  Come ſoupen in hys houſe wyth hym at eue
               
               
                  At which ſhe lough, & gan her fyrſt excuſe
                  And ſayd: it rayneth: lo, howe ſhulde I gone
                  
                     Let be (ꝙ he) ne ſtonde nat thus to muſe
                  This mote be done, ye ſhal come there anone
                  So at the laſte, herof they fell at one
                  Or els faſte he ſwore her in her eere
                  He nolde neuer comen there ſhe were
               
               
                  Sone after this, ſhe to hym gan rowne
                  And aſked hym yf Troylus were there
                  He ſwore her nay, for he was out of towne
                  And ſayd, nece: I poſe that he were there
                  You durſte neuer haue the more feere
                  For rather than men might hym there aſpye
                  Me were leuer a thouſande fold to dye
               
               
                  Naught lyſt myne auctour fully to declare
                  what that ſhe thought, whan he ſayd ſo
                  That Troylus was out of towne yfare
                  And yf he ſayd therof ſothe or no
                  But that wythouten awayte with him to go
                  She graūted him, ſyth he her that beſought
                  And as hys nece obeyed as her ought
               
               
                  But natheleſſe, yet gan ſhe hym beſeche
                  (All though wt him to gone it was no feere)
                  For to beware of gofyſhe peoples ſpeche
                  That dreme thynges, which that neuer were
                  And well auyſe him whom he brought there
                  And ſayd him eme, ſens I muſte on you tryſt
                  Loke al be wel, and do nowe as you lyſt
               
               
                  He ſwore her this, by ſtockes and by ſtones
                  And by the goddes that in heuen dwell
                  Or els were him leauer ſoule and bones
                  wyth Pluto kyng, as depe ben in hell
                  As Tantalus, what ſhulde I more tell
                  whan al was well, he roſe and toke his leue
                  And ſhe to ſouper came whan it was eue
               
               
                  wyth a certayne of her owne men
                  And with her fayre nece Antigone
                  And other of her women nyne or ten
                  But who was glad nowe, who as trowe ye?
                  But Troylus, that ſtode and myght it ſe
                  Throughout a lytel wyndowe in a ſtewe
                  There hebeſhet, ſith midnight was in mewe
               
               
                  Vnwyſt of euery wight, but of Pandare
                  But to the poynt, nowe whan yt ſhe was cōe
                  wyth all ioye, and all frendes fare
                  Her eme anone in armes hath her nome
                  And than to the ſupper all and ſome
                  whan tyme was, ful ſofte they hem ſette
                  God wote there was no deynte ferre to fette
               
               
                  And after ſupper gannen they to ryſe
                  At eaſe well, with hert freſhe and glade
                  And wel was him that coude beſt deuyſe
                  To lyken her, or that her laughen made
                  He ſonge, ſhe playde, he tolde a tale of wade
                  But at the laſte, as euery thyng hath ende
                  She toke her leaue, and nedes wolde wende
               
               
                  But o fortune, executrice of wyerdes
                  O influentes of theſe heuens hye
                  Sothe is, that vnder god ye ben our hierdes
                  Though to vs beeſtes, ben the cauſes wrie
                  This mene I now, for ſhe gā homward hye
                  But execute was al beſyde her leue
                  At the goddes wil, for which ſhe muſte bleue
               
               
                  The bente moone with her hornes pale
                  Saturnus and Ioue, in Cāc
                        •
                     o ioyned were
                  That ſuche a rayne from heuen gan auale
                  That euery maner woman that was there
                  Had of that ſmoky rayne a very feere
                  At whiche Pandare tho lough, & ſayd thenne
                  Nowe were it tyme a lady to gon henne
               
               
                  But good nece, yf I might euer pleaſe
                  You any thyng, than pray I you (ꝙ he)
                  To don myne herte as nowe ſo great an eaſe
                  As for to dwell here al this nyght wyth me
                  For why? this is your owne houſe parde
                  For by my trouhe, I ſay it nat in game
                  To wende as nowe, it were to me a ſhame
               
               
                  Creſeyde, which that could as moche good
                  As halfe a worlde, toke hede of hys prayere
                  And ſens it rayned, and al was in a flode
                  She thouȝt, as good chepe may I dwel here
                  And graunt it gladly with a frendes chere
                  And haue a thonke, as grutche & than abyde
                  For home to gone it may nat wel betyde
               
               
                  I woll (ꝙ ſhe) myne vncle liefe and dere
                  Sens that you lyſt, it ſkyll is to be ſo
                  I am ryght glad with you to dwellen here
                  I ſayd but againe I wolde go
                  I wys graunt mercy nece (ꝙ he) tho
                  were it a game or no, ſothe to tell
                  Now am I glad, ſens that you lyſte to dwel
               
               
                  Thus al is wel, but tho began aright
                  The newe ioye, and all the feeſt agayne
                  
                     But pandarus, yf goodly had he myght
                  He wolde haue hyed her to bedde fayne
                  And ſayd, lorde this is an huge rayne
                  Thys were a wether for to ſlepen in
                  And that I rede vs ſoone to begyn
               
               
                  And nece, wote ye where I wol you lay?
                  For that we ſhul nat lyggen ferre a ſonder
                  And for ye neyther ſhullen, dare I ſay
                  Here noyſe of rayne, ne of thonder
                  By god ryght in my cloſet yonder
                  And I wol in that vtter houſe alone
                  Ben wardayne of your women euerychone
               
               
                  And in this myddel chambre that ye ſe
                  Shall your women ſlepen, wel and ſofte
                  And there I ſayd, ſhall your ſeluen be
                  And yf ye lyggen well to nyght, come ofte
                  And careth nat what wether is a loſte
                  The wyne anon, and whan ſo you leſte
                  Go we to ſlepe, I trowe it be the beſte
               
               
                  There nys no more, but herafter ſone
                  They voyde, dronke, & trauers drawe anon
                  Gan euery wyght that had naught to done
                  More in the place, out of the chambre gon
                  And euermore ſo ſternelyche it rone
                  And blewe therwyth ſo wonderlyche loude
                  That wel nyghe no man heren other coulde
               
               
                  Tho Pādarus her eme, right as him ought
                  with women, ſuche as were her moſt aboute
                  Ful glad vnto her beddes ſyde her brought
                  And toke his leaue, and gan full lowe loute
                  And ſayd, here at this cloſet dore wythout
                  Right ouertwarte your women lyggen all
                  That whom you lyſt of hem, ye may ſone cal
               
               
                  So whan that ſhe was in the cloſet layde
                  And all her women forth by ordynaunce
                  A bedde weren, there as I haue ſayde
                  There nas no more to ſkippē nor to praunce
                  But boden go to bedde with miſchaunce
                  If any wyght ſterynge were any where
                  And let hem ſlepen, that a bedde were
               
               
                  But Pandarus, yt wel couthe eche adele
                  The olde daunce, and euery poynte therin
                  whan that he ſawe that all thyng was wele
                  He thought he wolde vpon his werke begyn
                  And gan the ſtewe dore al ſofte vnpyn
                  As ſtyl as ſtone, without lenger lette
                  By Troylus adown right he him ſette
               
               
                  And ſhortly to the poynte right for to gon
                  Of al thys werke he tolde him worde & ende
                  And ſayd, make the redy right anon
                  For thou ſhalt in to heuen blyſſe wende
                  Now blyſful Venus, thou me grace ſende
                  (ꝙ Troylus) for neuer yet no dede
                  Had I er nowe, ne halfendele the drede
               
               
                  (ꝙ Pandarus) ne drede the neuer adele
                  For it ſhal be right as thou wolte deſyre
                  So thriue I, this night ſhal I make it wele
                  Or caſten al the gruel in the fyre
                  Yet bliſfull Venus, this nyght yu me enſpyre
                  (ꝙ Troylus) as wys as I the ſerue
                  And euer bet and bet ſhal tyll I ſterue
               
               
                  And yf I had, O Venus full of myrthe
                  Aſpectes badde of Mars, or of Saturne
                  Or thou combuſte, or let were in my byrthe
                  Thy father pray, al thylke harme diſturne
                  Of grace, and that I glad ayen may turne
                  For loue of hym thou louedeſt in the ſhawe
                  I meane Adon, that with ye bore was ſ
                        •
                     awe
               
               
                  Ioue eke, for the loue of fayre Europe
                  The which in forme of a bulle away thou ſet
                  Now helpe, O Mars, thou wt thy blody cope
                  For loue of Cipria, thou me naught ne let
                  O Phebus, thīke whā Daphne her ſelue ſ
                        ••
                     t
                  Vnder the barke, and Laucer woxe for drede
                  Yet for her loue, o helpe nowe at thys nede
               
               
                  Mercurye, for the loue of her eke
                  For which Pallas was wt Aglauros wrothe
                  Nowe helpe, and eke Dyane I the beſeke
                  That thys vyage be nat to the lothe
                  O fatall ſuſtren, whyche or any clothe
                  Me ſhapen was, my deſtyne me ſponne
                  So helpeth to thys werke that is begon
               
               
                  (ꝙ Pādarus) thou wretched mouces herte
                  Arte thou agaſt ſo that ſhe wol the byte
                  why, do on this furred cloke vpon thy ſherte
                  And folowe me, for I wol haue the wyte
                  But byde, and let me gon before alyte
                  And wyth that he gan vndone a trappe
                  And Troylus he brought in by the lappe
               
               
                  The ſterne wynde ſo loude gan to route
                  That no wight other noyſe might here
                  
                     And they that layen at the dore without
                  Ful ſykerly they ſlepten al yfere
                  And Pandarus, with ful ſobre chere
                  Gothe to the dore anon withouten lette
                  There as they laye, and ſoftely it ſhette
               
               
                  And as he came ayenwarde priuely
                  Hys nece awoke, & aſketh, who goth there?
                  My dere nece (quod he) i
                        •
                     am I
                  Ne wondreth nat, ne haue of it no feere
                  And nere he came, and ſayd her in her eere
                  No worde for loue of god I you beſeche
                  Let no wyght aryſe, & heren of our ſpeche
               
               
                  what, which way be ye comen? benedicite,
                  (Quod ſhe) and howe vnwyſt of hem al
                  Here at this ſecrete trappe dore (ꝙ he)
                  (Quod tho Creſcide) let me ſome wight cal
                  Eygh, god forbyde that it ſhulde ſo fal
                  (ꝙ Pandarus) that ye ſuch foly wrought
                  they might deme thing they neuer er thouȝt
               
               
                  It is nat good a ſlepyng hounde to wake
                  Ne yeue a wyght a cauſe for to deuyne
                  Your women ſlepyng al I vndertake
                  So yt for hem the houſe men myght myne
                  And ſlepen wollen tyl the ſunne ſhyne
                  And whan my tale is brought to an ende
                  Vnwyſt right as I came, ſo woll I wende
               
               
                  Nowe nece myne, ye ſhul wel vnderſtande
                  (ꝙ he) ſo as ye women demen al
                  That for to holde in loue a man in honde
                  And hym her lefe and dere herte call
                  And maken hym an howue aboue a call
                  I mene as loue an other in this mene while
                  She doth her ſelfe a ſhame, and him agyle
               
               
                  Nowe wherby that I tel you al thys
                  Ye wote your ſelfe, as wel as any wyght
                  Howe that your loue al fully graunted is
                  To troylus, the worthyeſt wyght
                  One of the worlde, & therto trouth yplyght
                  That but it were on him alonge, ye nolde
                  Him neuer falſen, whyle ye lyuen ſholde
               
               
                  Nowe ſtonte it thus, yt ſyth I fro you went
                  Thys Troylus, ryght platly for to ſeyne
                  Is through a gutter by a priuy went
                  In to my chambre come in al thys reyne
                  Vnwyſte of euery maner wyght certeyne
                  Saue of my ſelfe, as wyſely haue I ioye
                  And by the fayth Iowe Priam of Troye
               
               
                  And he is come in ſuch payne and diſtreſſe
                  That but he be al fully woode by thys
                  He ſodaynly mote fal in to woodneſſe
                  But yf god helpe: and cauſe why is thys
                  He ſayth him tolde is of a frende of hys
                  How yt ye ſhuld louē one, that hyght Horaſt
                  for ſorow of which this niȝt ſhal be his laſt
               
               
                  Creſeyde, which that al thys wonder herde
                  G
                        •
                     ul ſodaynly aboute her herte colde
                  And with a ſyghe ſhe ſoroufully anſwerde
                  Alas, I wende who ſo tales tolde
                  My dere herte wolde me nat holde
                  So lyghtly falſe, alas conceytes wronge
                  what harme they done? for nowe lyue I to lōge
               
               
                  Horaſte alas, and falſen Troylus
                  I knowe hym not, god helpe me ſo (ꝙ ſhe)
                  Alas, what wycked ſpyrite tolde hym thus
                  Nowe certes eme, to morowe and I him ſe
                  I ſhal therof as fully excuſed me
                  As euer dyd woman, yf him lyke
                  And with that worde ſhe gan ful ſore ſyke
               
               
                  O god (ꝙ ſhe) ſo wordley ſelyneſſe
                  whych clerkes callen falſe felicite
                  ymedled is with many a bytterneſſe
                  Full anguyſhous, than is god wot (ꝙ ſhe)
                  Condicion of veyne proſperyte
                  For eyther ioyes comen nat yfere
                  Or els no wyght hath hem alway here
               
               
                  O brotyl wele of mannes ioye vnſtable
                  with what wyght ſo to be, or howe yu play
                  Eyther he wot, that ioye arte muable
                  Or wote it not, it mote bene one of tway
                  Now yf he wote it nat, howe may he ſay
                  That he hath very ioye and ſelyneſſe
                  That is of ignoraunce aye in derkeneſſe
               
               
                  Nowe yf he wote that ioye is tranſitorye
                  As euery ioy of worldly thyng mote flye
                  Than euery tyme, he that hath in memorye
                  The dred of leſyng, maketh him, that he
                  May in no parfyte ſykerneſſe be
                  And yf to leſe his ioye, he ſet a myte
                  Thā ſemeth it, that ioye is worth ful lyte
               
               
                  wherfore I wolde deffine in thys matere
                  That treuly for aught I can eſpye
                  
                     There is no very wele in thys worlde here
                  But O thou wycked ſerpent ielouſye
                  Thou miſbeleued, and enuyous folye
                  why haſt thou Troylus made to me vntriſt
                  That neuer yet agylte, that I wyſt
               
               
                  (Quod Pādarus) thus fallen is thys caas
                  why vncle myn (ꝙ ſhe) who tolde hym thys
                  why doth my dere hert thus alas?
                  Ye wote, ye nece myne (ꝙ he) what is
                  I hope al ſhal be wel, that is amys
                  For ye may quench al thys, if that you leſte
                  And doth ryght ſo, I holde it for the beſte
               
               
                  So ſhal I do to morowe, ywys (ꝙ ſhe)
                  And god to forne, ſo that it ſhal ſuffyſe
                  To morowe alas, that were fayre (ꝙ he)
                  Nay nay, it may nat ſtonden in this wyſe
                  For nece myne, this writen clerkes wyſe
                  That peryl is wyth dretchyng in drawe
                  Nay, ſoch abodes be nat worth an hawe
               
               
                  Nece, al thynge hath tyme I dare auowe
                  For whan a chambre a fyre is, or an hal
                  wel more nede is, it ſodaynly reſcowe
                  Than to deſputen and aſken amonges al
                  Howe the candel in the ſtrawe is fal
                  Ah benedicite, for al amonge that fare
                  The harme is done, and farwell feldefare
               
               
                  And nece myne, ne take it nat a greſe
                  If that ye ſuffre hym al nyght in thys wo
                  God helpe me ſo, ye had him neuer lefe
                  That dare I ſaine, now ther is but we two
                  But wel I wote that ye wol nat ſo do
                  Ye bene to wyſe to done ſo great folye
                  To put hys lyfe al nyght in ieopardye
               
               
                  Had I hym neuer lefe▪ by god I wene
                  Ye had neuer thyng ſo lefe (quod ſhe)
                  Nowe by my thryfte (ꝙ he) yt ſhal be ſene
                  For ſyth ye make thys enſample of me
                  If iche al nyght wolde him in ſorowe ſe
                  For al the treaſour in the towne of Troy
                  I bydde god, I neuer mote haue ioye
               
               
                  Nowe loke than, yf ye that bene hys loue
                  Shulde put hys lyfe al nyght in ieopardy
                  For thyng of nought, now by ye god aboue
                  Nat onely thys delay cometh of foly
                  But of malice, yf that I ſhulde nat lye
                  what platly and ye ſuffre hym in diſtreſſe
                  ye neyther bounte done ne gentylleſſe
               
               
                  (Quod tho Creſeyde) wol ye done o thyng
                  And ye therwyth ſhal ſtynte al his diſeaſe
                  Haue here and bere hym this blewe ryng
                  For there is nothing might him better pleſe
                  Saue I my ſelfe, ne more his herte apeſe
                  And ſaye my dere herte, that is ſorowe
                  Is cauſeleſſe, that ſhal he ſene to morowe
               
               
                  A rynge (ꝙ he) ye haſelwodes ſhaken
                  ye nece myne, ye ryng muſt haue a ſtone
                  That myght deed men alyue maken
                  And ſuch a ryng trowe I that ye haue none
                  Diſcrecion out of your heed is gone
                  That fele I nowe (ꝙ he) and that is routh
                  O time yloſt, wel maiſt thou curſen ſlouth
               
               
                  wote ye not wel that noble & hye courag
                        •
                     
                  
                  Ne ſoroweth not, ne ſtynteth eke for lyte
                  But yf a fole were in a ielous rage
                  I nolde ſetten at hys ſorowe amyte
                  But feſſe hym with a fewe wordes whyte
                  An other day, whā that I might him fynde
                  But thys thyng ſtant al in another kynde
               
               
                  Thys is ſo gentyl and ſo tender of hert
                  that wt his deth he wol hys ſorowes wreke
                  For truſt wel, howe ſore that him ſmert
                  He wol to you no ialous wordes ſpeke
                  And for thy nece, er that his herte breke
                  So ſpeke your ſelfe to hym of this matere
                  For wyth a worde ye may hys hert ſtere
               
               
                  Nowe haue I tolde what peryl he is in
                  And hys comyng vnwyſt is to euery wight
                  Ne parde harme may there be none, ne ſyn
                  I wolde my ſelfe be wyth you al this night
                  Ye knowe eke howe it is your owne knyght
                  And that by ryght, ye muſt vpon hym f
                        •
                     yſte
                  And I al preſt to fetche hym whā you lyſte
               
               
                  This accident ſo pytous was to here
                  And eke ſo lyke a ſoth, at prime face
                  And Troylus her knyght, to her ſo dere
                  His priue cōmyng, and the ſyker place
                  That though ſhe dyd him as than a grace
                  Conſydred al thynges as they ſtode
                  No wonder is, ſens he dyd al for goode
               
               
                  Creſeyde anſwerde, as wyſelye god at reſte
                  My ſoule bryng, as me is for him wo
                  
                     And eme ywys fayne wolde I done the beſt
                  If that I a grace had for to do ſo
                  But whether that ye dwell, or for hym go
                  I am, tyl god me bettre mynde ſende
                  At Dulcarnon, ryght at my wyttes ende
               
               
                  (Quod Pandarus) yea nece wol ye here
                  Dulcarnon is called flemyng of wretches
                  it ſemeth hard, for wretches woll nauȝt lere
                  For very ſlouth, or other wylful 
                        •
                     etches
                  this is ſayd by hem, yt be nat worth two fetches
                  But ye ben wiſe, & yt ye han on honde
                  Nys neyther hard, ne ſkylful to withſtonde
               
               
                  Thā eme (ꝙ ſhe) doth here of as you lyſt
                  But er he come, I wol vp fyrſt aryſe
                  And for the loue of god, ſens al my tryſt
                  Is on you two, and ye bethe bothe wyſe
                  So werketh nowe, in ſo diſcret a wyſe
                  That I honour may haue and he pleſaunce
                  For I am here, al in your gouernaunce
               
               
                  That is wel ſayd (ꝙ he) my nece dere
                  There good thryfte on that wyſe gētyl hert
                  But lyggeth ſtyl, & taketh hym ryght here
                  It nedeth not no ferther for hym ſtert
                  And ech of you eaſeth other ſorowes ſmert
                  For loue of god, and Venus I the herye
                  For ſone hope I, that we ſhal ben merye
               
               
                  This Troylus ful ſone on knees him ſette
                  Ful ſobrely, ryght by her beddes heed
                  And in his beſt wyſe hys lady grette
                  But lorde ſhe wore ſodaynlyche reed
                  Ne thoughe men ſhulde ſmyten of her heed
                  She colde not a worde aright out brynge
                  So ſodaynly for hys ſodayne comyng
               
               
                  But Pandarus, that ſo wele coulde fele
                  In euery thyng, to play anon began
                  And ſaid, nece, ſe how this lorde can knele
                  Nowe for your trouth, ſe thys gentyll man
                  And with that word, he for a quyſhen ran
                  And ſaid, kneleth now whyle that you leſte
                  There god your hertes brynge ſone at reſte
               
               
                  Can I naught ſayn, for ſhe bad him nat riſe
                  If ſorowe it put out of her remembraunce
                  Or els that ſhe toke it in the wyſe
                  Of duetie, as for his obſeruaunce
                  But wel fynde I, ſhe did hym this pleſaūce
                  That ſhe hym kyſt, al though ſhe ſyked ſore
                  And bade him ſytte adowne withoutē more
               
               
                  (Quod Pandarus) now wol ye well begyn
                  Nowe doth him ſytte, good nece dere
                  Vpon your beddes ſyde, al therwythin
                  That eche of you the bet may other here
                  And wt that worde he drew him to the fyere
                  And toke a light, & fonde his countenaunce
                  As for to loke vpon an olde romaunce
               
               
                  Creſeyde that was Troylus ladye ryght
                  And clere ſtode in a grounde of ſykerneſſe
                  Al thought ſhe her ſeruaunt & her knyght
                  Ne ſhulde non vntrouth in her geſſe
                  That nathleſſe, conſydred hys diſtreſſe
                  And that loue is in cauſe of ſuch foly
                  Thus ſpake ſhe to hym of his ialouſy
               
               
                  Lo hert myne, as wolde the excellence
                  Of loue, ayenſt the which that no man may
                  Ne ought eke goodly maken reſiſtence
                  And eke bycauſe I felte wel and ſay
                  Your great trouth and ſeruyce euery day
                  And yt your hert al myn was ſoth to ſayne
                  This droue me for to rew vpon your payne
               
               
                  And your goodnes haue I foūdē alway yet
                  Of which my dere hert, and all my knyght
                  I thanke it you, as ferre as I haue wyt
                  Al can I not as moche as it were ryght
                  And I emforth my cōnyng and my myght
                  Haue, & aye ſhal, howe ſore that me ſmert
                  Ben to you trewe & hole wythall myne hert
               
               
                  And dredeleſſe that ſhal be founden at preue
                  But herte myne, what al thys is to ſayne
                  Shal wel be told, ſo yt ye nought you greue
                  Though I to you right on your ſelf cōplain
                  For there wyth meane I finally payne
                  That halte your hert and mine in heuyneſſe
                  Fully to ſlayne, and euery wronge redreſſe
               
               
                  My good myne, not I, for why ne howe
                  That ielouſy alas, that wycked wyuere
                  Thus cauſeleſſe is cropen in to you
                  The harme of which I wold faine deliuere
                  Alas, that he al hole or of him ſlyuere
                  Shulde haue hys refute in ſo digne a place
                  That Ioue, him ſone out of your hert race
               
               
                  But O thou, O auctour of nature
                  Is thys an honour to thy dignyte
                  
                     That folke vngylty ſuffre here iniure
                  And who that gylty is, al quyte goth he
                  O were it leful for to playne of the
                  That vndeſerued ſuffreſt ialouſy
                  O, that I wolde vpon the playne and crye
               
               
                  Eke al my wo is this, that folke nowe vſen
                  To ſayne ryght thus: yee, ialouſy is loue
                  And wolde a buſhel of venym al excuſen
                  For whā that a graine of loue is on it ſhoue
                  But wote hygh Ioue that ſytte aboue
                  If it be lyker loue, hate or grame
                  And after that it ought beare hys name
               
               
                  But certayne is, ſome maner ialouſye
                  Is excuſable, more than ſome ywys
                  As whan cauſe is, and ſome ſuch fantaſye
                  wyth pyte ſo wel expreſſed is
                  That it vnneth doth or ſayth amys
                  But goodly drynketh vp al hys diſtreſſe
                  And that excuſe I for the gentylleſſe
               
               
                  And ſome ſo full of furye is, and diſpyte
                  That it ſurmounteth hys repreſſion
                  But hert myne, ye be nat in that plyte
                  That thonke I god, for which your paſſion
                  I wyl not cal it but illuſion
                  Of habundaunce of loue, and beſy cure
                  That doth your herte this diſeſe endure
               
               
                  Of which I am ſory, but not wroth
                  But for my deuoure and your hertes reſ
                        •
                     
                  
                  where ſo you lyſt, by ordal or by othe
                  By ſorte, or in what wyſe ſo you leſte
                  For loue of god, let preue it for the beſt
                  And yf that I be gylty, do me dey
                  Alas what myght I more done or ſey
               
               
                  wyth that a fewe bryght teeres newe
                  Out of her eyen fel, and thus ſhe ſeyde
                  now god yu woſt, in thouȝht ne dede vntrew
                  To Troylus was neuer yet Creſeyde
                  with yt her heed downe in the bed ſhe leyde
                  And with the ſhete it wrigh, & ſyghed ſore
                  & held her peace, nat a word ſpake ſhe more
               
               
                  But now help god, to quench all this ſorow
                  So hope I that he ſhal, for he beſt may
                  For I haue ſene of a ful miſty morowe
                  Folowen ful ofte a mery ſommers day
                  And after wynter foloweth grene May
                        •
                     
                  
                  Men ſene alday, and reden eke in ſtories
                  That after ſharpe ſhoures bene victories
               
               
                  Thys Troylus, whan he her wordes herde
                  Haue ye no care, him lyſte not to ſlepe
                  For it thought hym no ſtrokes of a yerde
                  To here or ſe Creſeyde hys lady wepe
                  But wel he felte aboute hys herte crepe
                  For euery teare whych that Creſeyde a ſtert
                  The crāpe of dethe, to ſtrayne him by ye hert
               
               
                  And in hys mynde he gan the tyme acurſe
                  That he came there, and that he was borne
                  For nowe is wycke turned in to worſe
                  And al that labour he hath done beforne
                  he wend it loſt, he thought he nas but lorne
                  O Pandarus thought he, alas thy wyle
                  Serueth of naught, ſo welaway the whyle
               
               
                  And there withal he hynge adown his heed
                  And fel on knees, and ſorowfully he ſyght
                  what might he ſaine? he felt he nas but deed
                  For wroth was ſhe yt ſhuld his ſorowes liȝt
                  But natheleſſe, whan that he ſpeken myght
                  Thā ſaide he thus, god wot yt of this game
                  whan al is wyſt, than am I not to blame
               
               
                  Therwyth the ſorowe of his hert ſhette
                  That from hys eyen fyl there nat a teere
                  And euery ſpyrit his vygour in knette
                  So they aſtonyed or oppreſſed were
                  The felyng of ſorowe, or of hys feere
                  Or of aught els, fledde were out of towne
                  Adowne he fyl al ſodaynly in ſwoune
               
               
                  Thys was no lytle ſorowe for to ſe
                  But al was huſhte, & Pandarus vp as faſte
                  O nece peace, or we be loſt (ꝙ he)
                  Bethe not agaſte, but certayne at laſte
                  For thys or that, he in to bedde hym caſte
                  And ſayd, O thefe, is this a mannes herte
                  And he rent al to his bare ſherte
               
               
                  And ſayd nece, but ye helpe vs nowe
                  Alas your owne Troylus is lorne
                  Iwys ſo wolde I, and I wyſte howe
                  Ful fayne (ꝙ ſhe) alas that I was borne
                  Yee nece, wol ye pullen out the thorne
                  That ſtycketh in his herte (ꝙ Pandare)
                  Say al foryeue, and ſtynt is al thys fare
               
               
                  Yea that to me (quod ſhe) ful leuer were
                  Than al the good the ſunne aboute goth
                  
                     And there wythal ſhe ſwore him in hys eere
                  Iwys my dere herte I am not wrothe
                  Haue here my trouth, & many an other othe
                  Nowe ſpeke to me, for it am I Creſeyde
                  but all for naught, yet might he nat abreyde
               
               
                  Therwt his ponce, & paumes of his handes
                  They gan to frote, & wete his tēples twayn
                  And to deliuer hym fro bytter bandes
                  She ofte hym kyſte, & ſhortly for to ſayne
                  Him to rewaken ſhe dyd al her payne
                  And at the laſt he gan his breth to drawe
                  And of his ſwoune ſone after that adawe
               
               
                  And gan bet mynde, and reaſon to hym take
                  But wonder ſore he was abaſhed ywys
                  And with a ſygh whan he gan bet awake
                  He ſaid, O mercy god, what thing is this?
                  why do ye wyth your ſeluen thus amys?
                  (Quod tho Creſeyde) is this a mans game
                  what Troylus, woll ye do thus for ſhame?
               
               
                  And therwtal her arme ouer hym ſhe ſayde
                  And al foryaue, and oft tyme him keſte
                  He thonked her, and to her ſpake and ſayde
                  As fyl to purpoſe, for his hertes reſte
                  And ſhe to that anſwerde hym as her leſte
                  And with her goodly wordes hym diſporte
                  She gan, and ofte hys ſorowes to comfort
               
               
                  (Quod Pandarus) for aught I can eſpyen
                  This light nor I ne ſeruen here of naught
                  Lyght is not good for ſycke folkes eyen
                  But for the loue of god, ſens ye ben brought
                  wt thus good plyte, let now non heuy thouȝt
                  Ben hangyng in the herts of you twey
                  And bare the candel to the chymeney
               
               
                  Soone after this, though it no nede were
                  whan ſhe ſuche othes as her lyſte deuyſe
                  Had of him take, her thought tho no feere
                  Ne cauſe eke none, to byd hym thence ryſe
                  Yet leſſe thyng than othes may ſuffyſe
                  In many a caſe, for euery wyght I geſſe
                  That loueth wel, meaneth but gentylleſſe
               
               
                  But in effecte ſhe wolde wete anon
                  Of what man, and eke where, and why
                  He ialous was, ſens there was cauſe non
                  And eke the ſigne that he toke it by
                  She bade him that to tel her beſyly
                  Or els certayne ſhe bare hym on honde
                  That thys was done of malyce her to fonde
               
               
                  wythouten more, ſhortly for to ſayne
                  He muſt obey vnto thys ladyes heeſt
                  And for the laſſe harme he muſt fayne
                  He ſayd her, whan ſhe was at ſuch a feeſt
                  She myght on him haue loked at the leeſt
                  Not I nat what al dere ynough a ryſhe
                  As he that nedes muſt a cauſe fyſhe
               
               
                  And ſhe anſwerde, ſwete, al were it ſo
                  what harme was yt ſens I non yuell meane
                  For by that god that bought vs both two
                  In al thynge is myne entent cleene
                  Such argumentes ne be not worth a beene
                  wol ye the chyldyſhe ialous counterfete
                  Nowe were it worthy that ye were ybete
               
               
                  Tho Troylus gan ſoroufully to ſyke
                  leſt ſhe be wroth, hym thouȝt hys hert deyde
                  And ſayde, alas, vpon my ſorowes ſyke
                  Haue mercy ſwete herte myne Creſeyde
                  And yf that in tho wordes that I ſeyde
                  Be any wronge, I wol no more treſpace
                  Doth what you lyſt, I am al in your grace
               
               
                  And ſhe anſwerde, of gylte myſericorde
                  That is to ſayne, that I foryeue al thys
                  And euermore on thys nyght you recorde
                  And bethe wel ware ye do nomore amys
                  Nay dere herte myne (ꝙ he) ywys
                  And now (ꝙ ſhe) that I haue you do ſmerte
                  For yeue it me, myne owne ſwete herte
               
               
                  This Troylus with bliſſe of that ſuppriſed
                  Put al in goddes hande, as he that mente
                  Nothyng but wel, and ſodaynly auyſed
                  He her in armes faſte to hym hente
                  And Pandarus, with a ful good entente
                  Layde him to ſlepe, and ſayde, yf ye be wyſe
                  Sweueneth not now leſt mo folke aryſe
               
               
                  what might or may the ſely larke ſay
                  whan the ſperhauke hath him in his fote?
                  I can no more, but of theſe ylke tway
                  To whom thys tale ſugre be or ſote
                  Though I tarye a yere, ſomtyme I mote
                  After myne auctour tellen her gladneſſe
                  As wel as I haue tolde her heuyneſſe
               
               
                  Creſeyde, which that felte her thus ytake
                  (As writen clerkes in her bokes olde)
                  
                     Ryght as an aſpen leefe ſhe gan to quake
                  whan ſhe hym felte her in hys armes folde
                  But Troylus al hole of cares colde
                  Gan thanken tho the blyſful goddes ſeuen
                  through ſōdry paines to bring folke to heuē
                  
               
               
                  This Troylus in armes gan her ſtraine
                  And ſayd ſwete, as euer mote I gone
                  Now be ye caught, here is but we twayne
                  Nowe yeldeth you, for other boote is none
                  To that Creſeyde anſwerde thus anone
                  Ne had I er nowe, my ſwete herte dere
                  Ben yolde ywys, I were nowe nat here
               
               
                  O, ſoth is ſayd, that healed for to be
                  As of a feuer, or other great ſickneſſe
                  Men muſt drynken, as we ofte ſe
                  Ful bytter drynke, and for to haue gladneſſe
                  Men drynken oft payne, and great diſtreſſe
                  I meane it here by, as for thys auenture
                  that through a paine hath foūde al his cure
               
               
                  And nowe ſwetneſſe ſemeth more ſwete
                  That bytterneſſe aſſayed was byforne
                  For out of wo in blyſſe nowe they flete
                  None ſuch they felten ſens they were borne
                  Nowe is thys bet, than both two be lorne
                  For loue of god, take euery woman hede
                  To werken thus, yf it come to the nede
               
               
                  Creſeyde al quite from euery drede and tene
                  As ſhe that iuſt cauſe had him to tryſte
                  Made him ſuch feeſt, it ioye was to ſene
                  whan ſhe his trouth and cleue entent wyſt
                  And as about a tre wyth many a twyſte
                  Bytrent and writhe the ſwete wodbynde
                  Can eche of hem in armes other wynde
               
               
                  And as the newe abaſhed nyghtyngale
                  that ſtynteth fyrſt, whā ſhe beginnneth ſing
                  whan that ſhe hereth any heerdes tale
                  Or in the hedges any wyght ſteryng
                  And after ſyker doth her voice out ryng
                  Ryght ſo Creſeyde, whan her drede ſtent
                  Opened her hert, and tolde him her entent
               
               
                  And right as he yt ſeeth hys deth yſhapen
                  And dyen mote, in aught that he may geſſe
                  And ſodaynly reſcous doth him eſcapen
                  And from his deth is brought in ſykerneſſe
                  For al this worlde, in ſuch preſent gladneſſe
                  was Troylus, and hath his lady ſwete
                  wyth worſe happe god let vs neuer mete
               
               
                  Her armes ſmal, her ſtreyght backe & ſoft
                  Her ſydes longe, fleſhly, ſmoth, and whyte
                  He gan to ſtroke, & good thrifte bade full oft
                  Her ſnowyſſe throte, her breſtes round & lite
                  Thus in thys heuen he gan him to delyte
                  And therwithal a thouſande tymes her kyſt
                  That what to done for ioye vnneth he wyſt
               
               
                  Than ſayd he thus, O loue, O charite
                  Thy mother eke, Citheria the ſwete
                  That after thy ſelfe, next heryed be ſhe
                  Venus I meane, the wel wylly planete
                  And next that, I meneus I the grete
                  For neuer man was to you goddes holde
                  As I which ye haue brought fro cares cold
               
               
                  Benigne loue, thou holy bonde of thynges
                  who ſo wol grace, & lyſte the nat honouren
                  Lo, thys deſyre wol flye wythouten wyngē
                  
                  For noldeſt thou of bountie hem ſocouren
                  That ſeruen beſt, and moſt alway labouren
                  Yet were al loſte, yt dare I well ſayne certes
                  But yf thy grace paſſed our deſertes
               
               
                  And for thou me ye leſte thōke coulde deſerue
                  Of hem that nombred ben vnto thy grace
                  Haſt holpen ther I lykely was for to ſterue
                  And me beſtowed in ſo hygh a place
                  That thylke boundes may no blyſſe pace
                  I can no more, but laude and reuerence
                  Be to thy bounte and thyne excellence
               
               
                  And therwithal Creſeyde anone he kyſt
                  Of which certayne ſhe felte no diſeaſe
                  And thus ſayd he, nowe wolde god I wyſt
                  Myne hert ſwete, howe I you might pleaſe
                  what man (ꝙ he) was euer thus at eaſe
                  As I on which the fayreſt, and the beſt
                  That euer I ſey, deyneth her to reſt
               
               
                  Here may men ſene that mercy paſſeth right
                  The experience of that is felte in me
                  That am vnworthy to ſo ſwete a wyght
                  But herte myne, of your benignite
                  So thynke, that though I vnworthy be
                  Yet mote I nede amenden in ſome wyſe
                  Ryght through ye vertue of your hye ſeruice
               
               
                  And for the loue of god my lady dere
                  ſyth he hath wrouȝt me for I ſhall you ſerue
                  
                     As thus I meane: woll ye be my ſeere
                  To do me lyue, yf that you lyſt, or ſterue
                  So teacheth me, howe that I may deſerue
                  Your thōke, ſo yt I thrugh myne ignoraūce
                  Ne do nothyng that you be diſpleaſaunce
               
               
                  For certes freſh womanlyche wyfe
                  This dar I ſaye, that trouth and diligence
                  That ſhall ye fynden in me all my lyfe
                  Ne I woll nat certayn breken your defence
                  And yf I do preſent or in abſence
                  For loue of god let ſlee me with the dede
                  Yf that it lyke vnto your womanhede.
               
               
                  I wys (ꝙ ſhe) myne owne hertes luſt
                  My grounde of eaſe & all myne hert dere
                  Graunt mercy, for on that is all my truſt
                  But let vs fal awaye fro this matere
                  For it ſuffyſeth, this that ſayd is here
                  And at o worde, withouten repentaunce
                  welcome my knyght, my peace, my ſuffyſaunce
               
               
                  Of her delyte or ioyes one of the leeſt
                  were impoſſyble to my wyt to ſaye
                  But iudgeth ye that haue ben at the feeſt
                  Of ſuch gladneſſe, yf that hem lyſt playe
                  I can nomore, but thus theſe ylke tway
                  That nigh betwixen drede and ſykerneſſe
                  Fe
                        •
                     ten in loue the great worthyneſſe
               
               
                  O blyſful nyght, of hem ſo longe yſought
                  How blyth vnto hem both two thou wer?
                  why ne had I ſuch feeſt wt my ſoul yboght
                  Yea, or the leeſt ioye that was there
                  Away thou foule daūger and thou feere
                  And let hem in this heuen blyſſe dwell
                  That is ſo hygh, that all ne can I tell.
               
               
                  But ſoth is, though I can not tellen all
                  As can myne auctour of his excellence
                  Yet haue I ſayd, and god to forne ſhall
                  In euery thyng all holly his ſentence
                  And yf that I at loues reuerence
                  Haue any worde in eched for the beſt
                  Doth therwithal ryght as your ſeluen leſt.
               
               
                  For my wordes here, and euery parte
                  I ſpeke hem all vnder correction
                  Of you that felyng haue in loues arte
                  And put it all in your diſcrettion
                  To entreate or make diminition
                  Of my langage, and that I you beſeche
                  But now to purpoſe of my rather ſpeche
               
               
                  Theſe ylke two that beth in armes laſt
                  So loth to hem a ſonder gon to were
                  That eche from other wenden ben byraft
                  Or els lo, this was her mooſt feere
                  That all this thing but nyce dreames wer
                  For which ful oft eche of hem ſayd, o ſwete
                  Clyppe I you thus, or els do I it mete
               
               
                  And lorde ſo he gan goodly on her ſe
                  That neuer his loke ne bleynt frō her face
                  And ſayde, O dere hert maye it be
                  That it be ſoth that ye ben in this place
                  Yea hert myne, god thanke I of his grace
                  (ꝙ tho Creſeyde) & therwithal hym kyſt
                  That where her ſpyrite was, for ioye ſhe nyſt
               
               
                  This Troylus full oft her eyen two
                  Gan for to kyſſe, and ſayd: O eyen clere
                  It weren ye that wrought me ſuche wo
                  Ye humble nettes of my lady dere
                  Though ther be mercy writtē in your chere
                  God wot the text full harde is for to fynde
                  How coude ye, withouten bonde me bynde.
               
               
                  Therwith he gan her faſt in armes take
                  And well an hundred tymes gan he ſyke
                  Nat ſuch ſorowfull ſyghes as men make
                  For wo, or els whan that folke be ſyke
                  But eaſy ſyghes ſuche as ben to lyke
                  That ſhewed his affection within
                  Of ſuche ſyghes coulde he nat blyu.
               
               
                  Sone after this, they ſpake of ſondry thinges
                  As fyll to purpoſe of this auenture
                  And playing, enterchaungeden her rynges
                  Of which I can not tellen no ſcripture
                  But well I wot, a broche of golde & aſure
                  In which a ruby ſet was lyke an herte
                  Creſeyde him yaue, & ſtacke it on his ſherte.
               
               
                  Lorde trowe ye that a couetous wretche
                  That blam
                        •
                     th loue, and halte of it deſpyte
                  That of tho pens yt he can muckre & ketche
                  was euer yet yeue to him ſuche delyte
                  As is in loue, in o poynt in ſome plyte
                  Nay doutleſſe, for alſo god me ſaue
                  So parfyte ioye may no nygarde haue.
               
               
                  They woll ſay yes, but lorde ſo they lye
                  Tho buſy wretches ful of wo and drede
                  
                     That callen loue a woodneſſe of follye
                  But it ſhall fall hem as I ſhall you rede
                  They ſhall forgon the whyte & eke the rede
                  And lyue in wo, ther god yeue hem myſchaūce
                  and euery louer this trouth auaūce
               
               
                  As wolde god tho wretches that diſpyſe
                  Seruyce of loue, had eares alſo longe
                  As had Mida, full of couetyſe
                  And therto dronken had as hote & ſtronge
                  As Creſus dyd, for his affectes wronge
                  To teachen hem, that they ben in the vyce
                  And louers nat although they holde hem nyſe
               
               
                  Theſe ylke two of whom yt I you ſay
                  whan that her hertes wel aſſured were
                  Tho gonnen they to ſpeake and to playe
                  And eke reherſen how, whan, and where
                  They knewe fyrſt, & euery wo or fere
                  That paſſed was, but all ſuche heuyneſſe
                  I thonke it god, was turned to gladneſſe
               
               
                  And euer more, whan that hem fyll to ſpeke
                  Of any thyng of ſuche a tyme agon
                  with kyſſyng all that tale ſhulde breke
                  And fallen into a newe ioye anon
                  And dyddē al her myght, ſyns they wer one
                  For to recoueren blyſſe, and ben at eaſe
                  And payſed wo with ioye, countrepeyſe.
               
               
                  Reaſon woll not that I ſpeake of ſlepe
                  For it accordeth not to my matere
                  God wot they toke of it full lytle kepe
                  But leſt this night that was to hem ſo dere
                  Ne ſhulde in vayne eſcape in no manere
                  It was beſet in ioye and beſyneſſe
                  Of all that ſowneth into gentylneſſe.
               
               
                  But whan the cocke, cōmune aſtrologer
                  Gan on his breeſt to beate, and after crowe
                  And Lucifer, the dayes meſſaunger
                  Gan for to ryſe, and out her beames throw
                  And eſtward roſe to him that that coulde it knowe
                  Fortuna maior, thā anon Creſeyde
                  with hert ſore to Troylus thus ſeyde.
               
               
                  Myne hertes lyfe, my truſt, all my pleſaūce
                  That I was borne alas, that me is wo
                  That day of vs mote make diſceueraunce
                  For tyme it is to ryſe, and hence go
                  Or els I am loſt for euer mo
                  O nyght alas, why wilt thou ouer vs houe
                  As longe as whan Alemena laye by Ioue.
               
               
                  O blacke nyght, as folke in bookes rede
                  That ſhapen art by god this world to hyde
                  At certayne tymes, with thy darke wede
                  That vnder that men myght in reſt abyde
                  wel oughtē beeſtes to playn, & folk to chyde
                  That ther as day wt labour wold vs breſt
                  That thou thus flyeſt, & deyneſt vs nat reſt
               
               
                  Thou doeſt alas, to ſhortly thyne offyce
                  Tho rakle night, ther god maker of kynde
                  The for thyne haſte, & thyne vnkynde vyce
                  So faſt aye to our himiſpery bynde
                  That neuermore vnder yu groūd thou wind
                  For now for thou ſo hyeſt out of Troye
                  Haue I forgone thus haſtly my ioye
               
               
                  This Troylus that with tho wordes felte
                  As thought hym tho, for pitous diſtreſſe
                  The blody teares from his hert melt
                  As he that yet neuer ſuche heuyneſſe
                  Aſſayed had, out of ſo great gladneſſe
                  Gan therwithall Creſeyde his lady dere
                  In armes ſtrayne, & holde in louely manere
               
               
                  O cruell daye, accuſer of the ioye
                  That night & loue haue ſtole & faſt ywryen
                  Accurſed be thy cōmyng into troye
                  For euery bore hath one of thy bryght eyen
                  Enuyous day, what lyſt the ſo to ſpyen
                  what haſt thou loſt, why ſekeſt thou this place
                  There god thy light ſo quēche for his grace.
               
               
                  Alas, what haue theſe louers the agylt?
                  Diſpytous day, thyne be the payne of hell
                  For many a louer haſt thou ſlayne, & wylt
                  Thy poring in wol nowhere let hem dwell
                  what profreſt thou thy lyght herefor to ſel?
                  Go ſell it hem that ſmal ſeales graue
                  we woll the not, vs nedeth no daye haue
               
               
                  And eke the ſunne Tytan gan he chyde
                  And ſayd, O foole, well may mē the deſpiſe
                  That haſt al night the dawning by thy ſide
                  And ſuffreſt her ſo ſoone vp fro the ryſe
                  For to diſeaſe vs louers in this wyſe
                  what hold your bed, ther thou & thy morow
                  I byd god ſo yeue you both ſorowe.
               
               
                  Therwith ful ſore he ſyghed, & thus he ſeyd
                  My lady ryght, and of my wele or wo
                  
                     The well & roote, o goodly myne Creſeyde
                  And ſhall I ryſe alas, and ſhall I ſo?
                  Now fele I that my hert mote a two
                  And how ſhulde I my lyfe an houre ſaue
                  Syns that with you is all the lyfe I haue?
               
               
                  what ſhall I done? for certes I not how
                  Ne whan alas, I ſhall the tyme ſe
                  That in this plyte I may ben eft wt you
                  And of my lyfe god wote, how ſhall that be
                  Syns that deſyre ryght nowe ſo byteth me
                  That I am deed anon, but I retourne
                  How ſhuld I long alas, fro you ſoiourne?
               
               
                  But natheleſſe, myne owne lady bryght
                  were it ſo that I wyſt vtterly
                  That your humble ſeruaunt, & your knight
                  were in your hert yſet ſo fermely
                  As ye in myne, the which truly
                  Me leuer were than theſe worldes twayne
                  Yet ſhulde I bet enduren all my payne
               
               
                  To that Creſeyde anſwered ryght anon
                  And with a ſygh ſhe ſayd: O hert dere
                  The game ywys ſo ferforth now is gone
                  That fyrſt ſhall Phebus fallen fro the ſpere
                  And eueryche the Egle ben the doues fere
                  And euery rocke out of his place ſterte
                  Er Troylus go out of Creſeydes hert.
               
               
                  Ye ben ſo depe within my hert graue
                  That tho I wold it turne out of my thouȝt
                  As wyſely very god my ſoule ſaue
                  To dyen in the payne, I coulde nought
                  And for ye loue of god yt vs hath wrought
                  Let in your brayne none other fantaſy
                  So crepe, that it cauſe me to dye.
               
               
                  And that ye me wolde haue as faſt in mind
                  As I haue you, that wolde I you beſeche
                  And yf I wyſt ſothly that to fynde
                  God myght not apoynt my ioyes eche
                  But hert myne withouten more ſpeche
                  Beth to me true, or els were it routh
                  For I am thyne, by god & by my trouth.
               
               
                  Beth glad for thy, and lyue in ſykerneſſe
                  Thus ſayd I neuer er this, ne ſhall to mo
                  And yf to you it were a great gladneſſe
                  To turne ayen ſone after that ye go
                  As fayne wolde I as ye, it were ſo
                  As wyſely god myne hert bryng to reſt
                  And hym in armes toke, and oft keſt
               
               
                  Ayenſt his wyll, ſyth it muſt nedes be
                  This Troylus vp roſe, and faſt hym cledde
                  And in his armes toke his lady free
                  An hundred tymes, & on his waye him ſped
                  And with ſuche wordes as his hert bledde
                  He ſayd: farewell my dere hert ſwete
                  That god vs graūt ſounde & ſone to mete
               
               
                  To which no worde for ſorow ſhe anſwerd
                  So ſore gan his partyng her diſtrayne
                  And Troylus vnto his palleys ferde
                  As wo begon as ſhe was, ſoth to ſayne
                  So hard him wrōg of ſharpe deſire ye payn
                  For to ben efte there he was in pleaſaunce
                  That it may neuer out of his remēbraunce.
               
               
                  Returned to his royal palleys ſone
                  He ſoft vnto his bed gan for to ſlynke
                  To ſlepe longe, as he was wont to done
                  But al for nouȝt he may wel lyg and wynke
                  But ſlepe may ther non in his hert ſynke
                  Thinking how ſhe, for whō deſire him brēd
                  A M. folde was worth more than he wend
               
               
                  And in his thouȝt gan vp & down to winde
                  Her wordes al, and euery countenaunce
                  And fermely impreſſen in his mynde
                  The leſt poynt, that to him was pleſaunce
                  And verely of thylke remembraunce
                  Deſyre al newe him brende, & luſt to brede
                  Gan more than erſt & yet toke he non hede
               
               
                  Creſeyde alſo, ryght in the ſame wyſe
                  Of Troylus gan in her hert ſhette
                  His worthyneſſe, his luſt, his dedes wyſe
                  His gentleneſſe, and how ſhe with him met
                  Thonkyng loue, he ſo well her beſet
                  Deſyryng oft to haue her hert dere
                  In ſuch a place as ſhe durſt make him chere
               
               
                  Pandare a morow which that cōmen was
                  Vnto his nece, and gan her fayre grete
                  And ſayd: all this nyght ſo rayned it alas
                  That al my drede is, that ye nece ſwete
                  Haue lytle leyſer had to ſlepe and mete
                  al this night (ꝙ he) hath rainſo do me wake
                  That ſome of vs I trowe her heedes ake
               
               
                  And nere he came, & ſayd how ſtant it now
                  This mery morowe nece how can ye fare
                  
                     Creſeyde anſwered: neuer the bet for you
                  Foxe that ye ben, god yeue your hart care
                  God helpe me ſo, ye cauſed all this fare
                  Trow I (ꝙ ſhe) for al your wordes whyte
                  O who ſo ſeeth you, knoweth you ful lyte
               
               
                  with that ſhe gan her face for to wry
                  with the ſhete, and woxe for ſhame al reed
                  And Pandarus gan vnder for to prye
                  And ſayd, yf that I ſhall ben deed
                  Haue here a ſworde, and ſmyt of my heed
                  with that his arme, all ſodaynly he thryſt
                  Vnder her necke, and at the laſt her kyſt.
               
               
                  I paſſe al ye which chargeth nought to ſaye
                  what, god foryaue his deth, and ſhe alſo
                  Foryaue: and with her vncle gan to play
                  For other cauſe was there none, than ſo
                  But of this thyng ryght to theffect to go
                  whā tyme was, home to her houſe ſhe went
                  And Pandare hath fully his entent.
               
               
                  Now turne we ayen to Troylus
                  That reſtleſſe full longe a bedde laye
                  And pryuily ſent after Pandarus
                  To hym to come in all the haſte he may
                  He came anon, not ones ſayd nay
                  And Troylus full ſobrely he gret
                  And downe vpon the beddes ſyde hym ſet
               
               
                  This Troylus with all thaffectioun
                  Of frendly loue, that hert maye deuyſe
                  To Pandarus on knees fyll adowne
                  And er that he wolde of the place aryſe
                  He gan hym thanken on his beſt wyſe
                  An hundred tyme he gan the tyme bleſſe
                  That he was borne to bring him to diſtreſſe
               
               
                  He ſayd: O frende of frendes, the alderbeſt
                  That euer was, the ſoth for to tell
                  Thou haſt in heuē wrought my ſoule at reſt
                  Fro Phlegeton the fyrye floud of hell
                  That though I might a thouſād tymes ſel
                  Vpon a daye my lyfe in thy ſeruyſe
                  It myght not a mote in that ſuffyſe.
               
               
                  The ſun which that all the worlde may ſe
                  Sawe neuer yet, my lyfe that dare I leye
                  So ioly, fayre, and goodly as is ſhe
                  whoſe I am all, and ſhall tyll that I dye
                  And that I thus am hers dare I ſeye
                  That thanked be the hygh worthyneſſe
                  Of loue, and eke thy kynde beſyneſſe
               
               
                  Thus haſt thou me no lytle thyng iyeue
                  For why, to the obleged be for aye
                  My lyfe & why? for thrugh thyn help I liue
                  Or els deed had I ben ago many a day
                  And wt that worde downe in his bed he lay
                  And Pandarus full ſoberly hym herde
                  Tyll all was ſayd: & than he hym anſwerd.
               
               
                  My dere frende, I haue done for the
                  In any caſe god wot it is me lefe
                  And am as glad as man maye of it be
                  God helpe me ſo, but take nowe nat agrefe
                  That I ſhall ſayn, beware of this miſchefe
                  That ther as now brought art to thy blyſſe
                  That thou thy ſelfe, ne cauſe it nat to myſſe.
               
               
                  For of fortunes ſharpe aduerſitie
                  The worſt kynde of infortune is this
                  A man to haue ben in proſperitie
                  And it remembre whan it paſſed is
                  Thou art wyſe ynouȝ for thy do nat amys
                  Be nat to rakel though thou ſyt warme
                  For yf thou be, certayne it woll the harme
               
               
                  Thou art at eſe, and holde the well therin
                  For alſo ſure as red is euery fyre
                  As great a craft is to kepe well, as wynne
                  Brydle alway well thy ſpeche & thy deſyre
                  For wordly ioye holdeth nat but by a wyre
                  That preueth well it breſt alday ſo oft
                  For thy nede is to werken with it ſoft
               
               
                  (Quod Troylus) I hope, and god toforne
                  My dere frende, that I ſhall ſo me bere
                  That in my gilt there ſhal nothing ben lorn
                  Ne I nyll nat rakle, as for to greuen here
                  It nedeth nat this mater oft tere
                  For wiſteſt thou myne hert wel Pandare
                  God wot of this thou woldeſt lyte care
               
               
                  Tho gan he tell hym of his glad nyght
                  And wherof fyrſt his hert drad, and how
                  And ſayd frende, as I am true knyght
                  And by that fayth I owe to god and you
                  I had it neuer halfe ſo hote as now
                  And aye the more that deſyre me byteth
                  To loue her beſt the more it me delyteth.
               
               
                  I nat my ſelfe nat wyſely what it is
                  But now I fele a newe qualitie
                  
                     Yea all an other than I dyd or this
                  Pandare anſwered and ſayd thus, that he
                  That ones may in heuen blyſſe be
                  He feleth other wayes dare I laye
                  Than thilke tyme he firſt herde of it ſaye
               
               
                  This is a worde for all, that Troylus
                  was neuer full to ſpeke of this matere
                  And for to prayſen vnto Pandarus
                  The bountie of his ryght lady dere
                  And Pandarus to thank, and maken chere
                  This tale was aye ſpan newe to begyn
                  Tyll that the nyght departed hem atwyn
               
               
                  Sone after this, for that fortune it wolde
                  I comen was the blyſfull tyme ſwete
                  That Troylus was warned, yt he ſholde
                  Ther he was erſt, Creſeyde his lady mete
                  For which he felte his hert in ioye flete
                  And faythfully gan al the goddes hery
                  And let ſe now, yf that he can be mery
               
               
                  And holden was the forme and all the gyſe
                  Of her cōmyng, and of his alſo
                  As it was erſt which nedeth nought deuiſe
                  But playnly to theffect ryght for to go
                  In ioye and ſuretie Pandarus hem two
                  Abed brought whan hem both leſt
                  And thus they ben in quyet and in reſt
               
               
                  Naught nedeth it to you, ſyth they ben met
                  To aſke at me, yf that they blythe were
                  For it erſt was well, tho was it bet
                  A thouſand folde, this nedeth not enquere
                  Ago was euery ſorowe and euery fere
                  And both ywys they had, and ſo they wend
                  As moche ioye as hert maye comprehende.
               
               
                  This nys no lytle thynge of for to ſey
                  This paſſeth euery wyt for to deuyſe
                  For eche of hem gan other luſtes obey
                  Felicitie, which that theſe clerkes wyſe
                  Cōmenden ſo, ne may nat here ſuffyſe
                  This ioye may not wrytten be with ynke
                  This paſſeth all that hert may bethynke
               
               
                  But cruel day, ſo welaway the ſtounde
                  Gan for to aproch, as they by ſignes knewe
                  For which hem thought felen dethes woūd
                  So wo was hem, yt chaungen gan her hew
                  And day they gonnen to deſpyſe all newe
                  Calling traytour, enuyous and worſe
                  And bytterly the dayes lyght they curſe.
               
               
                  (Quod Troylus) alas, now am I ware
                  That Pyrous, and tho ſwyft ſtedes thre
                  which that drawen forth the ſonnes chare
                  Han gon ſome bypath in deſpyte of me
                  And maketh it ſo ſoone daye to be
                  And for the ſunne hym haſteth thus to ryſe
                  Ne ſhall I neuer don hym ſacrifyce
               
               
                  But nedes day depart hem muſt ſone
                  And whan her ſpeche don was & her chere
                  They twyn anon, as they wer wont to don
                  And ſetten tyme of metyng eft yfere
                  And many a night they wrouȝt in this manere.
                  And thus fortune a tyme lad in ioye
                  Creſeyde, & eke this kynges ſon of Troye.
               
               
                  In ſuffyſaunce, in blyſſe, & in ſyngynges
                  This Troylus gan al his lyfe to lede
                  He ſpendeth, iuſteth, & maketh feeſtynges
                  He yeueth frely oft, and chaungeth wede
                  He helde about hym alway out of drede
                  A world of folke, as com him well of kynde
                  The freſheſt and the beſt he coulde fynde.
               
               
                  That ſuche a voyce was of him, & a ſteuen
                  Throughout yu worlde of honour & largeſſe
                  That it vp ronge vnto the yate of heuen
                  And as in loue he was in ſuche gladneſſe
                  That in his hert, he demed as I geſſe
                  That there nis louer in this worlde at eaſe
                  So wel as he, and thus gan loue him pleſe
               
               
                  The goodlyhed or beautie, which yt kynde
                  In any other lady had yſette
                  Can nat ye moūtenaunce of a gnat vnbynde
                  About his hert of all Creſeydes nette
                  He was ſo narowe ymaſked and yknette
                  That is vndon on any maner ſyde
                  That nyll nat ben for ought yt maye betyde
               
               
                  And by the honde full oft he wolde take
                  This Pandarus, and into garden lede
                  And ſuche a feaſte, and ſuch a proceſſe make
                  Hym of Creſeyde, and of her womanheed
                  And of her beautie, that withouten drede
                  It was an heuen his wordes for to here
                  And than he wolde ſynge in this manere
               
               
                  Loue that of erth, & ſee hath gouernaūce
                  Loue, that his heeſtes hath in heuen hye
                  
                     Loue, that with an holeſome alyaunce
                  Halt people ioyned, as hym lyſt hem gye
                  Loue, that knytteth lawe and company
                  And couples doth in vertue for to dwell
                  Bynde this accorde, yt I haue tolde, & tell.
               
               
                  That yt the world wt faith which yt is ſtable
                  Dyuerſeth ſo his ſtoundes accordyng
                  That elementes that beth ſo diſcordable
                  Holden abonde perpetually duryng
                  That Phebus mote his roſy day forth brīg
                  And yt the mone hath lordſhip ouer ye niȝtes
                  Al this doth loueaye heried be his mightes
               
               
                  That yt the ſee, that gredy is to flowen
                  Conſtrayneth to a certayne ende ſo
                  His floudes, that ſo ferſly they ne growen
                  To drenchen erth and all for euermo
                  And yf that loue ought let his brydle go
                  All that now loueth aſondre ſhulde lepe
                  And loſt wer al, yt loue halt nowe to hepe
               
               
                  So wolde to god, that authour is of kynde
                  That with his bonde, loue of his vertu lyſt
                  To ſerchen hertes al, and faſt bynde
                  That frō his bōd no wight ye wey out wyſt
                  And hertes colde hem, wold I yt hem twyſt
                  To make hem loue, & that hem lyſt aye rew
                  On hertes ſore, & kepe hem that ben trewe.
               
               
                  In all nedes for the townes werre
                  He was, and aye the fyrſt in armes dyght
                  And certaynly, but yf that bokes erre
                  Haue Hector, mooſt ydradde of any wyght
                  And this encreaſe of hardyneſſe and myght
                  Com hym of loue, his ladyes thank to wyn
                  That altered his ſpyrite ſo within.
               
               
                  In tyme of truce on hauking wolde he ryde
                  Or els hunt bore, beare, or lyoun
                  The ſmall beeſtes let he gon beſyde
                  And whan yt he come rydyng into ye towne
                  Full oft his lady from her window downe
                  As freſh as faucon, comen out of mue
                  Full redy was hym goodly to ſalue
               
               
                  And mooſt of loue & vertue was his ſpeche
                  And in deſpyte had al wretchedneſſe
                  And doutleſſe no nede was hym beſeche
                  To honouren hem, that had worthyneſſe
                  And eaſen hem that weren in diſtreſſe
                  And glad was he yf any wight wel ferde
                  That louer was, whan he it wyſt or herde.
               
               
                  For ſoth to ſayne, he loſte held euery wiȝt
                  But yf he were in loues hygh ſeruyce
                  I meane folke that ought it ben of ryght
                  And ouer all this, ſo wel coulde he deuyſe
                  Of ſentement, and in ſo vncouth wyſe
                  All his aray, that euery louer thought
                  That all was well, what ſo he ſayde or wrought.
               
               
                  And though that he be come of bloud royal
                  Hym lyſt of pryde, at no wyght for to chace
                  Benigne he was to eche in generall
                  For which he gat him thāke in euery place
                  Thus wolde loue yhered be his grace
                  That pryde and yre, enuy and auaryce
                  He gan to flye, and euery other vyce
               
               
                  Thou lady bright, the doughter of Diane
                  Thy blynde & winged ſon eke Dan Cupide
                  Ye ſuſtren nyne, eke that by Helic
                        •
                     ne
                  In hyl Pernaſo lyſten fyr to abyde
                  That ye thus ferre han deyned me to gyde
                  I can nomore but ſyns that ye woll wende
                  Ye heryed ben for aye withouten ende.
               
               
                  Through you haue I ſayd fully in my ſōge
                  Theffect and ioye of Troylus ſeruyce
                  All be it there was ſome diſeaſe amonge
                  As myne auctour lyſteth to deuyſe
                  My thyrde boke nowe ende I in this wyſe
                  And Troylus in luſt and in quyete
                  Is with Creſeyde his owne hert ſwete
               
               
                  ¶Explicit liber tertius.
                  
                     BVt all to lytle, welaway the whyle
                  Laſteth ſuche ioy, ythonked be fortune
                  That ſemeth treweſt whan ſhe woll begyle
                  And can to fooles ſo her ſonge entune
                  That ſhe hem hent, ye blēt traytour cōmune
                  And whā a wight is frō her whele ythrow
                  Thā laugheth ſhe, & maketh hym the mow.
               
               
                  From Troylus ſhe gan her bryght face
                  Away to wryth, and toke of hym none hede
                  And caſt hym clene out of his ladyes grace
                  And on her whele ſhe ſet vp Diomede
                  For which myn hert riȝt now gyueth blede
                  And now my pen alas wt which I wryte
                  
                     Quaketh for drede, of that I muſte endyte
               
               
                  For how Creſeyde Troylus forſoke
                  Or at the leſte, howe that ſhe was vnkynde
                  Mote hence forthe, ben mater of my boke
                  As writē folke, through which it is in mynde
                  Alas that they ſhulde euer cauſe fynde
                  To ſpeke her harme, & yf they on her lye
                  Iwys hem ſelfe ſhulde haue the vilanye
               
               
                  O ye Herynes nyghtes doughters thre
                  That endleſſe complayne euer in payne
                  Megera, Alle
                        •
                     to, and eke Teſiphonee
                  Thou cruell Mars eke, father of Quiryne
                  This ylke Fourth boke helpe me to fyne
                  So that the loos, and loue, and lyfe yfere
                  Of Troylus be fully ſhewed here.
               
            
            
               ¶Incipit liber Quartus.
               
                  
                     LIgging in hoſt, as I haue ſayd er this
                  The grekes ſtrōg, aboute Troy toun
                  Byfell, that whan that Phebus ſhynyng is
                  Vpon the breſt of Hercules Lyon
                  That Hector, with many a bolde baron
                  Caſte on a day with grekes for to fyght
                  As he was wont, to greue hē what he might
               
               
                  Not I how longe or ſhorte it was bytwene
                  This purpoſe, & that day they fyghtē mente
                  But on a day wel armed bright and ſhene
                  Hector and many a worthy knight out wente
                  with ſpeare in hond, and bygge bowes bente
                  And in the berde withouten lenger lette
                  Her fomen in the felde anon hem mette
               
               
                  The longe day wt ſpeares ſharpe ygroūde
                  with arowes, dartes, ſwerdes, & maces fell
                  They fight, & bringen horſe & man to groūde
                  And with her axes out the braynes quell
                  But in the laſte ſhoure, ſothe to tell
                  The folke of Troye hem ſeluen ſo miſledden
                  That with ye worſe at night hom they fleddē
                  
               
               
                  At wyche day was taken Anthenor
                  Maugre Polymydas, or Moneſteo
                  Xantyppe, Sarpedon, Paleſtynor
                  Polyte, or eke the Troyan dan Rupheo
                  And other laſſe folke, as Phebuſeo
                  So that for harme ye day the folke of Troye
                  Dredden to leſe a great parte of her ioye
               
               
                  Of Priamus was yeue, at grekes requeſte
                  A tyme of truce, and tho they gonnen trete
                  Her Priſoners to chaungen moſte and leſte
                  And for the ſurplus yeuen ſommes grete
                  This thyng anon was couthe in euery ſtrete
                  Both in thaſſege, in towne, and euery where
                  And with the fyrſt it came to Calkas eere
               
               
                  whan Calkas knew this tretyſe ſhulde hold
                  In conſyſtorie amonge the grekes ſone
                  He gan in thring, forthe with lordes olde
                  And ſet hym there as he was wonte to done
                  And with a chaunged face, hem bade aboue
                  For loue of god, to done that reuerence
                  To ſtynten noyſe, & yeue him audyence
               
               
                  Than ſayd he thus, lo lordes myne I was
                  Troyan, as it is knowen out of drede
                  And yf that you remembre, I am Calkas
                  That alderfyrſt yaue comforte to your nede
                  And tolde wel howe that ye ſhulde ſpede
                  For dredeleſſe through you ſhal in a ſtounde
                  Ben Troy ybrent, & beaten down to groūde
               
               
                  And in what forme, or in what maner wyſe
                  This town to ſhende, & al your luſte tacheue
                  Ye haue er this wel herde me deuyſe
                  This knowe ye my lordes, as I leue
                  And for the grekes weren me ſo leue
                  I came my ſelfe in my propre perſone
                  To teche in this, how you was beſt to done
               
               
                  Hauyng vnto my treaſour, ne my rent
                  Right no regarde, in reſpecte of your eaſe
                  Thus al my good I lefte, and to you went
                  wenyng in this you lordes for to pleaſe
                  But all that loſſe ne dothe me no diſeaſe
                  I vouchſafe, as wiſely haue I ioye
                  For you to leſe, all that I haue in Troye
               
               
                  Saue of a doughter that I lefte, alas?
                  Slepyng at home, whan out of Troy I ſtert
                  O ſterne, o cruell father that I was
                  How might I haue in that ſo harde an hert?
                  Alas that I ne had brought her in my ſhert
                  For ſorow of which I wol nat liue to morow
                  
                     But yf ye lordes rewe vpon my ſorowe
               
               
                  For bycauſe that I ſawe no tyme er nowe
                  Her to delyuer, iche holden haue my pees
                  But nowe or neuer, yf that it lyke you
                  I may her haue right ſoone doutlees
                  O helpe and grace, among al this prees
                  Rewe on this olde caytyfe in dyſtreſſe
                  Sith I through you haue al this heuyneſſe
               
               
                  Ye haue nowe caught, and fettred in priſon
                  Troyans ynow, and yf your wylles be
                  My chylde with one maye haue redemption
                  Nowe for the loue of god, and of bounte
                  One of ſo fele alas, ſo yefe hym me
                  what nede were it this prayer for to werne
                  Sith ye ſhul haue, both folke & town as yern
               
               
                  On peryll of my lyfe I ſhall nat lye
                  Apollo hath me tolde full faytfully
                  I haue eke founde it by aſtronomy
                  By ſorte, and by augury trewly
                  And dare wel ſaye the tyme is faſt by
                  That fyre & ſlambe on all ye town ſhal ſprede
                  And thus ſhall Troy turne to aſhen dede
               
               
                  For certayne Phebus, & Neptunus bothe
                  That makeden the walles of the toun
                  Ben wt the folke of Troye alway ſo wrothe
                  That they wol bring it to confuſyoun
                  Right in deſpyte of kyng Lamedoun
                  By cauſe he nolde payen hem her hyre
                  The towne of Troye ſhall ben ſet on fyre
               
               
                  Tellyng his tale alway this olde grey
                  Humble in his ſpeche and lokyng eke
                  The ſalte teeres from his eyen twey
                  Full faſte ronnen downe by eyther cheke
                  So longe he gan of ſocoure hem beſeke
                  That for to heale him of hys ſorowes ſore
                  They gaue him Antenor, withouten more
               
               
                  But who was glad ynough, but Calcas tho
                  And of this thyng full ſone his nedes leyde
                  On hem that ſhulden for the tretyſe go
                  And hem for Antenor ful ofte preyde
                  To bringen home kynge Thoas, & Creſeyde
                  And whan Priam his ſafegarde ſente
                  Thembaſſadours to Troy ſtreight they wēt
               
               
                  The cauſe I tolde of her cōmyng, the olde
                  Priam the kyng, full ſone in generall
                  Let here vpon his parlyment holde
                  Of whiche theffecte rehercen you I ſhall
                  Thembaſſadours ben anſwerde for fynal
                  The eſchaunge of priſoners, and al this nede
                  Hem lyketh wel, and forthe in they procede
               
               
                  This Troylus was preſent in the place
                  whan aſked was for Antenor Creſeyde
                  For whiche full ſone chaungen gan hys face
                  As he yt with tho wordes well nyghe deyde
                  But natheleſſe he no worde to it ſeyde
                  Leſte men ſhulde his affection eſpye
                  wyth mannes herte, he gan his ſorowes drie
               
               
                  And full of anguyſhe and of griſly drede
                  Abode, what other lordes wolde to it ſey
                  And yf they wolde graunt, as god forbede
                  theſchaūge of her, thā thouȝt he thīges twey
                  Firſt, how to ſaue her honour, & what wey
                  He might beſt theſchaunge of her withſtonde
                  Ful faſte he caſte howe al this might ſtonde
               
               
                  Loue him made al preſt to done her byde
                  And rather dyen, than ſhe ſhulde go
                  But Reaſon ſayde him on that other ſyde
                  withouten aſſent of her, do nat ſo
                  Leſte for thy werke ſhe wolde be thy foe
                  And ſayn, yt thorugh thy medling is yblowe
                  Your bother loue, there it was erſt vnknowe
               
               
                  For whyche he gan delyberen for the beſt
                  And though the lordes wolde that ſhe went
                  He wolde lete hem graunt what hem leſt
                  And tel his lady fyrſt what that they ment
                  And whan that ſhe had ſayd him her entent
                  Therafter wolde he worken alſo blyue
                  Tho al the worlde ayen it wolde ſtryue
               
               
                  Hector whiche that well the grekes herde
                  For Antenor, how they wold haue Creſeyde
                  Gan it wythſtonde, and ſoberly anſwerde
                  Syrs, ſhe nys no priſoner (he ſeyde)
                  I not on you who that this charge leyde
                  But on my parte, ye may eftſones hem tel
                  we vſen here, no women for to ſel
               
               
                  The noyſe of people vp ſterte than atones
                  As brymme as blaſe of ſtrawe yſet on fyre
                  For in fortune it wolde for the nones
                  They ſhulden her confuſyon deſyre
                  Hector (ꝙ they) what goſt may you enſpyre
                  This woman thus to ſhild, and done vs leſe
                  
                     Dan Antenor, a wronge waye now ye cheſe
               
               
                  That is ſo wyſe, and eke ſo bolde baroun
                  And we haue nede to folke, as men may ſe
                  He is one the gretteſt of thys towne
                  O Hector, lette thy fantaſies be
                  O kyng Priam (ꝙ they) thus ſegge we
                  That all our voice is to forgone Creſeyde
                  And to delyuer Antenore they preyde
               
               
                  O Iuuenall lorde, trewe is thy ſentence
                  That lytell wenen folke what is to yerne
                  That they ne fynden in her deſyre offence
                  For cloude of errour lete hem diſcerue
                  what beſt is, and lo, here enſample as yerne
                  Theſe folke deſyren nowe delyueraunce
                  Of Antenore that brought hem to miſchaūce
               
               
                  For he was after traytour to the toun
                  Or Troye alas, they quytte him out to rathe
                  O nyce worlde, lo thy diſcrecion
                  Creſeyde, whiche that neuer dyd hem ſcathe
                  Shall nowe no lenger in her blyſſe bathe
                  But Antenor, he ſhal come home to towne
                  And ſhe ſhall out, thus ſaid heere and howne
               
               
                  For whiche delybered was by parlyment
                  For Antenor to yelden out Creſeyde
                  And it pronounced by the preſydent
                  Though that Hector nay full ofte prayde
                  And fynally, what wight that it withſayde
                  It was for naught, it muſte ben, and ſholde
                  For ſubſtaunce of the parlyment it wolde
               
               
                  Departed out of parlyment echone
                  This Troylus, wythout wordes mo
                  Vnto his chambre ſpedde hym faſte alone
                  But yf it were a man of hys or two
                  The which he bade out fa
                        •
                     te for to go
                  Bycauſe he wolde ſlepen, as he ſayde
                  And haſtely vpon his bedde him layde
               
               
                  And as in wynter leaues ben byrafte
                  Eche after other tyll trees be bare
                  So that there nys but barke & braūche ylafte
                  Lythe Troylus, byrafte of eche welfare
                  I bounden in the blacke barke of care
                  Diſpoſed woode out of his wytte to breyde
                  So ſore him ſate the chaungyng of Creſeyde
               
               
                  He ryſt him vp, and euery doore he ſhette
                  And wyndowe eke, & tho this ſoroufull man
                  Vpon his beddes ſyde downe him ſette
                  Full lyke a deed ymage, pale and wan
                  And in his breſte the heaped wo began
                  Out bueſte, and he to worken in this wyſe
                  In his woodneſſe, as I ſhall you deuyſe
               
               
                  Right as ye wylde bulle begynneth ſpring
                  Nowe here nowe there, ydarted to the herte
                  And of his dethe roreth, in complaynyng
                  Right ſo gan he aboute the chambre ſterte
                  Smyting his breſt, aye with his fyſtes ſmert
                  His heed to the wal, his body to the grounde
                  Full ofte he ſwapte him ſeluen to confounde
               
               
                  His eyen two for pyte of hys herte
                  Out ſtremeden as ſwyfte as welles twey
                  The highe ſobbes of his ſorowes ſmerte
                  His ſpeche him refte, vnnethes myght he ſey
                  O dethe alas, why nylte thou do me dey?
                  Acurſed be that daye whiche that nature
                  Shope me to ben a lyues creature
               
               
                  But after whan the fury and all the rage
                  whiche that his hert twyſle, and faſt threſt
                  By length of tyme ſomwhat gan aſwage
                  Vpon his bedde he layde him downe to reſt
                  But tho begon his teares more out to breſt
                  That wonder is the body maye ſuffyſe
                  To halfe this wo, which that I you deuyſe
               
               
                  Than ſayd he thus: Fortune alas ye whyle
                  what haue I done? what haue I the agylte?
                  Howe myghteſt thou for routhe me begyle?
                  Is there no grace? and ſhal I thus be ſpylt?
                  Shal thus Creſeyde awaye for yt thou wylte
                  Alas: how mighteſt thou in thyn herte fynde
                  To ben to me thus cruell and vnkynde?
               
               
                  Haue I the nat honoured all my lyue?
                  As thou wel woreſt, aboue the goddes all
                  why wylte thou me fro ioye thus depriue
                  O Troylus, what may men nowe the call
                  But wretche of wretches, out of honour fall
                  In to myſery, in which I wol bewayle
                  Creſeyde alas, tyll that the brethe me fayle
               
               
                  Alas Fortune, yf that my lyfe in ioye
                  Diſpleaſed had vnto thy foule enuye
                  why ne haddeſt thou my father king of Troy
                  Berafte the lyfe, or done my brethern dye
                  Or ſlayne my ſelfe, yt thus complayne & crye
                  I combre worlde, that may of nothyng ſerue
                  
                     But euer dye, and neuer fully ſterue
               
               
                  If that Creſeyde alone were me lafte
                  Naught raught I whyder thou woldeſt me ſtere
                  And her alas, thā haſt thou me byraft
                  But euermore, lo this is thy manere
                  To reue a wight, that moſte is to him dere
                  To preue in that thy gierful vyolence
                  Thus am I loſte, there helpeth no defence
               
               
                  O very lorde, O loue, o god alas
                  That knoweſt beſt myn hert, & al my thouȝt
                  what ſhal my ſorouful lyfe done in this caas
                  If I forgo that I ſo dere haue bought
                  Sens ye Creſeyde & me haue fully brought
                  In to your grace, and both our hertes ſealed
                  Howe may ye ſuffre alas it be repealed
               
               
                  what I may done I ſhal, whyle I may dure
                  On lyue, in turment and in cruel payne
                  This infortune, or this diſauenture
                  Alone as I was borne I woll complayne
                  Ne neuer wol I ſene it ſhyne or rayne
                  But ende I wol as Edippe in derkneſſe
                  My ſorouful lyfe, and dyen in diſtreſſe
               
               
                  O wery goſte, that erreſt to and fro
                  why nylt thou ſtyen out of the wofulleſt
                  Body that euer might on grounde go?
                  O ſoule, lurkyng in thys woful neſte
                  Flye forthout myn herte, and it breſte
                  And folowe alway Creſeyde thy lady dere
                  Thy right place is nowe no lenger here
               
               
                  O wofull eyen two, ſens your diſporte
                  was al to ſene Creſeydes eyen bright
                  what ſhal ye done, but for my diſcomforte
                  Stondē for naught, & wepen out your ſyght
                  Sens ſhe is queynt, yt wōt was you to light
                  In veyne from this forth haue I eyen twey
                  I formed, ſens your vertue is awey
               
               
                  O my Creſeyde, O lady ſouerayne
                  Of this wofull ſoule that thus cryeth
                  who ſhal nowe yeuen comforte to thy payne
                  Alas no wight, but whan myne herte dyeth
                  My ſpyrite, whiche that ſo vnto you hyeth
                  Receyue in gree, for that ſhall aye you ſerue
                  For thy no force is, though the body ſterue
               
               
                  O ye louers, that hygh vpon the whele
                  Ben ſette of Fortune, in good auenture
                  God lene that ye fynden aye loue of ſtele
                  And longe mote your lyfe in ioye endure
                  But whan ye comen by my ſepulture
                  Remembreth that your felowe reſteth there
                  For I loued eke, though I vnworthy were
               
               
                  O olde vnholſome and miſlyued man
                  Calkas I meane, alas what eyled the
                  To ben a greke? ſens thou art borne Troyan
                  O Calcas, whiche that wolte my bane be
                  In curſed tyme waſte thou borne for me
                  As wolde blyſful Ioue for his ioye
                  That I the had where I wolde in Troye
               
               
                  A thouſande ſyghes hotter than the glede
                  Out of his breſt, eche after other went
                  Medled with playnte newe, his wo to fede
                  For whiche his woful teeres neuer ſlente
                  And ſhortly ſo hys ſorowes hym to rente
                  And woxe ſo mate, that ioye or penaunce
                  He feleth none, but lyeth in a traunce
               
               
                  Pandare, whiche that in the parlyment
                  Had herde what euery lorde & burgeys ſeyde
                  And howe full graunted was by one aſſent
                  For Antenor, to yelden out Creyſeyde
                  Gan wel nigh wode out of his wyt to breyde
                  So that for wo he nyſte what he mente
                  But in a race to Troylus he wente
               
               
                  A certayne knight, that for the tyme kepte
                  The chambre doore, vndyd it hym anon
                  And Pandare that full tenderly wepte
                  In to the derke chambre as ſtyll as ſtone
                  Towarde the bedde gan ſoftely to gone
                  So confuſe, that he nyſte what to ſay
                  For very wo, his wytte was nyghe away
               
               
                  And with chere and lokyng al to torne
                  For ſorowe of this, & with his armes folden
                  He ſtode this woful Troylus beforne
                  And on hys pytous face he gan beholden
                  But ſo ofte gan hys herte colden
                  Seyng his frende in wo, whoſe heuyneſſe
                  His herte ſlough, as thought him for diſtreſſe
               
               
                  This woful wight, this Troylus that felte
                  His frende Pandare ycomen him to ſe
                  Gan as the ſnowe ayenſt the ſonne melte
                  For whiche this woful Pandare, of pyte
                  Gan for to wepe, as tenderly as he
                  And ſpecheleſſe thus ben theſe ylke twey
                  
                     That neyther might for ſorowe o worde ſey
               
               
                  But at the laſte, this wofull Troylus
                  Nygh deed for ſmert, gan breſten out to rore
                  And with a forouful noyſe he ſayd thus
                  Amonges his ſobbes and his ſyghes ſore
                  Lo Pandare I am deed, withouten more
                  Haſte thou nat herde at parlyment he ſeyde
                  For Antenor howe loſte is my Creſeyde
               
               
                  This Pandare ful deed and pale of hewe
                  Ful pitouſly anſwerde, and ſayd yes
                  As wyſely were it falſe as it is trewe
                  That I haue herde, and wote al howe it is
                  O mercy god, who wolde haue trowed thys
                  who wold haue wēde, yt in ſo lytell a throwe
                  Fortune our ioye wolde haue ouerthrowe
               
               
                  For in this worlde there is no creature
                  As to my dome, that euer ſawe ruyne
                  Straūger thā this, through caſe or auēture
                  But who may al eſchue or al deuyne
                  Suche is this worlde, for thy I thus defyne
                  Ne truſt no wight to fynde in Fortune
                  Aye propretie, her yeftes ben cōmune
               
               
                  But tel me this, why thou art now ſo mad
                  To ſorowē thus, why lyeſt thou in this wyſe
                  Sens thy deſyre al holly haſte thou had
                  So that by right, it ought ynough ſuffyſe
                  But I that neuer felte in my ſeruyce
                  A frendly chere or lokyng of an eye
                  Let me thus wepe and waylen tyl I dye
               
               
                  And ouer al this, as thou wel woſt thy ſelue
                  This towne is full of ladyes al aboute
                  And to my dome, fayrer than ſuche twelue
                  As euer ſhe was, ſhall I fyndē in ſome route
                  Yea one or twey, withouten any doute
                  For thy be glad myn owne dere brother
                  If ſhe be loſte, we ſhall recouer an other
               
               
                  What god forbyd alway yt eche pleſaunce
                  In o thyng were, and in non other wight
                  If one can ſynge, another can well daunce
                  If this be goodly, ſhe is glad and light
                  And this is fayre, and that can good aright
                  Eche for his vertue holden is for dere
                  Bothe heroner and faucon for ryuere
               
               
                  And eke as writ zanſis, that was ful wyſe
                  The newe loue out chaſeth ofte the olde
                  And vpon newe caſe lythe newe auyſe
                  Thynke eke thy ſelfe to ſauen art thou holde
                  Suche fyre by proceſſe, ſhall of kynde colde
                  For ſens it is but caſuell pleſaunce
                  Some caſe ſhall put it out of remembraunce
               
               
                  For alſo ſure as day cometh after nyght
                  The newe loue, labour, or other wo
                  Or els ſelde ſeynge of a wight
                  Done olde affections al ouer go
                  And for thy parte, thou ſhalte haue one of tho
                  To abredge with thy bytter paynes ſmerte
                  Abſence of her, ſhal driue her out of herte
               
               
                  Theſe wordes ſayd he for the nones all
                  To helpe his frende, leſte he for ſorow deyde
                  For doutleſſe to don his wo to fall
                  He raught not what vnthrift that he ſeyde
                  But Troylus that nygh for ſorowe deyde
                  Toke lytel hede, of al that euer he mente
                  One eere it herde, at the other out it went
               
               
                  But at the laſte he anſwerde, & ſaid frende
                  This lechcrafte, or healed thus to be
                  were wel ſyttyng, yf that I were a fende
                  To trayen a wight, that trewe is vnto me
                  I pray god let this counſayle neuer ythe
                  But do me rather ſterue anon right here
                  Er I thus done, as thou me woldeſt lere
               
               
                  She that I ſerue ywis, what ſo thou ſeye
                  To whom myn herte enhabyt is by right
                  Shall haue me holly hers tyll that I deye
                  For Pandarus, ſens I haue trouth her hight
                  I wol nat ben vntrewe for no wight
                  But as her man I woll aye lyue and ſterue
                  And neuer none other creature ſerue
               
               
                  And ther thou ſayeſt yu ſhalt as fayre fynde
                  As ſhe, let be, make no comparyſon
                  To creature yformed here by kynde
                  O leue Pandare, in concluſyon
                  I wol nat ben of thyne opinyon
                  Touchyng al thys, for whiche I the beſeche
                  So hold thy pece, thou ſleeſt me wt thy ſpech
               
               
                  Thou byddeſt me I ſhulde loue another
                  All freſhly newe, and let Creſeyde go
                  It lythe nat in my power leue brother
                  And though I might, yet wol I nat do ſo
                  But canſte thou playen raket to and fro
                  Netle in docke out, now this now ye Pādare
                  
                     Nowe foule fall her for thy wo that care
               
               
                  Thou fareſt eke by me Pandarus
                  As he, that whan a wight is wo bygon
                  He cometh to him a pace, and ſaith right thus
                  Thynke nat on ſmerte, & thou ſhalt fele none
                  Thou mayſte me fyrſt tranſmewē in a ſtone
                  And reue me my paſſyons all
                  Or thou ſo lightly do my wo to fall
               
               
                  The dethe may wel out of my breſt departe
                  The lyfe ſo longe may this ſorowe myne
                  But fro my ſoule ſhall Creſeydes darte
                  Out neuermore, but down with Proſerpyne
                  whan I am deed, I wol wonne in pyne
                  And there I woll eternally complayne
                  My wo, & how that twynned be we twayne
               
               
                  Thou haſt here made an argumēt forfyne
                  Howe that it ſhulde laſſe payne be
                  Creſeyde to forgon, for ſhe was myne
                  And lyued in 
                        •
                     aſe and in felycite
                  why gabbeſt thou, that ſaydeſt vnto me
                  That him is worſe that is fro wele ythrowe
                  Than he had erſt none of that wele knowe
               
               
                  But tel me now, ſens yt the thinketh ſo light
                  To chaungen ſo in loue aye to and fro
                  why haſte thou nat done beſily thy might
                  To chaungen her, that dothe the al thy wo?
                  why nylte thou let her fro thyne herte go?
                  why nylte thou loue another lady ſwete
                  That may thyne herte ſetten in quyete?
               
               
                  If thou haſte had in loue aye yet miſchaūce
                  And canſte it nat out of thyne herte dryue
                  I that lyued in luſt and in pleſaunce
                  with her, as moche as creature on lyue
                  Howe ſhulde I that foryet, and that ſo blyue
                  O where haſt thou ben hyd ſo long in mewe
                  That canſte ſo wel and formelyche argewe
               
               
                  Nay godwote, naught worth is al thy rede
                  For whiche, for what that euer may befall
                  withouten wordes mo I wol ben deed
                  O dethe, that ender arte of ſorowes all
                  Come nowe, ſens I ſo ofte after the call
                  For ſely is that dethe, ſothe for to ſayne
                  That ofte ycleped, cometh and endeth payne
               
               
                  wel wote I, whyle my lyfe was in quiete
                  Er thou me ſlewe, I wolde haue yeuen hyre
                  But nowe thy commyng is to me ſo ſwete
                  That in this worlde, I nothyng ſo deſyre
                  O dethe, ſens with thys ſorowe I am a fyre
                  Thou eyther do me anon in teeres drenche
                  Or with thy colde ſtroke myne herte quenche
               
               
                  Sens that thou ſleeſt ſo fele in ſondrie wyſe
                  Ayenſt her wyl, vnprayed day and nyght
                  Do me at my requeſt thys ſeruyce
                  Delyuer nowe the world, ſo doſte thou right
                  Of me that am the wofulleſt wight
                  That euer was, for tyme is that I ſterue
                  Sēs in this world of right nauȝt do I ſerue
               
               
                  This Troylus in teeres gan diſtyll
                  As lycoure out of allambyke ful faſte
                  And Pandarus gan holde his tonge ſtyll
                  And to the grounde hys eyen downe he caſte
                  But natheleſſe, thus thought he at laſte
                  what parde, rather than my felawe dey
                  Yet ſhal I ſomwhat more vnto him ſey
               
               
                  And ſaid frende, ſens thou haſt ſuch diſtreſſe
                  And ſens the lyſt myne argumentes blame
                  why nylt thy ſeluen helpe don redreſſe
                  And with thy manhode letten all thys game
                  Go rauiſh her, ne canſt thou nat for ſhame?
                  And eyther let her out of towne fare
                  Or holde her ſtyll, and leaue thy nyce fare
               
               
                  Arte thou in Troye, and haſte non hardymēt
                  To take a wight, whiche that loueth the
                  And wolde her ſeluen ben of thyne aſſent
                  Nowe is nat thys a nyce vanyte
                  Ryſe vp anon, and let this wepyng be
                  And ſythe thou arte a man, for in this hour
                  I woll ben deed, or ſhe ſhall ben our
               
               
                  To this anſwerde hym Troylus ful ſofte
                  And ſayd, iwys my leue brother dere
                  Al this haue I my ſelfe yet thought full ofte
                  And more thyng than thou deuyſeſt here
                  But why this thing is laft, yu ſhalt wel here
                  And whan thou haſte me yeuen audyence
                  Therafter mayſt thou tell all thy ſentence
               
               
                  Firſt ſyn yu woſt this toun hath al this werre
                  For rauyſhyng of women ſo by might
                  It ſhulde nat ben ſuffred me to erre
                  As it ſtonte nowe, ne done ſo great vnright
                  I ſhulde haue alſo blame of euery wight
                  My fathers graunt yf that I ſo withſtode
                  
                     Sens ſhe is chaunged for the townes gode
               
               
                  I haue eke thought, ſo it were her aſſent
                  To aſke her at my father of hys grace
                  Then thynke I, thys were her accuſement
                  Sens well I wote I may her not purchace
                  For ſens my father in ſo hygh a place
                  As parlyment, hath her eſchaunge enſealed
                  He nyll for me hys lettre be repealed
               
               
                  Yet drede I moſte her herte to perturbe
                  wyth violence, yf I do ſuche a game
                  For yf I wolde it openly dyſturbe
                  It muſte be dyſclaundre to her name
                  And me were leuer dye then her defame
                  As nolde god, but I ſhulde haue
                  Her honour, leuer then my lyfe to ſaue
               
               
                  Thus am I loſte, for aught that I can ſe
                  For certayne is that I am her knyght
                  I muſte her honour leuer haue then me
                  In euery caſe, as louer ought of ryght
                  Thus am I with deſyre and reaſon twyght
                  Deſyre for to dyſtourben her me redeth
                  And reaſon nyll not, ſo myne herte dredeth
               
               
                  Thus wepynge, that he could neuer ceaſe
                  He ſayd alas, how ſhall I wretch fare
                  For well fele I alwaye my loue encreaſe
                  And hope is laſſe and laſſe Pandare
                  Encreaſen eke the cauſes of my care
                  So welawaye, why nyll myne herte breſte
                  For as in loue there is but lytell reſte
               
               
                  Pandare anſwerd, frende thou mayſt for me
                  Done as the lyſt, but had I it ſo hote
                  And thyne eſtate, ſhe ſhulde go wyth me
                  Tho al this towne cryed on thys thynge by note
                  I nolde ſet at al that noyſe a grote
                  For whē mē haue cryed thē woll they ronne
                  Eke wōder laſt but .ix. dayes neuer in tonne
               
               
                  Deuyne not in reaſon aye ſo depe
                  Ne curteſly, but helpe thy ſelfe anone
                  Bet is that other then thy ſeluen wepe
                  And namely ſens ye two ben all one
                  Ryſe vp, for by myne heed ſhe ſhall not gone
                  And rather be in blame a lytell yfounde
                  Thē ſterue here as a gnat withoutē woūde
               
               
                  It is no ſhame vnto you ne no vyce
                  Her to wyth holden, that ye loueth moſte
                  Parauenture ſhe myght holde the for nyce
                  So letten her go thus vnto the grekes hoſte
                  Thinke eke fortune, as wel thy ſeluen woſte
                  Helpeth hardy man vnto hys empryſe
                  And weyueth wretches, for her cowardyſe
               
               
                  And though thy lady wolde alyte her greue
                  Thou ſhalt thy ſelfe thy peace herafter make
                  But as to me certayne I can not leue
                  That ſhe wolde it as nowe for yuell take
                  why ſhulde then for feare thyne herte quake
                  Thynke howe Paris hath, yt is thy brother
                  A loue, & why ſhalt thou not haue another
               
               
                  And Troylus, o thynge I dare the ſwere
                  That yf Creſeyde, whych that is thy lefe
                  Nowe loueth the, as well as thou doſte here
                  God helpe me ſo, ſhe nyll not take a grefe
                  Though yu do boote anone in this myſchefe
                  And yf ſhe wylneth fro the for to paſſe
                  Then is ſhe falſe, ſo loue her well the laſſe
               
               
                  For thy take hert, & thynke ryght as a knight
                  Through loue is broken aldaye euery lawe
                  Kyth now ſomwhat thy corage & thy myght
                  Haue mercy on thy ſelfe for any awe
                  Let not this wretched wo thyne hert gnawe
                  But manly ſet the worlde on ſyxe & ſeuen
                  And yf thou dye a marter go to heuen
               
               
                  I wol my ſelfe ben wyth the at thys dede
                  Though I and all my kyn vpon a ſtounde
                  Shulde in a ſtrete, as dogges lyggen deede
                  Through gyrte wyth many a bloody woūde
                  In euery caſe I woll a frende be founde
                  And yf the lyſteth here ſteruen as a wretche
                  Adieu, the deuell ſpede hym that retche
               
               
                  Thys Troylus gan wt tho wordes quicken
                  And ſayd frende, graunt mercy, I aſſent
                  But certaynly thou mayſt not ſo me prycken
                  Ne payne none ne may me ſo turment
                  That for no caſe, it is not myne entent
                  At ſhort wordes, though I dyen ſholde
                  To rauyſhen her, but yf her ſelfe it wolde
               
               
                  why, ſo meane I (ꝙ Pādarus) al this day
                  But tel me then, haſt thou her well aſſayde
                  That ſoroweſt thus? & he anſwerde him nay
                  wherof arte thou (ꝙ Pādare) thē dyſmayde
                  That noſt not that ſhe woll ben euel apayde
                  To rauyſhē her, ſens thou haſt not ben there
                  
                     But yf that Ioue tolde it in thyne eere
               
               
                  For thy ryſe vp as nought ne were anone
                  And waſhe thy face, & to ye kynge thou wēde
                  Or he may wondren whyther thou art gone
                  Thou muſt wt wyſedome, hym & other blede
                  Or vpon caſe he may after the ſende
                  Or thou beware, and ſhortly brother dere
                  Be glad, & let me werke in thys matere
               
               
                  For I ſhall ſhape it ſo, that ſekerly
                  Thou ſhalt this night ſōtime in ſome maner
                  Come ſpeken wyth thy lady priuely
                  And by her wordes eke, as by her chere
                  Thou ſhalt full ſone aperceyue & wel here
                  Of her entent, and in thys caſe the beſte
                  And fare nowe wel, for in this poynt I reſte
               
               
                  The ſwyfte fame, whych yt falſe thinges
                  Equall reporteth lyke the thynges trewe
                  was throughout Troy iſled, wt preſtwinges
                  Fro man to man, and made hys tale al newe
                  How Calcas doughter with her bright hew
                  At parlyment wythout wordes more
                  I graunted was, in chaunge of Antenore
               
               
                  The whych tale anone ryght as Creſeyde
                  Had herde, ſhe whych yt of her father rought
                  (As in thys caſe) right nauȝt, ne whē he deyd
                  Ful buſely to Iupiter beſought
                  Yeue hem myſchaūce, yt thys tretys brought
                  But ſhortly leſte theſe tales ſoth were
                  She durſte at no wyght aſken it for fere
               
               
                  As ſhe that had her herte & al her mynde
                  On Troylus yſet ſo wonder faſte
                  That al this world ne miȝt her loue vnbynd
                  Ne Troylus out of her herte caſte
                  She wold bē hys, whyle yt her lyfe may laſt
                  And ſhe thus brenneth both in loue & drede
                  So that ſhe nyſt what was beſt to rede
               
               
                  But as men ſene in towne, and all aboute
                  That women vſen her frendes to viſyte
                  So to Creſeyde of women came a route
                  For pitous ioye, and wenden her delyte
                  And wyth her tales dere ynough a myte
                  Theſe women, whych that in the cyte dwell
                  They ſet hem downe, & ſayd as I ſhall tell
               
               
                  (Quod fyrſt that one) I am glad trewly
                  Bycauſe of you, that ſhall your father ſe
                  Another ſayd, ywys ſo am not I
                  For all to lytle hath ſhe wyth vs be
                  (Quod tho the thyrd) I hope ywys that ſhe
                  Shall bryngen vs the peace on euery ſyde
                  That whē ſhe goeth, almyghty god her gyde
               
               
                  Tho wordes & tho womannyſhe thynges
                  She herd hē ryght as though ſhe thēce were
                  For god it wote, her hert on other thynge is
                  Although the body ſat amonge hem there
                  Her aduertence is alwaye els where
                  For Troylus full faſte her ſoule ſought
                  wythoutē worde, on hym alway ſhe thought
               
               
                  Theſe women that thus wendē her to pleſe
                  About naught gonne all her tales ſpende
                  Suche vanite ne can done her none eſe
                  As ſhe that all thys meane whyle brende
                  Of other paſſyon then they wende
                  So that ſhe felte almoſte her herte dye
                  Fo wo, and wery of that companye
               
               
                  For whych myght ſhe no lenger reſtrayne
                  Her teryes, they gan ſo vp to well
                  That gaue ſygnes of her bytter payne
                  In whych her ſpirite was, and muſt dwell
                  Remēbrynge her frō heuen vnto whych hell
                  She fallen was, ſens ſhe forgo the ſyght
                  Of Troylus, and ſorowfully ſhe ſyght
               
               
                  And thylke fooles, ſyttynge her aboute
                  wende that ſhe wepte and ſyghed ſore
                  Bycauſe that ſhe ſhulde out of the route
                  Departen, and neuer playe wyth hem more
                  And they that had knowen her of yore
                  Se her ſo wepe, & thought it was kyndneſſe
                  And eche of hem wepte eke for her dyſtreſſe
               
               
                  And beſely they gonnen her to comforten
                  One thīg god wot, on which ſhe lytel thouȝt
                  And wyth her tales wenden her dyſporten
                  And to be glad they oft her beſought
                  But ſuch an eaſe therwith they her wrought
                  Ryght as a man is eaſed for to fele
                  For ache of heed, to clawen hym on hys hele
               
               
                  But after all thys nyce vanyte
                  They toke her leue, and home they wentē all
                  Creſeyde full of ſorowfull pyte
                  Into her chambre vp wente out of the hall
                  And on her bedde ſhe gan for deed to fall
                  
                     In purpoſe neuer thence for to ryſe
                  And thus ſhe wrought, as I ſhal you deuyſe
               
               
                  Her ownded heer, yt ſonnyſhe was of hewe
                  She rent, & eke her fyngers longe and ſmale
                  She wronge ful ofte, & bad god on her rewe
                  And wyth the death to do bote on her bale
                  Her hewe whylom bright, that tho was pale
                  Bare wytneſſe of her wo, & her conſtraynte
                  And thus ſhe ſpake, ſobbyng in her cōplaynt
               
               
                  ¶Alas (quod ſhe) out of thys regioun
                  I wofull wretch and infortuned wyght
                  And borne in curſed conſtellatioun
                  Mote gone, & thus departen fro my knyght
                  wo worth alas, that ylke dayes lyght
                  On which I ſawe him fyrſt wt eyen twayne
                  That cauſeth me, and I hym all thys payne
               
               
                  Therwyth the teeres from her eyen two
                  Downe fell, as ſhoure in Apryll ſwythe
                  Her whyte breſt ſhe bette, and for the wo
                  After the death ſhe cryed a thouſande ſyth
                  Sens he that wonte her wo was for to lyth
                  She mote forgone, for whych dyſauenture
                  She helde her ſelfe a forloft creature
               
               
                  She ſayd, howe ſhall he done and I alſo
                  Howe ſhuld I lyue, yf yt I from him twynne
                  O dere herte eke that I loue ſo
                  who ſhall ye ſorowe ſlene, that ye ben inne?
                  O Calkas father, thyne be all thys ſynne
                  O mother myne, that cleaped were Argyue
                  wo worth yt daye, that thou me bare on lyue
               
               
                  To what fyne ſhuld I lyue & ſorowen thus?
                  Howe ſhuld a fyſhe wythouten water dure?
                  what is Creſeyde worth from Troylus?
                  Howe ſhulde a plante or lyues creature
                  Lyue wythouten hys kynde noriture?
                  For whych full ofte, a by worde here I ſey
                  That roteleſſe mote grene ſone dey
               
               
                  I ſhal don thus, ſens neither ſword ne darte
                  Dare I none handle, for the cruelte
                  That ylke daye that I fro you departe
                  yf ſorowe of that nyl not my bane be
                  Then ſhall no meate ne drynke come in me
                  Tyll I my ſoule out of my breſt vnſhethe
                  And thus my ſeluen woll I done to dethe
               
               
                  And Troylus, my clothes euerychone
                  Shul blacke ben, in tokenynge herte ſwete
                  That I am as out of thys worlde agone
                  That wonte was you to ſet in quyete
                  And of myne ordre aye, tyll death me mete
                  The obſeruaunce euer in your abſence
                  Shal ſorowe ben, complaynt, & abſtynence
               
               
                  Myne herte, & eke the wofull goſt therin
                  Byqueth I wyth your ſpirite to complayne
                  Eternally, for they ſhall neuer twyn
                  For though in erth twynned be we twayne
                  Yet in the felde of Pyte, out of payne
                  That hyght Elyſos, ſhall we ben yfere
                  As Orpheus and Erudice hys fere
               
               
                  Thus herte myne, for Antenor alas
                  I ſone ſhalbe chaunged, as I wene
                  But howe ſhull ye done in thys ſorowful cas
                  Howe ſhall your tendre herte thys ſuſtene
                  But herte myne, foryet thys ſorowe and tene
                  And me alſo, for ſothly for to ſey
                  So ye welfare, I retche not to dey
               
               
                  Howe myght it euer redde ben or yſonge
                  The playnt that ſhe made in her dyſtreſſe
                  I not, but as for me my lytell tonge
                  Yf I dyſcryuen wolde her heuyneſſe
                  It ſhulde make her ſorowe ſeme leſſe
                  Then that it was, and chyldyſhly deface
                  Her hye complaynt, and therfore I it pace
               
               
                  Pandare, whych that ſent from Troylus
                  was vnto Creſeyde, as ye haue herde deuyſe
                  That for the beſt it was acorded thus
                  And he full glad to done hym that ſeruyſe
                  Vnto Creſeyde in a full ſecrete wyſe
                  There as ſhe lay, in turment and in rage
                  Came her to tell al holy hys maſſage
               
               
                  And fonde that ſhe her ſeluen gan to trete
                  Full petouſly, for wyth her ſalte teeres
                  Her breſt and face ybathed was full wete
                  Her myghty treſſes of her ſonnyſh heeres
                  Vnbroyden, hangen all aboute her eeres
                  whych yaue hym very ſygne of matere
                  Of death, whych that her herte gan deſyre
               
               
                  when ſhe hym ſawe, ſhe gan for ſorowe anon
                  Her tery face, atwyxte her armes hyde
                  For whych thys Pandare is ſo wo bygon
                  That in the houſe he myght vnneth abyde
                  As he that felte ſorowe on euery ſyde
                  
                     For yf Creſeyde had erſt complayned ſore
                  Tho gan ſhe playne a thouſand tymes more
               
               
                  And in her aſpre playnte, thus ſhe ſeyde
                  Pandare, fyrſt of ioyes mo then two
                  was cauſynge vnto me Creſeyde
                  That nowe tranſmued ben in cruell wo
                  whether ſhall I ſaye to you welcome or no?
                  That alderfyrſt me brought vnto ſeruyſe
                  Of loue alas, that endeth in ſuche wyſe
               
               
                  Endeth then loue in wo? ye or men lyeth
                  And all worldly blyſſe, as thynketh me
                  The ende of blyſſe aye ſorowe it occupyeth
                  And who troweth not that it ſo be
                  Let hym vpon me wofull wretch ſe
                  That my ſelfe hate, and aye my byrth curſe
                  Felynge alwaye, fro wycke I go to worſe
               
               
                  who ſome ſeeth, he ſeeth ſorowe al atonis
                  Payne, turment, playnte, wo, and dyſtreſſe
                  Out of my wofull body harme there none is
                  As langour, anguyſhe, cruell bytterneſſe
                  Annoye, ſmerte, drede, furye, & eke ſyckneſſe
                  I trowe ywys from heuen teeres rayne
                  For pyte of my aſpre and cruell payne
               
               
                  And thou my ſyſter, full of dyſcomforte
                  (Quod Pādarus) what thinkeſt thou to do?
                  why ne haſt thou to thy ſeluen ſome reſport?
                  why wylt thou thus alas thy ſelfe fordo?
                  Leaue al thys werke, and take nowe hede to
                  That I ſhall ſayne, & herken of good entent
                  This meſſage, yt by me Troylus you ſente
               
               
                  Turned her tho Creſeyde, a wo makynge
                  So great, that it a death was for to ſe
                  Alas (ꝙ ſhe) what wordes maye ye brynge
                  what woll my dere herte ſayne to me
                  whych that I drede neuer more to ſe
                  woll he haue playnte or teeres er I wende
                  I haue ynough, yf he therafter ſende
               
               
                  She was ryght ſuch to ſene in her viſage
                  As is that wyght that men on bere bynde
                  Her face lyke of paradys the ymage
                  was all ychaunged in another kynde
                  The play ye laughter, mē were wont to fynd
                  On her, and eke her ioyes euerychone
                  Ben fledde, and thus lyeth Creſeyde alone
               
               
                  Aboute her eyen two, a purpre rynge
                  Bytrent, in ſothfaſt tokenynge of her payne
                  That to beholde it was a deedly thynge
                  For whych Pandare myght not reſtrayne
                  The teeres from hys eyen for to rayne
                  But natheleſſe as he beſt myght he ſeyde
                  From Troylus theſe wordes to Creſeyde
               
               
                  Lo nece, I trowe ye han herde al howe
                  The kynge wyth other lordes for the beſte
                  Hath made eſchaunge of Antenor and you
                  That cauſe is of thys ſorowe & thys vnreſt
                  But howe thys caſe doth Troylus moleſte
                  Thys may none earthly mannes tonge ſay
                  For very wo, hys wytte is all away
               
               
                  For whych we haue ſo ſorowed, he and I
                  That into lytell, it had vs both ſlawe
                  But through my counſayle thys daye fynaly
                  He ſomwhat is fro wepynge wythdrawe
                  And ſemeth me that he deſyreth fawe
                  wyth you to ben all nyght for to deuyſe
                  Remedye of thys, yf there were any wyſe
               
               
                  This ſhorte & playne, theffect of my meſſage
                  As ferforth as my wytte can comprehende
                  For ye that ben of turment in ſuche rage
                  May to no longe prologe as nowe entende
                  And hervpon ye maye anſwere hym ſende
                  And for the loue of God my nece dere
                  So leaue thys wo or Troylus be here
               
               
                  Great is my wo (ꝙ ſhe) and ſyghed ſore
                  As ſhe that feleth deedly ſharpe dyſtreſſe
                  But yet to me hys ſorowe is mokell more
                  That loue hym bet then he hym ſelfe I geſſe
                  Alas, for me hath he ſuch heuyneſſe
                  Can he for me ſo pytouſly complayne
                  Iwys thys ſorowe doubleth al my payne
               
               
                  Greuous to me god wot is for to twynne
                  (Quod ſhe) but yet it harder is to me
                  To ſene that ſorowe, whych that he is inne
                  For well wote I, it wol my bane be
                  And dye I wol in certayne tho (quod ſhe)
                  But byd hī come, er deth yt thus me threteth
                  Driue out yt goſt, whych in myne hert beteth
               
               
                  Theſe wordes ſayd ſhe, on her armes two
                  Fyll gruffe, and gan to wepen pytouſly
                  (Quod Pandarus) alas why do ye ſo
                  Sens ye well wote the tyme is faſt by
                  That he ſhall come, aryſe vp haſtely
                  
                     That he you not bewopen thus ne fynde
                  But ye wol haue him wode out of his minde
               
               
                  For wyſt he that ye farde in thys manere
                  He wolde hym ſelfe flee: and yf I wende
                  To haue thys fare, he ſhulde not come here
                  For all the good that Priam maye dyſpende
                  For to what fyne he wolde anone pretende
                  That knowe I well, and for thy yet I ſey
                  So leaue this ſorowe, or plainly he wol dey
               
               
                  And ſhapeth you hys ſorowe for to abredge
                  And not encreaſe, lefe nece ſwete
                  Beth rather to hym cauſe of plat then edge
                  And wt ſome wyſedom, ye hys ſorowes bete
                  what helpeth it to wepen full a ſtrete
                  Or though ye both in ſalte teeres dreynte
                  Bet is a tyme of cure aye then of pleynte
               
               
                  I meane thus, whē I hym hether brynge
                  Sens ye be wyſe, and both of one aſſent
                  So ſhapeth howe to diſtourbe your goynge
                  Or come ayen ſone after ye be went
                  women ben wyſe, in ſhort auyſement
                  And let ſene howe your wyt ſhall auayle
                  And what that I may helpe, it ſhal not fayle
               
               
                  Go (quod Creſeyde) and vncle truely
                  I ſhall done all my myght me to reſtrayne
                  From wepynge in hys ſyght, and beſely
                  Hym for to glad, I ſhall done all my payne
                  And in my herte ſeken euery vayne
                  Yf to thys ſore there maye ben founden ſalue
                  It ſhall not lacke certayne on myne halue
               
               
                  Goth Pandarus, and Troylus he ſought
                  Tyll in a temple he founde hym al alone
                  As he that of hys lyfe no lenger rought
                  But to the pytouſe goddes euerychone
                  Full tendrely he prayed, and made hys mone
                  To done hym ſone out of thys world to pace
                  for wel he thought ther was non other grace
               
               
                  And ſhortly all the ſoth for to ſeye
                  He was ſo fallen in dyſpayre that day
                  That vtterly he ſhope him for to deye
                  For ryght thus was hys argument alway
                  He ſayd he nas but lorne welaway
                  For all that cometh, cometh by neceſſite
                  Thus to be lorne is my deſtyne
               
               
                  For certaynly thys wote I well he ſayd
                  That forſyght of diuyne purueyaunce
                  Had ſene alwaye me to forgone Creſeyde
                  Sens god ſeeth euery thing out of doutaūce
                  And hem dyſpoſeth through hys ordynaūce
                  In hys merytes ſothly for to be
                  As they ſhull comen by predeſtyne
               
               
                  But natheleſſe alas, whom ſhall I leue
                  For there ben great clerkes many one
                  That deſtynie, through argumentes preue
                  And ſome ſayne that nedely there is none
                  But that free choyce is yeuen vs euerychone
                  O welawaye, ſo ſlygh arne clerkes olde
                  That I not whoſe opinion I maye holde
               
               
                  For ſome men ſayne, ye god ſeeth al byforne
                  Ne god maye not dyſceyued ben parde
                  Thā mote it fallen, though mē had it ſworne
                  That purueiaunce hath ſene beforne to be
                  wherfore I ſaye, that from eterne yf he
                  Hath wyſt beforn our thouȝt eke as our dede
                  we haue no fre choyce, as theſe clerkes rede
               
               
                  For other thought, nor other dede alſo
                  Myght neuer ben, but ſuche as purueyaunce
                  whych maye not ben dyſceyued neuer mo
                  Hath feled byforne, wythouten ignoraunce
                  For yf there myght ben a variaunce
                  To wrythen out fro goddes purueynge
                  There nere no preſcience of thynge cōmynge
               
               
                  But it were rather an opinion
                  Vncertayne, and no ſtedfaſt foreſeyng
                  And certes that were an abuſyon
                  That god ſhuld haue no parfite clere weting
                  More then we men, yt haue doutous wening
                  But ſuch an errour vpon god to geſſe
                  were falſe & foule, and wycked curſedneſſe
               
               
                  Eke thys is an opinion of ſome
                  That haue her top ful hygh & ſmoth yſhore
                  They ſayn right thus, yt thing is not to come
                  For that the preſcience hath ſene before
                  That it ſhall come, but they ſayne yt therfore
                  That it ſhall come, therfore the purueyaunce
                  wote it beforne wythouten ignoraunce
               
               
                  And in thys maner thys neceſſyte
                  Returneth in hys parte contrary agayne
                  For nedefully behoueth it not to be
                  That thylke thynges fallen in certayne
                  That bē purueyed, but nedfully as they ſayn
                  
                     Behoueth it that thynges whych that fall
                  That they in certayne ben puruayed all
               
               
                  I meane as though I laboured me in this
                  To enquyre which thīge cauſe of which thīg be
                  As whether that the preſciēce of god is
                  The certayne cauſe of the neceſſite
                  Of thynges that to comen be pardy
                  Or of neceſſite of thynge comynge
                  Becauſe certayne of the purueyeng
               
               
                  But now ne enforce I me not in ſhewyng
                  How ye ordre of ye cauſes ſtāt, but wel wote I
                  That it behoueth that the befallyng
                  Of thynges wyſt before certaynly
                  Be neceſſary, all ſeme it not therby
                  That preſcience put fallynge neceſſayre
                  To thynge to come, all fall it foule or fayre
               
               
                  For yf there ſyt a man yonde on a ſee
                  That by neceſſite behoueth it
                  That certes thyne opinion ſoth be
                  That weneſt or coniecteſt that he ſyt
                  And further ouer, nowe ayenwarde yet
                  Lo, ryght ſo is it on the parte contrarye
                  As thus, nowe herken for I woll not tarye
               
               
                  I ſaye that yf the opinion of the
                  Be ſoth for that he ſyt, then ſaye I thys
                  That he mote ſytten by neceſſyte
                  And thus neceſſyte in eyther is
                  For in hym nede of ſyttynge is ywys
                  And in the nede of ſoth, and thus forſoth
                  There mote neceſſite ben in you both
               
               
                  But thou mayſt ſayne ye mā ſyt not therfore
                  That thyne opinion of hys ſyttynge ſoth is
                  But rather for the man ſat there before
                  Therfore is thyne opinion ſoth ywys
                  And I ſaye, though the cauſe of ſoth of thys
                  Cometh of hys ſyttynge, yet neceſſite
                  Is entrechaunged, both in hem and in the
               
               
                  Thus in the ſame wyſe out of dontaunce
                  I maye well maken, as it ſemeth me
                  My reaſonynge of goddes purueyaunce
                  And of the thynges that to comen be
                  By whych reaſon men may well yſe
                  That thylke thynges that in erth fall
                  That by neceſſite they comen all
               
               
                  For al though that forthing ſhal come ywys
                  Therfore is it purueyd certaynly
                  Not that it cometh for it purueyed is
                  Yet natheleſſe behoueth it nedefully
                  That thynge to come be purueyed truely
                  Or els thinges that purueyed be
                  That they betyden by neceſſyte
               
               
                  And this ſuffyſeth ryght ynough certayne
                  For to deſtroye our free choyce euerydel
                  But nowe is thys abuſyon to ſayne
                  That fallynge of the thynges temporel
                  Is cauſe of the goddes preſcience eternell
                  Nowe truely that is a falſe ſentence
                  That thing to come ſhuld cauſe his preſciēce
               
               
                  what might I wene & I had ſuch a thought
                  But that god purueyeth thynge yt is to come
                  For that it is to come, and els nought
                  So might I wene that thinges al and ſome
                  That whylom ben byfal and ouercome
                  Ben cauſe of thylke ſouerayne purueyaunce
                  That forewote all, wythouten ignoraunce
               
               
                  And oueral thys, yet ſay I more therto
                  That right as whē I wote there is a thinge
                  Iwys that thynge mote nedefully be ſo
                  Eke ryght ſo, when I wote a thing comyng
                  So mote it come, and thus the befallynge
                  Of thynges that ben wyſt before the tyde
                  They mowe not ben eſchewed on no ſyde
               
               
                  Thē ſayd he thus, almyghty Ioue in trone
                  That woteſt of al thys thyng ye ſothfaſtneſſe
                  Rewe on my ſorowe, and do me dyen ſone
                  Or brynge Creſeyde & me fro thys dyſtreſſe
                  And whyle he was in all thys heuyneſſe
                  Dyſputynge wyth hym ſelfe in thys matere
                  Came Pandare in, & ſayd as ye may here
               
               
                  O myghty god (ꝙ Pandarus) in trone
                  Eygh, who ſawe euer a wyſe man faren ſo?
                  why Troylus, what thynkeſt thou to done?
                  Haſt thou ſuche luſte to ben thyne owne foe?
                  what parde, yet is not Creſeyde ago
                  why lyſt the ſo thy ſelfe fordone for drede
                  That in thyne heed, thyne eyen ſemen dede?
               
               
                  Haſt thou not lyued many a yere beforne
                  wythouten her? and farde full well ateaſe
                  Arte thou for her and for none other borne
                  Hath kynde ye wrought all only her to pleaſe
                  Let be and thynke ryght thus in thy dyſeaſe
                  
                     That in ye dyce, right as there fallē chaūces
                  Ryght ſo in loue there come & go pleſaūces.
               
               
                  And yet this is a wonder mooſt of all
                  why thou thus ſoroweſt ſith thou wuſt nat yet
                  Touching her going, how yt it ſhal fall
                  Ne yf ſhe can her ſelfe diſtourben it
                  Thou haſt nat yet aſſayed all her wyt
                  A man maye al betyme his necke bede
                  whan it ſhall of, and ſorowen at the nede
               
               
                  For thy take hede of all that I ſhal ſay
                  I haue with her yſpoke and longe ybe
                  So as accorded was betwyxt vs twey
                  And euermo me thynketh thus, that ſhe
                  Hath ſomwhat in her hertes priuitie
                  wherwith ſhe can, yf I ſhall aryght rede
                  Diſturbe al this of which thou art in drede
               
               
                  For which my counſayl is whan it is night
                  Thou to her go, and make of this an ende
                  And blyſful Iuno, through her gret myght
                  Shal (as I hope) her grace vnto vs ſende
                  Myne hert ſeeth certayne ſhe ſhal nat wend
                  And for thy put thy hert a whyle in reſt
                  And holde thy purpoſe, for it is the beſt.
               
               
                  This Troylus anſwerde, and ſyghed ſore
                  Thou ſayeſt ryght wel, & I wil do ryght ſo
                  And what him liſt, he ſayd vnto him more
                  And whan it was tyme for to go
                  Full priuely hym ſelfe withouten mo
                  Vnto her came, as he was wont to done
                  And how they wrought I ſhal you tell ſone
               
               
                  Soth is, that whan they gone firſt to mete
                  So gan the payne her hertes for to twyſt
                  That neyther of hem other myght grete
                  But hem in armes toke, and after kyſt
                  The laſſe wofull of hem both nyſt
                  wher yt he was, ne might o word out bring
                  As I ſayd erſt, for wo and for ſobbyng
               
               
                  The wofull teares that they letten fal
                  As bytter weren out of teres kynde
                  For payne, as is lignealoes, or gall
                  So bytter teeres wept nat as I fynde
                  The woful Myrra through ye bark & rynd
                  That in this world ther nis ſo hard an hert
                  That nold haue rewed on her paines ſmert
               
               
                  But whan her woful wery goſtes twayne
                  Returned ben there, as hem ought to dwell
                  And that ſomwhat to weaken gan ye payne
                  By length of playnt, & ebben gan the wel
                  Of her teares, and the hert vnſwell
                  wt brokē voyce al horſe, for ſhright Creſeyde
                  To Troylus theſe ylke wordes ſayde
               
               
                  O Ioue I dye, and mercy the beſeche
                  Helpe Troylus, & therwith all her face
                  Vpon his breſt ſhe layde, and loſt ſpeche
                  Her woful ſpyrit from his propre place
                  Ryght wt the worde away in poynt to pace
                  And thus ſhe lyth wt hewes pale and grene
                  That whylom freſh & fayreſt was to ſene.
               
               
                  This Troylus that on her gan beholde
                  Cleping her name, and ſhe lay as for deed
                  wtouten anſwer, & felt her lymmes colde
                  Her eyen throwen vpwarde to her heed
                  This ſorouful mā can nowe non other rede
                  But oft tyme her colde mouth he kyſt
                  wher him was wo, god & him ſelfe it wyſt.
               
               
                  He riſeth him vp, & long ſtreight he her layd
                  For ſigne of lyfe, for ought he can or may
                  Can he none fynde in nothing of Creſeyde
                  For which his ſonge ful oft is welaway
                  But whan he ſawe that ſpecheleſſe ſhe laye
                  wt ſoroufull voyce, & herte of blyſſe all bare
                  He ſayd, how ſhe was fro this world yfare
               
               
                  So after that he longe had her cōplayned
                  His hōdes wronge, & ſayd that was to ſeye
                  And wt his teeres ſalte her breſt berayned
                  He gan tho teeres wypen of full dreye
                  And pytouſly gan for the ſoule preye
                  And ſayd, lorde that ſet art in thy trone
                  Rewe eke on me, for I ſhal folowe her ſone
               
               
                  She colde was, and without ſentement
                  For ought he wot, for breth felt ne none
                  And thus was him a preignant argument
                  That ſhe was forth out of this world agon
                  And whā he ſawe ther was non other won
                  He gan her lymmes dreſſe in ſuche manere
                  As men do on hem yt ſhall ben layen on bere
               
               
                  And after this, with ſterne and cruel herte
                  His ſwerde anon out of his ſheth he twight
                  Him ſelf to ſleen, howe ſore that him ſmerte
                  So that his ſoule her ſoule folowē myght
                  Ther as the dome of Mynos wold it dight
                  Syth loue and cruell fortune it ne wolde
                  
                     That in this worlde he lenger lyuen ſhold
               
               
                  Than ſayd he thus, fulfyld of high diſdayn
                  O cruel Ioue, and thou fortune aduerſe
                  This al & ſome that falſely haue ye ſlayne
                  Creſeyde, and ſyth ye may do me no werſe
                  Fye on your myght and workes ſo dyuerſe
                  Thus cowardly ye ſhal me neuer wyn
                  There ſhall no deth me fro my lady twyn.
               
               
                  for I this world ſith ye haue ſlayn her thus
                  wol let and folowe her ſpyrite lowe or hye
                  Shall neuer louer ſayne, that Troylus
                  Dare nat for feare with his lady dye
                  For certayne I woll beare her company
                  But ſyth ye wol nat ſuffre vs lyuen here
                  Yet ſuffreth that our ſoules ben yfere
               
               
                  And thou cytie, in which I lyue in wo
                  And thou Priam, and brethren al yfere
                  And thou my mother, farewel for I go
                  And Attropoſe make redy thou my bere
                  And thou Creſeyde, o ſwete hert dere
                  Receyue now my ſpyrite, wolde he ſey
                  with ſwerde at herte all redy for to deye
               
               
                  But as god wolde, of ſwough ſhe abrayde
                  And gan to ſygh, and Troylus ſhe cryde
                  And he anſwerd, lady myne Creſeyde
                  Lyue ye yet? & let his ſwerde downe glyde
                  Yea hert myne, that thanked be cupyde
                  (Quod ſhe) & therwithal ſhe ſore ſyght
                  And he began to glad her as he myght
               
               
                  Toke her in his armes two, & kyſt her ofte
                  And her to glad, he dyd all his entent
                  For which her gooſt yt flyckered aye a loft
                  Into her woful hert ayen it went
                  But at the laſt, as that her eye glent
                  Aſyde, anon ſhe gan his ſworde aſpye
                  As it laye bare, and gan for feare crye.
               
               
                  And aſked hym, why he had it out drawe
                  And Troylus anon the cauſe her tolde
                  And how hī ſelf therwt he wold haue ſlawe
                  For which Creſeyd vpon hym gan beholde
                  And gan hym in her armes faſt folde
                  And ſayde: o mercy god, lo which a dede
                  Alas how nygh we weren both deed
               
               
                  Than yf I nad ſpoken, as grace was
                  Ye wolde haue ſlayne your ſelf anon (ꝙ ſhe)
                  Yea doutleſſe: and ſhe anſwerde alas
                  For by that ylke lorde that made me
                  I nolde a forlonge way on lyue haue be
                  After your deth to haue ben trowned quene
                  Of al ye londe the ſunne on ſhyneth ſhene
               
               
                  But with this ſelue ſwerd, which yt here is
                  My ſelfe I wolde haue ſlayne (ꝙ ſhe) tho
                  But ho, for we haue ryght ynough of this
                  And let vs ryſe, & ſtreyght to bed go
                  And there let vs ſpeken of our wo
                  For by that marter, which that I ſe brene
                  Knowe I ful well, that day is nat ferre hen
               
               
                  whan they were in her bed in armes folde
                  Nought was it lyke tho niȝtes here beforn
                  For pytouſly eche other gan beholde
                  As they that hadden all her blyſſe ylorne
                  Bewaylyng aye ye day that they wer borne
                  Til at ye laſt this ſorowful wyght Creſeyd
                  To Troylus theſe ylke wordes ſeyde
               
               
                  Lo hert myne, wel wot ye this (quod ſhe)
                  That yf a wight alway his wo complayne
                  And ſeketh nat how holpen for to be
                  It nys but folye, and encreaſe of payne
                  And ſyns yt here aſſembled be we twayne
                  To fynde bote of wo that we ben in
                  It were tyme all ſoone to begyn.
               
               
                  I am a woman, as full well ye wot
                  And as I am aduyſed ſodaynly
                  So woll I tell you whyle it is whote
                  Me thynketh thus, that neyther ye nor I
                  Ought halfe this wo to maken ſkylfully
                  For there is arte ynough for to redreſſe
                  That yet is myſſe, & ſleen this heuyneſſe
               
               
                  Soth is, the wo the which we ben in
                  For ought I wot, for nothyng els is
                  But for the cauſe that we ſhulde twyn
                  Conſydred al, there nys nomore amys
                  And what is than a remedy vnto this
                  But that we ſhape vs ſoone for to mete
                  This all and ſome, my dere hert ſwete
               
               
                  Now that I ſhal well bryngen it about
                  To come ayen ſone after that I go
                  Therof am I no maner thyng in dout
                  For dredeleſſe, within a weke or two
                  I ſhal ben here, and that it mayebe ſo
                  
                     By all ryght, and in wordes fewe
                  I ſhall you well an heape of wayes ſhewe
               
               
                  For which I wol not make longe ſermon
                  For tyme yloſt may not recouered be
                  But I wol go to my concluſyon
                  And to the beſt in ought that I can ſe
                  And for the loue of god foryeue it me
                  Yf I ſpeke ought ayenſt your hertes reſt
                  For truly I ſpeke it for the beſt
               
               
                  Makyng alway a proteſtacion
                  That now theſe wordes which I ſhal ſaye
                  Nys but to ſhewen you my mocion
                  To fynde vnto our helpe the beſt waye
                  And taketh it none otherwyſe I pray
                  For in effect, what ſo ye me cōmaunde
                  That wol I don, for that is no demaunde
               
               
                  Now herkeneth this ye haue wel vnderſtōd
                  My going graunted is by parlyment
                  So ferforth yt it may not ben withſtonde
                  For all this worlde as by my iudgement
                  And ſyth ther helpeth non aduyſement
                  To letten it, let it paſſe out of mynde
                  And let vs ſhape a better way to fynde
               
               
                  The ſoth is, the twynnyng of vs twayne
                  wol vs diſeaſe, and cruelly anoye
                  But him behoueth ſomtyme haue a payne
                  That ſerueth loue, yf that he wol haue ioye
                  And ſyth I ſhal no ferther out of Troye
                  Thā I may ryde ayen on halfe a morowe
                  It ought laſſe cauſen vs for to ſorowe
               
               
                  So as I ſhal not ſo ben hyd in mewe
                  That day by day, myne owne hert dere
                  Syns well I wot that it is nowe a trewe
                  Ye ſhall ful well all myne eſtate here
                  And er that truce is don, I ſhal ben here
                  Than haue ye both Antenor ywon
                  And me alſo beth glad now yf ye con
               
               
                  And think right thus, Creſeyd is now agon
                  But what, ſhe ſhal come haſtely ayen
                  And whan alas? by god, ſo right anon
                  Er dayes ten, this dare I ſafely ſayne
                  And than at erſt ſhall we be ſo fayne
                  So as we ſhall togythers euer dwell
                  That all this world ne might our blyſſe tel
               
               
                  I ſe that oft tyme, there as we ben nowe
                  That for the beſt our counſayl for to hyde
                  Ye ſpeake not with me, nor I with you
                  In fourtenyght, ne ſe ye go ne ryde
                  May ye nat ten dayes than abyde
                  For myne honour in ſuche auenture
                  Iwys ye mowe els lyte endure?
               
               
                  ye knowe eke howe that al my kyn is here
                  But if that only it my father be
                  And eke myne other thynges al yfere
                  And namely my dere herte ye
                  whom that I nolde leauen for to ſe
                  For al this world as wide as it hath ſpace
                  Or els ſe I neuer Ioues face
               
               
                  why trowe ye my father in this wyſe
                  Coueyteth ſo to ſe me, but for drede
                  Leſt in this towne that folkes me diſpyſe
                  Bycauſe of him, for his vnhappy dede
                  what wote my father what lyfe that I lede
                  For if he wyſte in Troye howe wel I fare
                  Vs neded for my wendyng nat to care
               
               
                  Yea, that euery day eke more and more
                  Men treate of peace, and it ſuppoſed is
                  That men the quene Heleyne ſhal reſtore
                  And grekes vs reſtore that is mys
                  So though there nere cōfort none but this
                  That men purpoſen peace on euery ſyde
                  Ye may the better at eaſe of hert abyde
               
               
                  For yf that it be peace, myne hert dere
                  The nature of the peace mote nedes dryue
                  That men muſt entercōmune yfere
                  And to and fro eke ryde and gone as blyue
                  Al day as thycke as been ſlyen frō an hyue
                  And euery wyght haue lybertie to bleue
                  where as him lyſt, the bet withouten leue
               
               
                  And though ſo be ye peace ther may be none
                  Yet hither though ther neuer peace ne were
                  I muſt come, for whyder ſhulde I gone
                  Or how miſchaunce ſhulde I dwel there
                  Amonge tho men of armes euer in feare
                  For which as wyſely god my ſoule rede
                  I can nat ſene wherof ye ſhulde drede
               
               
                  Haue here another way yf it ſo be
                  That al this thing ne may you nat ſuffyſe
                  My father as ye knowen well parde
                  Is olde, and eke ful of couetyſe
                  And I right now haue founden all the gyſe
                  
                     withouten net, wherwith I ſhal hym hente
                  And herkeneth now yf that ye wyl aſſent
               
               
                  Lo Troylus, men ſayne that ful harde it is
                  The wolfe ful, and the weder hole to haue
                  This is to ſayne, that men ful oft iwys
                  Mote ſpenden part, ye remnaunt for to ſaue
                  For aye with gold men may the hert graue
                  Of hym that ſet is vpon couetyſe
                  And how I meane I ſhal it you deuyſe
               
               
                  The mouable, which yt I haue in this toun
                  Vnto my father ſhall I take and ſay
                  That ryght for truſt, and for ſaluatioun
                  It ſent is, from a frende of his or tway
                  The which frendes feruently him praye
                  To ſende after more, and that in hye
                  whyle yt this town ſtant thus in ieopardy
               
               
                  And that ſhalbe of golde an huge quantitie
                  Thus ſhal I ſayne, but leſt folke it eſpyde
                  This may be ſent by no wyght but by me
                  I ſhal eke ſhewen hym, yf peace betyde
                  what frendes that I haue on euery ſyde
                  Towarde the court, to don the wrath pace
                  Of Priamus, and do hym ſtonde in grace
               
               
                  So what for o thyng and for other ſwete
                  I ſhall him enchaunten with my ſawes
                  That right in heuē his ſoul is, ſhal he mete
                  For all Apollo, or his clerkes lawes
                  Or calculyng auayleth nat thre hawes
                  Deſyre of golde ſhall ſo his ſoule blende
                  That as my lyſt, I ſhall well make an ende
               
               
                  And yf he wolde ought by his ſorte it preue
                  If that I lye, in certayne I ſhal fonde
                  Diſtourben him, and plucke by the ſleue
                  Makyng his ſorte, & bearen hym on honde
                  He hath nat well the goddes vnderſtonde
                  For goddes ſpeke in amphibologies
                  And for o ſoth, they tellen twenty lyes
               
               
                  Eke drede fonde firſt goddes I ſuppoſe
                  Thus ſhall I ſayne, & that his coward hert
                  Made hym amyſſe the goddes text to gloſe
                  whan he for ferde out of Delphos ſtert
                  And but I make hym ſone to conuert
                  And don my rede within a day or twey
                  I woll to you oblege me to deye.
               
               
                  And truly, as wrytten well I fynde
                  That al this thing was ſayd of good entēt
                  And that her hert true was and kynde
                  Towardes him, & ſpake ryght as ſhe ment
                  And yt ſhe ſtarfefor wo nigh whan ſhe went
                  And was in purpoſe euer to be trewe
                  Thus wryten they yt of her werkes knewe
               
               
                  This Troylus with hert and eares ſprad
                  Herde all this thyng deuyſed two and fro
                  And verily it ſemed that he had
                  The ſelue wyt, but yet to let her go
                  His hert myſyaue hym euermo
                  But fynally he gan his hert wreſt
                  To truſten her, and toke it for the beſt
               
               
                  For which the great fury of his penaunce
                  was queynt wt hope, therwt hem bytwene
                  Began for to ioye the amorous daunce
                  And as ye byrdes whan the ſun is ſhene
                  Delyten in her ſonge, in leues grene
                  Ryght ſo the wordes, that they ſpake yfere
                  Delyten hem, and make hem hertes clere.
               
               
                  But nathelſſe, the wendyng of Creſeyde
                  For al this world may not out of his mynd
                  For which ful oft he pytouſly her preyde
                  That of her heeſt he might her true fynde
                  And ſayd her, certes yf ye be kynde
                  And but ye come at day ſet in Troye
                  Ne ſhal I neuer haue heale, honour ne ioye
               
               
                  For all ſo ſoth as ſunne vpryſt a morowe
                  And god ſo wyſely thou me woful wretche
                  To reſt bryng, out of this cruell ſorowe
                  I woll my ſeluen ſlee yf that ye dretche
                  But of my deth though lytle be to retche
                  Yet er that ye me cauſen ſo to ſmert
                  Dwell rather here myne owne ſwete herte.
               
               
                  For truly myne owne lady dere
                  The ſleyghtes yet yt I haue herde you ſtere
                  Full ſhapely ben to fallen all yfere
                  For thus men ſayth, yt one thynketh ye bere
                  But al another thynketh the ledere
                  Your ſire is wyſe, and ſayd is out of drede
                  Men may the wyſe out ren, & not out rede
               
               
                  It is full harde to halten vneſpyed
                  Before a creple, for he can the crafte
                  Your father is in ſleyght as Argus eyed
                  For al be it that his mouable is him byraft
                  His olde ſleyght is yet ſo with hym lafte
                  
                     Ye ſhall nat blende hym for your womāhed
                  Ne ſayne aryght, and that is al my drede
               
               
                  I not yf peace ſhall euermo betyde
                  But peace or no, for erneſt ne for game
                  I wot ſyth Calcas on the grekes ſyde
                  Hath ones ben, and loſt ſo foule his name
                  He dar nomore come here agayne for ſhame
                  For which that we, for ought I can eſpy
                  To truſten on, nys but a fantaſye.
               
               
                  Ye ſhal eke ſene your father ſhal you gloſe
                  To ben a wyfe, and as he can wel preche
                  He ſhal ſome greke ſo preyſe and wel aloſe
                  That rauyſhen he ſhal you with his ſpeche
                  Or do you don by force as he ſhall teache
                  And Troylus on whom ye nyll haue routh
                  Shall cauſeleſſe ſo ſteruen in his trouth.
               
               
                  And ouer all this your father ſhal deſpyſe
                  Vs al, and ſayn this citie is but lorne
                  And that thaſſege neuer ſhal aryſe
                  For why the grekes haue it all ſworne
                  Tyl we bē ſlayne, & down our walles torne
                  And thus he ſhal you with his wordes fere
                  That aye drede I, that ye wol bleuen there
               
               
                  Ye ſhall eke ſene ſo many a luſtye knyght
                  Amonge the grekes full of worthyneſſe
                  And eche of hem with hert, wyt & myght
                  To pleſen you don all his beſyneſſe
                  That ye ſhull dullen of the rudyneſſe
                  Of ſely Troyans, but yf routh
                  Remorde you, or vertue of your trouth
               
               
                  And this to me ſo greuous is to thynke
                  That fro my breſt it woll my ſoule rende
                  Ne dredleſſe in me there may not ſynke
                  O good opinyon, yf that ye wende
                  For why your fathers ſleyght woll vs ſhēd
                  And yf ye gone, as I haue tolde you yore
                  So think I nam but deed, withouten more
               
               
                  For which with humble, true, & pitous hert
                  A thouſande tymes mercy I you praye
                  So reweth on myne aſpre paynes ſmert
                  And doth ſomwhat, as that I ſhall you ſay
                  And let vs ſteale away betwyxt vs tway
                  And thinke yt foly is whā a man maye cheſe
                  For accident his ſubſtaunce for to leſe
               
               
                  I meane thus, that ſyns we nowe or day
                  well ſteale awaye, and ben togyther ſo
                  what wyt were it to putten it in aſſaye
                  (In caſe ye ſhulden to your father go)
                  If that ye myghten come ayen or no
                  Thus meane I that were a great folly
                  To put that ſykerneſſe in ieopardy
               
               
                  And vulgarly to ſpeken of ſubſtaunce
                  Of treaſour may we both with vs lede
                  Ynough to lyue in honour and pleaſaunce
                  Tyl vnto tyme that we ſhal ben deed
                  And thus we may eſchewen al this drede
                  For euery other waye ye can recorde
                  Myne hert ywys may therwith nat accorde.
               
               
                  And hardely ne dredeth no pouertie
                  For I haue kyn and frendes els where
                  That though we comen in our bare ſherte
                  Vs ſhulde neyther lacke golde ne gere
                  But ben honoured whyle we dwelten there
                  And go we anon, for as in myne intent
                  This is the beſt, yf that ye woll aſſent
               
               
                  Creſeyde with a ſygh, ryght in this wyſe
                  Anſwerde: ywys my dere herte true
                  we maye wel ſteale away, as ye deuyſe
                  And fynden ſuche vnthryftye wayes newe
                  But afterwarde full ſore it woll vs rewe
                  And helpe me god ſo at my mooſt nede
                  As cauſeleſſe ye ſuffren all this drede
               
               
                  For thylke day that I for cheryſſhyng
                  Or drede of father, or for any other wyght
                  Or for eſtate, delyte, or for weddyng
                  Be falſe to you, my Troylus my knyght
                  Saturnus doughter Iuno through her migh
                  As wode as Achamāt do me dwel
                  Eternally with ſtyx in the pyt of hell
               
               
                  Ad this on euery god celeſtiall
                  I ſweare it you, and eke on eche goddeſſe
                  On euery nymphe, and deitie infernall
                  On Satiry and Fauny more and leſſe
                  That halfe goddes ben of wylderneſſe
                  And Attrapos my threde of lyfe to breſt
                  If I be falſe, now trowe me yf ye leſt.
               
               
                  And thou Synoys that as an arowe clere
                  Thrugh Troy rēneſt aye dounward to ye ſe
                  Be wytneſſe of this worde yt ſayd is here
                  That ylke daye that I vntrue be
                  To Troylus myne owne hert free
                  
                     That thou returne bakwarde to thy well
                  And I with body and ſoule ſynke to hell
               
               
                  But that ye ſpeke away thus for to go
                  And leten al your frendes god forbede
                  For any woman that ye ſhulden ſo
                  And namly ſyns Troy hath now ſuch nede
                  Of helpe, and eke of o thyng taketh hede
                  Yf this were wiſt, my lyfe laye in balaunce
                  And your honour, god ſhylde vs from myſchaunce.
               
               
                  And yf ſo be that peace herafter betake
                  As all daye heppeth after angre game
                  why lorde ye ſorowe & wo ye wolden make
                  That ye ne durſt come ayen for ſhame
                  And er that ye ieoparden ſo your name
                  Beth nat to haſty in this hote fare
                  For haſty man ne wanteth neuer care
               
               
                  what trowe ye the people eke al about
                  wolde of it ſay? it is ful lyght to arede
                  They wolden ſay, and ſwere it out of dout
                  That loue ne draue you nat to do this dede
                  But luſt voluptuous, and cowarde drede
                  Thus were all loſt iwys myne hert dere
                  Your honour, which yt now ſhyneth clere
               
               
                  And alſo thynketh on myne honeſtie
                  That floureth yet, how foul I ſhuld it ſhēd
                  And with what fylth it ſpotted ſhulde be
                  If in this forme I ſhoulde with you wende
                  Ne though I lyued vnto the worldes ende
                  My name ſhulde I neuer ayenwarde wyn
                  Thus wer I loſt, and yt were routh & ſynne
               
               
                  And for thy, ſlee with reaſon al this hete
                  Men ſayne the ſuffraunt ouercōmeth parde
                  Eke who ſo wol haue lefe, he lefe mote lete
                  Thus maketh vertue of neceſſitie
                  By pacience, and thynke that lorde is he
                  Of fortune aye yt nought wol of her retche
                  And ſhe ne daūteth no wight but a wretche
               
               
                  And truſteth this, that certes hert ſwete
                  Or Phebus ſuſter Lucina the ſhene
                  The Lyon paſſe out of this Ariete
                  I wol ben here withouten any wene
                  I mene, as helpe me Iuno heuens quene
                  The tenth day, but if that death me aſſayle
                  I woll you ſene withouten any fayle
               
               
                  And now ſo thus be ſoth (quod Troylus)
                  I ſhall well ſuffre vnto the tenth daye
                  Syns that I ſe, that nedes it mote be thus
                  But for the loue of god, yf it be maye
                  So let vs ſtelen priuely away
                  For euer in one, as for to lyuen in reſt
                  Myne hert ſayth that it woll be the beſt
               
               
                  O mercy god, what lyfe is this (ꝙ ſhe)
                  Alas, ye ſlee me thus for very tene
                  I ſe well now that ye myſtruſten me
                  For by your wordes it is well yſene
                  Now for the loue of Scithia the ſhene
                  Miſtruſt me nat thus cauſeleſſe for routh
                  Sis to be tru, I haue you plight my trouth
               
               
                  And thynketh wel, that ſōtyme it was wyt
                  To ſpende a tyme, a tyme for to wyn
                  Ne parde lorne I nat fro you yet
                  Though that we ben a daye or two a twyn
                  Driue out tho fantaſyes you within
                  And truſteth me, & leaueth eke your ſorowe
                  Or here my trouth, I wyl nat lyue tyll morowe.
               
               
                  For if ye wyſt how ſore it doth me ſmerte
                  Ye wold not ceſſe of this, for god thou woſt
                  The pure ſpyrit wepeth in myne herte
                  To ſene you wepen, which yt I loue mooſt
                  And that I mote gon vnto the grekes hoſt
                  Yea nere it that I wyſt a remedye
                  To come ayen, ryght here I wolde dye
               
               
                  But certes I am not ſo nyce a wyght
                  That I ne can ymagynen away
                  To come ayen that daye that I haue hyght
                  For who may holden a thyng yt wol awaye
                  My father nought, for all his queynt playe
                  And by my thrift my wendyng out of Troy
                  An other daye ſhall turne vs all to ioye.
               
               
                  For thy with all myne hert I you beſeke
                  Yf that you lyſt done ought for my prayer
                  And for ye loue which that I loue you eke
                  That er that I departe fro you here
                  That of ſo good a comfort and a chere
                  I may you ſene, that ye may bring at reſt
                  Myne herte, which is at poynt to breſt
               
               
                  And ouer all this I praye you (ꝙ ſhe) tho
                  Myne owne hertes ſothfaſt ſuffyſaunce
                  Syth I am thyne all hole withouten mo
                  That whyle that I am abſent, no pleſaūce
                  Of other, do me fro your remembraunce
                  
                     For I am euer agaſt, for why men rede
                  That loue is thyng aye ful of beſy drede
               
               
                  For in thys worlde there leueth lady none
                  If that I were vntrewe, as god defende
                  That ſo betrayed were, or wo begone
                  As I, that al trouth in you entende
                  And doutleſſe, yf that iche other wende
                  I were but deed, and er ye cauſe fynde
                  For goddes loue, ſo beth me naught vnkind
               
               
                  To this anſwered Troylus, and ſeyde
                  Now god, to whō there nys no cauſe ywrie
                  Me glade, as wys I neuer vnto Creſeyde
                  Sith thylke day I ſaw her fyrſt wyth eye
                  was falſe, ne neuer ſhal tyl that I dye
                  At ſhorte wordes, wel ye may me leue
                  I can no more, it ſhal be founde at preue
               
               
                  Graūt mercy it good hert myn ywis (ꝙ ſhe)
                  And blyſful Venus let me neuer ſterue
                  Er I may ſtonde at pleaſaunce in degre
                  To quyte him wel, that ſo wel can deſerue
                  And whyle yt god my wyt wyl me conſerue
                  I ſhal ſo done, ſo trewe I haue you founde
                  That aye honour to me ward ſhall rebound
               
               
                  For truſteth wel, that your eſtate royal
                  Ne veyne delyte, nor onely worthyneſſe
                  Of you in werre or turuay marcial
                  Ne pompe, array, nobley, or eke rycheſſe
                  Ne made me to rewe on your diſtreſſe
                  But moral vertue, grounded vpon trouth
                  that was ye cauſe I firſt had on you routh
               
               
                  Eke gentyl hert, and manhede that ye had
                  And that ye had (as me thought) in diſpyte
                  Euery thyng that ſowned in to bad
                  And rudeneſſe, and peoplyſhe appetyte
                  And that your reaſon bridled your deiyte
                  This made abouen euery creature
                  yt I was yours, & ſhal while I may endure
               
               
                  And thys may lengthe of yeres nat fordo
                  Ne remnable fortune deface
                  But Iupitter, that of his myght may do
                  The ſorouful to be glad, ſo yeue vs grace
                  Er nyghtes ten, to meten in this place
                  So that it may your hert and myn ſuffyſe
                  And fareth now wel, for time is that ye ryſe
               
               
                  And after that they longe yplayned had
                  And ofte ykyſt, and ſtrayte in armes folde
                  The day gan ryſe, and Troylus him clad
                  And rufully his lady gan beholde
                  As he that felte dethes cares colde
                  And to her grace he gan hym recōmaunde
                  where he was wo, this holde I no demaūd
               
               
                  For mannes heed ymaginen ne can
                  Ne entendement conſyder, ne tonge tel
                  The cruel paynes of this ſorouful man
                  That paſſen euery torment downe in hel
                  For whan he ſawe that ſhe ne might dwel
                  which that his ſoule out of his herte rent
                  withoutē more, out of the chambre he went
               
            
            
               ¶Explicit li.iiii. Et incipit li.v.
               
                  
                     AProchen gan the fatall deſtyne
                  That Ioues hathe in diſpoſytioun
                  And to you angrye Parcas ſuſtren thre
                  Committeth to done, execuſioun
                  For which Creſeyde muſt out of the toun
                  And Troylus ſhal dwel forth in pyne
                  Tyl Lacheſis his threde no lenger twyne
               
               
                  The golde treſſed Phebus hyghe on loſte
                  Thriſe had al with his beames clere
                  The ſnowes molt, and zephyrus as ofte
                  Ybrought ayen the tender leaues grene
                  Sens that the ſonne of Eccuba the quene
                  Began to loue her firſt, for whō his ſorowe
                  was al, that ſhe departe ſhulde a morowe
               
               
                  Ful redy was at prime Diomede
                  Creſeyde vnto the grekes hooſt to leed
                  For ſorowe of which, ſhe felte her hert blede
                  As ſhe that nyſte what was beſt to reed
                  And trewly, as men in bookes reed
                  Men wyſt neuer woman haue the care
                  Ne was ſo lothe out of a towne to fare
               
               
                  Thys Troylus wythouten rede or lore
                  As man that hath his ioyes eke forlore
                  was waytyng on hys lady euer more
                  As ſhe that was ſothfaſt croppe and more
                  Of al his luſt or ioyes here tofore
                  But Troylus now fare wel al thy ioye
                  For ſhalte thou neuer ſene her efte in Troye
               
               
                  
                  Sothe is, yt whyle he bade in this manere
                  He gan his wo ful manly for to hyde
                  That wel vnneth it ſene was in his chere
                  But at the yate there ſhe ſhulde out ryde
                  with certayne folke he houed her to abyde
                  So wo begon, al wolde he not him playne
                  That on hys horſe vnneth he ſate for payne
               
               
                  For ire he quoke, ſo his herte gnawe
                  whan Diomede on horſe gan him dyght
                  And ſayd vnto him ſelfe thys ylke ſawe
                  Alas (ꝙ he) thus foule a wretchydneſſe
                  why ſuffre I it: why nyl I it redreſſe?
                  were it nat bet atones for to dye
                  Than euermore in langour thus to crye?
               
               
                  why nyl I make at ones ryche and poore
                  To haue ynough to done er that ſhe go?
                  why nyl I brynge al Troye vpon a roore
                  why nyl I 
                        ••
                     een thys Diomede alſo?
                  why nyl I rather wyth a man or two
                  Steale her away? why wol I this endure?
                  why nyl I helpen to myne owne cure?
               
               
                  But why he nolde done ſo fel a dede
                  That ſhal I ſayne, & why hym lyſte it ſpare
                  He had in herte alway a maner drede
                  Leſte that Creſeyde, in rumour of thys fare
                  Shulde haue ben ſlayn, lo this was all hys care
                  And els certayne, as I ſayd yore
                  He had it done, withouten wordes more
               
               
                  Creſeyde whan ſhe redy was to ryde
                  Ful ſoroufully ſhe ſyghed, and ſayd alas
                  But forth ſhe mote, for aught yt may betyde
                  And forth ſhe rydeth ful ſoroufully a paas
                  There is none other remedye in this caas
                  wat wonder is, though that her ſore ſmerte
                  whan ſhe forgoth her owne ſwete herte
               
               
                  Thys Troylus in gyſe of curteſye
                  wyth hauke on hande, & with an huge route
                  Of knyghtes, rode and dyd her companye
                  Paſſyng al the valey, ferre wythout
                  And ferther wold haue rydden out of doute
                  Ful fayne, and wo was hym to gon ſo ſone
                  But turne he muſt, and it was eke to done
               
               
                  And ryght wyth that was Antenor ycome
                  Out of the grekes hoſte, and euery wyght
                  was of hym glad, & ſayd he was welcome
                  And Troylus al nere hys herte lyght
                  He payned hym, wyth al hys ful myght
                  Hym to wythholde of wepyng at leſte
                  And Antenor he kyſte, and made feſte
               
               
                  And therwythal he muſt his leaue take
                  And caſt his eyes vpon her pytouſly
                  And nere he rode, hys cauſe for to make
                  To take her by the honde al ſobrely
                  And lorde ſo ſhe gan wepen tenderly
                  And he ful ſofte and ſlyghly gan her ſey
                  Now holde your day, and do me not to dey
               
               
                  with that hys courſer turned he aboute
                  wyth face pale, and vnto Diomede
                  No worde he ſpake, ne none of al his route
                  Of which the ſonne of Tydeus toke hede
                  As he that kouth more than the crede
                  In ſuch a crafte, and by the rayne her hente
                  And Troylus to Troye, homwardes went
               
               
                  This Diomede, that ladde her by the bridel
                  whan that he ſaw the folke of Troye away
                  Thought, al my labour ſhal not ben on ydel
                  If that I may, for ſomwhat ſhal I ſay
                  For at the worſte, it ſhorte may our way
                  I haue herde ſay eke, tymes twyſe twelue
                  He is a foole that wol foryete hym ſelue
               
               
                  But nathleſſe, thys thought he wel ynough
                  That certaynly I am about nought
                  If that I ſpeke of loue, or make it thought
                  For douteleſſe, yf ſhe haue in her thought
                  Him that I geſſe, he may not ben ybrought
                  So ſone away, but I ſhal fynde a meane
                  That ſhe ſhal not yet wete what I meane
               
               
                  Thus Diomede, as he that coulde his gode
                  whā this was don, gan fallē forth in ſpeche
                  Of this and that, and aſke why ſhe ſtode
                  In ſuch diſeaſe, and gan her eke beſeche
                  That yf that he encreaſen myght or eche
                  wyth any thyng her eaſe, that ſhe ſholde
                  Cōmaund it him, and ſayd he done it wolde
               
               
                  For trewly he ſwore her as a knyght
                  yt ther nas thyng wt which he myȝt her pleſe
                  That he nolde don hys payne, & al his myȝt
                  To don it, for to done her herte an eſe
                  And prayde her ſhe wolde her ſorowe apeſe
                  And ſayd, ywys we grekes can haue ioye
                  To honouren you, as well as folke of Troy
               
               
                  
                  He ſaid eke thus, I wote you thīketh ſtraūg
                  No wonder is, for it is to you newe
                  Thacqueyntaūce of theſe troyans to chaūg
                  For folke of Grece, that ye neuer knewe
                  But wolde neuer god, but yf as trewe
                  A greke ye ſhuld amonge vs al fynde
                  As any troyan is, and eke as kynde
               
               
                  And bycauſe I ſwore you ryght nowe
                  To ben your frende, & helply to my might
                  And for that more acqueintaunce eke of you
                  Haue I had, than another ſtraunger wight
                  So fro this forth, I pray you daye & nyght
                  Cōmaūdeth me, howe ſore that me ſmerte
                  To done, al that may lyke vnto your herte
               
               
                  And that ye me wold, as your brother treat
                  And taketth nat my frendſhpyp in diſpyte
                  & though your ſorowes ben for thinges gret
                  Not I nat why, but out of more reſpyte
                  Myn hert hath for to amend it great delyte
                  And yf I may your harmes nat redreſſe
                  I am ryght ſory for your heuyneſſe
               
               
                  For though ye troyans wt vs grekes wroth
                  Haue many a day ben: alway yet parde
                  O god of loue, in ſoth we ſeruen both
                  And for the loue of god my lady free
                  whō ſo ye hate, as beth not wroth wyth me
                  For trewly there can no wyght you ſerue
                  that halfe ſo loth your wrath wolde deſerue
               
               
                  And nere it that we ben ſo nere the tent
                  Of Calcas, which that ſene vs both may
                  I wolde of thys you tel al myne entent
                  But thys enſealed tyl another day
                  yeue me your hande, I am and ſhal be aye
                  god helpe me ſo, while yt my life may endure
                  Your owne, abouen euery creature
               
               
                  Thus ſaide I neuer er now to womā borne
                  For god myne herte as wyſely glade ſo
                  I loued neuer woman here beforne
                  As paramours, ne neuer ſhal no mo
                  And for the loue of god be not my foe
                  Al can I nat to you my lady dere
                  Complayne aryght, for I am yet to lere
               
               
                  And wōdreth nouȝt myn owne lady bryght
                  Though yt I ſpeke of loue to you thus bliue
                  For I haue herde or thys of many a wyght
                  Hath loued thynge he neuer ſawe his lyue
                  Eke I am not of power for to ſtryue
                  Ayenſt the god of loue, but hym obey
                  I wol alway, and mercy I you prey
               
               
                  There beth ſo worthy knyghtes in the place
                  And ye ſo fayre, that eueryche of hem al
                  wol payne hym to ſtonden in your grace
                  But myght me ſo fayre a grace fal
                  That ye me for your ſeruaunte wolde cal
                  So lowly, ne ſo trewly you ſerue
                  Nyl none of hem, as I ſhal tyl I ſterne
               
               
                  Creſeyde vnto that purpoſe lyte anſwerde
                  As ſhe that was wyth ſorowe oppreſſed
                  That in effecte ſhe naught his tales herde
                  But here & there, nowe here a worde or two
                  Her thought her ſorouful hert braſt a two
                  For whan ſhe gan her father ferre eſpye
                  wel nyghe downe of her horſe ſhe gan to ſye
               
               
                  But nathleſſe ſhe thonketh Diomede
                  Of al his trauayle and his good chere
                  And that him lyſt his frendſhyp to her bede
                  And ſhe accepteth it in good manere
                  And wol do fayne that is him lefe and dere
                  And truſteth hym ſhe wold, & wel ſhe might
                  As ſayd ſhe, and from her horſe ſhe alyght
               
               
                  Her father hath her in his armes nōme
                  & twēty times he kyſt his doughter ſwete
                  And ſayd: O dere doughtee mine welcome
                  She ſayd eke, ſhe was fayne wt him to mete
                  And ſtode forth muet, mylde, and manſuete
                  But here I leaue her wyth her father dwell
                  And forth I wol of Troylus you tell
               
               
                  To Troye is come this woful Troylus
                  In ſorowe abouen al ſorowes ſmerte
                  with felon loke, and face diſpytous
                  Tho ſodaynly downe frō his horſe he ſterte
                  And through his paleys with ſwolne herte
                  To chābre he went, of nothyng toke he hede
                  Ne non to him dare ſpeke o worde for drede
               
               
                  And there his ſorowes that he ſpared had
                  He yaue an iſſue large, and dethe he cryde
                  And in his throwes, frenetyke and mad
                  He curſeth Iuno, Apollo, and eke Cupide
                  He curſeth Bachus, Ceres, and Cipride
                  His byrth, him ſelfe, his fate, & eke nature
                  And ſaue his lady, euery creature
               
               
                  
                  To bed he goth and weyleth there & turneth
                  In furye, as doth he Ixion in hell
                  and in this wyſe he nygh tyl day ſoiourneth
                  But tho began his herte alyte vnſwel
                  Through teeres, which ye gonnen vp to wel
                  And pytouſly he cryed vpon Creſeyde
                  And to hym ſelfe thus he ſpake and ſeyde
               
               
                  where is myne owne lady lefe and dere?
                  where is her white breſt, where is it where?
                  where ben her armes, and her eyen clere
                  That yeſterdaye this tyme with me were?
                  Nowe may I wepe alone many a teere
                  And graſpe aboute I may, but in this place
                  Saue a pylowe, fynde naught to embrace
               
               
                  How ſhal I don whā ſhal ſhe come agayne?
                  I not alas, why let I her go?
                  As wolde god I had as tho be ſlayne
                  O hert myne Ceſeyde, O ſwete fo
                  O lady myne, that I loue and no mo
                  To whom for euer more myne hert a dowe
                  Se howe I dye, ye nyll me not reſcowe
               
               
                  who ſeeth you nowe, my ryght lode ſterre?
                  who ſytteth ryght nowe in your preſence?
                  who can comforten now your hertes werre
                  Now I am gon, whom yeue ye audience?
                  who ſpeketh for my ryght nowe in your abſence
                  Alas no wyght, & that is al my care
                  For wel wote I, as yuell as ye fare
               
               
                  Howe ſhulde I thus ten dayes ful endure
                  whan I the fyrſt nyght haue al thys tene
                  Howe ſhal ſhe eke ſorouful creature
                  For tenderneſſe, howe ſhall ſhe thys ſuſtene
                  Suche wo for me, o pytous pale, and grene
                  Shal ben your freſhe womanly face
                  For langour er ye turne vnto thys place
               
               
                  And whan he fyl in any ſlombrynges
                  Anon begyne he ſhulde for to grone
                  And dreamen of the dredfulleſt thynges
                  That myght ben, as mete he were alone
                  In place horrible makyng aye hys mone
                  Or meten that he was amonges al
                  Hys enemyes, and in her handes fal
               
               
                  And therwithal hys body ſhulde ſterte
                  And wyth the ſterte al ſodaynly awake
                  And ſuch a tremour fele about his herte
                  That of the feare hys body ſhulde quake
                  And therwythal he ſhulde a noyſe make
                  And ſeme as though he ſhulde fal depe
                  From hygh alofte, and than he wolde wepe
               
               
                  And rewen on hym ſelfe ſo pytouſly
                  That wonder was to here hys fantaſye
                  Another tyme he ſhulde myghtely
                  Comforte hym ſelfe, and ſayne it was folye
                  So cauſeleſſe, ſuche drede for to drie
                  And efte begyn his aſpre ſorowes newe
                  That euery man might on his paines rewe
               
               
                  who coulde tel al, or fully diſcryue
                  His wo, his playnt, hys langour, & his pyne
                  Nat al the men that han or ben on lyue
                  Thou reder mayſt thy ſelfe ful wel deuyne
                  That ſuch a wo my wyt can not defyne
                  On ydel for to write it ſhulde I ſwynke
                  whan that my wyt is wery it to thynke
               
               
                  On heuen yet the ſterres weren ſene
                  Although full pale ywoxen was the moone
                  And whyten gan the orizonte ſhene
                  Al eeſtwarde, as it is wonte to doone
                  And Phebus wyth hys roſy carte ſoone
                  Gan after that to dreſſe him vp to fare
                  whan Troylus hath ſent after Pandare
               
               
                  This Pandare, that of al the day beforne
                  Ne might hym comen thys Troylus to ſe
                  Although he on hys heed it had ſworne
                  For with the kyng Priam alday was he
                  So that it laye nat in his lyberte
                  No wher to gon, but on ye morowe he went
                  To Troylus, whan that he for hym ſent
               
               
                  For in hys herte he coulde wel deuyne
                  That Troylus al nyght for ſorowe woke
                  And that he wolde tel hym of hys pyne
                  Thys knew he well ynough wythout boke
                  For which to chābre ſtreyght ye way he toke
                  And Troylus tho ſobrely he grette
                  And on the bed ful ſone he gan hym ſette
               
               
                  My Pandarus (ꝙ Troylus) the ſorowe
                  which that I drie, I may not longe endure
                  I trowe I ſhal not lyuen tyl to morowe
                  For which I wolde alwayes on auenture
                  To the deuyſen of my ſepulture
                  The forme, & of my mouable thou diſpone
                  Ryght as the ſemeth beſt is for to done
               
               
                  
                  But of the fyre and flambe funerall
                  In which my body brennen ſhall to glede
                  And of the feeſt and playes paleſtrall
                  At my vygyle, I pray the take good hede
                  That that be wel, and offre Mars my ſtede
                  My ſworde, myn helme, & leue brother dere
                  My ſheld to Pallas yeue, that ſhyneth clere
               
               
                  the poudre ī which min hert ibrēde ſhal turn
                  That pray I the thou take, and it conſerue
                  In a veſſel that men clepeth an vrne
                  Of golde, and to my lady that I ſerue
                  For loue of whom thus pytouſly I ſterue
                  So yeue it her, and do me thys pleſaunce
                  To prayen her to kepe it for a remembraūce
               
               
                  For wel I fele by my maladye
                  And by my dreames, nowe and yore ago
                  Al certaynly, that I mote nedes dye
                  The oule eke, which that hyght aſcaphylo
                  Hath after me ſhryght al theſe nyghtes two
                  & god Mercury, now of me wofull wretche
                  The ſoule gyde, and whan the lyſte it fetche
               
               
                  Pandare anſwerde, and ſayd Troylus
                  My dere frende, as I haue tolde the yore
                  That it is folye for to ſorowen thus
                  And cauſeleſſe, for which I can no more
                  But who ſo wol nat trowen rede ne lore
                  I can not ſene in hym no remedye
                  But let hym worchen with his fantaſye
               
               
                  But Troylus I pray the tel me nowe
                  If that thou trowe er thys that any wyght
                  Hath loued paramours as wel as thou
                  Ye god wote, & fro many a worthy knyght
                  Hath hys ladye gone a fourtenyght
                  And he nat yet made haluendele the fare
                  what nede is the to maken al thys care?
               
               
                  Sens day by day thou mayſt thy ſeluen ſe
                  That from his loue, or els from hys wyfe
                  A man mote twynnen of neceſſyte
                  Yee, though he loue her as his owne lyfe
                  Yet nyl he wyth him ſelfe thus maken ſtryfe
                  For wel thou woſt my leue brother dere
                  That alway frendes may not ben yfere
               
               
                  how don thys folke yt ſene her loues wedded
                  By frendes myght? as it betydeth ful ofte
                  And ſene hem in her ſpouſes bed ybedded
                  God wote they take it wyſely fayre & ſofte
                  For why, good hope halt vp her herte alofte
                  And for they can a tyme of ſorowe endure
                  As tyme hem hurteth, a time doth hem cure
               
               
                  So ſhuldeſt thou endure, and letten ſlyde
                  The tyme, and fonde to ben gald and lyght
                  Ten dayes nys not ſo longe to abyde
                  And ſens ſhe to comen the hath behyght
                  She nyl her heſte breken for no wyght
                  For drede the not, that ſhe nyl fynde way
                  To come ayen, my lyfe that durſt I laye
               
               
                  Thy ſweueneſſe eke, and al ſuch fantaſye
                  Dryue out, and let hem faren to miſchaunce
                  For they procede of thy melancolye
                  That doth the fele in ſlepe al thys penaunce
                  A ſtrawe for al ſweuenes ſignifyaunce
                  God helpe me ſo, I counte hem nat abeene
                  ther wot no mā aright what dremes meene
               
               
                  For preeſtes of the temple tellen thys
                  That dreames bene the reuelations
                  Of goddes, and als wel they tel ywys
                  That they bene infernales, illuſyons
                  And leches ſayne, that of complections
                  Proceden they of faſte, or glotonye
                  who wot in ſoth thus what they ſignyfye
               
               
                  Eke other ſayne, that through impreſſions
                  As yf a wyght hath faſte a thinge in mynde
                  That therof cometh ſuch auiſions
                  And other ſayne, as they in bokes fynde
                  That after tymes of the yere by kynde
                  Mē dreme, & that theffect goth by the mone
                  But leue no dreame, for it is not to done
               
               
                  well worth of dremes aye theſe olde wyues
                  And trewly eke, augurye of theſe foules
                  For feare of which, mē wemen leſe her liues
                  as rauēs qualm or ſchriching of theſe oules
                  To trowen on it, both falſe and foule is
                  Alas alas, that ſo noble a creature
                  As is a man, ſhulde drede ſuch ordure
               
               
                  For which with al myne herte I the beſeche
                  Vnto thy ſelfe, that al thys thou foryeue
                  And ryſe nowe vp, withouten more ſpeche
                  And let vs caſt how forth may beſt be dryuē
                  
                  The time, & eke how freſhly we may lyuen
                  whā ſhe cometh, yu which ſhall be right ſone
                  God helpe me ſo, the beſt is thus to done
               
               
                  
                  Ryſe, let vs ſpeke of luſtye lyfe in Troye
                  That we haue lad, and forth the time dryue
                  And eke of tyme comyng vs reioye
                  That bryngen ſhal our blyſſe now ſo blyue
                  And langour of theſe twyſe dayes fyue
                  we ſhal therwyth ſo foryete or oppreſſe
                  That well vnneth it done ſhal vs dureſſe
               
               
                  Thys towne is ful of lordes al aboute
                  And truce laſten all thys meane whyle
                  Go we playen vs in ſome luſty route
                  To Sarpedon, not hence but a myle
                  And thus thou ſhalt the tyme wel begyle
                  And driue it forth vnto that blyſful morow
                  That thou her ſe, that cauſe is of thy ſorow
               
               
                  Nowe ryſe my dere brother Troylus
                  For certes it non honoure is to the
                  To wepe, and in thy bedde to rouken thus
                  For trewly of o thyng truſt to me
                  If thou thus lygge, a daye, two or thre
                  The folke woll wene, yt thou for cowardyſe
                  The fayneſt ſicke, & that thou darſt not ryſe
               
               
                  This Troylus anſwerde: o brother dere
                  Thys knowē folke that haue yſuffred paine
                  that though he wepe, & make ſorouful chere
                  That feleth harme and ſmert in euery vaine
                  No wonder is, and though I euer playne
                  Or alway wepe, I am nothyng to blame
                  Sens yt I haue loſte, ye cauſe of al my game
               
               
                  But ſens of fyne force I mote aryſe
                  I ſhal aryſe, as ſone as euer I may
                  And god, to whom myne hert I ſacrifyſe
                  So ſende vs haſtely the tenthe daye
                  For was there neuer foule ſo fayne of May
                  As I ſhal ben, whan yt ſhe cometh in Troye
                  That cauſe is of my turment and my ioye
               
               
                  But whyder is thy rede (ꝙ Troylus)
                  That we may playe vs beſte in al thys toun
                  By god my counſayle is (quod Pandarus)
                  To ryde & playe vs wyth king Sarpedoun
                  So longe of this they ſpeken vp and doun
                  Tyl Troylus gan at the laſte aſſent
                  To ryſe, & forth to Sarpedon they went
               
               
                  Thys Sarpedon, as he that honourable
                  was euer his lyue, and ful of hye proweſſe
                  wythal that myght yſerued bene on table
                  That deyntie was, al coſt it great rycheſſe
                  He fed hem day by day, that ſuche nobleſſe
                  As ſayden both the mooſt and eke the leeſt
                  was neuer er that daye wyſt at any feeſt
               
               
                  Nor in this worlde ther is none inſtrument
                  Delicious, through wynd or touch on corde
                  As ferre as any wyght hath euer ywent
                  That tonge tell, or herte maye recorde
                  But at that feeſt, it nas wel herde recorde
                  Ne of ladyes eke ſo fayre a companye
                  On daūce er tho, was neuer yſene with eye
               
               
                  But what auayleth thys to Troylus
                  That for his ſorowe, nothyng of it rought
                  But ruer in one, as hert pytous
                  Ful beſily Creſeyde his lady ſought
                  On her was al that euer his hert thought
                  Now thys nowe that, ſo faſt ymaginyng
                  That glad ywys can him no feſtyng
               
               
                  Theſe ladyes eke, that at thys feeſt ben
                  Sens that he ſawe his lady was a wey
                  It was his ſorowe vpon hem for to ſeen
                  Or for to here on inſtrumentes pley
                  For ſhe that of hys herte hath the key
                  was abſent, lo thys was his fantaſye
                  That no wyght ſhulde make melodye
               
               
                  Nor there nas houre in al the day or nyght
                  whā he was ther as no mā myght him here
                  That he ne ſayd, O loueſom lady bryght
                  Howe haue ye faren ſens that ye were there
                  welcome ywys myne owne lady dere
                  But welaway, al this nas but a maſe
                  Fortune his houe, entended bet to glaſe
               
               
                  The letters eke, that ſhe of olde tyme
                  Had hym yſent, he wolde alone rede
                  An hundred ſythe, atwixte noone and prime
                  Refiguryng her ſhappe, & her womanhede
                  wythin his hert, and euery worde and dede
                  that paſſed was, & thus he droue to an ende
                  The fourth day, and ſayd he wol wende
               
               
                  And ſayd leue brother Pandarus
                  Intendeſt thou that we ſhal here bleue
                  Tyl Sarpedon woll forthe conueyen vs
                  Yet were it fayrer that we toke our leue
                  For goddes loue, let vs nowe ſone at eue
                  Our leaue take, and homwarde let vs turne
                  For trewly I nyl not thus ſoiourne
               
               
                  
                  Pandare anſwerde, be we comen hyther
                  To fetchen fyre, and rennen home agayne
                  God helpe me ſo, I can not tellen whyther
                  we myght gone, yf I ſhall ſothly ſayne
                  There any wyght is of vs more fayne
                  Then Sarpedon, and yf we hence hye
                  Thus ſodeynly I holde it vylanye
               
               
                  when that we ſayden we wolde bleue
                  wyth hym a weke, and nowe thus ſodaynly
                  The fourth daye, to take of hym our leue
                  He wolde wondren on it truely
                  Let vs holden forth our purpoſe fermely
                  And ſens that ye behyghten hym to abyde
                  Holde forewarde nowe, & after let vs ryde
               
               
                  Thys Pandarus, wyth all pyne and wo
                  Made hym to dwell, and at the wekes ende
                  Of Sarpedon they toke her leaue tho
                  And on her way they ſpedden hem to wende
                  (Quod Troylus) now lorde me grace ſende
                  That I may fynde at myne home cōmynge
                  Creſeyde comen, and therwyth gan he ſynge
               
               
                  Ye haſelwode thought thys Pandare
                  And to hym ſelfe full ſoftely he ſeyde
                  God wote refroyden may thys hotte fare
                  Er Calkas ſende Troylus Creſeyde
                  But natheles he iaped thus and ſeyde
                  And ſwore ywys, hys hert him wel behyght
                  She wold come, as ſone as euer ſhe myght
               
               
                  when they vnto the palays were ycomen
                  Of Troylus, they downe of horſe alyght
                  And to ye chābre, her way haue they nōmen
                  And vnto tyme that it gan to nyght
                  They ſpeken of Creſeyde the lady bryght
                  And after thys, when hem both leſte
                  They ſpedde hem fro the ſupper vnto reſte
               
               
                  On morowe, as ſone as daye began to clere
                  Thys Troylus gan of hys ſlepe to abreyde
                  And to Pandarus, hys owne brother dere
                  For loue of god, full pytouſly he ſeyde
                  As go we ſene the paleys of Creſeyde
                  For ſens we yet may haue no more feeſt
                  So let vs ſene her paleys at the leeſt
               
               
                  And therwythall hys meyne for to blende
                  A cauſe he fonde in towne for to go
                  And to Creſeydes houſe they gone wende
                  But lorde thys ſely Troylus was wo
                  Hym thought his ſorowful hert braſt in two
                  For when he ſawe her dores ſperred all
                  wel nyg for ſorowe adowne he gan to fall
               
               
                  Therwith whē he was ware, & gan beholde
                  Howe ſhet was euery wyndowe of the place
                  As froſt hym thought hys herte gan to colde
                  For whych wyth chaunged deedly pale face
                  wythouten worde, he forth by gan to pace
                  And as god welde, he gan ſo faſte ryde
                  That no wyght of hys countenaunce aſpyde
               
               
                  Then ſayd he thus: O paleys deſolate
                  O houſe of houſes, whylom beſt yhyght
                  O paleys empty and dyſconſolate
                  O thou lanterne, of whych queynt is ye light
                  O paleys, whylom daye yt nowe art nyght
                  well oughteſt thou to fall, and I to dye
                  Sens ſhe is went, that wont was vs to gye
               
               
                  O paleys, whylom crowne of houſes all
                  Enlumyned wyth ſunne of blyſſe
                  O rynge, of whych the rubie is out fall
                  O cauſe of wo, that cauſe haſte ben of blyſſe
                  Yet ſens I maye no bet, fayne wolde I kyſſe
                  Thy colde doores, durſt I for thys route
                  And farwel ſhryne, of which the ſaynt is out
               
               
                  Therwyth he caſt on Pandarus hys eye
                  wyth chaunged face, and pytous to beholde
                  And when he myght hys tyme aryght aſpye
                  Aye as he rode, to Pandarus he tolde
                  Hys newe ſorowe, and eke hys ioyes olde
                  So pytouſly, and wyth ſo deed an hewe
                  That euerywight, might on his ſorow rewe
               
               
                  Fro thence forth he rydeth vp and downe
                  And euery thynge came him to remēbraunce
                  As he rode forth by the places of the towne
                  In whych he whylom had all hys pleſaunce
                  Lo, yonder ſawe I myne owne lady daunce
                  And in that temple wyth her eyen clere
                  Me kaught fyrſt my ryght lady dere
               
               
                  And yonder haue I herde full luſtely
                  My dere herte laugh, and yonder play
                  Sawe I her ownes eke full blyſfully
                  And yonder ones to me gan ſhe ſaye
                  Nowe good ſwete, loue me well I praye
                  And yonde ſo goodly gan ſhe me beholde
                  
                     That to the death myne herte is to her holde
               
               
                  And at the corner in the yonder houſe
                  Herde I myne alderleueſt lady dere
                  So womanly, wyth voyce melodyouſe
                  Syngen ſo well, ſo goodly and ſo clere
                  That in my ſoule yet my thynketh I here
                  The blyſfull ſowne, and in that yonder place
                  My lady fyrſt me toke vnto her grace
               
               
                  Thē thought he thus, o blyſful lorde Cupide
                  when I the proceſſe haue in memorye
                  Howe thou me haſte weryed on euery ſyde
                  Men myght a boke make of it lyke a ſtorye
                  what nede is the to ſeke on me vyctorye
                  Sens I am thyne, and holy at thy wyll
                  what ioye haſt thou thyn owne folke to ſpyl
               
               
                  wel haſt thou lord ywroke on me thyn yre
                  Thou myghty god, and dredfull for to greue
                  Nowe mercy lorde, thou woſte wel I deſyre
                  Thy grace moſte, of all luſtes leue
                  And lyue and dye I woll in thy beleue
                  For whych I ne aſke in guerdon but a boone
                  That thou Creſeyde ayen me ſende ſoone
               
               
                  Dyſtrayne her herte as faſt to returne
                  As thou doeſt myne to longen her to ſe
                  Then wote I wel that ſhe nyll not ſoiourne
                  Nowe blyſfull lorde, ſo cruell thou ne be
                  Vnto the bloode of Troye, I praye the
                  As Iuno was vnto the bloode Thebane
                  For which ye folk of Thebes caught her bane
               
               
                  And after thys he to the yates wente
                  There as Creſeyde out rode, a ful good paas
                  And vp & downe there made he many a wēte
                  And to hym ſelfe ful ofte he ſayd alas
                  Fro hence rode my blyſſe and my ſolas
                  As wolde blyſfull god nowe for hys ioye
                  I myght her ſene ayen come to Troye
               
               
                  And to the yonder hyll I gan her gyde
                  Alas, and there I toke of her my leue
                  And yonde I ſawe her to her father ryde
                  For ſorowe of which myne hert ſhall to cleue
                  And hyther home I come when it was eue
                  And here I dwell, out caſt from al ioye
                  And ſhall, tyll I maye ſene her efte in Troye
               
               
                  And of hym ſelfe ymagined he ofte
                  To ben defeyted, pale, and woxen leſſe
                  Then he was wont, & that men ſayden ſofte
                  what maye it be? who can the ſoth geſſe
                  why Troylus hath all thys heuyneſſe
                  And all thys nas but hys melancolye
                  That he had of hym ſelfe ſuche fantaſye
               
               
                  Another tyme ymagynen he wolde
                  That euery wyght that went by the wey
                  Had of hym routh, & that they ſayne ſholde
                  I am ryght ſory, Troylus woll dey
                  And thus he droue a day yet forth or tweye
                  As ye haue herde, ſuche lyfe gan he lede
                  As he that ſtode bytwixen hope and drede
               
               
                  For whych hym lyked in hys ſonges ſhewe
                  Thencheſon of hys wo, as he beſt myght
                  And made a ſonge, of wordes but a fewe
                  Somwhat hys wofull herte for to lyght
                  And when he was from euery mānes ſyght
                  wyth ſofte voyce, he of hys lady dere
                  That abſent was, gan ſynge as ye may here
               
               
                  O ſterre, of whych I loſt haue al the light
                  wyth herte ſore, well ought I to bewayle
                  That euer derke in turment, nyght by nyght
                  Towarde my deth, wt wynde I ſtere & ſayle
                  For whych the tenth nyght, yf that I fayle
                  The gydyng of thy beames bryght an houre
                  My ſhyp and me Carybdes woll deuoure
               
               
                  Thys ſonge whē he thus ſongē had ſoone
                  He fyll ayen into hys ſyghes olde
                  And euery nyght, as was his wont to doone
                  He ſtode the bryght moone to beholde
                  And all hys ſorowe he to the moone tolde
                  And ſayd, ywys whē thou arte horned newe
                  I ſhall be glad, yf all the worlde be trewe
               
               
                  I ſawe thyne hornes old eke by the morowe
                  when hence rode my ryght lady dere
                  That cauſe is of my turment and my ſorowe
                  For whych, O bryght Lucina the clere
                  For loue of God ren faſt aboute thy ſpere
                  For when thyne hornes new gynnē ſprynge
                  Then ſhall ſhe come yt may my blyſſe brynge
               
               
                  The daye is more, and lenger euery night
                  Then they ben wōte to be, hym thought tho
                  And that the ſonne went hys courſe vnryght
                  By lenger waye then it was wonte to go
                  And ſayd, ywys I drede me euer mo
                  The Sonnes ſonne Pheton be on lyue
                  
                     And that hys fathers carte amyſſe he dryue
               
               
                  Vpon the walles faſt eke wolde he walke
                  And on the grekes hoſte he wolde ſe
                  And to hym ſelfe ryght thus he wolde talke
                  Lo, yonder is myne owne lady free
                  Or els yonder, there the tentes be
                  And thence cometh thys ayre that is ſo ſoote
                  That in my ſoule I fele it dothe me boote
               
               
                  And hardly thys wynde that more & more
                  Thus ſtoundemele encreaſeth in my face
                  Is of my ladyes depe ſyghes ſore
                  I preue it thus, for in none other ſpace
                  Of all thys towne, ſaue only in thys place
                  Fele I no winde, that ſowneth ſo lyke payne
                  It ſayeth alas, why twynned be we twayne
               
               
                  Thys lōge tyme he dryueth forth ryght thus
                  Tyll fully paſſed was the nynth nyght
                  And aye beſyde hym was thys Pandarus
                  That beſyly dyd all hys full myght
                  Hym to comforte, and make hys herte lyght
                  Yeuynge him hope alway ye tenth morowe
                  That ſhe ſhal comen, & ſtynten al his ſorowe
               
               
                  Vpon that other ſyde eke was Creſeyde
                  wyth women fewe, amonge ye grekes ſtrōge
                  For whych full ofte a day alas ſhe ſeyde
                  That I was borne, wel may myn herte lōge
                  After my death, for nowe lyue I to longe
                  Alas, and I ne maye it not amende
                  For nowe is worſe then euer yet I wende
               
               
                  My father nyll for nothynge do my grace
                  To gone ayen, for ought I can hym queme
                  And yf ſo be, that I my terme pace
                  My Troylus ſhall in hys herte deme
                  That I am falſe, & ſo it maye well ſeme
                  Thus ſhall I haue vnthanke on euery ſyde
                  That I was borne ſo welawaye the tyde
               
               
                  And yf that I me put in ieopardye
                  To ſteale awaye by nyght, and it be fall
                  That I be caught, I ſhalbe holde a ſpye
                  Or els lo, thys drede I moſte of all
                  Yf in the handes of ſome wretche I fall
                  I nam buſt loſte, all bemyn herte trewe
                  Now mighty god, thou on my ſorowe rewe
               
               
                  Full pale ywoxen was her bryght face
                  Her lymmes leane, as ſhe that all the daye
                  Stode when ſhe durſt, & loked on the place
                  There ſhe was borne, and dwelt had aye
                  And all the nyght wepynge alas ſhe laye
                  And thus dyſpayred out of al cure
                  She ladde her lyfe, thys wofull creature
               
               
                  Full ofte a day ſhe ſyghed eke for dyſtreſſe
                  And in her ſelfe ſhe went aye purtrayeng
                  Of Troylus the great worthyneſſe
                  And all hys goodly wordes recordyng
                  Sens fyrſt that day her loue begā to ſpryng
                  And thus ſhe ſette her wofull herte a fyre
                  Through remembraunce of yt ſhe gan deſyre
               
               
                  In all thys world there nys ſo cruel herte
                  That her had herde cōplaynen in her ſorowe
                  That nold haue weptē for her paynes ſmert
                  So tenderly ſhe wepte, both eue & morowe
                  Her neded no teeres for to borowe
                  And thys was yet the worſt of all her payne
                  There was no wyȝt, to whō ſhe durſt playne
               
               
                  Full rewfully ſhe loked vpon Troye
                  Behelde the toures hygh, and eke the hallis
                  Alas (ꝙ ſhe) the pleaſaunce and the ioye
                  The whych that nowe al turned into gall is
                  Haue I had ofte, wythin yonder wallis
                  O Troylus, what doeſt thou nowe ſhe ſeyde
                  Lord whether thou yet thinke vpō Creſeyde
               
               
                  Alas, that I ne had ytrowed on your lore
                  And went wyth you, as ye me redde er thys
                  Then had I nowe not ſyghed halfe ſo ſore
                  who myght haue ſayd, yt I had done amys
                  To ſteale awaye wyth ſuche one as he is
                  But all to late cometh the lectuary
                  when men the corſe vnto the graue carye
               
               
                  To late is nowe to ſpeke of that matere
                  Prudence alas, one of thyne eyen thre
                  Me lacked alwaye, er that I came here
                  For on tyme paſſed well remembred me
                  And preſent tyme eke coulde I well ſe
                  But future tyme, er I was in the ſnare
                  Coulde I not ſene, that cauſeth now my care
               
               
                  But natheleſſe, betyde what betyde
                  I ſhall to morowe at nyght, by eeſt or weſt
                  Out of thys hooſt ſteale, on ſome ſyde
                  And gone wyth Troylus, where as hem leſt
                  This purpoſe wol I holde, & this is ye beſt
                  No force of wycked tonges ianglerye
                  
                     For euer on loue, haue wretches had enuy
               
               
                  For who ſo wol of euery worde take hede
                  Or rulen hym by euery wyghtes wyt
                  Ne ſhall he neuer thryuen out of drede
                  For that that ſome men blamen euer yet
                  Lo, other maner folke comenden it
                  And as for me, for all ſuche variaunce
                  Felicite clepe I my ſuffyſaunce
               
               
                  For whych, wythout any wordes mo
                  To Troy I woll, as for concluſioun
                  But God it wote, er fully monethes two
                  She was full ferre fro that entencioun
                  For both Troylus and Troye toun
                  Shall knotleſſe throughout her herte ſlyde
                  For ſhe woll take a purpoſe for to abyde
               
               
                  Thys Diomede, of whome you tell I can
                  Goeth nowe wythin hym ſelfe aye arguyng
                  wyth all the ſleyght and all that euer he can
                  Howe he maye beſt wyth ſhorteſt taryeng
                  In to hys nette Creſeydes herte brynge
                  To thys entente he couth neuer fyne
                  To fyſhen her, he layde out hoke and lyne
               
               
                  But natheleſſe, well in hys herte he thought
                  That ſhe nas not wythout a loue in Troye
                  For neuer ſythen he her thens brought
                  Ne couth he ſene her laugh, or maken ioye
                  He nyſt howe beſt her herte for tacoye
                  But for taſſey, he ſayd naught it ne greueth
                  For he that naught aſſayeth nauȝt atcheueth
               
               
                  Yet ſayd he to hym ſelfe vpon a nyght
                  Nowe am I not a fole, that wote wel howe
                  Her wo is, for loue of another wyght
                  And hervpon to gon aſſaye her nowe
                  I maye well wete, it nyll not ben my prowe
                  For wyſe folke in bokes it expreſſe
                  Men ſhall not wowe a wyght in heuyneſſe
               
               
                  But who ſo myght wynnen ſuche a floure
                  Fro him, for whō ſhe mourneth night & daye
                  He myght ſayne he were a conquerour
                  And ryght anone, as he that bolde was aye
                  Thought in his hert, happe how happe may
                  All ſhulde I dye, I woll her herte ſeche
                  I ſhall no more leſen but my ſpeche
               
               
                  Thys Diomede, as bokes vs declare
                  was in hys nedes preſt and coragious
                  wyth ſterne voyce, & mighty lymmes ſquare
                  Hardy, teſtyfe, ſtronge, and cheualrous
                  Of dedes lyke hys father Tydeus
                  And ſome men ſayne, he was of tonge large
                  And heyre he was, of Calcidony and Arge
               
               
                  Creſeyde meane was of her ſtature
                  Therto of ſhappe, of face, and eke of chere
                  There myght ben no fayrer creature
                  And ofte tyme thys was her manere
                  To gone ytreſſed wyth her herres clere
                  Downe by her colere, at her backe behynde
                  which with a threde of golde ſhe wold bynde
               
               
                  And ſaue her browes ioyneden yfere
                  There nas no lacke, in aught I can eſpyen
                  But for to ſpeken of her eyen clere
                  Lo, trewly they wrytten that her ſeyen
                  That paradys ſtode formed in her eyen
                  And wyth her ryche beaute euermore
                  ſtroue loue in her, ay which of hē was more
               
               
                  She ſobre was eke, ſymple, & wyſe withal
                  The beſte ynoryſhed eke that myght be
                  And goodly of her ſpeche in generall
                  Charitable, eſtately, luſty, and fre
                  Ne neuer more ne lacked her pyte
                  Tendre herted, ſlydynge of corage
                  But truely I can not tell her age
               
               
                  And Troylus well woxen was in hyght
                  And complete formed by proporcioun
                  So wel, that kynde it naught amēden might
                  Yonge, freſhe, ſtronge, and hardy as lyoun
                  Trewe as ſtele, in eche condicioun
                  One of the beſte entetched creature
                  That is or ſhal, whyle yt the world may dure
               
               
                  And certaynly, in ſtory as I it fonde
                  That Troylus was neuer vnto no wyght
                  As in hys tyme, in no dregre ſeconde
                  In darynge do, that longeth to a knyght
                  Al myght a gyaunt paſſen hym of myght
                  hys herte aye wyth the fyrſt and wyth ye beſt
                  Stode peregall to dare done what hym leſte
               
               
                  But for to tellen forth of Diomede
                  It fyll, that after on the tenthe daye
                  Sens that Creſeyde out of the cyte yede
                  Thys Diomede, as freſh as braūche in May
                  Came to the tente there as Calkas lay
                  And fayned hym wt Calcas haue to doone
                  
                     But what he mente, I ſhal you tellen ſoone
               
               
                  Creſeyde at ſhorte wordes for to tell
                  welcomed hym, & downe hym by her ſette
                  And he was eth ynough to maken dwell
                  And after thys, wythouten longe lette
                  The ſpyces and the wyne mē forth hem fette
                  And forth they ſpeke of thys and that yfere
                  As frendes done, of whych ſome ſhal ye here
               
               
                  He gan fyrſt fallen of the werre in ſpeche
                  Betwyxen hem & the folke of Troye toun
                  And of thaſſiege he gan eke her beſeche
                  To tellen hym what was here opinioun
                  Fro that demaunde he ſo dyſcendeth doun
                  To aſken her, yf that her ſtraunge thought
                  The grekes gyſe, & werkes yt they wrought.
               
               
                  And why her father taryeth ſo longe
                  To wedden her vnto ſome worthy wyght
                  Creſeyde that was in her paynes ſtronge
                  For loue of Troylus her owne knyght
                  So ferforth as ſhe connynge had or myght
                  Anſwerde hym tho, but as of hys entente
                  It ſemed not ſhe wyſte what he mente
               
               
                  But natheleſſe thys ylke Diomede
                  Gan on hym ſelfe aſſure, and thus he ſeyde
                  Yf I aryght haue taken on you hede
                  Me thynketh thus, o lady myne Creſeyde
                  That ſens I fyrſt hōde on your brydel leyde
                  when ye out came of Troye by the morowe
                  Ne myght I neuer ſene you but in ſorowe
               
               
                  I can not ſayne what may the cauſe be
                  But yf for loue of ſome Troyan it were
                  The whych ryght ſore wolde athynken me
                  That ye for any wyght that dwelleth there
                  Shulden ſpyll a quarter of a teere
                  Or pytouſly your ſeluen ſo begyle
                  For dredeleſſe it is not worth the whyle
               
               
                  The folke of Troye, as who ſayth al & ſome
                  In pryſon ben, as ye your ſeluen ſe
                  Fro thence ſhall not one on lyue come
                  For all the golde atwyxen ſunne and ſee
                  Truſteth well, and vnderſtandeth me
                  There ſhall not one to mercy gone on lyue
                  All were he lorde of worldes twyſe fyue
               
               
                  Such wrech on hem for fetchyng of Heleyne
                  There ſhall be take, er that we hence wende
                  That Maunes, which ye goddes bē of peyne
                  Shal ben agaſt that grekes wol hem ſhende
                  And men ſhall drede vnto the worldes ende
                  From hence forth, to rauyſhen any quene
                  So cruell ſhall our wreche on hem be ſene
               
               
                  And but yf Calcas lede vs wyth ambages
                  That is to ſayne, wyth double wordes ſlye
                  Such as mē clepen a worde wt two viſages
                  Ye ſhall well knowen that I not ne lye
                  And all thys thinge ryght ſene it wt your eye
                  And yt anone, ye nyll not trowe howe ſoone
                  Nowe taketh hede, for it is for to doone
               
               
                  what wene ye your wyſe father wolde
                  Haue yeuen Antenor for you anone
                  Yf he ne wyſt that the cytie ſhulde
                  Dyſtroyed ben? why nay ſo mote I gone
                  He knewe full well there ſhal not ſcapen one
                  That Troyan is, and for the great feere
                  He durſt not that ye dwelte lenger there
               
               
                  what woll ye more, o loueſom lady dere
                  Let Troye and troyans fro your herte pace
                  Dryue out yt bytter hope, & make good chere
                  And clepe ayen the beaute of your face
                  That ye wyth ſalte teeres ſo deface
                  For Troye is brought in ſuche a ieopardye
                  That it to ſaue is nowe no remedye
               
               
                  And thynketh wel, ye ſhal in grekes fynde
                  A more parfyte loue, er it be nyght
                  Then any troyan is, and more kynde
                  And bet to ſeruen you woll done hys myght
                  And yf ye vouchſafe my lady bryght
                  I woll ben he, to ſeruen you my ſelue
                  Yea leauer then be lorde of Greces twelue
               
               
                  And wyth yt worde he gan to waxen reed
                  And in hys ſpeche, a lytel whyle he quoke
                  And caſt aſyde a lytell wyth hys heed
                  And ſtynte a whyle, & afterwarde he woke
                  And ſobrely on her he threwe hys loke
                  And ſayd I am, al be it to you no ioye
                  As gentyll a man, as any wyght in Troye
               
               
                  For yf my father Tydeus, he ſeyde
                  Ilyued had, I had ben er thys
                  Of Calcidony and Arge a kynge Creſeyde
                  And ſo hope I that I ſhalbe ywys
                  But he was ſlayne alas, the more harme is
                  Vnhappely at Thebes all to rathe
                  
                     Polymyte, and many a man to ſcathe
               
               
                  But herte myne, ſythe that I am your mā
                  
                  And ben the fyrſt, of whome I ſeche grace
                  To ſerue you as hertely as I can
                  And euer ſhall whyle I to lyue haue ſpace
                  So that, er I departe out of thys place
                  Ye woll me graunt that I maye to morowe
                  At better leyſer tell you of my ſorowe
               
               
                  what ſhulde I tell hys wordes yt he ſeyd?
                  He ſpake ynough for o daye at the meſt
                  It preueth well he ſpake ſo, that Creſeyde
                  Graunted on the morowe at hys requeſt
                  For to ſpeake wyth hym at the leeſt
                  So that he nolde ſpeake of ſuche matere
                  And thus ſhe to hym ſayd, as ye mowe here
               
               
                  As ſhe that had her herte on Troylus
                  So faſt, that there maye it none arace
                  And ſtraungely ſhe ſpake, and ſayd thus
                  O Diomede, I loue that ylke place
                  There I was borne, & Ioues for thy grace
                  Delyuer it ſoone of all that doth it care
                  God for thy myght ſo leue it well to fare
               
               
                  That grekes wold her wrath on Troy wrek
                  Yf that they myght I knowe it wel ywys
                  But it ſhall naught befallen as ye ſpeke
                  And god to forne, and farther ouer thys
                  I wote my father wyſe and redy is
                  And that he me hath bought, as ye me tolde
                  So dere I am the more vnto hym holde
               
               
                  That Grekes ben of hygh condition
                  I wote eke wel, but certayne men ſhal fynde
                  As worthy folke wythin Troy toun
                  As connyng, as parfyte, and as kynde
                  As ben betwyxtr Orcades and Inde
                  And that ye coude well your lady ſerue
                  I trowe eke well, her thanke for to deſerue
               
               
                  But as to ſpeke of loue, ywys ſhe ſeyde
                  I had a lorde, to whome I wedded was
                  The whoſe myne herte was all tyll he deyde
                  And other loue, as helpe me nowe Pallas
                  There in myne herte nys, ne neuer was
                  And that ye ben of noble and hygh kynrede
                  I haue well herde it tellen out of drede
               
               
                  And that doth me to haue ſo great a wonder
                  That ye woll ſcorne any woman ſo
                  Eke god wote, loue and I ben fer aſonder
                  I am dyſpoſed bet ſo mote I go
                  Vnto my death playne and make wo
                  what I ſhall after done, I can not ſay
                  But trewly as yet me lyſt not play
               
               
                  Myne herte is nowe in tribulatioun
                  And ye in armes beſy daye by daye
                  Herafter when ye wonnen haue the toun
                  Perauenture then, ſo it happen may
                  That when I ſe that I neuer ere ſay
                  Then woll I werke yt I neuer ere wrought
                  Thys worde to you ynoughe ſuffyſen ought
               
               
                  To morow eke wol I ſpekē wyth you fayne
                  So that ye touchen naught of thys matere
                  And when you lyſt, ye may come here againe
                  And er ye gone, thus moche I ſaye you here
                  As helpe me Pallas, wyth her heeres clere
                  Yf that I ſhulde of any greke haue routhe
                  It ſhulde be your ſeluen by my trouthe
               
               
                  I ſaye not therfore that I wol you loue
                  Ne ſay not nay, but in concluſioun
                  I meane well by god that ſyt aboue
                  And therwythall ſhe caſte her eyen doun
                  And gā to ſigh & ſaid, Troilus & Troy toun
                  Yet bydde I god, in quyete and in reſte
                  I maye you ſene, or do myne herte breſte
               
               
                  But in effecte, and ſhortly for to ſaye
                  Thys Diomede all freſhly newe agayne
                  Gan preaſen on, and faſte her mercy praye
                  And after thys the ſoth for to ſayne
                  Her gloue he toke, of which he was ful fayne
                  And fynally, when it was woxen eue
                  And all was well, he roſe and toke hys leue
               
               
                  The bryght Venus folowed & aye taught
                  The way there brode Phebus downe alight
                  And Cythera her chare horſe ouer raught
                  To whyrle out of the lyon, yf ſhe myght
                  And Signifer hys candels ſheweth bryght
                  when that Creſeyde vnto her bedde wente
                  wythin her fathers fayre bryght tente
               
               
                  Retournyng in her ſoule aye vp & downe
                  The wordes of thys ſodayne Diomede
                  Hys great eſtate, and peryl of the towne
                  And that ſhe was alone, and had nede
                  Of frendes helpe, and thus be gan to brede
                  The cauſe why the ſoth for to tell
                  
                     She toke fully purpoſe for to dwell
               
               
                  The morow came, and gooſtly for to ſpeke
                  This Diomede is come vnto Creſeyde
                  And ſhortly, leſte that ye my tale breke
                  So wel he for hym ſelfe ſpake and ſeyde
                  That all her ſyghes ſore, downe he leyde
                  And fynally, the ſothe for to ſayne
                  He lefte her the great of all her payne
               
               
                  And after this, the ſtorye telleth vs
                  That ſhe him yaue the fayre baye ſtede
                  The whiche ſhe ones wan of Troylus
                  And eke a broche (and that was lytel nede)
                  That Troylus was, ſhe yaue this Diomede
                  And eke the bet from ſorowe him to releue
                  She made him weare a pencell of her ſleue
               
               
                  I fynde eke in ſtories els where
                  whan through the body hurte was Diomede
                  Of Troylus, tho wepte ſhe many a teere
                  whā that ſhe ſawe his wyde woundes blede
                  And that ſhe toke to kepen him good hede
                  And for to healen him of his ſmerte
                  Men ſayn, I not, that ſhe yaue him her herte
               
               
                  But trewly the ſtorie telleth vs
                  There made neuer woman more wo
                  Than ſhe, whan that ſhe falſed Troylus
                  She ſayd alas, for nowe is clene ago
                  My name in trouthe of loue for euermo
                  For I haue falſed one the gentylleſt
                  That euer was, and one the worthyeſt
               
               
                  Alas, of me vnto the worldes ende
                  Shal neyther ben ywritten nor yſonge
                  No good word, for theſe bokes wol me ſhēde
                  Irolled ſhall I ben on many a tonge
                  Throughout ye worlde, my bel ſhal be ronge
                  And women moſte woll hate me of all
                  Alas, that ſuche a caas me ſhulde fall
               
               
                  They wol ſayne, in as moche as in me is
                  I haue hem done diſhonour welaway
                  Albe I nat the fyrſt that dyd amys
                  what helpeth that, to don my blame away
                  But ſens I ſe there is no better way
                  And that to late is nowe for me to rewe
                  To Diomede I woll algate be trewe
               
               
                  But Troylus, ſens I no better may
                  And ſens that thus departen ye and I
                  Yet pray I god ſo yeue you right good day
                  As for the gentylleſt knyght trewly
                  That euer I ſawe, to ſeruen faythfully
                  And beſt can aye his ladyes honour kepe
                  And with ye worde ſhe braſte anone to wepe
               
               
                  And certes you ne haten ſhall I neuer
                  And frendes loue, that ſhal ye haue of me
                  And my good worde, all ſhulde I lyuen euer
                  And trewly I wolde right ſorie be
                  For to ſene you in aduerſyte
                  And gyltleſſe I wote wel I you leue
                  And all ſhall paſſe, and thus take I my leue
               
               
                  But trewly howe longe it was bytwene
                  That ſhe forſoke him for this Diomede
                  There is none auctour telleth it I wene
                  Take euery man nowe to his bokes hede
                  He ſhall no terme fynden, out of drede
                  For though that he began to wow her ſoone
                  Er he her wan, yet was there more to done
               
               
                  Ne me ne lyſte this ſely woman chyde
                  Ferther than the ſtorie woll deuyſe
                  Her name alas, is publyſhed ſo wyde
                  That for her gylte it ought ynough ſuffyſe
                  And yf I might excuſe her in any wyſe
                  For ſhe ſo ſory was for her vntrouthe
                  Iwys I wolde excuſe her yet for routhe
               
               
                  This Troylus, as I before haue tolde
                  Thus driueth forth, as wel as he hath might
                  But ofte was his herte hote and colde
                  And namely that ylke nynthe nyght
                  whiche on the morowe ſhe had him behyght
                  To come ayen, god wote fall lytel reſte
                  Had he that night, nothyng to ſlepe him leſte
               
               
                  The laurer crowned Phebus, with his heate
                  Gan in his courſe aye vpwarde as he wente
                  To warmen of the eeſt ſee the waues weate
                  And Cyrces doughter ſonge, with freſh entēt
                  whan Troylus his Pandare after ſente
                  And on the walles of the towne they pleyde
                  To loke, yf they can ſene aught of Creſeyde
               
               
                  Tyll it was noone, they ſtoden for to ſe
                  who that ther came, and euery maner wight
                  That came fro ferre, they ſayden it was ſhe
                  Tyll that they colden knowen him aright
                  Nowe was his herte dull, now was it light
                  And thus beiaped ſtoden for to ſtare
                  
                     Aboute naught, this Troylus & Pandare
               
               
                  To Pandarus, this Troylus tho ſeyde
                  For aught I wotte, before noone ſykerly
                  In to this town ne cometh nat here Creſeyde
                  She hath ynough to done hardely
                  To wynnen from her father, ſo trowe I
                  Her olde father wol yet make her dyne
                  Er that ſhe go, god yeue his herte pyne
               
               
                  Pādarus anſwerd, it may well ben certayne
                  And for thy let vs dyne, I the beſeche
                  And after noon, thā mayſt thou come agayn
                  And whom they go, without more ſpeche
                  And comen ayen, but longe may they ſeche
                  Er that they fynde that they after gape
                  Fortune hem bothe thynketh for to iape
               
               
                  (Quod Troylus) I ſe well nowe that ſhe
                  Is taryed with her olde father ſo
                  That er ſhe come it woll nygh euen be
                  Come forthe, I woll vnto the yate go
                  Theſe porters ben vnkonnyng euermo
                  And I woll done hem holden vp the yate
                  As naught ne were, all though ſhe come late
               
               
                  The day gothe faſte, & after that came eue
                  And yet came nat to Troylus Creſeyde
                  He loketh forthe by hedge, by tree, by greue
                  And ferre his heed ouer the wall he leyde
                  And at the laſte he turned him, and ſeyde
                  By god I wote her meanyng now Pandare
                  Almoſte ywis al newe was my care
               
               
                  Nowe douteleſſe thys lady can her goode
                  I wote ſhe cometh rydyng priuely
                  I commende her wyſedom by myne hode
                  She woll nat maken people nycely
                  Gaure on her whan yt ſhe cometh, but ſoftly
                  By nyght in to the town ſhe thynketh ryde
                  And dere brother thynke nat longe to abyde
               
               
                  We haue naught els for to don ywis
                  And Pandarus, now wylte thou trowen me
                  Haue here my trouthe I ſe her, yonde ſhe is
                  Heaue vp thyne eyen man, mayſt thou nat ſe
                  Pandare anſwerde, nay ſo mote I the
                  Al wrōg by god, what ſayſt yu mā wher arte?
                  That I ſe yonde, nys but a farre carte
               
               
                  Alas, thou ſayeſt right ſothe (ꝙ Troylus)
                  But hardely it is nat al for nought
                  That in myne herte I nowe reioyce thus
                  It is ayenſt ſome good, I haue a thought
                  Not I nat howe, but ſens yt I was wrought
                  Ne felte I ſuche a comfort dare I ſay
                  She cometh to night, my lyfe yt durſt I lay
               
               
                  Pādarus anſwerd, it may be wel ynough
                  And helde with him, of al that euer he ſayde
                  But in his herte he thought, and ſofte lough
                  And to him ſelfe full ſoberly he ſayde
                  Frome haſelwodde, there ioly Robyn pleyde
                  Shall come all that thou abydeſt here
                  Yea, farwell all the ſnowe of ferne yere
               
               
                  The wardeyn of the yates gan to call
                  The folke, which that without yt yates were
                  And bade hem driuen in her beeſtes all
                  Or all the night they muſte bleuen there
                  And ferre within the night, with many a tere
                  This Troylus gan homwarde for to ryde
                  For wel he ſeeth it helpeth nat to abyde
               
               
                  But natheleſſe he gladded him in this
                  He thought he myſcounted had hys dey
                  And ſayd, I vnderſtonde haue al amys
                  For thylke night I laſte Creſeyde ſey
                  She ſayd, I ſhall ben here, yf that I may
                  Er that the moone, o dere herte ſwete
                  The Lyon paſſe, out of this Aryete
               
               
                  For which ſhe may yet hold al her by
                        •
                     eſte
                  And on the morowe, vnto the yate he wente
                  And vp and downe, by weſt & eke by eſte
                  Vpon the walles made he many a wente
                  But al for naught, his hope alway him blent
                  For whiche at night, in ſorowe & ſyghes ſore
                  He wente hym home, withouten any more
               
               
                  This hope all clene out of hys herte fledde
                  He ne hath wheron nowe lenger for to honge
                  But for yt payne him thouȝt his herte bledde
                  So were his throwes ſharpe, & wōder ſtrōg
                  For whan he ſawe that ſhe abode ſo longe
                  He nyſte what he iudgen of it myght
                  Sens ſhe hath broken that ſhe hym behyght
               
               
                  The thyrde, fourthe, fyfthe, and ſyxte day
                  After tho dayes ten, of whiche I tolde
                  Betwyxen hope and drede his herte lay
                  Yet ſomwhat truſtyng on her heſtes olde
                  But whan he ſaw ſhe nolde her terme holde
                  He can nowe ſene none other remedye
                  
                     But for to ſhape him ſone for to dye
               
               
                  Therwith the wicked ſpiryt, god vs bleſſe
                  which that men clepen woode ialouſye
                  Gan in him crepe, in al this heuyneſſe
                  For whyche bycauſe he wolde ſone dye
                  He ne ete ne dronke for hys melancolye
                  And eke from euery companye he fledde
                  This was the lyfe that al this tyme he ledde
               
               
                  He ſo defayte was, that no maner man
                  Vnneth him might knowen there he wente
                  So was he leane, and therto pale and wan
                  And feble, that he walketh by potente
                  And with his ire he thus him ſelfe ſhente
                  But who ſo aſked him wherof hym ſmerte
                  He ſayd, his harme was al aboute his herte
               
               
                  Priam full ofte, and eke his mother dere
                  His bretherne & his ſuſtren gan him frayne
                  why he ſo ſoroufull was in all his chere
                  And what thyng was ye cauſe of al his payne
                  But al for naught, he nolde hys cauſe playne
                  But ſayd, he felte a greuous maladye
                  Aboute his herte, and fayne he wolde dye
               
               
                  So on a day he laye him downe to ſlepe
                  And ſo byfell that in ſlepe him thought
                  That in a foreſt faſte he walked to wepe
                  For loue of her, yt him theſe paynes wrought
                  And vp and downe, as he that foreſt ſought
                  He mette he ſawe a bore, with tuſkes greate
                  That ſlept ayenſt the bright ſonnes heate
               
               
                  And by this bore, faſte in her armes folde
                  Lay kyſſyng aye his lady bright Creſeyde
                  For ſorow of which, whan he it gan beholde
                  And for diſpyte, out of his ſlepe he breyde
                  And loude he cryed on Pandarus, and ſeyde
                  O Pandarus, nowe knowe I croppe & roote
                  I nam but deed, there nys non other boote
               
               
                  My lady bright Creſeyde hath me betrayde
                  In whom I truſted moſte of any wight
                  She els where hath nowe her herte apayde
                  The blyfful goddes, through her gret might
                  Haue in my dreame yſhewed it full right
                  Thus in my dreme, Creſeyde haue I behold
                  And all this thyng to Pandarus he tolde
               
               
                  O my Creſeyde alas, what ſubtylte?
                  what newe luſt? what beaute? what ſcience?
                  what wrathe of iuſte cauſe haue ye to me?
                  what gylte of me? what fel experience
                  Hath me rafte alas? thyne aduertence
                  O truſt, o faythe, o depe aſſuraunce
                  who hath me rafte Creſeyde, all my pleſaūce
               
               
                  Alas, why let I you from hence go?
                  For which wel nigh out of my wyt I breyde
                  who ſhall nowe trowe on any othes mo?
                  God wote I wende, o lady bright Creſeyde
                  That euery worde was goſpel that ye ſeyde
                  But who may bet begyle, yf hym lyſte
                  Than he on whom men wenen beſt to tryſte
               
               
                  What ſhall I done, my Pandarus alas?
                  I fele nowe ſo ſharpe a newe payne
                  Sens that there is no remedye in this caas
                  That bet were it, I with myn hōdes twayn
                  My ſeluen ſlowe, than alway thus to playn
                  For throgh ye deth my wo ſhuld haue an end
                  Ther euery day with lyfe my ſelfe I ſhende
               
               
                  Pandare anſwerde & ſayd, alas the whyle
                  That I was borne, haue I nat ſayd er thys
                  That dreames many a maner man begyle
                  And why? for folke expounden hem amys
                  Howe darſte thou ſayne that falſe thy lady is
                  For any dreame, right for thyn owne drede
                  Let be this thought, yu canſt no dremes rede
               
               
                  Parauēture there thou dreameſt of this bore
                  It may ſo be that it may ſignifye
                  Her father, whiche that olde is and eke hore
                  Ayen the ſonne lythe on poynte to dye
                  And ſhe for ſorowe gynneth wepe and crye
                  And kyſſeth him, there he lythe on ye grounde
                  Thus ſhuldeſt yu thy dreme aright expounde
               
               
                  Howe might I than done (ꝙ Troylus)
                  To knowe of this, yea were it neuer ſo lyte
                  Now ſayeſt thou wiſely (ꝙ this Pandarus)
                  My rede is this, ſens thou canſt wel endyte
                  That haſtely a letter thou her write
                  Through which yu ſhalt well bringen about
                  To knowe a ſothe, of that thou arte in doute
               
               
                  And ſe nowe why? for this I dare wel ſayne
                  That yf ſo is, that ſhe vntrewe be
                  I can nat trowen that ſhe wol write agayne
                  And yf ſhe write, thou ſhalt ful ſone yſe
                  As whether ſhe hath any lyberte
                  To come ayen, or els in ſome clauſe
                  
                     If ſhe be let, ſhe woll aſſygne a cauſe
               
               
                  Thou haſt nat writtē to her ſens yt ſhe went
                  Nor ſhe to the, and this I durſte lay
                  There may ſuche cauſe ben in her entente
                  That hardely thou wolt thy ſeluen ſay
                  That her abode the beſt is for you tway
                  Nowe write her than, & thou ſhalt fele ſone
                  A ſothe of all, there is no more to done
               
               
                  Acorded ben to this concluſyoun
                  And that anon, theſe ylke lordes two
                  And haſtely ſate Troylus adoun
                  And rolleth in his herte to and fro
                  Howe he may beſt diſcryuen her his wo
                  And to Creſeyde his owne lady dere
                  He wrote right thus, & ſayd as ye may here.
               
               
                  
                     ¶The copy of the letter.
                     
                        
                           RIght freſhe floure, whoſe I haue ben and ſhall
                        Withoutē parte of els where ſeruyce
                        Wyth herte, body, lyfe, luſte, thought, and all
                        I wofull wight, in euery humble wyſe
                        That tonge can tel, or herte may deuyſe
                        As ofte as mater occupyeth place
                        Me recommaunde vnto your noble grace
                     
                     
                        Lyketh it you to weten ſwete herte
                        As ye wel knowe, howe longe tyme agon
                        That ye me left in aſpre paynes ſmerte
                        whan that ye went, of whiche yet bote non
                        Haue I non had▪ but euer worſe bygon
                        Fro day to day am I, and ſo mote dwell
                        whyle it you lyſt, of wele and wo my well
                     
                     
                        For which to you, with dredeful hert trewe
                        I write, as he that ſorowe driueth to write
                        My wo, that euery houre encreaſeth newe
                        Complaynyng as I dare, or can endyte
                        And that defaced is that may ye wyte
                        The teares, which that frō myne eyen rayne
                        That wolden ſpeke, yf yt they durſte & playne
                     
                     
                        You fyrſt beſeche I, that your eyen clere
                        To toke on this defouled ye nat holde
                        And ouer al this, that ye nat lady dere
                        wol vouchſafe this letter to beholde
                        And by the cauſe eke of my 
                              〈◊〉
                            colde
                        That ſleeth my wyt, yf aught amys me ſterte
                        Foryeue it me, myne owne ſwete herte
                     
                     
                        If any ſeruaunt durſt or ought of ryght
                        Vpon his lady pitouſly complayne
                        Than wene I that I ought be that wyght
                        Cōſydred this, that ye theſe monthes twayn
                        Haue taryed, there ye ſayden ſothe to ſayn
                        But ten dayes ye nolde in hoſte ſoiourne
                        But in two monthes, yet ye nat retourne
                     
                     
                        But for as moche, as me mote nedes lyke
                        All that you lyſt, I dare nat playne more
                        But humbly, with ſoroufull ſyghes ſyke
                        You write I myne vnreſty ſorowes ſore
                        Fro day to day, deſyryng euer more
                        To knowen fully, yf your wyll it were
                        Howe ye haue fared & don while ye be there
                     
                     
                        Whoſe welfare and heale eke god encreaſe
                        In honour ſuche, that vpwarde in degree
                        It growe alway, ſo that it neuer ceaſe
                        Right as your herte aye can my lady free
                        Deuyſe, I pray to god ſo mote it be
                        And graunt it that ye ſoone vpon me rewe
                        As wiſely as in all I am to you trewe
                     
                     
                        And yf you lyketh knowen of the fare
                        Of me, whoſe wo ther may no wiȝt diſcryue
                        I can no more, but cheſt of euery care
                        At writyng of this letter I was on lyue
                        Al redy out my wofull goſt to dryue
                        whiche I delay, and holde him yet in honde
                        Vpon the ſyght of mater of your ſonde
                     
                     
                        Myne eyen two in vayn, with which I ſe
                        Of ſoroufull teares ſalte arn woxen wellis
                        My ſonge in playnt of myne aduerſyte
                        My good in harm, myn eaſe eke woxē hell is
                        My ioye in wo, I can ſey nowe nought ellis
                        But turned is, for whiche my lyfe I wary
                        Euery ioye preaſe in his contrary
                     
                     
                        Which wt your cōmyng home ayē to Troy
                        Ye may redreſſe, and more a thouſande ſythe
                        Than euer I had encreſſen in me ioy
                        For was there neuer herte yet ſo blythe
                        To haue his lyfe, as I ſhall ben as ſwythe
                        As I you ſe, and though no maner routhe
                        Can meuen you, yet thinketh on your trouthe
                     
                     
                        And yf ſo be my gylte hath dethe deſerued
                        
                           Or yf you lyſt no more vpon me ſe
                        In guerdon yet of that I haue you ſerued
                        Beſeche I you, myn owne lady fre
                        That her vpon ye wolden write me
                        For loue of god, my right lode ſterre
                        That deth may make an ende of al my werre
                     
                     
                        If other cauſe aught doth you for to dwel
                        That with your letter ye may me recomforte
                        For though to me your abſence is an hell
                        wyth pacience I woll my wo comforte
                        And with your lettre of hope I wol diſporte
                        Now writeth ſwete, & let me thus nat playn
                        with hope or dethe, delyuereth me fro payne
                     
                     
                        Iwys myne owne dere herte trewe
                        I wote that whan ye next vpon me ſe
                        So loſte haue I myn heale, & eke myn hewe
                        Creſeyde ſhall nat conne knowen me
                        Iwys myne hertes day, my lady fre
                        So thurſteth aye myne herte to beholde
                        Your beaute, that vnneth my lyfe I holde
                     
                     
                        I ſay no more, all haue I for to ſey
                        To you wel more than I tell may
                        But whether that ye do me lyue or dey
                        Yet pray I god, ſo yeue you right good day
                        And fareth wel goodly fayre freſh may
                        As ye that lyfe or dethe me may commaunde
                        And to youre trouthe aye I me recōmaunde
                     
                     
                        Wyth heale ſuche, that but ye yeuen me
                        The ſame heale, I ſhal none heale haue
                        In you lythe, whan you lyſt that it ſo be
                        The day in which me clothen ſhal my graue
                        And in you my lyfe, in you might for to ſaue
                        Me fro diſeaſe of all paynes ſmerte
                        And fare nowe well myne owne ſwete herte
                        
                           Le voſtre T.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  This lettre forth was ſent vnto Creſeyde
                  Of whiche her anſwere in affecte was thys
                  Full pitouſly ſhe wrote ayen, and ſeyde
                  That alſo ſone as ſhe myght ywis
                  She wold come, & mende al that was amys
                  And fynally ſhe wrote and ſayd then
                  She wolde come, ye, but ſhe nyſte when
               
               
                  But in her letter made ſhe ſuche feeſtes
                  That wōder was, & ſwore ſhe loued him beſt
                  Of which he founde but botomleſſe byheſtes
                  But Troylus thou mayſt nowe eeſt & weſt
                  Pype in an Iuy leefe yf that the leſt
                  Thus gothe the worlde, god ſhylde vs fro miſchaunce
                  And euery wight that meneth trouth auaūce
               
               
                  Encreaſen gan the wo fro day to nyght
                  Of Troylus, for taryeng of Creſeyde
                  And leſſen gan his hope and eke his myght
                  For which al down he in his bedde him leyd
                  He ne ete, dronke, ne ſlept, ne worde ſeyde
                  Imagynyng aye that ſhe was vnkynde
                  For which wel nigh he wext out of his mind
               
               
                  This dreme, of which I told haue eke beforn
                  May neuer come out of his remembraunce
                  He thought aye well, he had his lady lorne
                  And that Ioues, of hys purueyaunce
                  Hym ſhewed had in ſlepe the ſignyfiaunce
                  Of her vntrouth, and his diſauenture
                  And that the bore was ſhewed him in fygure
               
               
                  For whiche he for Sybille his ſuſter ſente
                  That called was Caſſandre eke all aboute
                  And all his dreame he tolde her er he ſtente
                  And her beſought aſſoylen him the doute
                  Of the ſtronge boore, with tuſkes ſtoute
                  And fynally, within a lytell ſtounde
                  Caſſandre him gan thus hys dreme expoūde
               
               
                  She gan firſt ſmyle, & ſayd o brother dere
                  If thou a ſoth of this deſyreſt to knowe
                  Thou muſte a fewe of olde ſtories here
                  To purpoſe howe that fortune ouerthrowe
                  Hath lordes old, through which wtin a throw
                  Thou ſhalt this bore know, & of what kynde
                  He comen is, as men in bookes fynde
               
               
                  Diane, which that wroth was and in yre
                  For grekes nolde done her ſacrifyce
                  Ne encens vpon her aulter ſette on fyre
                  She for that grekes gonne her ſo diſpyſe
                  wrake her in a wonder cruel wyſe
                  For with a bore, as great as oxe in ſtall
                  She made vp frete her corne and vynes all
               
               
                  To ſlee the bore was al ye countrey reyſed
                  Amonge whiche there came this bore to ſe
                  A mayd, one of this worlde the beſt yprayſed
                  And Meleager, lorde of that countre
                  He loued ſo this freſhe mayden fre
                  That with his manhode, er he wolde ſtente
                  This bore he ſlough, and her ye heed he ſente
               
               
                  
                  Of whiche, as olde bokes tellen vs
                  There roſe a conteke and a great enuye
                  And of this lorde diſcended Tideus
                  By lygne or els olde bokes lye
                  But howe this Meleager gan to dye
                  Through his mother, woll I you nat tell
                  For all to longe it were for to dwell
               
               
                  She tolde eke howe Tideus, er ſhe ſtente
                  Vnto the ſtronge cyte of Thebes
                  (To claymen kyngdom of the cyte) went
                  For his felawe dan Polimites
                  Of whiche the brother dan Ethiocles
                  Ful wrongfully of Thebes helde ye ſtrentgh
                  This tolde ſhe by proceſſe all by length
               
               
                  She tolde eke howe Hemonydes aſterte
                  whan Tydeus ſlough fyfty knightes ſtoute
                  She tolde eke all the propheſies by herte
                  And howe that ſeuen kynges with her route
                  Beſiegeden the cyte all aboute
                  And of the holy ſerpent, and the well
                  And of the furyes al ſhe gan hym tell
               
               
                  Aſſociat profugum, Tydeus primo Polimidem
                  Tidea legatum docet inſidiaſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſecundis
                  Tertius Hermodien canit et vates latitantes
                  Mors furie Leuine quinto narrantur et angues
                  Quartus habet reges ineuntes prelia ſeptem
                  Archynon buſtum, ſexto ludi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      leguntur
                  Dat Graios Thebes vatem ſeptimis vmbris
                  Octauo cecidit Tibeus ſpes vita pelagis
                  Ipomedon nono moritur, cum Parthonepeo
                  Fulmine percuſſo, decimo Canapus ſuperatur
                  Vndecimo leſe perimunt per vulnera fratres
                  Argiuam flentem, narrant duodenis et ignem.
               
               
                  Of Archinories buryeng, and the playes
                  And how Amphiorax fyll through ye groūde
                  Howe Tideus was ſlayne, lorde of Argeyes
                  And howe Hypomedon in a lytell ſtounde
                  was dreynte, & deed Parthonepe of wounde
                  And alſo howe Campaneus the proude
                  wyth thōder dynte was ſlayne, ye cryed loude
               
               
                  He gā eke tel him how that eyther brother
                  Ethiocles and Polimites alſo
                  At a ſcarmyſhe, eche of hem ſlough other
                  And of Argynes wepyng and her mo
                  And how ye town was brent ſhe told eke tho
                  And tho diſcended downe from ieſtes olde
                  To Diomede, and thus ſhe ſpake and tolde
               
               
                  This ylke bore betokeneth Diomede
                  Tideus ſonne, that downe diſcended is
                  Fro Meleager, that made the bore to blede
                  And thy lady, where ſo ſhe be ywis
                  This Diomede her herte hath, and ſhe hys
                  wepe yf thou wolte or leaue, for out of doute
                  This Diomede is in, and thou arte oute
               
               
                  Thou ſayeſt nat ſoth (ꝙ he) thou ſorcereſſe
                  wyth all thy falſe goſte of prophecie
                  Thou weneſt ben a great deuynereſſe
                  Nowe ſeeſt thou nat this foole of fantaſye
                  Paynen her on ladyes for to lye
                  Away (ꝙ he) there Ioues yeue the ſorowe
                  Thou ſhalt be fals parauēture yet to morow
               
               
                  As wel thou mighteſt lyen on good Alceſte
                  That was of creatures (but men lye)
                  That euer weren, kyndeſt and the beſte
                  For whan her huſbonde was in ieopardye
                  To dye him ſelfe, but yf ſhe wolde dye
                  She cheſe for him to dye, and gon to hell
                  And ſtarfe anon, as vs the bokes tell
               
               
                  Caſſandre gothe, and he wyth cruell herte
                  Foryate his wo, for angre of her ſpeche
                  And from his bedde all ſodaynly he ſterte
                  As though al hole hym had ymade a leche
                  And day by day he gan enquire and ſeche
                  A ſothe of this, wyth all hys full cure
                  And thus he dryueth forth his auenture
               
               
                  Fortune, whiche that permutacion
                  Of thynges hath, as it is her commytted
                  Through purueyaunce and diſpoſycion
                  Of hygh Ioue, as reygnes ſhall ben flytted
                  Fro folke ī folk, or whā they ſhal ben ſmytted
                  Gan pull away the fethers bright of Troye
                  Fro day to day, tyl they ben bare of ioye
               
               
                  Amonge all this, the fyne of the ieoperdy
                  Of Hector gan approchen wonder blyue
                  The fate wolde his ſoule ſhulde vnbodye
                  And ſhapen had a meane it out to driue
                  Ayenſt whych fate him helpeth nat to ſtryue
                  But on a day to fyghten gan he wende
                  At whiche alas, he caught his lyues ende
               
               
                  For which me thynketh euery maner wyght
                  That haunteth armes, ought to bewayle
                  The dethe of him that was ſo noble a knight
                  For as he drough a kyng by thauentayle
                  Vnware of this, Achilles through the mayle
                  And through the body gan hym for to ryue
                  And thus ye worthy knight was refte of lyue
               
               
                  For whom as olde bookes tellen vs
                  
                     was made ſuch wo, ye tonge it may not tell
                  And namely the ſorowe of Troylus
                  That next him was of worthyneſſe the wel
                  And in this wo gan Thoylus to dwell
                  That what for ſorow, loue, and for vnreſte
                  Ful ofte a daye he bade his herte breſte
               
               
                  But nathleſſe, though he gan him diſpayre
                  And dredde aye that his lady was vntrewe
                  Yet aye on her his herte gan repayre
                  and as theſe louers don, he ſought aye new
                  To get ayen Creſeyde bryght of hewe
                  And in his hert he went her excuſyng
                  That Calcas cauſed al her taryeng
               
               
                  And ofte time he was in purpoſe greate
                  Hym ſeluen lyke a pylgrym to diſgyſe
                  To ſene her, but he may not countrefeate
                  To ben vnknowen of folke that weren wiſe
                  Ne fynde excuſe aryght that may ſuffyſe
                  If he amonge the grekes knowen were
                  For which he wepte ful ofte many a teere
               
               
                  There he wrote yet ofte tyme al newe
                  Ful pytouſly, he lefte it not for ſlouth
                  Beſechyng her, ſens that he was trewe
                  that ſhe wol come ayen & holde her trouth
                  For which Creſeyde vpon a day for routh
                  I take it ſo, touchynge al thys matere
                  wrote him ayen, and ſayd as ye may here
               
               
                  Cupides ſonne, enſample of godlyhede
                  O ſworde of knighthode, ſours of gētilneſſe
                  How myght a wight in turment & in drede
                  And healeleſſe you ſende, as yet gladneſſe
                  I hertleſſe, I ſycke, I in diſtreſſe
                  Sens ye wt me, nor I wyth you may deale
                  You neyther ſende I herte may nor heale
               
               
                  Your letters ful the paper al yplaynted
                  Conceyued hath myne hertes pyte
                  I haue eke ſene wyth teares al depaynted
                  Your letter, and howe that ye requyren me
                  To come ayen, which yet ne may nat be
                  But why, leſte that this letter foūden were
                  No mencion ne make I nowe for feere
               
               
                  Greuous to me (god wote) is your vnreſt
                  Your haſte, and that the goddes ordinaunce
                  It ſemeth not ye take it for the beſte
                  Nor other thyng nys in your remembraūce
                  As thynketh me, but onely your pleſaunce
                  But beth nat wroth, and that I you beſeche
                  For that I tary is al for wycked ſpeche
               
               
                  For I haue herde wel more than I wende
                  touchyng vs two, how thinges haue yſtōde
                  whych I ſhal wyth diſſimulyng amende
                  and beth not wroth I haue eke vnderſtonde
                  Howe ye ne do but holden me in honde
                  But now no force, I can not in you geſſe
                  But al trouth and al gentylneſſe
               
               
                  Come I wol, but yet in ſuch diſioynte
                  I ſtōde as nowe, yt what yere, or what daye
                  That this ſhal be, that can I not apoynte
                  But in effecte I pray you as I maye
                  of your good worde, & of your frendſhip aye
                  For trewely whyle that my lyfe may dure
                  As for a frende ye may in me aſſure
               
               
                  Yet praye I you on yuel ye ne take
                  That it is ſhort, whych that I to you write
                  I dare not there I am wel letters make
                  Ne neuer yet ne coulde I wel endyte
                  Eke great effecte men write in place lyte
                  Thentent is al, and not the letters ſpace
                  And fareth well, god haue you in hys grace
               
               
                  La voſtre C.
                  This Troylus thouȝt this letter al ſtraūge
                  whan he it ſawe, and ſoroufully he ſyght
                  Him thought it lyke a kalendes of eſchaung
                  But finally he ful ne trowen myght
                  That ſhe ne wolde him holdē that ſhe hight
                  For with ful yuel wyl lyſt hym to leue
                  yt loueth well in ſuch caſe though him greue
               
               
                  But nathleſſe, men ſayne that at the laſte
                  For any thynge, men ſhal the ſoth ſe
                  And ſuche a caſe betydde, and that as faſte
                  That Troylus wel vnderſtode that ſhe
                  Nas nat ſo kynde, as that her ought be
                  And finally he wote nowe out of doute
                  That al is loſt, that he hath ben aboute
               
               
                  Stode on a day in hys melancolye
                  Thys Troylus, and in ſuſpectioun
                  Of her, for whom he wende to dye
                  And ſo befyl, that throughout Troy toun
                  As was the gyſe, yborne was vp and doun
                  A manere cote armure, as ſayth the ſtorye
                  Beforne Deiphebe, in ſigne of his victorye
               
               
                  The whyche cote, as telleth Lollius
                  
                     Diephebe it had rent fro Diomede
                  The ſame daye and whan thys Troylus
                  It ſawe, he gan to taken of it hede
                  Auyſyng of the length and of the brede
                  And al the werke, but as he gan beholde
                  Ful ſodaynly hys herte gan to colde
               
               
                  As he that on the coler fonde wythin
                  A broche, that he Creſeyde yaue at morowe
                  That ſhe from Troye muſt nedes twyn
                  In remembraunce of him, and of his ſorow
                  And ſhe him layde ayen her fayth to borow
                  To kepe it aye, but nowe full wel he wyſt
                  Hys lady nas no lenger on to tryſt
               
               
                  He goth hym home, and gan ful ſone ſende
                  For Pandarus, and al thys newe chaunce
                  and of this broch he tolde him worde & ende
                  Complaynyng of her hertes variaunce
                  His longe loue, hys trouth, and his penaūce
                  And after deth, without wordes more
                  Ful faſte he cryed, his reſte him to reſtore
               
               
                  Than ſpake he thus, O lady mine Creſeyde
                  wher is your ſayth, & where is your beheſt?
                  where is your loue, where is your trouth he ſeyd
                  of diomede haue ye now al this feeſt?
                  Alas, I wolde haue trowed at the leeſt
                  That ſens ye nolde in trouth to me ſtonde
                  That ye thus nolde haue holden me in hōde
               
               
                  who ſhal nowe trowen on any othes mo?
                  Alas I neuer wolde haue wende er thys
                  That ye Creſeide coulde haue chaunched ſo
                  Ne but I had agylte, and done amys
                  So cruel wende I not your herte ywys
                  To ſlee me thus, alas your name of trouthe
                  Is nowe fordon, and that is al my routhe
               
               
                  was there none other broche you lyſte lete
                  To feffe wyth your newe loue (quod he)
                  But thylke broche that I wyth teeres wete
                  You yaue, as for a remembraunce of me
                  None other cauſe alas, ne had ye
                  But for diſpyte, and eke for that ye mente
                  Al vtterly to ſhewen your entent
               
               
                  Through which I ſe, that clene out of your minde
                  Ye haue me caſt, & I ne can nor may
                  For al this worlde, within mine herte fynde
                  To vnlonen you a quarter of a daye
                  In curſed tyme I borne was welaway
                  That you that done me al thys wo endure
                  Yet loue I beſt of any creature
               
               
                  Nowe god (ꝙ he) me ſende yet the grace
                  That I may meten with this Diomede
                  And trewly yf I haue myght and ſpace
                  Yet ſhal I make I hope his ſydes blede
                  Nowe god (ꝙ he) that oughteſt taken hede
                  To forthren trouth, and wronges to punice
                  why nylt thou don a vengeaūce of thys vice
               
               
                  O Pandarus, that in dremes for to tryſt
                  Me blamed haſt, & wont arte ofte vpbreyde
                  Now mayſt thou ſene thy ſelfe, yf that ye lyſt
                  How trew is now thy nece bryght Creſeyde
                  In ſondry formes (god it wote) he ſeyde
                  The goddes ſhewen both ioye and tene
                  In ſlepe and by my dreame it is nowe ſene
               
               
                  And certaynly, withouten more ſpeche
                  From hence forth, as ferforth as I may
                  Myne owne deth in armes wol I ſeche
                  I retche nat howe ſoone be the daye
                  But trewly Creſeyde, ſwete maye
                  whom I haue with al my might yſerued
                  That ye thus done, I haue it not deſerued
               
               
                  This Pādarus that al theſe thynges herde
                  And wyſte wel he ſayd as ſoth of this
                  He not a worde ayen to hym anſwerde
                  For ſory of his frendes ſorowe he is
                  And ſhamed for his nece hath done amys
                  And ſtante aſtonyed of theſe cauſes tway
                  As ſtyl as ſtone, o worde ne coulde he ſay
               
               
                  But at the laſte thus he ſpake, and ſeyde
                  My brother dere, I may do the no more
                  what ſhuld I ſayne, I hate ywys Creſeyde
                  And god it wote I wol hate her euermore
                  And that thou me beſoughteſt done of yore
                  Hauyng vnto myne honour ne my reſte
                  Ryght no regarde, I dyd al that the leſte
               
               
                  If I dyd aught, that myght lyken the
                  It is me lefe, and of this treaſon nowe
                  God wote that it a ſorowe is to me
                  And dredeleſſe, for hertes eaſe of you
                  Ryght fayne I wold amend it, wyſt I how
                  And fro this worlde, almyghty god I pray
                  Delyuer her ſoone, I can no more ſay
               
               
                  Great was the ſorow & playnt of Troylus
                  
                     But forthe her courſe fortune aye gan holde
                  Creſeyde loueth the ſonne of Tydeus
                  And Troylus mote wepe in cares colde
                  Such is this worlde, who ſo it can beholde
                  In eche eſtate is lytle hertes reſte
                  God leue vs to take it for the beſte
               
               
                  In many cruel batayle out of drede
                  Of Troylus, thys ylke noble knyght
                  (As men may in theſe olde bokes rede)
                  was ſene hys knygthod, & his great might
                  And dredeleſſe hys yre day and nyght
                  Ful cruelly the grekes aye abought
                  (and alway moſt this Diomede) he ſought
               
               
                  And ofte tyme (I fynde) that they mette
                  with bloody ſtrokes, & with wordes greate
                  Aſſayeng howe her ſpeares weren whette
                  And god it wote, wyth many a cruel heate
                  Gan Troylus vpon his helme to beate
                  But nathleſſe, fortune it nought ne wolde
                  Of outher hande that eyther dyen ſhulde
               
               
                  And yf I had ytaken for to write
                  The armes of this ylke worthy man
                  Than wolde I of his battaylles endyte
                  And for that I to writen fyrſt began
                  Of hys loue, I haue ſayd as I can
                  Hys worthy dedes, who ſo hem lyſte here
                  Rede Dares, he can tel hem al yfere
               
               
                  Beſechyng euery lady bryght of hewe
                  And euery gentle woman, what ſhe be
                  Al be it that Creſeyde was vntrewe
                  That for that gylt ye be nat wroth with me
                  Ye may her gylt in other bokes ſe
                  And gladder I wol write, yf you leſt
                  Penelopes trouth, and good Alceſt
               
               
                  Ne I ſay not thys al only for theſe men
                  But moſte for women that betrayed be
                  Throuȝ falſe folke, god yeue hē ſorow amē
                  
                  That wyth her great wyt and ſubtylte
                  Betrayen you, and thys meneth me
                  To ſpeke, and in effecte you al I pray
                  Beth ware of men, & herkeneth what I ſay
               
               
                  Go lytle boke, go my lytel tragedy
                  There god thy maker yet er that I dye
                  So ſende me might to make ſome comedye
                  But lytle boke, make thou none enuye
                  But ſubiecte ben vnto al poeſye
                  And kyſſe the ſteppes, wher as yu ſeeſt pace
                  Of Vergil, Ouide, Homer, Lucan, & Stace
               
               
                  And for there is ſo great diuyrſite
                  In englyſhe, and in writyng of our tonge
                  So pray I to god, that none miſwrite the
                  Ne the myſſe metre, for defaute of tonge
                  And redde where ſo thou be, or els ſonge
                  That thou be vnderſtonde, god I beſeche
                  But yet to purpoſe of my rather ſpeche
               
               
                  The wrath, as I began you for to ſey
                  Of Troylus, the grekes boughten dere
                  For thouſandes hys handes maden dey
                  As he that was wothouten any pere
                  Saue in hys tyme Hector as I can here
                  But welaway, ſaue onely goddes wyl
                  Diſpytouſly him ſlough the feirſe Achyl
               
               
                  And whā that he was ſlaine in this manere
                  His lyght goſte, ful bliſfully is went
                  Vp to the holowneſſe of the ſeuenth ſpere
                  In hys place letyng eueryche element
                  And there he ſawe, wyth ful auyſement
                  The arratykes ſterres, herkenyng armonye
                  wyth ſownes ful of heuenyſſe melodye
               
               
                  And downe from thence, faſte he gan auyſe
                  This lytle ſpotte of erth, that wyth the ſee
                  Enbraced is, and fully gan diſpiſe
                  Thys wretched worlde, and helde al vanite
                  To reſpecte of the playne felicite
                  That is in heuen aboue, and at the laſt
                  Ther he was ſlayn, his loking down he caſt
               
               
                  And in him ſelfe he lough, ryght at the wo
                  Of hem that wepten for hys 
                        •
                     erh ſo faſt
                  And dampned al our werkes yt foloweth ſo
                  The blynde luſt, whych that maye nat laſt
                  And ſhulden al our herte on heuen caſt
                  And forth he went, ſhortly for to tel
                  There as Mercurie ſorted him to dwel
               
               
                  Such fyne hathe lo, this Troylus for loue
                  Such fyne hath al his greate worthyneſſe
                  Such fyne hath hys eſtate royal aboue
                  ſuch fine his luſt, ſuch fyne hath his nobleſſe
                  Such fyne hath falſe worldes brotelneſſe
                  And thus began his louyng of Creſeyde
                  As I haue tolde, and in thys wyſe he deyde
               
               
                  O yonge freſhe folkes, he or ſhe
                  
                     In which ye loue vp groweth with your age
                  Repayreth home from worldly vanite
                  And of your hertes, vp caſteth the viſage
                  To thylke god, that after his ymage
                  You made, and thynketh all nys but a fayre
                  This world yt paſſeth ſone, as floures fayre
               
               
                  And loueth him, yt which that right for loue
                  Vpon a croſſe our ſoules for to bey
                  Fyrſt ſtarfe & roſe, and ſyt in heuen aboue
                  For he nyl falſen no wyght dare I ſey
                  That wol his herte al holy on him ley
                  And ſens he beſt to loue is, and moſte meke
                  what nedeth fayned loues for to ſeke
               
               
                  Lo here of paynems, curſed olde rytes
                  Lo here what al her goddes may auayle
                  Lo here thys wretched worldes appetytes
                  Lo here the fyne and guerdon for trauayle
                  Of Ioue, Apollo, of Mars, & ſuch raſkayle
                  Lo here the forme of olde clerkes ſpeche
                  In poetrye, yf ye her bokes ſeche
               
               
                  O moral Gower, thys boke I directe
                  To the, and to the Philoſophical Strode
                  To vouchſafe there nede is to correcte
                  Of your benignityes and zeles goode
                  and to that ſothfaſt Chriſt yt ſtarfe on roode
                  wythal myne herte, of mercy euer I pray
                  And to the lorde aright, thus I ſpeake & ſay
               
               
                  Thou one, two, and thre, eterne on lyue
                  That raigneſt aye in thre, two and one
                  Vncircumſcript, & all mayſt circumſcryue
                  Vs from viſible and inuiſible fone
                  Defende, and to thy mercy euerychone
                  So make vs Ieſus to thy mercy digne
                  For loue of mayde, & mother thyne benigne
               
               ¶Thus endeth the fyfth boke and laſt of Troylus: and here foloweth the pyteful and dolorous teſtament of fayre Creſeyde
            
         
         
            The teſtament of Creſeyde
            
               
                  ADolye ſeaſonne tyll a careful dyte
               Shulde coreſponde, and be equiuolent
               Right ſo it was whā I began to write
               Thys tragedy, yt weder ryght feruent
               whan Aries in myddes of the lent
               ſhowres of hayle can fro the north deſcende
               that ſcantly fro the colde I miȝt me defende
            
            
               Yet neuertheles wythin myne orature
               I ſtode, whā Titan had his beames bright
               withdrawen downe, and ſcyled vnder cure
               And fayre Venus the beautye of the nyght
               Vprayſe, and ſet vnto the weſt ful ryght
               Her golden face in oppoſitiowne
               Of god Phebus directe diſcendinge downe
            
            
               Throuȝout ye glaſſe her bemes braſt ſo fayre
               That I might ſe on euery ſyde me by
               The northern wynde had purifyed the ayre
               And ſhedde his myſty cloudes fro the ſkye
               The froſte freſed, the blaſtes bytterly
               Fro pole Artike come whiſking loud & ſhyll
               And cauſed me remoue ayenſt my wyll
            
            
               For I truſted that Venus loues quene
               To whom ſomtyme I hyght obedience
               My ſaded hert of loue ſhe wold make grene
               And therupon with humble reuerence
               I thought to pray her hye magnifycence
               But for great colde as than I letted was
               And in my chambre to the fyre can pas
            
            
               Though loue be hote, yet in a man of age
               It kyndleth nat ſo ſoone as in youtheed
               Of whom the blode is flowyng in a rage
               And in the olde, the corage dul and deed
               Of which the fyre outward is beeſt remeed
               To helpe by phiſyke where ye nature fayled
               I am experte, for both I haue aſſayed
            
            
               I made the fyre and beaked me about
               Than toke I drinke my ſpirites to conforte
               And armed me wel fro the colde therout
               To cut the wynter night and make it ſhorte
               I toke a queare, and lefte al other ſporte
               written by worthy Chaucer glorious
               Of fayre Creſeyde, and luſty Troylus
            
            
               
               And there I founde after that Diomede
               Receyued had that lady bryght of hewe
               How Troylus nere out of his wytte abrede
               And wepte ſore, wyth viſage pale of hewe
               For which wanhope his teares gan renewe
               whyle eſperous reioyſed him agayne
               Thus while in ioy he liued & while in paine
            
            
               Of her beheſt he had great comfortynge
               Truſting to Troy yt ſhe wolde make retour
               which he deſyred moſt of al erthly thynge
               For why ſhe was his onely paramoure
               But whan he ſaw paſſed both day & hour
               Of her gayncome, in ſorowe can oppreſſe
               His woful herte, in care and heuyneſſe
            
            
               Of his diſtreſſe me nedeth not reherſe
               For worthy Chaucer in that ſame boke
               In goodly termes, and in ioly verſe
               Compyled hath his cares who wyl loke
               To breake my ſlepe another queare I toke
               In whych I founde the fatal deſteny
               Of fayre Creſeyde, which ended wretchedly
            
            
               who wote if al that Chaucer wrote be trew
               Nor I wotte not yf this narration
               Be authoryzed, or forged of the newe
               Of ſome poete by hys inuention
               Made to reporte the lamentation
               And woful ende of thys luſty Creſeyde
               And what diſtreſſe ſhe was in or ſhe deyde
            
            
               whan Diomede had al his appetyte
               And more fulfylled of thys fayre lady
               Vpon another ſette was al his delyte
               And ſende to her a lybel repudy
               And her excluded fro his company
               Than deſolate ſhe walked vp and downe
               As ſome men ſaine, in the courte as comune
            
            
               O fayre Creſeyde, the floure and a per ſe
               Of Troy & Grece, how were thou fortunate
               To chaunge in fylth al thy femynite
               And be with fleſhly luſte ſo maculate
               And go among the grekes early and late
               So giglotlyke, taking thy ſoule pleaſaunce
               I haue pyte the ſhulde fal ſuch miſchaunce
            
            
               Yet neuertheleſſe, what euer mē deme or ſay
               In ſcornful langage of thy brutelneſſe
               I ſhal excuſe, as ferforth as I may
               Thy womanheed, thy wiſedome & fayrneſſe
               The which fortune hath put to ſuch diſtreſſe
               As her pleaſed, & nothing through the gylte
               Of the, through wicked langage to be ſpilte
            
            
               Thys fayre lady on thys wiſe deſtitute
               Of al comforte and conſolation
               Right priuely wythout felowſhyp or refute
               Diſheuelde, paſſed out of the town
               A myle or two vnto a manſioun
               Bylded ful gay, where her father Calcas
               which thā amōge the grekes dwelling was
            
            
               whan he her ſawe, the cauſe he can enquyre
               Of her cōmyng, ſhe ſayd ſyghyng ful ſore
               Fro Diomede had goten his deſyre
               He wore wery and wolde of me no more
               ꝙ Calcas doughter, wepe thou not therfore
               Parauenture al cometh for the beſt
               welcome to me thou arte ful dere a geſt
            
            
               Thys olde Calcas, after the lawe was tho
               was keper of the temple as a preeſt
               In which Venus and her ſonne Cupido
               were honoured, and hys chambre was neſt
               To which Creſeyde wt bale enewed in breſt
               Vſed to paſſe, her prayers for to ſay
               whyle at the laſt vpon a ſolempne day
            
            
               As cuſtome was, the people ferre and nere
               Before the noone, vnto the temple went
               with ſacrifyce, deuoute in theyr manere
               But ſtyl Creſeyde heuy in her entent
               In to the church wolde not her ſelfe preſent
               For gyuyng the people any demyng
               Of her expulſe fro Diomede the kyng
            
            
               But paſſed in to aſecrete oratore
               where ſhe myght wepe her woful deſteny
               Behynde her backe, ſhe cloſed faſt the dore
               And on her knees bare fel downe in hye
               Vpon Venus and Cupide angerly
               She cryed out, and ſayd in thys wyſe
               Alas that euer I made you ſacrifyce
            
            
               Ye gaue me ones a diuyne reſponſayle
               That I ſhulde be the floure of loue in Troy
               Now am I made an vnworthy outwayle
               And al in care tranſlated is my ioye
               who ſhal me gyde? who ſhal me now cōuoy
               Syth I fro Diomede, and noble Troylus
               Am clene excluded, as abiecte odious
            
            
               
               O falſe Cupyde, none is to wyte but thou
               And thy mother of loue, that blynd goddace
               Ye cauſed me vnderſtande alway and trow
               The ſeede of loue was ſowem on my face
               & aye grewe grene throuȝ your ſouple grace
               But nowe alas, yt ſeed wyth froſt is ſlayne
               And I fro louers lefte and al forlayne
            
            
               whan thys was ſayd, downe in an extaſy
               Rauyſhed in ſprite, in a dreame ſhe fel
               And by apparaunce herde where ſhe dyd lye
               Cupide the kyng tynkyng a ſyluer bel
               which men myght here fro heuen in to hel
               At whoſe ſounde before Cupide aperes
               the ſeuē planets diſcendyng fro their ſperes
            
            
               which hath power of all thyng generable
               To rule and ſtere by their great influence
               weder and wynde, and courſe variable
               And fyrſte of al Saturne gaue hys ſentence
               which gaue to Cupide lytle reuerence
               But as a boyſtous churle in hys manere
               Came crabbedly wyth auſtryne loke & chere
            
            
               His face frounced, his lere was lyke ye leed
               Hys teth chattred, & ſheuered wyth the chyn
               His eyen drouped hole ſonken in hys heed
               Out at his noſe the myldrop faſt gan ryn
               with lyppes blo, & chekes leaue and thyn
               The yſe yekels yt fro hys heer downe honge
               was wonder great, & as a ſpeare as longe
            
            
               Attour hys belte his lyarte lockes lay
               Feltred vnfayre, ouerfret wyth froſtes hore
               His garment and his gate fal gay of gray
               His widdred wede fro hī ye winde out wore
               A bouſtous bow within his hande he bore
               Vnder his gyrdel a faſhe of felone flayns
               Feddred with yſe, & heeded wyth holſtayns
            
            
               Than Iupiter ryght fayre and amiable
               God of the ſterres in the fyrmament
               And norice to al thyng generable
               Fro hys father Saturne farre different
               with burly face, and browes bryght & brent
               Vpon hys heed a garlonde wonders gaye
               Of floures fayre, as it had ben in Maye
            
            
               his voice was clere as chriſtal was his eien
               As golddē wier ſo glettring was his heare
               His garmente and his gyte ful gay of grene
               wyth golden lyſtes gylte on euery geare
               A burly brande aboute his myddle he beare
               In his ryght hande he had a groundē ſpere
               Of hys father, the wrath fro vs to bere
            
            
               Next after him came Mars the god of yre
               Of ſtryfe, debate, and all diſcentioun
               To chyde and fyght, as feirſe as any fyre
               In harde harneſſe hewmōde & habergioun
               And on his haunch a rouſty fel fauchoun
               And in his hande he had a rouſty ſworde
               writhyng his face with many angry worde
            
            
               Shaking his brande, befor Cupide he come
               with reed viſage, & griſely glowyng eyen
               And at his mouth a blubber ſtode of fome
               Lyke to a boore, whettinge his tuſkes keyn
               Right tulſure lyke, but temperaunce in tene
               An horne blew wt many bouſtous bragge
               which al this world wt warre hath made to wagge
            
            
               Thā fayre Phebus, lanterne & lāpe of lyght
               Of man & beeſt, both frute and floriſhyng
               Tender norice, and banyſher of nyght
               And of the worlde, cauſyng by his mouyng
               And influence, lyfe in al erthly thyng
               without cōforte of whom of force to nought
               Muſt go dye, yt al this world hath wrought
            
            
               As kyng royal, he rode vpon a chare
               The which Phiton ſōtyme gyded vnright
               the bryghtneſſe of hys face whā it was bare
               Non might beholde, for perſing of his ſight
               This golden carte with firy beames bright
               Foure yoked ſtedes ful different of hewe
               But bayt or tyring through the ſperes drew
            
            
               The firſt was ſord, wt mane as reed as roſe
               Called Eoye in to the orient
               The ſeconde ſtede to name, hight Ethyoſe
               whitely and pale, and ſome dele aſcendent
               The thyrde Peroſe, right hote & eke feruent
               The fourth was blacke, called Phelologee
               which rolleth Phebus downe in to the ſee
            
            
               Venus was there preſent, that goddes gay
               Her ſonnes quarel to defende and make
               his owne complaynt, cladde in a nyce aray
               the one halfe grene thother halfe ſable blake
               white heer as golde, kembet & ſhed a bake
               But in her face ſemed great variaunce
               whyle parfite trouth, & whyles incōſtaunce
            
            
               
               Vnder ſmylyng ſhe was diſſimulate
               Prouocatyue with blynkes amorous
               And ſodaynly chaunged and alterate
               Angry as any ſerpent venomous
               Ryght pungityue with wordes odious
               Thus variaūt ſhe was, who lyſt take kepe
               with one eye laugh, and with ye other wepe
            
            
               In tokenyng that al fleſſhly paramour
               which Venus hath in rule & gouernaunce
               Is ſomtyme ſwete, ſomtyme bytter & ſour
               Ryght vnſtable and full of variaunce
               Mynged with careful ioy & falſe pleaſaūce
               Now hote now colde, now blythe, now full of wo
               now grene as lefe, now widred & ago
            
            
               with boke in hand, than come Mercurious
               Ryght eloquent and full of rethorye
               with polyte termes and delicious
               with penne and ynke to report all readye
               Settyng ſonges, and ſyngen merely
               His hode was red hecled attour his crown
               Lyke tyll a poete of the olde faſſyoun
            
            
               Bores he bare with fyne electuares
               And ſugred ſyropes for digeſtion
               Spyces belongyng to the potiquares
               with many holſome ſwete confectioun
               Doctor in phiſyke cled in a ſcarlet gowne
               And furred wele as ſuch one ought to be
               Honeſt & good, and nat a worde couth lye.
            
            
               Next after him come lady Synthia
               The laſt of al, and ſwyfteſt in her ſpere
               Of colour blacke, buſked with hornes twa
               And in the nyght ſhe lyſteth beſt tapere
               Hawe as the leed, of colour nothyng clere
               For al the light ſhe boroweth at her brother
               Tytan, for of her ſelf ſhe hath none other
            
            
               Her gyte was gray and full of ſpottes blak
               And on her breeſt a churle paynted full euen
               Bearyng a buſh of thornes on his backe
               which for his theft miȝt clime no ner ye heuē
               
               Thus whā they gadred wer ye goddes ſeuē
               
               Mercurius they choſed with one aſſent
               To be foreſpeker in the parlyment
            
            
               who had ben there and lykyng for to here
               His facondetonge, and termes exquiſyte
               Of rethorike the practyke he myght lere
               In brefe ſermon, a preignaūt ſentence write
               Before Cupide, valyng his cappe alyte
               Sper is the cauſe of that vacatioun
               And he anon ſhewed his ententioun
            
            
               Lo ꝙ Cupide, who wol blaſpheme ye name
               Of his owne god, eyther in worde or dede
               To all goddes he doth both loſſe and ſhame
               And ſhulde haue bytter paynes to his mede
               I ſay this by yonder wretche Creſeyde
               The which thrugh me was ſōtyme flour of loue
               Me & my mother ſhe ſtatelye gan reproue
            
            
               Saying of her great infelicitie
               I was the cauſe, and my mother Venus
               She called a blynde goddes & myght nat ſe
               with ſclaunder and defame iniurious
               Thus her lyuyng vnclene and lecherous
               She wolde retort in me and my mother
               To whō I ſhewed my grace aboue al other
            
            
               And ſyth ye are al ſeuen delicate
               Participant of deuyne ſapience
               This great iniure done to our hye eſtate
               Me thīk wt payn we ſhulde make recōpence
               was neuer to goddes done ſuch violence
               As well for you, as for my ſelfe I ſaye
               Therfore go helpe to reuenge I you praye
            
            
               Mercurius to Cupide gaue anſwere
               And ſayd, ſyr kyng: my coūſayle is that ye
               Referre you to the hyeſt planet here
               And take to him the loweſt of degree
               The payne of Creſeyde for to modefye
               As god Saturne with hym take Synthia
               I am cōtent (ꝙ he) to take they twa
            
            
               Than thus proceded Saturne & the moone
               whan they the matter rypely had degeſt
               For the deſpyte to Cupid that ſhe had done
               And to Venus open and manifeſt
               In al her lyfe with payne to be oppreſt
               And turmēt ſore, with ſykneſſe incurable
               And to all louers be abhominable.
            
            
               This doleful ſentēce Saturne toke on hand
               And paſſed down wher careful Creſeyd lay
               And on her heed he layde a froſty wande
               Than lawfully on this wyſe can he ſay
               Thy great fayrneſſe, and all thy beauty gay
               Thy wanton blood, & eke thy golden here
               Here I exclude fro the for euermeere.
            
            
               
               I chaunge thy myrth into melancoly
               which is the mother of all penſyueneſſe
               Thy moyſter and thy hete into colde & drye
               Thy inſolence, thy play, & thy wantōneſſe
               To great diſeaſe, thy pompe & thy rycheſſe
               Into mortal nede and great penuritie
               Thou ſuffre ſhalt, and as a beggar dye
            
            
               O cruell Saturne frowarde and angrye
               Harde is thy dome, and to malicyous
               Of fayr Creſeyd why haſt thou no mercye
               which was ſo ſwete, gentle, and amorous
               withdrawe thy ſentence and be gracyous
               As thou wer neuer, ſo ſheweth through thy dede
               A wrekeful ſentence gyuen on Creſeyd
            
            
               Thā Synthia, whan Saturne paſt away
               Out of her ſeate, diſcended downe belyue
               And red a byll on Creſeyde where ſhe lay
               Conteynyng this ſentence diffynityue
               Fro heale of body here I the depryue
               And to thy ſykneſſe ſhalbe no recure
               But in dolour thy dayes to endure
            
            
               Thy chriſtal eyen menged wt blood I make
               Thy voyce ſo clere vnpleſaunt heer & hace
               Thy luſty lere ouerſpred wt ſpottes blake
               And lumpes hawe apering in thy face
               wher thou comeſt eche man ſhal flye ye place
               Thus ſhalt thou go beggyng fro houſe to houſe
               with cup & clapper lyke a lazarous
            
            
               This dooly dreame, this vgly viſioun
               Brought tyll an ende, Creſeyd fro it awoke
               And all that court and conuocatioun
               Vanyſhed away, than roſe ſhe vp & toke
               A poliſhed glaſſe, & her ſhadowe couth loke
               And whā ſhe ſawe her vyſage ſo deformate
               If ſhe in hert were wo, I ne wyt god wate
            
            
               wepyng full ſore, lo what it is (ꝙ ſhe)
               with frowarde langage to moue & ſtere
               Our crabbed goddes, and ſo is ſene on me
               My blaſphemyng now haue I bought full dere
               All erthly ioye and myrth I ſet arere
               Alas this day, alas this woful tyde
               whan I began with my goddes to chyde
            
            
               Be this was ſayd, a childe came fro the hal
               To warne Creſeyde the ſupper was redy
               Fyrſt knocked at the dore, and eft couth cal
               Madam, your father byddeth you com ī hy
               He hath maruayl ſo longe on groufe ye lye
               And ſayth your beedes beth to longe ſōdele
               The goddes wote al your entent ful wele
            
            
               Quod ſhe fayr chylde, go to my father dere
               And pray hym come to ſpeke with me anon
               And ſo he dyd, & ſayd doughter what chere
               Alas (ꝙ ſhe) father, my myrth is gone
               How ſo (ꝙ he) and ſhe can al expone
               As I haue told, the vengeaūce & the weake
               For her treſpaſſe Cupide on her couth take
            
            
               He loked on her vgly lepers face
               The which before was white as lely floute
               wryngyng his handes, ofttymes ſayd alas
               That hee had lyued to ſe that woful houre
               For he knewe wel, that ther was no ſucour
               To her ſykneſſe, and yu doubled his payne
               Thus was ther care ynowe betwyxe hem twayne
            
            
               whā they togyther mourned had full lange
               ꝙ Creſeyde father, I wolde not be kende
               Therfore in ſecrete wyſe ye let me gange
               To you hoſpitall at the townes ende
               And thyder ſom meat for charitie me ſende
               To lyue vpon, for al myrth in this earth
               Is fro me gone, ſuche is my wicked werth
            
            
               whan in a mantell and a Beuer hat
               with cuppe and clapper wonder priuely
               He opened a ſecrete gate, and out thereat
               Conueyde her, that no man ſhulde eſpye
               There to a vylage halfe a myle therby
               Delyuered her in at the ſpyttel houſe
               And dayly ſende her parte of his almous
            
            
               Some knewe her wel, & ſom had no knowlege
               Of her, bicauſe ſhe was ſo deforma
                     •
                  e
               with byles blake ouerſpred in her viſage
               And her fayre colour faded and alterate
               Yet they preſumed for her hye regrate
               And ſtyll mournyng ſhe was of noble kyn
               with better wyll, there they toke her inne
            
            
               The day paſſed, and Phebus wēt vnto reſt
               The cloudes blacke on euery ſyde al the ſky
               God wote yf Creſede were a ſorowfull geſt
               Seing that vncouth fare and herbory
               But meate or drynke ſhe dreſſed her to lye
               In a darke corner of the houſe alone
               And on this wyſe wepynge, ſhe made her mone.
            
            
               
               ¶Here foloweth the complaynt of Creſeyde
               
                  O Sop of ſorowe ſonken into care
               O caytife Creſeyd now and euermare
               Gone is thy ioye, and al thy myrth in erth
               Of all blytheneſſe nowe art thou blacke & bare
               There is no ſalue may helpe thy ſare
               Fell is thy fortune, wycked is thy werth
               Thy blyſſe is banyſſhed & thy bale vnberde
               Vnder the great god yf I grauen ware
               where men of Grece ne yet of Troye myght herde
            
            
               where is thy chambre wantonly beſene
               with burly bed, & bankers brouded bene
               Spyces and wyne to thy collatioun
               The cuppes al of golde and ſyluer ſhene
               Thy ſwete meates ſerued in plates clene
               with ſauery ſauce of a good facioun
               Thy gay garmētes wt many goodly goune
               Thy pleſaūt laune pynned wt golden pene
               Al is arere thy great royall renoune.
            
            
               where is thy gardeyne with thy greces gay
               And freſhe floures, which yu quene Floraye
               Had paynted pleſauntly in euery pane
               where thou were wont ful merily in May
               To walke and take the dewe be it was day
               And here the merie and mauyſe many one
               with ladyes fayre in carollyng to gone
               And ſe the royall renkes in the raye
            
            
               This leper loge take for thy goodly bour
               And for thy bed, take nowe a bonche of ſtro
               For wayled wyne and meetes thou had tho
               Take mouled breed, pyrat and ſyder ſoure
               But cuppe and clapper is al now ago.
            
            
               My clere voyce and my courtly carollynge
               Is ranke as roke, ful hidous heer and hace
               Deformed is the fygure of my face
               To loke on it no people hath lykyng
               Soſped in ſyght, I ſay with ſore ſyghinge
               Lying amonge the leper folke alas.
            
            
               O ladyes fayre of Troy and Grece attende
               My freyle fortune, myne infelicitie
               My great myſchef which nomā can amend
               And in your mynde a myrrour make of me
               As I am now peraduenture that ye
               For al your might may come to ye ſame end
               Or els worſe yf any worſe may be
               Beware therfore aproches nere your ende
            
            
               Nouȝt is your fayrneſſe but a fading floure
               Nouȝt is your famous laude & hye honour
               But wynde inflate in other mens eares
               Your roſyng red to rotyng ſhal retour
               Example make of me in your memore
               which of ſuch thīges, woful witnes beares
               All welth in erth as wynd away it weares
               Beware therfore aprocheth nere your hour
            
            
               Thus chydyng with her drery deſtiny
               wepyng, ſhe woke ye nyght fro ende to ende
               But all in vayne her dole, her careful crye
               Miȝt not remedy, ne yet her mourning mēd
               A leper lady roſe, and to her wende
               And ſayd: why ſpurneſt thou agayne ye wal
               To ſlee thy ſelfe and mend nothynge at all
            
            
               Sith that thy weping but doubleth thy wo
               I counſayle the make vertue of a nede
               Go lerne to clap thy clapper to and fro
               And lerne after the lawe of lepers lede
               Ther was no bote but forth wt thā ſhe yede
               Fro place to place, whyle colde & hūgre ſore
               Compelled her to be a ranke beggore
            
            
               That ſame tyme of Troy the garnyſoun
               which had the cheftayne worthye Troylus
               Thrugh ieopardy of war had ſtrykē down
               Knyghtes of Grece in nōbre maruaylous
               with great triumph and laude victorious
               Agayne to Troy ryght royally they rode
               The way wher Creſeyde wt the leper ſtode
            
            
               Seing that company come all with o ſteuē
               
               They gaue a crye, & ſhoke cups good ſpede
               worthy lordes, for goddes loue of heauen
               To vs lepers, parte of your almeſſe dede
               Than to her crye noble Troylus toke hede
               Hauyng pytie, nere by the place gan paſſe
               wher Creſeyd ſat, nat wetīg what ſhe was
            
            
               Than vpon hym ſhe keſt vp both her eyen
               And wt a blynke it come intyl his thought
               That he ſometyme her face before had ſeyn
               
                  But ſhe was in ſuch plite he knew hernouȝt
               Yet than her loke into his mynde he brouȝt
               The ſwete vyſage & amorous blenkynge
               Of fayre Creſeyd, ſōtyme his owne derling
            
            
               No wonder was, ſuppoſe in mynde that he
               Toke her fygure ſo ſoone, and lo now why
               The ydoll of a thynge in caſe may be
               So depe emprynted in the fantaſy
               That it defendeth the wyttes outwardly
               And ſo appereth in forme and lyke eſtate
               within the mynde as it was figurate
            
            
               A ſpark of loue than tyl his hert couth ſprīg
               And kyndeled his body in a fyre
               with hote feuer, in ſwet and trymblynge
               Him toke, whyle he was redy to expyre
               To beare his ſhylde his breeſt begon to tyre
               within a whyle he chaunged manye a hewe
               And neuertheleſſe nat one another knewe.
            
            
               For knyghtly pytie and memoriel
               Of fayr Creſeyd, a gyrdle gan he take
               A purſe of golde, and many a gay iewel
               And in ye ſkyrt of Creſeyd downe can ſhake
               Thā rode awaye, and nat a worde he ſpake
               Penſife in hert whyle he came to ye towne
               And for great care oftſith almoſt fel downe
            
            
               The lepre folke to Creſeyde than couth drawe
               To ſe the equall diſtributioun
               Of ye almous, but whan the golde they ſaw
               Eche one to other priuely can rowne
               And ſayd: you lorde hath more affectioun
               How euer it be vnto you lazarous
               Than to vs all, we knowe by his almous
            
            
               what lorde is you (ꝙ ſhe) haue ye no fele?
               That doth to vs ſo great humanitie
               Yes ꝙ a lepre man, I knowe him wele
               Syr Troylus it is a knyght gentle & free
               whan Creſeyde vnderſtode that it was he
               Styffer thā ſtele there ſtert a bytter ſtound
               Thrughout her hert, & fyl down to ye groūd
            
            
               whan ſhe ouercom with ſyghyng ſore & ſad
               with many a carefull crye & colde atone
               Now is my breſt with ſtormy ſtoūdes ſtad
               wrapped in wo wretch fulwyl of one
               Than fel in ſwoun ful oft or ſhe wolde f
                     •
                  ne
               And euer in her ſwouning cryed ſhe chus
               O falſe Creſeyd, & true knyght Troylus.
            
            
               Thy loue, thy laude, and all thy gentylneſſe
               I compted ſmal in my proſperitie
               So effated I was in wantonneſſe
               And clambe vpon the fykel whele ſo hye
               All fayth and loue I promoted to the
               was in thy ſelfe fekle and furyous
               O falſe Creſeyde, & true knyght Troylus
            
            
               For loue of me thou kept countenaunce
               Honeſt and chaſte in conuerſatioun
               Of all women protectour and defence
               Thou were, and helped theyr opynioun
               My mynde on fleſhly foule affectioun
               was enclyned to luſtes lecherous
               Fye falſe Creſeyde, o true knyght Troylus
            
            
               Louers beware, and take good hede about
               whom yt ye loue, for whan ye ſuffre payne
               I let you wyt ther is right fewe thrughout
               whō ye may truſt to haue true loue agayne
               Proue whā ye wol your labour is in vayne
               Therfore I rede ye take them as ye fynde
               For they are as ſad as wethercock in wynd
            
            
               Bycauſe I knowe the great vnſtableneſſe
               Bryttell as glaſſe, vnto my ſelfe I ſay
               Truſtyng in other as great brutelneſſe
               As inconſtaunt, and as vntrue of faye
               Thouȝ ſom be true, I wot riȝt fewe ar they
               who fyndeth truthe, let hym his lady 
                     ••
                  ſe
               None but my ſelfe as now I woll accuſe
            
            
               whan this was ſayd, wt paper ſhe ſat doun
               And in this maner made her teſtament
               Here I bequeth my corſe and caryoun
               with wormes and with toodes to be rent
               My cup, my clapper, and myne ornament
               And al my gold theſe leper folke ſhal haue
               whan I am deed, to bury me in graue
            
            
               This royal rynge ſet with this Rubye red
               which Troylus in dowry to me ſende
               To hym agayne I leaue it whā I am deed
               To make my careful deth vnto him kende
               Thus I conclude ſhortly and make an ende
               My ſprit I leue to Diane where ſhe dwels
               To walke wt her in waſte wodes & welles.
            
            
               O Diomede thou haſt both broche and belt
               which Troylus gaue me in tokenyng
               
                  Of his true loue, and wt the word ſhe ſwelt
               And ſoone a leper man toke of the rynge
               Than buryed her withouten tarying
               To Troylus forth with the rynge he bare
               And of creſeyde the deth he can declare
            
            
               whan he had herde her great infirmitie
               Her legacy, and lamentatioun
               And how ſhe ended in ſuche pouertie
               He ſwelt for wo & fell downe in a ſwoun
               For ſorowe his hert to braſt was boun
               Syghyng full ſadly ſayde I can nomore
               She was vntrue, and wo is me therfore.
            
            
               Som ſaith he made a tomb of marble gray
               And wrote her name and ſuperſcription
               And layde it on her graue where as ſhe laye
               In golden letters cōtaynynge this reaſoun
               Lo fayre ladyes, Creſeyde of Troy ye toune
               Somtyme cōpted the floure of womanhed
               Vnder this ſtone late leper lyeth deed.
            
            
               Now worthy women in this balade ſhort
               Made for your worſhyp and inſtruction
               Of charitie I monyſh and exhorte
               Mynge nat your loue with falſe diſception
               Beare in your mynde this ſore concluſion
               Of fayre Creſeyde, as I haue ſayde before
               Syth ſhe is deed I ſpeke of her nomore.
            
            ¶Thus endeth the piteful and dolorous teſtament of fayre Creſeyde: And hereafter foloweth the legende of good women.
         
         
            
            ¶The legende of good women.
            
               
                  
                     A Thouſande tymes I haue herde men tel
                  That there is ioye in heuen & payne in hel
                  And I accorde it wel that it is ſo
                  But natheleſſe, yet wot I wele alſo
                  That there nys none dwelling in this countrie
                  That eyther hath in heuen or hel ybe
                  Ne may of it none other wayes wytten
                  But as he herde ſayd, or founde it wrytten
                  For by aſſaye there maye no man it preue
                  But god forbede, but men ſhulde leue
                  well more thynge than they han ſene wt eye
                  Men ſhall nat wenen euery thynge a lye
                  But yf hym ſelfe it ſeeth, or els it doth
                  For god wot thyng is neuer the leſſe ſoth
                  Though euery wyght ne maye it nat yſe
                  Bernarde the monke ne ſaugh al parde
                  Than mote we to bokes that we fynde
                  (Thrugh which ye old thinges ben in minde
                  And to the doctryne of theſe olde wyſe)
                  Yeue credence in euery ſkylfull wyſe
                  That tellen of theſe olde appreued ſtories
                  Of holyneſſe, of reygnes, of victories
                  Of loue, of hate, of other ſondry thynges
                  Of which I may nat make reherſynges
                  And yf that olde bokes were awaye
                  Ylorne were of remembraunce the kay
                  wel ought vs than honouren and beleue
                  Theſe bokes, there we han non other preue
                  And as for me, though yt I can but lyte
                  On bokes for to rede I me delyte
                  And to hem yeue I fayth and ful credence
                  And in myne hert haue ben in reuerence
                  So hertely, that there is game none
                  That fro my bokes maketh me to gone
                  But it be ſeldom on the holy day
                  Saue certaynly whā yt the moneth of May
                  Is comen, and yt I here the foules ſynge
                  And that the floures gynnen for to ſprynge
                  Farewell my boke, and my deuotioun
                  Now haue I than eke this conditioun
                  That of all the floures in the mede
                  Than loue I moſt theſe floures white & red
                  Such yt men callen dayeſies in our toune
                  To hem haue I ſo great affectioun
                  As I ſayd erſt, whan comen is the May
                  That in my bed there daweth me no day
                  That I nam vp, & walkyng in the mede
                  To ſeen this floure ayenſt the ſunne ſprede
                  whan it vp ryſeth early by the morowe
                  That blyſful ſyght ſoftneth al my ſorowe
                  So glad am I, whan that I haue preſence
                  Of it, to done it all reuerence
                  As ſhe that is of all floures floure
                  Fulfylled of al vertue and honour
                  And euer ylyke fayre, and freſh of hewe
                  And euer I loue it, and euer ylke it newe
                  And euer ſhal, tyl that myne hert dye
                  All ſwere I nat of this, I wol nat lye
                  There loued no wyght hoter in his lyue
                  And whan that it is eue I renne blythe
                  Aſſoone as euer the ſunne gynneth weſt
                  To ſene this flour, how it woll go to reſt
                  For feare of nyght, ſo hateth ſhe darkneſſe
                  Her chere is plainly ſpred in the brightneſſe
                  Of the ſunne, for there it woll vncloſe
                  Alas that I ne had Englyſhe ryme or proſe
                  Suffiſaunt, this floure to preyſe aryght
                  But helpeth ye that han connynge & myght
                  Ye louers that can make of ſentement
                  In this caſe ought ye be diligent
                  To forthren me ſomwhat in my labour
                  whether ye ben wt the leſe or with the floure
                  For wel I wot, that ye han here beforne
                  Of makyng, ropen, and lad away the corne
                  And I come after, glenyng here and there
                  And am ful glad, yf I may fynde an ere
                  Of any goodly worde that ye han lefte
                  And though it happen me to reherſen efte
                  That ye han in your freſh ſonges ſayde
                  Forbereth me, and beth nat euyll apayde
                  Syth that ye ſe, I do it in the honoure
                  Of loue: and eke in ſeruyce of the floure
                  whom yt I ſerue, as I haue wyt or myght
                  She is the clereneſſe and the very lyght
                  That in this darke world me wint & ledeth
                  The hert within my ſorowful breſt you dredeth
                  And loueth ſo ſore, yt ye ben verely
                  The maſtres of my wyt, and nothyng I
                  My word, my workes, is knytte ſo in your bond
                  That as an harpe obeyeth to ye hond
                  And make it ſowne after his fyngerynge
                  Ryght ſo mowe ye out of my hert brynge
                  Such voyce, ryght as you lyſt, to laugh or payn
                  Be ye my guyde, and lady ſouerayne
                  
                     As to myne erthly god, to you I call
                  Both in thys werke, and my ſorowes all
                  But wherfore that I ſpake to yeue credence
                  To olde ſtoryes, and done hem reuerence
                  And that men muſten more thynge beleue
                  Then men may ſene at eye, or els preue
                  That ſhall I ſeyne, when that I ſe my tyme
                  I maye not all at ones ſpeake in ryme
                  My beſy gooſt, that thurſteth alway newe
                  To ſene hys floure ſo yōge, ſo freſh of hewe
                  Conſtrayned me, wyth ſo gredy deſyre
                  That in myne herte I fele yet the fyre
                  That made me to ryſe er it were daye
                  And thys was nowe ye fyrſt morow of May
                  wyth dredfull herte, and glad deuocion
                  For to ben at the reſurrection
                  Of this floure, when that it ſhulde vncloſe
                  Agayne the ſunne, that roſe as reed as roſe
                  That in the breſt was of the beeſt that daye
                  That Angenores doughter ladde away
                  And downe on knees anone ryght I me ſet
                  And as I coulde, thys freſhe floure I gret
                  Knelynge alwaye, tyll it vncloſed was
                  Vpon the ſmall, ſofte, ſwete gras
                  That was wt floures ſwete embrouded all
                  Of ſuche ſwetneſſe, & ſuche adour ouer all
                  That for to ſpeke of gūme, herbe, or tre
                  Comparyſon may none ymaked be
                  For it ſurmounteth playnly all odoures
                  And of ryche beautye all floures
                  Forgotten had the earth hys poore eſtate
                  Of wynter, that hym naked made & mate
                  And wyth hys ſworde of cold ſo ſore greued
                  Nowe hath the atēpre ſunne all that releued
                  That naked was, and clad it newe agayne
                  The ſmale foules, of the ceaſon fayne
                  That of the panter and the nette ben ſeaped
                  Vpon the fouler, that hem made awhaped
                  In wynter, and deſtroyed had her brood
                  In his diſpite hem thought it dyd hem good
                  To ſynge of hym, and in her ſonge dyſpyſe
                  The foule chorle, that for hys couetyſe
                  Had hem betrayed, wyth hys ſophiſtrye
                  Thys was her ſonge: The fouler we defye
                  And all hys crafte, and ſome ſongen clere
                  Layes of loue, that ioye it was to here
                  In worſhyppyng & prayſynge of her make
                  And for the newe blyſfull ſomers ſake
                  Vpon the braunches full of bloſmes ſofte
                  In her delyte, they turned hem full ofte
                  And ſongen, bleſſed be ſaynt Valentyne
                  For on hys daye I cheſe you to be myne
                  wythouten repentynge, myne herte ſwete
                  And therwythall her beckes gonnen mete
                  yeldynge honoure, and humble obeyſaunce
                  To loue, and dydden her other obſeruaunce
                  That longeth vnto loue, and to nature
                  Conſtrewe that as you lyſt, I do no cure
                  And tho that had done vnkyndneſſe
                  As doth the Tidyfe, for newe fangelneſſe
                  Beſought mercy of her treſpaſynge
                  And humbly ſonge her repentynge
                  And ſworen on the bloſomes to be trewe
                  So that her makes wolde vpon hem rewe
                  And at the laſt maden her accorde
                  Al foūde they Daūger for the tyme a lorde
                  Yet Pyte, through hys ſtrōge gentyl myght
                  Forgaue, and made mercy paſſen ryght
                  Through innocence, and ruled curteſye
                  But I ne cleape it not innocence folye
                  Ne falſe pyte, for vertue is the meane
                  As Etycke ſayeth, in ſuche maner I meane
                  And thus theſe foules, voyde of all malyce
                  Acordeden to loue, and laften vyce
                  Of hate, and ſonge all of one accorde
                  welcome ſommer, our gouernour and lorde
                  And zephirus, and Flora gentelly
                  Yaue to the floures ſofte and tenderly
                  Her ſwote brethe, & made hem for to ſprede
                  As god and goddeſſe of the floury mede
                  In whych me thought I myght day by day
                  Dwellen alway, the ioly monthe of May
                  wythouten ſlepe, wythoutē meate or drynke
                  Adowne full ſoftly I gan to ſynke
                  And leanynge on my elbowe and my ſyde
                  The longe day I ſhope me for to abyde
                  For nothynge els, and I ſhall not lye
                  But for to loke vpon the deyſye
                  That well by reaſon men it call maye
                  The dayeſy, or els the eye of the daye
                  The empryce, and floure of floures all
                  I praye to god that fayre mote ſhe fall
                  And all that louen floures, for her ſake
                  But natheleſſe, ne wene not that I make
                  In prayſynge of the floure agayne the leefe
                  Nomore then of the corne agayne the ſheefe
                  For as to me nys leuer none ne lother
                  I nam wyth holden yet wyth neuer nother
                  Ne I not who ſerueth leefe, ne who ye floure
                  well brouken they her ſeruyce or laboure
                  For thys thynge is all of another tonne
                  Of olde ſtorye, er ſuch thynge was begonne
                  when yt the ſunne, out of the ſouth gan weſt
                  And that thys floure gan cloſe, & gan to reſt
                  
                     For derknes of ye nyght, ye whiche ſhe dredde
                  Home to myn houſe, ful ſwyftly I me ſpedde
                  To gon to reſte, and erly for to ryſe
                  To ſene this flour to ſprede, as I deuyſe
                  And in a lytell herber that I haue
                  That benched was on turues freſhe ygraue
                  I bade men ſhulde me my couche make
                  For deyntie of the newe ſommers ſake
                  I bade hem ſtrawen floures on my bedde
                  whan I was layde, and had myn eyen hedde
                  I fell a ſlepe, and ſlepte an houre or two
                  Me mette howe I lay in the medowe tho
                  To ſene this floure, that I loue ſo and drede
                  And from a ferre came walkyng in the mede
                  The god of Loue, and in hys hande a quene
                  And ſhe was cladde in royall habyte grene
                  A fret of golde ſhe had next her heere
                  And vpon that a whyte crowne ſhe beere
                  wyth florouns ſmall, and I ſhall nat lye
                  For all the worlde ryght as a dayeſye
                  Ycrowned is, wyth whyte leaues lyte
                  So were the florouns of her corown whyte
                  For of o perle fyne orientall
                  Her whyte corowne was ymaked all
                  For which the white corowne, aboue ye grene
                  Made her lyke a dayeſye for to ſeme
                  Conſydred eke her fret of golde aboue
                  Iclothed was this mighty god of Loue
                  In ſylke embrouded, full of grene greues
                  In whiche a fret of reed roſe leues
                  The freſheſt ſens ye worlde was fyrſt begōne
                  His gylte heere was corowned with a ſonne
                  In ſtede of golde, for heuyneſſe and weight
                  Therwith me thouȝt his face ſhone ſo bright
                  That well vnnethes might I him beholde
                  And in his hāde, me thouȝt I ſaw him holde
                  Two firy dartes, as the gledes rede
                  And angelyke his wynges ſawe I ſprede
                  And all be that men ſayne, that blynde is he
                  Algate me thought that he myght ſe
                  For ſternely on me he gan beholde
                  So that his lokyng dothe myn herte colde
                  And by the hande he helde this noble quene
                  Crowned wyth whyte, & clothed al in grene
                  So womanly, ſo benygne, and ſo meke
                  That in this world, though yt men wold ſeke
                  Halfe her beautie ſhulde they nat fynde
                  In creature that formed is by kynde
                  And therfore may I ſayne, as thynketh me
                  This ſonge, in prayſyng of this lady fre.
               
               
                  Hyde Abſolon thy gylte treſſes clere
                  Heſter lay thou thy mekeneſſe al adoun
                  Hyde Ionathas al thy frendely manere
                  Penelopee, and Marcia Catoun
                  Make of your wyfehode no comparyſoun
                  Hyde ye your beauties, I ſoude & Heleyne
                  My lady cometh, that al this may diſtayne
               
               
                  Thy fayre body, let it nat apere
                  Lauyne, and thou Lucrece of Rome toun
                  And Polixene, that boughten loue ſo dere
                  And Cleopatras, with all thy paſſyoun
                  Hyde ye your trouthe of loue, & your renoun
                  And thou Tiſbe, that haſt of loue ſuch payne
                  My lady cometh, that all this may diſtayne
               
               
                  Hero, Dido, Laodomia, all yfere
                  And Phillis, hangyng for the Demophoun
                  And Canace, eſpyed by thy chere
                  Hipſyphile betrayed with Iaſoun
                  Maketh of your trouth neytherboſte ne ſoun
                  Nor Hypermiſtre, or Ariadne, ye twayne
                  My lady cometh, that all thys may diſtayne
               
               
                  ¶This balade may full well yſongen be
                  As I haue ſayd erſt, by my lady fre
                  For certaynly, all theſe mowe nat ſuffyſe
                  To apperen wyth my lady in no wyſe
                  For as the ſunne woll the fyre diſtayne
                  So paſſeth all my lady ſouerayne
                  That is ſo good, ſo fayre, ſo debonayre
                  I pray to god that euer fall her fayre
                  For nad comforte ben of her preſence
                  I had ben deed, wythouten any defence
                  For drede of Loues wordes, and his chere
                  As whan tyme is, herafter ye ſhall here
                  Behynde this god of Loue vpon the grene
                  I ſawe comyng of ladyes nynetene
                  In royall habyt, a full eaſy pace
                  And after hem came of women ſuche a trace
                  That ſens that god Adam had made of erthe
                  The thyrde parte of mankynde, or the ferthe
                  Ne wende I nat by poſſibylyte
                  Had euer in thys wyde worlde ybe
                  And trewe of loue, theſe women were echon
                  Now whether was yt a wōder thing or non
                  That right anon, as that they gonne eſpye
                  This floure, whych that I clepe the dayeſye
                  Full ſodaynly they ſtynten all at ones
                  And kneled downe, as it were for the nones
                  And ſongen with o voyce, heale & honour
                  To trouthe of womanhede, and to this flour
                  That beareth our alder priſe in fyguryng
                  
                     Her whyte corowne beareth the wytneſſyng
                  And with that worde, acompas enuyroun
                  They ſytten hem full ſoftely adown
                  Firſt ſate the god of loue, & ſythe hys quene
                  with the whyte corowne, clad all in greue
                  And ſythen all the remenaunt, by and by
                  As they were of eſtate, full curteſly
                  Ne nat a worde was ſpoken in the place
                  The moūtenaūce of a furlong way of ſpace
                  I knelyng by this floure, in good entente
                  Abode to knowen what this people mente
                  As ſtyll as any ſtone, tyll at the laſte
                  This god of loue, on me his eyen caſte
                  And ſaid, who kneleth there: and I anſwerde
                  Vnto hys aſkyng, whan that I it herde
                  And ſayd, ſyr it am I, and come hym nere
                  And ſalued hym▪ (ꝙ he) what doeſt thou here
                  So nygh myne owne floure, ſo boldely
                  It were better worthy trewly
                  A worme to nighen nere my floure thā thou
                  And why ſir (ꝙ I) and it lyke you?
                  For thou (ꝙ he) arte therto nothyng able
                  It is my relyke, digne and delytable
                  And thou my foe, & all my folke werreyeſt
                  And of myne olde ſeruauntes thou miſſayeſt
                  And hyndreſt hem, wyth thy tranſlation
                  And letteſt folke from her deuocion
                  To ſerue me, and holdeſt it folye
                  To ſerue loue, thou mayeſt it nat denye
                  For in playne text, wythouten nede of gloſe
                  Thou haſt tranſlated the Romaūt of ye Roſe
                  That is an hereſye ayenſt my lawe
                  And makeſt wyſe folke fro me withdrawe
                  And of Creſeyde, thou haſt ſayd as the lyſte
                  That maketh men to women leſſe tryſte
                  That ben as trewe as euer was any ſtele
                  Of thyn anſwere auyſe the ryght wele
                  For though thou renyed haſte my lay
                  As other wretches haue done many a day
                  By ſeynt Venus, that my mother is
                  If that thou lyue, thou ſhalt repenten this
                  So cruelly, that it ſhall wel be ſene
                  Tho ſpake this lady, clothed al in grene
                  And ſayd, god ryght of your curteſye
                  Ye mote herken yf he can replye
                  Agaynſt all thys, that ye haue to him meued
                  A god ne ſhulde nat be thus agreued
                  But of hys deyte he ſhall be ſtable
                  And therto gracious and merciable
                  And yf ye nere a god, that knowen all
                  Than might it be, as I you tellen ſhall
                  Thys man to you may falſely ben accuſed
                  That as by ryght, hym ought ben excuſed
                  For in your court is many a loſengeour
                  And many a queynt toteler accuſour
                  That Tabouren in your eares many a ſoun
                  Ryght after her ymaginatioun
                  To haue your daliaunce, and for enuy
                  Theſe ben the cauſes, and I ſhall not lye
                  Enuy is lauender of the court alwaye
                  For ſhe ne parteth neyther nyght ne daye
                  Out of the houſe of Ceſar thus ſayeth Dant
                  who ſo that goeth algate ſhe wol not want
                  And eke perauenter for thys man is nyce
                  He myght done it, geſſynge no malyce
                  But for he vſeth thynges for to make
                  Him recketh nought of what mater he take
                  Or hym was boden make thylke twey
                  Of ſome perſone, and durſt it not wythſey
                  Or hym repenteth vtterly of thys
                  He ne hath not done ſo greuouſly amys
                  To tranſlaten that olde clerkes wrytten
                  As though that he of malyce wold endytten
                  Dyſpyte of loue, & had hym ſelfe it wrought
                  This ſhuld a riȝtwiſe lord haue ī his thought
                  And not be lyke tyrauntes of Lombardy
                  That haue no rewarde but at tyranny
                  For he that kynge or lorde is naturell
                  Hym ought not be tyraunt ne cruell
                  As is a fermour, to done the harme he can
                  He muſt thynke it is hys liege man
                  And is hys treaſour, and hys golde in cofre
                  Thys is the ſentence of the philoſophre
                  A kynge to kepe hys lieges in iuſtyce
                  wythouten doute that is hys offyce
                  All wol he kepe hys lordes in her degre
                  As it is ryght and ſkyll, that they be
                  Enhaunced and honoured, and moſte dere
                  For they ben half goddes, in this world here
                  Yet mote he done both ryght to pore & ryche
                  All be that her eſtate be not both ylyche
                  And haue of poore folke compaſſyon
                  For lo, the gentell kynde of the lyon
                  For when a flye offendeth hym or byteth
                  He wyth hys tayle awaye the flye ſmyteth
                  All eaſely, for of hys gentrye
                  Hym deyneth not to wreke hym on a flye
                  As doth a curre, or els another beeſt
                  In noble corage ought ben areeſt
                  And wayen euery thynge by equite
                  And euer haue regarde vnto his owne degre
                  For ſyr, it is no mayſtrye for a lorde
                  To dampne a mā, without anſwere of word
                  And for a lorde, that is full foule to vſe
                  
                     And it ſo be, he may him nat excuſe
                  But aſketh mercy with a dredefull herte
                  And profereth hym, right in hys bare ſherte
                  To ben ryght at your owne iugement
                  Than ought a god by ſhorte auyſement
                  Conſydre his owne honour and his treſpace
                  For ſythe no cauſe of dethe lyeth in thys cace
                  You ought to ben the lightlyer mercyable
                  Leteth your ire, and bethe ſomwhat tretable
                  The man hath ſerued you of hys connynges
                  And forthred wel your law in his makinges
                  All be it that he can nat well endyte
                  Yet hath he made leude folke delyte
                  To ſerue you, in preyſyng of you name
                  He made the boke, yt hight the houſe of Fame
                  And eke the dethe of Blaunche the ducheſſe
                  And the Parlyment of Foules, as I geſſe
                  And all the loue of Palamon and Arcyte
                  Of Thebes, though the ſtorie is knowē lyte
                  And many an hympne, for your holydaies
                  That hyghten balades, roundels, virelayes
                  And for to ſpeke of other holyneſſe
                  He hath in proſe tranſlated Boece
                  And made the lyfe alſo of ſaynt Cecyle
                  He made alſo, gone is a great whyle
                  Origenes vpon the Maudelayne
                  Hym ought nowe to haue the leſſe payne
                  He hath made many a ley, and many a thyng
                  Nowe as ye be a god, and eke a kyng
                  I your alceſte, whylom quene of Trace
                  I aſke you this man right of your grace
                  That ye hym neuer hurte in all hys lyue
                  And he ſhall ſwearen to you, and that blyue
                  He ſhall neuer more agylten in thys wyſe
                  But ſhall maken as ye woll deuyſe
                  Of women trewe in louyng all her lyfe
                  where ſo ye woll, of mayden or of wyfe
                  And forthren you, as moche as he miſſeyde
                  Or in the Roſe, or els in Creſeyde
                  The god of Loue anſwerd her thus anon
                  Madame (ꝙ he) it is ſo longe agon
                  That I you knewe, ſo charitable and trew
                  That neuer yet, ſens the worlde was new
                  To me ne founde I better none than ye
                  If that I woll ſaue my degree
                  I may nor wol nat werne your requeſt
                  All lyth in you, dothe wyth hym as you leſt
                  I all foryeue withouten lenger ſpace
                  For who ſo yeueth a yefte or dothe a grace
                  Do it be tyme, hys thanke ſhall be the more
                  And demeth ye what he ſhall do therfore
                  Go thanke nowe my lady here (ꝙ he)
                  I roſe, and down I ſette me on my kne
                  And ſayd thus: Madame, the god aboue
                  For yelde you that the god of Loue
                  Haue maked me hys wrathe to foryeue
                  And grace ſo longe for to lyue
                  That I may knowe ſothly what ye be
                  That haue me holpen, and put in this degre
                  But trewly I wende, as in this caas
                  Nought haue agylte, ne done to loue treſpas
                  For why, a trewe man withouten drede
                  Hath nat to parten wyth a theues dede
                  Ne a trewe louer ought me nat to blame
                  Though that I ſpeke a falſe louer ſōe ſhame
                  They ought rather with me for to holde
                  For that I of Creſeyde wrote or tolde
                  Or of the Roſe, what ſo myne authour ment
                  Al gate god wotte it was myne entent
                  To forthren trouth in loue, and it cheryce
                  And to ben ware fro falſneſſe and fro vyce
                  By whiche enſample, this was my menyng
                  And ſhe anſwerd, let be thyne arguyng
                  For loue ne woll nat countrepleted be
                  In right ne wronge and lerne that of me
                  Thou haſte thy grace, & holde ye right therto
                  Now wol I ſayn what penaunce yu ſhalt do
                  For thy treſpace, vnderſtonde it here
                  Thou ſhalt while yt thou lyueſt yereby yere
                  The moſte partie of thy tyme ſpende
                  In makyng of a gloriouſe legende
                  Of good women, maydens, and wyues
                  That weren trewe in louyng all her lyues
                  And tell of falſe men that hem betrayen
                  That all her lyfe ne do nat but aſſayen
                  Howe many women they may done a ſhame
                  For in your worlde that is now hold a game
                  And though the lyke nat a louer be
                  Speke wel of loue, this penaunce yeue I the
                  And to the god of loue I ſhall ſo praye
                  That he ſhal charge his ſeruātes by any way
                  To fortheren the, and well thy labour quyte
                  Go nowe thy way, this penaunce is but lyte
                  And whā this boke is made, yeue it ye quene
                  On my behalfe, at Eltham, or at Shene
                  The god of loue gan ſmyle, and than he ſayd
                  woſt thou (ꝙ he) wher this be wyfe or mayde
                  Or quene, or counteſſe, or of what degre
                  That hath ſo lytell penaunce yeuen the
                  That haſte deſerued ſore for to ſmerte
                  But pyte renneth ſone in gentyll herte
                  That mayſt yu ſene, ſhe kytheth what ſhe is
                  And I anſwerde, nay ſyr ſo haue I blys
                  No more, but that I ſe well ſhe is good
                  
                     That is a trewe tale by myne hoode
                  (ꝙ Loue) and thou knoweſt well parde
                  If it be ſo that thou auyſe the
                  Haſte thou nat in a booke in thy cheſte
                  The great goodneſſe of the quene Alceſte
                  That turned was in to a dayeſye
                  She that for her huſbonde cheſe to dye
                  And eke to gone to hell, rather than he
                  And Hercules reſcued her parde
                  And brought her out of hell agayne to blys
                  And I anſwerde agayne, and ſayd yes
                  Nowe knowe I her, & is thys good Alceſte
                  The dayeſye, and myne owne hertes reſte
                  Nowe fele I wel the goodneſſe of this wyfe
                  That bothe after her dethe, and in her lyfe
                  Her great bountie doubleth her renoun
                  well hath ſhe quyt me myne affectioun
                  That I haue to her floure the dayeſye
                  No wonder is though Ioue her ſtellyfye
                  As telleth Agaton, for her great goodneſſe
                  Her whyte corowne beareth of it wytneſſe
                  For alſo many vertues had ſhe
                  As ſmall florouns in her corowne be
                  In remembraunce of her, and in honour
                  Cibylla made the dayeſy and the flour
                  I crowned all wyth white, as men may ſe
                  And Mars yaue to her a corown reed parde
                  In ſtede of Rubies ſet amonge the white
                  Therwith this quene wox red for ſhāe a lyte
                  whan ſhe was prayſed ſo in her preſence
                  Than ſayd Loue, a full great neglygence
                  was it to the, that ylke tyme thou made
                  (Hyde Abſolon thy treſſes) in balade
                  That thou forgete her in thy ſonge to ſette
                  Sythe that thou arte ſo greatly in her dette
                  And woſt well that kalender is ſhe
                  To any woman, that wol louer be
                  For ſhe taught all the crafte of trewe louyng
                  And namely of the wyfehode the lyueng
                  And all the boundes that ſhe ought kepe
                  Thy lytell wytte was thylke tyme a ſlepe
                  But nowe I charge the vpon thy lyfe
                  That in thy Legend thou make of this wyfe
                  whan thou haſte other ſmale ymade before
                  And fare nowe well, I charge the no more
                  But er I go, thus moche I wol the tell
                  Ne ſhall no trewe louer come in hell
                  Theſe other ladyes ſyttynge here a rowe
                  Ben in my balade, yf thou conſt hem knowe
                  And in thy bokes, all thou ſhalt hem fynde
                  Haue hem nowe in thy legende all in mynde
                  I meane of hem that ben in thy knowyng
                  For here ben twenty thouſande mo ſyttyng
                  Than thou knoweſt, good women all
                  And trewe of loue, for aught that may befall
                  Make the metres of hem as the leſt
                  I mote gon home, the ſunne draweth weſt
                  To paradys, wyth all this companye
                  And ſerue alway the freſhe dayeſye
                  At Cleopatras I woll that thou begynne
                  And ſo forthe, & my loue ſo ſhalt thou wynne
                  For let ſe nowe what man that louer be
                  wol done ſo ſtronge a payne for loue as ſhe
                  I wote wel that thou mayſte nat al it ryme
                  That ſuche louers dyd in her tyme
                  It were to longe to reden and to here
                  Suffyſeth me thou make in thys manere
                  That thou reherce of all her lyfe the great
                  After theſe olde authours lyſten for to treate
                  For who ſo ſhall ſo many a ſtorye tel
                  Sey ſhortely or he ſhall to longe dwel
                  And with that worde my bokes gan I take
                  And ryght thus on my legende gan I make.
               
               ¶Thus endeth the Prologue.
            
            
               ¶Here begynneth the legende of Cleopatras quene of Egypt.
               
                  AFter the dethe of Ptholome the kyng
               That al Egipt had in his gouernyng
               Reigned hys quene Cleopatras
               Tyl on a tyme byfell there ſuche a caas
               That out of Rome was ſent a ſenatour
               For to conqueren realmes and honour
               Vnto the towne of Rome, as was vſaunce
               To haue the worlde at her obeyſaunce
               And ſothe to ſay, Antonius was his name
               So fyl it, as fortune hym ought a ſhame
               whan he was fallen in proſperyte
               Rebell vnto the towne of Rome is he
               And ouer all thys, the ſuſter of Ceſare
               He lefte her falſly, er that ſhe was ware
               And wolde algates han another wyfe
               For which he toke with Rome & Ceſar ſtryfe
               Natheleſſe, for ſothe this ylke ſenatour
               Was a ful worthy gentyll werryour
               And of hys dethe it was full great domage
               
                  But loue had brought this mā in ſuch a rage
               And him ſo narowe bounden in hys laas
               And all for the loue of Cleopatras
               That all the worlde he ſette at no value
               Hym thouȝt ther was nothyng to him ſo due
               As Cleopatras, for to loue and ſerue
               Hym thought that in armes for to ſterue
               In the defence of her, and of her right
               This noble quene, eke loued ſo this knight
               Through his deſerte, and for his chyualrye
               As certaynly, but yf that bookes lye
               He was of perſon, and of gentylneſſe
               And of diſcretion, and of hardyneſſe
               worthy to any wight that lyuen may
               And ſhe was fayre, as is the roſe in May
               And for to maken ſhorte is the beſte
               She woxe his wyfe, & had him as her leſte
               The weddyng and the feeſt to deuyſe
               To me that haue ytake ſuche empriſe
               And ſo many a ſtorye for to make
               It were to longe, leſte that I ſhulde ſlake
               Of thyng that beareth more effecte & charge
               For men may ouerlade a ſhyp or barge
               And for thy, to effecte than woll I ſkyppe
               And all the remenaunt, I woll let it ſlyppe
               Octauian, that woode was of this dede
               Shope him an hooſte on Antony to lede
               All vtterly, for hys diſtruction
               wyth ſtoute romaynes, cruell as lyon
               To ſhyp they went, & thus I let hem ſayle
               Antonius was ware, and woll nat fayle
               To meten with theſe romaynes, yf he may
               Toke eke hys rede, and bothe vpon a day
               Hys wyfe & he, and all his hoſte forth wente
               To ſhyp anon, no lenger they ne ſtente
               And in the ſee it happed hem to mete
               Vp goth the trumpe, & for to ſhoute & ſhete
               And paynen hem to ſette on with the ſonne
               wyth griſly ſowne, out goth the great gonne
               And hertely they hurtlen in al at ones
               And fro ye toppe, down cometh ye gret ſtones
               In gothe the grapenell ſo full of crokes
               Amonge the ropes ran the ſheryng hokes
               In wyth the polaxe preaſeth he and he
               Behynde the maſte, begynneth he to flye
               And out agayne, and driueth hem ouer borde
               He ſtycketh hym vpon hys ſpeares orde
               He rente the ſayle with hokes lyke a ſythe
               He bringeth ye cuppe, & byddeth hem be blyth
               He poureth peeſen vpon the hatches ſlyder
               wyth pottes full of lyme, they gone to gyder
               And thus the longe day in fyght they ſpende
               Tyll at the laſte, as euery thyng hath ende
               Antony is ſhent, and put hym to the flyght
               And all his folke to go, that beſt go myght
               Fleeth eke the quene, withal her purpre ſayle
               For ſtrokes, which yt went as thicke as hayle
               No wonder was, ſhe might it nat endure
               And whan that Antony ſawe ye auenture
               Alas (ꝙ he) the day that I was borne
               My worſhyp in thys day thus haue I lorne
               And for diſpayre, out of hys wytte he ſterte
               And xofe hym ſelfe anon throughout ye herte
               Er that he ferther went out of the place
               His wyfe, that coulde of Ceſar haue no grace
               To Egypte is fled, for drede and for diſtreſſe
               But herkeneth ye that ſpeken of kyndeneſſe
               Ye men that falſly ſwearen many an othe
               That ye wol dye, yf that your loue be wroth
               Here may ye ſene of women ſuche a trouth
               This woful Cleopatre hath made ſuch routh
               That there nys tonge none that may it tell
               But on the morowe, ſhe wol no lenger dwel
               But made her ſubtyll werkmē make a ſhrine
               Of all the rubyes and the ſtones fyne
               In all Egypte, that ſhe coulde eſpye
               And put ful the ſhrine of ſpycerie
               And let ye corſe enbaume, and forthe ſhe fette
               This deed corſe, and in the ſhrine it ſhette
               And next the ſhrine a pyt than doth ſhe graue
               And all the ſerpentes that ſhe might haue
               She put hem in that graue, & thus ſhe ſeyde
               Now loue, to whō my ſorouful hert obeyde
               So ferforthly, that fro that blyſfull houre
               That I you ſwore, to ben all frely your
               I meane you, Antonius my knyght
               That neuer wakyng in the day or nyght
               Ye nere out of myn hertes remembraunce
               For well or wo, for carole, or for daunce
               And in my ſelfe, this couenaunt made I tho
               That ryght ſuche as ye felten wele or wo
               As ferforthe as it in my power laye
               Vnreprouable vnto my wyfehod aye
               The ſame wolde I felen, lyfe or dethe
               And thilke couenaūt, whyle me laſteth breth
               I woll fulfyl, and that ſhall well be ſene
               was neuer vnto her loue a trewer quene
               And with ye word, naked with ful good herte
               Amonge the ſerpentes in the pytte ſhe ſterte
               And there ſhe cheſe to haue her buryeng
               Anon the nedders gonne her for to ſtynge
               And ſhe her dethe receyueth with good chere
               For loue of Antony that was her ſo dere
               And this is ſtoryall, ſothe it is no fable
               
                  Now er I fynde a mā thus trewe & ſtable
               And woll for loue hys death ſo frely take
               I praye god let our heades neuer ake.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the legende of Cleopatras, and here foloweth the legende of Tiſbe of Babilon.
               
                  AT Babylon whylom fell it thus
               The whych towne the quene Simyramus
               Let dytchen all aboute, and walles make
               Full hye, of harde tyles well ybake
               There were dwellynge in thys noble towne
               Two lordes, which yt were of great renown
               And woneden ſo nygh vpon a grene
               That ther nas but a ſtone wal hem betwene
               As ofte in great townes is the wonne
               And ſoth to ſayne, yt one man had a ſonne
               Of all that lande, one of the luſtyeſt
               That other had a doughter, the fayreſt
               That eaſtward in ye world was tho dwellīg
               The name of eueryche, gan to other ſpryng
               By women that were neyghbours aboute
               For in that countrey yet wythouten doute
               Maydens ben ykept for ielouſye
               Full ſtreyte, leſte they dydden ſome folye
               Thys yonge man was cleped Piramus
               Tyſbe hyght the mayde (Naſo ſayeth thus)
               And thus by reporte, was her name yſhoue
               That as they woxe in age, ſo woxe her loue
               And certayne, as by reaſon of her age
               There might haue ben bitwixt hem mariage
               But that her fathers nolde it not aſſente
               And both in loue ylyke ſore they brente
               That none of all her frendes myght it lette
               But priuely ſomtyme yet they mette
               By ſleyght, and ſpaken ſome of her deſyre
               As wrye the glede, and hotter is the fyre
               Forbyd a loue, and it is ten tymes ſo wode
               This wal, which yt betwixt hem both ſtode
               was clouen a two, right fro the toppe adoun
               Of olde tyme, of hys foundacion
               But yet this clyfte was ſo narowe and lyte
               It was not ſene, dere ynough a myte
               But what is that, that loue can not eſpye
               Ye louers two, yf that I ſhall not lye
               Ye founden fyrſt thys lytell narowe clyfte
               And wyth a ſounde, as ſofte as any ſhryfte
               They let her wordes through the clyfte pace
               And tolden, whyle yt they ſtoden in the place
               All her complaynt of loue, and all her wo
               At euery tyme when they durſt ſo
               On that one ſyde of the wall ſtode he
               And on that other ſyde ſtode Tyſbe
               The ſwete ſowne of other to receyue
               And thus her wardeyns wold they dyſceyue
               And euery daye thys wall they wolde threte
               And wyſhe to god, that it were downe ybete
               Thus wold they ſayne, alas yu wycked wall
               Through thyne enuye, thou vs letteſt all
               why nyit thou cleaue, or fallen all a two
               Or at the leeſt, but thou woldeſt ſo
               Yet woldeſt thou but ones let vs mete
               Or ones that we myght kyſſen ſwete
               Then were we cured of our cares colde
               But natheleſſe, yet be we to the holde
               In as moche as thou ſuffreſt for to gone
               Our wordes thrugh thy lime & eke thy ſtone
               Yet ought we wyth the ben well apayde
               And when theſe ydell wordes weren ſayd
               The colde wall they wollen kyſſe of ſtone
               And take her leaue, & forth they woldē gone
               And thys was gladly in the euentyde
               Or wonder early, leſt men it eſpyde
               And lōge tyme they wrought in this manere
               Tyl on a daye, when Phebus gan to clere
               Aurora wyth the ſtremes of her hete
               Had dryed vp the dewe of herbes wete
               Vnto thys clyfte, as it was wonte to be
               Come Piramus, and after come Tiſbe
               And plyghten trouth, fully in her fay
               That ylke ſame nyght to ſteale away
               And to begyle her wardeyns euerychone
               And forth out of the cytie for to gone
               And for the feldes ben ſo brode and wyde
               For to mete in o place at o tyde
               They ſet markes, her metynges ſhulde be
               There kynge Ninus was grauē, vnder a tre
               For olde paynems, that ydolles heryed
               Vſeden tho in feldes to ben buryed
               And faſt by thys graue was a well
               And ſhortly of thys tale for to tell
               Thys couenaunt was affyrmed wonder faſt
               And longe hem thought that the ſunne laſt
               That it nere gone vnder the ſee adoun
               Thys Tiſbe hath ſo great affectioun
               And ſo great lykynge Piramus to ſe
               That when ſhe ſawe her tyme myght be
               At nyght ſhe ſtale awaye full priuely
               
                  wyth her face ywympled ſubtelly
               For all her frendes (for to ſaue her trouth)
               She hath forſake alas, and that is routhe
               That euer woman wolde be ſo trewe
               To truſten man, but ſhe the bet hym knewe
               And to the tree ſhe goeth a full good pace
               For loue made her ſo hardy in thys caſe
               And by the well, adowne ſhe gan her dreſſe
               Alas, then cometh a wylde lyoneſſe
               Out of the wodde, wythouten more areeſt
               wyth bloody mouth, of ſtranglyng of a beeſt
               To drynken of the well there as ſhe ſat
               And when that Tiſby had eſpyed that
               She ryſt her vp, wyth a full drery herte
               And in a caue, wyth dredfull foote ſhe ſterte
               For by the moone ſhe ſawe it well wythall
               And as ſhe ran, her wymple let ſhe fall
               And toke no hede, ſo ſore ſhe was a whaped
               And eke ſo glad that ſhe was eſcaped
               And thus ſhe ſate, and lurketh wonder ſtyll
               when that thys lyoneſſe hath dronke her fyll
               Aboute the well gan ſhe for to wynde
               And ryght anone the wymple gan ſhe fynde
               And wyth her blody mouth it all to rente
               when thys was done, no lenger ſhe ne ſtente
               But to ye wodde her way thē hath ſhe nome
               And at the laſt thys Piramus is come
               But all to longe (alas) at home was he
               The moone ſhone, men myght well yſe
               And in hys way, as that he come full faſte
               Hys eyen to the grounde adowne he caſte
               And in the ſonde, as he behelde adoun
               He ſawe the ſteppes brode of a lyoun
               And in hys herte he ſodeynly agroſe
               And pale he wexte, therwyth hys herte aroſe
               And nere he came, & foūde the wymple torne
               Alas (quod he) the daye that I was borne
               Thys o nyght wyll both vs louers ſlee
               Howe ſhulde I aſken mercy of Tiſbee
               when I am he that haue you ſlayne, alas
               My byddynge hath you ſlayne in thys caas
               Alas, to bydde a woman gone by nyght
               In place there as peryll fallen myght
               And I ſo ſlowe, alas I ne had be
               Here in thys place, a furlonge way crye
               Nowe what lyoun that is in thys foreſte
               My body mote he rente, or what beſte
               That wylde is, gnawen mote he myne herte
               And with that worde, he to ye wymple ſterte
               And kyſt it ofte, and wept on it full ſore
               And ſayd wymple alas, there nys nomore
               But thou ſhalt fele as well the bloode of me
               As thou haſte felte the bledynge of Tiſbe
               And wyth yt worde, he ſmote hym to ye herte
               The bloode out of the woūde as brode ſterte
               As water, when the conduyt broken is
               Nowe Tiſbe, whych that wyſt not thys
               But ſyttynge in her drede, ſhe thought thus
               Yf it ſo fall that my Piramus
               Be comen hether, and may me not yfynde
               He may me holden falſe, and eke vnkynde
               And out ſhe cometh, & after hym gan eſpyen
               Both wyth her herte, and wyth her eyen
               And thought, I woll hym tellen of my drede
               Both of the lyoneſſe and of my dede
               And at the laſte her loue then hath ſhe foūde
               Beatynge wyth hys heeles on the groūde
               All blody, and therwythall abacke ſhe ſterte
               And lyke the wawes, quappe gan her herte
               And pale as boxe ſhe woxe, and in a throwe
               Auyſed her, and gan hym well to knowe
               That it was Piramus her herte dere
               who coulde wryte whych a deedly chere
               Hath Tiſbe nowe, & how her heere ſhe rente
               And howe ſhe gan her ſelfe to turmente
               And how ſhe lyeth & ſwouneth on ye groūde
               And how ſhe wept of teeres full his woūde
               How medleth ſhe his bloode, wt her cōplaint
               How wt his bloode, her ſeluen gan ſhe paynt
               Howe clyppeth ſhe the deed corſe, alas
               Howe doth thys wofull Tiſbe in thys caas
               Howe kyſſeth ſhe hys froſty mouthe ſo colde
               who hath don this? & who hath ben ſo bold?
               To ſleen my lefe, o ſpeake Piramus
               I am thy Tiſbe, that the calleth thus
               And therwythall ſhe lyfteth vp hys heed
               Thys wofull mā, that was not fully deed
               when that he herde the name of Tiſbe cryen
               On her he caſt hys heuy deedly eyen
               And downe agayne, & yeldeth vp the gooſt
               Tiſbe ryſt vp, wythout noyſe or booſt
               And ſawe her wymple and hys empty ſheth
               And eke hys ſwerde, yt hym hath don to deth
               Then ſpake ſhe thus, thy woful hāde (ꝙ ſhe)
               Is ſtronge ynough in ſuch a werke to me
               For loue ſhall yeue me ſtrength & hardyneſſe
               To make my wounde large ynough I geſſe
               I woll the folowen deed, and I woll be
               Felowe, and cauſe eke of thy dethe (ꝙ ſhe)
               And though yt nothynge ſaue the deth only
               Myght the fro me departe truely
               Thou ſhalt no more departe nowe fro me
               Then fro the deth, for I woll go wyth the
               And nowe ye wretched ielouſe fathers our
               
                  we that weren whylom chyldren your
               we prayen you, wythouten more enuye
               That in o graue we moten lye
               Sens loue hath brought vs this pitous end
               And ryghtwyſe God, to euery louer ſend
               That loueth truly more proſperite
               Then euer had Piramus and Tiſbe
               And let no gentyll woman her aſſure
               To putten her in ſuche an auenture
               But god forbyd but a woman can
               Ben as trewe and louynge as a man
               And for my parte, I ſhall anone it kyth
               And wyth ye word, his ſwerd ſhe toke ſwyth
               That warme was of her loues blode, & hote
               And to the herte ſhe her ſeluen ſmote
               And thus are Tiſbe and Piramus ygo
               Of trewe men I fynde but fewe mo
               In all my bokes, ſaue thys Piramus
               And therfore haue I ſpoken of hym thus
               For it is deynte to vs men to fynde
               A man that can in loue be trewe and kynde
               Here maye ye ſene, what louer ſo he be
               A woman dare, and can as well as he.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the legende of Tyſbe of Babilon, and here foloweth the legende of Dido quene of Cartage.
               
                  GLorie and honoure Virgyle Mantuan
               Be to thy name, and I ſhall as I can
               Folowe thy lanterne, as thou goeſt byforne
               Howe Eneas to Dido was forſworne
               In thyne Eneyde, and Naſo woll I take
               The tenour and the great effectes make
               when Troye brought was to dyſtruction
               By grekes ſleyght, and namely by Synon
               Faynynge the horſe offred vnto Minerue
               Through which yt many a troyā muſt ſterue
               And Hector had after hys death apered
               And fyre ſo wode, it myght not ben ſtered
               In all the noble toure of Ilion
               That of the cytie was the chefe dongeon
               And all the countre was ſo lowe ybrought
               And Priamus the kynge fordone & nought
               And Eneas was charged by Venus
               To flyen awaye, he toke Aſcanius
               That was his ſon, in his right hāde & fledde
               And on hys backe he bare, & wyth hym ledde
               His olde father, cleped Anchyſes
               And by the way hys wyfe Creuſa he lees
               And mokell ſorowe had he in hys mynde
               Er that he coulde his felawſhyp fynde
               But at the laſte, whan he had hem founde
               He made hym redy, in a certayne ſtounde
               And to the ſee ful faſte he gan hym hye
               And ſayleth forthe, with all hys companye
               Towarde Itayle, as wolde deſtynee
               But of his auentures in the ſee
               Nys nat to purpoſe for to ſpeke of here
               For it acordeth nat to my matere
               But as I ſayd, of hym and of Dido
               Shall be my tale, tyll that I haue do
               So longe he ſayled in the ſalte ſee
               Tyll in Libye vnneth arryued he
               So was he wyth the tempeſt all to ſhake
               And whan that he the hauen had ytake
               He had a knight was called Achatees
               And hym of all hys felawſhyp he thees
               To gone wyth hym, the countrey for teſpye
               He toke wyth hym nomore companye
               But forth they gone, & lefte his ſhyppes ryde
               His feere and he, wythouten any gyde
               So longe he walketh in this wylderneſſe
               Tyll at the laſte he mette an huntereſſe
               A bowe in honde, and arowes had ſhe
               Her clothes cutted were vnto the knee
               But ſhe was yet the fayreſt creature
               That euer was yformed by nature
               And Eneas and Achates ſhe grette
               And thus ſhe to hem ſpake, whā ſhe hē mette
               Sawe ye (ꝙ ſhe) as ye han walked wyde
               Any of my ſuſtren walke you beſyde
               Wyth any wylde bore, or other beeſt
               That they haue hunted to in this foreſt
               I tucked vp, wyth arowes in her caas
               Nay ſothly lady (ꝙ this Eneas)
               But by thy beautie, as it thynketh me
               Thou myghteſt neuer erthely woman be
               But Phebus ſuſter art thou, as I geſſe
               And yf ſo be that thou be a goddeſſe
               Haue mercy on our labour and our wo
               I nam no goddeſſe ſothly (ꝙ ſhe) tho
               For maydens walken in this countre here
               wyth arowes & with bowe, in this manere
               This is the realme of Libye, there ye bene
               Of whiche that Dido lady is and quene
               And ſhortly tolde all the occaſyon
               why Dido came in to that regyon
               Of whyche as nowe me lyſteth nat to ryme
               
                  It nedeth not, it nere but loſſe of tyme
               For thys is all and ſome, it was Venus
               Hys owne mother, yt ſpake wyth hym thus
               And to Cartage ſhe bad he ſhulde him dyght
               And vanyſhed anone out of hys ſyght
               I coulde folowe worde for worde Vergyle
               But it wolde laſten all to longe whyle
               Thys noble quene that clypped was Dido
               That whylom was the wyfe of Sitheo
               That fayrer was then the bryght ſonne
               This noble towne of Cartage hath begonne
               In whych ſhe raygneth in ſo great honour
               That ſhe was holde of all quenes flour
               Of gentylleſſe, of fredome, and of beautee
               That well was hym that myght ones ſee
               Of kynges and lordes ſo deſyred
               That all ye worlde her beauty had yfyred
               She ſtode ſo well in euery wyghtes grace
               when Eneas was come vnto the place
               Vnto the mayſter temple of all the toun
               There Dido was in her deuocioun
               Full priuely hys waye then hath he nome
               when he was in the large temple come
               I can not ſayne, yf that it be poſſyble
               But Venus had hym maked inuiſible
               Thus ſayeth the boke wythouten any lees
               And when thys Eneas and Achates
               Hadden in thys temple ben ouer all
               Then founde they depaynted on a wall
               Howe Troye and al the lāde dyſtroyed was
               Alas that I was borne (quod Eneas)
               Through ye world our ſhame is kyd ſo wyde
               Nowe it is paynted on euery ſyde
               we that weren in proſperite
               Ben nowe dyſclaundred, and in ſuche degre
               No lenger for to lyuen I ne kepe
               And wyth yt worde, he braſt out for to wepe
               So tenderly, that routhe it was to ſene
               Thys freſhe lady of the cyte quene
               Stode in the temple, in her eſtate royall
               So rychely, and eke ſo fayre wyth all
               So yonge, ſo luſty, wyth her eyen glade
               That yf that god, that heuen & earth made
               wolde haue a loue, for beauty and goodneſſe
               And womanheed, troth, and ſemelyneſſe
               whom ſhulde he louen, but thys lady ſwete?
               There nys no woman to hym halfe ſo mete
               Fortune, that hath the world in gouernaūce
               Hath ſodaynly brought in ſo newe a chaunce
               That neuer was there yet ſo frened a caas
               For all the company of Eneas
               whych we wende haue lorne in the ſee
               Armed is nought ferre fro that cyte
               For whych the greateſt of hys lordes, ſome
               By auenture ben to the cyte come
               Vnto the ſame temple for to ſeke
               The quene, and of her ſocour her beſeke
               ſuch renōe was ther ſprōge of her goodneſſe
               And when they had tolde all her dyſtreſſe
               And all her tempeſt and all her harde caas
               Vnto the quene appered Eneas
               And openly beknewe that it was he
               who had ioye then, but thys meyne
               That haddē foūde her lorde, her gouernour
               The quene ſawe they dyd him ſuch honour
               And had herden ofte of Eneas, er tho
               And in her herte had routh and wo
               That euer ſuche a noble man as he
               Shall ben dyſherited in ſuche degre
               And ſawe ye man, yt he was lyke a knyght
               And ſuffyſaunt of perſone and of myght
               And lyke to ben a very gentylman
               And well hys wordes he beſette can
               And had a noble vyſage for the nones
               And formed well of brawne and of bones
               And after Venus, had ſuche fayrneſſe
               That no mā myght be halfe ſo fayre I geſſe
               And well a lorde hym ſemed for to be
               And for he was a ſtraunger, ſomwhat ſhe
               Lyked hym the bette, as god do boote
               To ſome folke, often newe thynge is ſwote
               Anone her herte hath pyte of hys wo
               And wyth pyte, loue came alſo
               And thus for pyte and for gentylneſſe
               Refreſhed muſt he ben of hys dyſtreſſe
               She ſayde: certes, that ſhe ſory was
               That he hath had ſuch peryl and ſuch caas
               And in her frendly ſpeche, in thys manere
               She to hym ſpake, and ſayd as ye may here.
               Be ye not Venus ſonne and Anchyſes
               In good fayth, all the worſhyp and encrees
               That I maye goodly done you, ye ſhall haue
               Your ſhyppes and your meyne ſhall I ſaue
               And many a gentyll worde ſhe ſpake hym to
               And commaunded her meſſangers to go
               The ſame daye wythouten any fayle
               Hys ſhyppes for to ſeke, and hem vytayle
               Full many a beeſt ſhe to the ſhyppes ſent
               And wyth the wyne ſhe gan hem to preſent
               And to her royall paleys ſhe her ſpedde
               And Eneas alwaye wyth her ſhe ledde
               what nedeth you the feeſtes to dyſcryue
               He neuer better at eaſe was in hys lyue
               Full was the feeſt of deynties and rycheſſe
               
                  Of inſtrumentes of ſonge, and of gladneſſe
               And many an amorous lokynge and deuyſe
               Thys Eneas is come to paradyſe
               Out of the ſwolowe of hell, and thus in ioye
               Remembreth hym of hys eſtate in Troye
               To dauncynge chābres ful of paramentes
               Of ryche beddes, and of pauementes
               Thys Eneas is ledde after the meete
               And wyth the quene when that he had ſeete
               And ſpyces parted, and the wyne agone
               Vnto hys chambre was he ladde anone
               To take hys eaſe, and for to haue hys reſte
               wyth all hys folke, to done what ſo hem leſte
               There nas courſer well ybrydled none
               Ne ſtede for the iuſtynge well to gone
               Ne large palfrey, eaſy for the nones
               Ne iowell fret full of ryche ſtones
               Ne ſackes full of golde, of large wyght
               Ne ruby none that ſhyneth by nyght
               Ne gentyll hauten faukon heronere
               Ne hounde for herte, wylde bore, or deere
               Ne cuppe of golde, wyth floreyns newe ybet
               That in the lande of Libye may ben gette
               That Dido ne hath it Eneas yſent
               And all is payed, what that he hath ſpent
               Thus cā this honorable quene her geſtes cal
               As ſhe that can in fredome paſſen al
               Eneas ſothely eke, wythout lees
               Hath ſent to hys ſhyppe by Achates
               After hys ſonne, and after ryche thynges
               Both ſceptre, clothes, broches, & eke rynges
               Some for to weare, and ſome to preſente
               To her, that al theſe noble thinges him ſent
               And bad his ſonne howe that he ſhuld make
               The preſentynge, and to the quene it take
               Repayred is thys Achates agayne
               And Eneas full blyſfull is and fayne
               To ſene hys yonge ſonne Aſcanyus
               For to hym it was reported thus
               That Cupido, that is the god of loue
               At prayer of hys mother hye aboue
               And the lykeneſſe of the chylde ytake
               Thys noble quene enamoured for to make
               On Eneas, but of that ſcripture
               Be as be maye, I make of it no cure
               But ſoth is thys, ye quene hath made ſuche chere
               Vnto this child, that wōder is to here
               And of the preſente that hys father ſent
               She thanked hym ofte in good entent
               Thus is thys quene in pleaſaunce & ioye
               wyth all theſe newe luſty folke of Troye
               And of the dedes hath ſhe more enquyred
               Of Eneas, and all the ſtorye lered
               Of Troye, and all the longe day they twey
               Entendeden for to ſpeke and for to pley
               Of whych there gan to breden ſuche a fyre
               That ſely Dido hath nowe ſuche deſyre
               wyth Eneas her newe geſte to deale
               That ſhe loſte her hewe and eke her heale
               Nowe to theffecte, nowe to the frute of all
               why I haue tolde thys ſtorye, and tellē ſhall
               Thus I begynne, it fell vpon a nyght
               when that the moone vpreyſed had her lyght
               Thys noble quene vnto her reſte wente
               She ſygheth ſore, & gon her ſelfe turmente
               She waketh, waloweth, & made many braid
               As done theſe louers, as I haue herde ſayd
               And at the laſte, vnto her ſuſter Anne
               She made her mone, & riȝt thus ſpak ſhe thā
               
               Nowe dere ſuſter myne, what may it be
               That me agaſteth in my dreme (quod ſhe)
               Thys ylke newe troyan is ſo in my thought
               For that me thynketh he is ſo wel ywrought
               And eke ſo lykely to ben a man
               And therwyth ſo mykell good he can
               That al my loue and lyfe lyeth in hys cure
               Haue ye not herde hym tell hys auenture?
               Nowe certes Anne, yf that ye rede me
               I woll fayne to hym ywedded be
               Thys is ye effecte, what ſhulde I more ſeyne
               In hym lyeth all, to do my lyue or deyne
               Her ſuſter Anne, as ſhe yt coulde her good
               Said as her thought, & ſomdele it withſtode
               But here of was ſo longe a ſermonynge
               It were to longe to make reherſynge
               But fynally, it maye not be wythſtonde
               Loue woll loue, for no wyght wol it wonde
               The dawnynge vp ryſt, out of the ſee
               Thys amerous quene chargeth her meyne
               The nettes dreſſe, and ſpeares brode & kene
               An huntynge woll thys luſty freſhe quene
               So prycketh her thys newe ioly wo
               To horſe is all her luſty folke ygo
               Vnto the court the houndes ben ybrought
               And vp on courſer ſwyfte as any thought
               Her yonge knyghtes heuen all aboute
               And of her women eke an huge route
               Vpon a thycke palfraye, paper whyte
               wyth ſadell reed, enbrouded wyth delyte
               Of golde the barres, vp enboſſed hygh
               Sate Dido, all in golde and perrey wrygh
               And ſhe is fayre, as is the bryght morowe
               That healeth ſycke folkes of nyghtes ſorow
               Vpon a courſer, ſtartlynge as the fyre
               
                  Men myght turne hym wyth a lytell wyre
               But Eneas, lyke Phebus to deuyſe
               So was he freſhe arayed in hys wyſe
               The fomy brydell, wyth the bytte of golde
               Gouerneth he ryght as hym ſelf hath wolde
               And forth, thys noble quene, thys lady ryde
               On huntynge, wyth thys troyan by her ſyde
               The heerde of hartes, founden is anone
               with hey gobet, prycke thou, let gon, let gone
               why nyll the lyon comen or the beare
               That I might him ones metē wt this ſpeare
               Thus ſayne this yonge folke, & vp they kyll
               The wylde hartes, & haue hem at her wyll
               Amonge al thys, to romblen gan the heuen
               The thonder rored wyth a gryſly ſteuen
               Downe come ye rayne, wt hayle & ſlet ſo faſte
               wyth heuens fyre, that made ſo ſore agaſte
               Thys noble quene, and alſo her meyne
               That eche of hem was glad awaye to flye
               And ſhortly fro the tempeſt her to ſaue
               She fled her ſelfe, into a lytell caue
               And wyth her went thys Eneas alſo
               I not wyth hem yf there went any mo
               The auctoure maketh of it no mencion
               And here began the depe affection
               Bytwixt hem two this was ye fyrſt morowe
               Of her gladneſſe, & gynnyng of her ſorowe
               For there hath Eneas ykneled ſo
               And tolde her all hys hurte and all hys wo
               And ſworne ſo depe to her to be trewe
               For well or wo, and chaunge for no newe
               And as a falſe louer, ſo well can playne
               That ſely Dido rewed on hys payne
               And toke him for huſbōde, & became his wife
               For euer more, whyle that hem laſte lyfe
               And after thys, when yt the tempeſt ſtente
               with myrth out as they came, home they wēt
               The wycked fame vp roſe, and that anone
               Howe Eneas hath wyth the quene ygone
               In to the caue, and demed as hem leſte
               And when ye kyng (yt Yarbas hyght) it wyſt
               As he that had her loued euer hys lyfe
               And wowed her to haue to hys wyſe
               Such ſorow as he hath maked, & ſuche chere
               It is a ruthe and pyte for to here
               But as in loue, aldaye it happeth ſo
               That one ſhall laughen at anothers wo
               Nowe laugheth Eneas, and is in ioye
               And more richeſſe, then euer was in Troye
               O ſely woman, full of innocence
               Full of pyte, of truthe, and contynence
               what maked you to men to truſten ſo?
               Haue ye ſuch routh vpon her fayned wo
               And haue ſuche olde enſamples you beforne
               Se ye not all howe they ben forſworne
               where ſe ye one, that he ne hath lafte his lefe
               Or ben vnkynde, or done her ſome myſchefe
               Or pylled her, or boſted of hys dede
               Ye maye as well it ſene, as ye may rede
               Take hede nowe of thys great gentylman
               Thys troyan that ſo well her pleaſe can
               That fayneth hym ſo trewe and obeyſynge
               So gentyll, and ſo preuy of hys doynge
               And can ſo well done all hys obeyſaunce
               To her, at feeſtes and at daunce
               And whē ſhe goeth to temple, & home ageine
               And faſten tyll he hath hys lady ſeyne
               And bearen in hys deuyſes for her ſake
               Not I not what, and ſonges wolde he make
               Iuſten, and done of armes many thynges
               Sende her letters, tokens, broches, & rynges
               Now herkneth how he ſhal his lady ſerue
               There as he was in peryll for to ſterue
               For honger and for myſchefe in the ſee
               And deſolate, and fledde fro hys countree
               And all hys folke wyth tempeſt al to dryuen
               She hath her body & eke her realme yeuen
               In to hys honde, there ſhe myght haue bene
               Of other lande then of Cartage a quene
               And lyued ī ioy ynough, what wold ye more
               Thys Eneas, that hath thus depe yſwore
               Is wery of hys crafte wythin a throwe
               The hote erneſt is all ouerblowe
               And priuely he doth hys ſhyppes dyght
               And ſhapeth hym to ſteale awaye by nyght
               Thys Dido hath ſuſpection of thys
               And thought well that it was all amys
               For in hys bedde he lyeth a nyght and ſyketh
               She aſketh him anone, what him miſlyketh
               My dere herte, whych that I loue moſte
               Certes (ꝙ he) thys nyght my fathers goſt
               Hath in my ſlepe, me ſo ſore turmented
               And eke marcury his meſſage hath preſented
               That nedes to the conqueſt of Itayle
               My deſtyne is ſoone for to ſayle
               For which me thinketh, broſtē is myne herte
               Therwyth hys falſe teeres out they ſterte
               And taketh her wythin hys armes two
               Is that in erneſt (ꝙ ſhe) woll ye ſo
               Haue ye not ſworne, to wyfe me to take
               Alas, what woman woll ye of me make?
               I am a gentyl woman, and a quene
               Ye woll not fro your wyfe thus foule flene
               That I was borne alas, what ſhall I do?
               
                  To tellen in ſhort, this noble quene Dido
               She ſeketh halowes, and doth ſacrifyce
               She kneleth, cryeth, yt routhe is it to deuyſe
               Coniureth hym, and proffreth hym to be
               His thral, his ſeruaūt, in the beſt degree
               She falleth hym to foote, & ſwouneth there
               Diſcheuyle with her bryght gylt heer
               And ſayth, haue mercy, let me wt you ryde
               Theſe lordes, which ye wonnen me beſyde
               woll me deſtroyen only for your ſake
               And ye woll me now to wyf take
               As ye haue ſworn, thā wol I yeue you leue
               To ſleen me wt your ſwerd, now ſone at eue
               For than yet ſhall I dyen as your wyfe
               I am with chylde, & yeue my chylde his lyfe
               Mercy lorde, haue pytie in your thought
               But al this thing auayleth her ryght nouȝt
               And as a traytour forth gan to ſayle
               Towarde the large countre of Itayle
               And thus hath he left Dido in wo & pyne
               And wedded there a lady hyght Rauyne
               A cloth he laft, & eke his ſwerde ſtōdynge
               whan he fro Dido ſtale in her ſlepyng
               Ryght at her beddes heed, ſo gan he hye
               whan that he ſtale awaye to his nauye
               which cloth, whā ſely Dido gan awake
               She hath it kyſt full oft for his ſake
               And ſayd, o ſwete cloth, while iupiter it leſt
               Take my ſoule, vnbynde me of this vnreſt
               I haue fulfylled of fortune all the courſe
               And thus alas, withouten his ſocourſe
               Twenty tyme yf wouned hath ſhe than
               And whan that ſhe vnto her ſuſter Anne
               Cōplayned had, of which I may not wryte
               So great routh I haue it to endyte
               And bad her norice and her ſuſtren gon
               To fetchen fyre, and other thynges anon
               And ſayd that ſhe wolde ſacrifye
               And whan ſhe myght her tyme wel aſpy
               Vpon the fyre of ſacrifyce ſhe ſterte
               And wt his ſwerde ſhe rofe her to the hert
               But as myn auctor ſayth, yet thus ſhe ſeyd
               Or ſhe was hurt, beforne or ſhe deyed
               She wrote a letter anon, and tus began
               Ryght ſo (ꝙ ſhe) as the whyte ſwan
               Ayenſt his deth begynneth for to ſynge
               Ryght ſo to you I make my cōplaynyng
               Not that I trowe to getten you agayne
               For wel I wot it is all in vayne
               Syns yt the goddes ben cōtrarions to me
               But ſyn my name is loſt thrugh you (ꝙ ſhe)
               I may well leſe a worde on you or letter
               All be it, I ſhalbe neuer the better
               For thilke wynde yt blew your ſhyp away
               The ſame winde hath blowaway your fay
               But whoſo wol al this letter haue in minde
               Rede Ouyde, and in hym he ſhal it fynde
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the legende of Dido quene of Cartage: And here foloweth the legend of Hypſiphile and Medea.
               
                  THou rote of falſe louers, duke Iaſon
               Thou ſleer, deuourer, and confuſion
               Of gentle women, gentle creatures
               Thou madeſt thy reclaymyng & thy lures
               To ladyes of thy ſcathlyche apparaunce
               And of thy wordes farſed with pleaſaunce
               And of thy fayned trouth, and thy manere
               with thyne obeyſaunce and humble chere
               And wt thy counterfayted payne and wo
               There other falſen one, thou falſed two
               O oft ſwore thou, that thou woldeſt dye
               For loue, whan thou ne felteſt malady
               Saue foule delyte, whiche thou calleſt loue
               Yf that I lyue, thy name ſhalbe ſhoue
               In englyſh, that thy diſceyte ſhalbe knowe
               Haue at the Iaſon, now thyne honoure is blowe
               But certes, it is both routh and wo
               That loue with falſe louers worketh ſo
               For they ſhal haue well better loue & chere
               Than he that hath bought loue ful dere
               Or had in armes many a blody boxe
               For euer as tender a capon eateth the foxe
               Though he be falſe, & hath ye foule betrayde
               As ſhall the good man yt therfore payde
               Although he haue to ye capon ſkil and right
               The falſe foxe wol haue his parte at nyght
               On Iaſon this example is wel yſene
               By Hypſiphyle and Medea the quene
               In Theſſalye, as Ouyde telleth vs
               There was a knyght that hyght Pelleus
               That had a brother which that hyght Eſō
               
               And whā for age he myght vnethes gon
               He yaue to Pelleus the gouernyng
               Of al his reygne, & made hym lord & kynge
               Of which Eſon, this Iaſon getten was
               That in his tyme, and in al ye land there nas
               Not ſuche a famous knyght of gentleneſſe
               Of fredome, of ſtrength, and of luſtyneſſe
               After his fathers death he bare hym ſo
               
                  That there was none that lyſt ben his ſo
               But dyd hym al honour and company
               Of which this Pelleus hath great enuy
               Imaginyng, that Iaſon myght be
               Enhaunced ſo, and put in ſuche degree
               with loue of lordes of his regyoun
               That frō his reigne, he may be put adoun
               And in his wyt a nyght compaſſed he
               How Iaſon myght beſt deſtroyed be
               withouten ſclaunder of his compaſment
               And at the laſt he toke aduyſement
               That to ſendē him into ſome ferre countrie
               There as this Iaſon may deſtroyed be
               This was his wyt, al made he to Iaſon
               Great chere of loke, and of affectioun
               For drede leſt his lordes it eſpyde
               So fyll it, as fame ronneth wyde
               Ther was ſuche tydyng ouer al, & ſuch loos
               That in an yle that called was Colcos
               Beyonde Troy eſtwarde in the ſee
               That ther was a ram that men myght ſe
               That had a flees of golde yt ſhone ſo bryght
               That now her was ther ſuch another ſyght
               But it was kept alwaye with a drogoun
               And many other maruayles vp and doune
               And with two bulles maked al of bras
               That ſpyttē fyre, & moche thyng there was
               But this was eke the tale nathelees
               That whoſo wolde wynnen thilke flees
               He muſt both, or he it wynne myght
               with the bulles and the dragon fyght
               And kynge Otes lorde was of that yle
               This Pelleus bethought vpon this wyle
               That he his neuewe Iaſon wolde exhort
               To ſaylen to that londe, him to diſport
               And ſayd, neuewe, yf it myght be
               That ſuche worſhyp myght fal the
               That thou this famous treſure might win
               And bringe it my region within
               It were to me great pleſaunce and honour
               Than were I holde to quyte thy labour
               And all the coſtes I woll my ſelfe make
               And choſe what folke thou wolt wt thetake
               Let ſe now, darſt thou taken this voyage
               Iaſon was yonge, and luſty of corage
               And vndertoke to done this ylke empriſe
               Anon Argus his ſhyppes can deuyſe
               with Iaſon went the ſtronge Hercules
               And many an other that he with hym ches
               But whoſo aſketh, who is with hym gone
               Let hym rede Argonautycon
               For he woll tell a tale longe ynough
               Philoctetes anon the ſayle vp drough
               whan the wynde was good, & gan him hye
               Out of his countrie, Called Theſſalye
               So longe he ſayled in the ſalt ſee
               Tyll in the yle of Lemnon arryued he
               Al be this not reherſed of Guydo
               yet ſayth Ouyde in his epyſtles ſo
               And of this yle lady was and quene
               The fayre yonge Hypſiphile the ſhene
               That whylom Thoas doughter was the kyng
               Hypſiphile was gone in her playing
               And romyng on the cleuys by the ſee
               Vnder a banke anon eſpyed ſhe
               where lay the ſhyp, that Iaſon gan aryue
               Of her goodneſſe adowne ſhe ſendeth blyue
               To weten, yf that any ſtraunge wyght
               with tempeſt thyder wer yblowe anyght
               To don hym ſucour, as was her vſaunce
               To furthren euery wyght, & don pleſaunce
               Of very bountie and of curteſye
               This meſſenger adowne hym gan to hye
               And founde Iaſon and Hercules alſo
               That in a cogge to londe were ygo
               Hein to refreſhen, and to take the ayre
               The mornyng attempre was and fayre
               And in her way this meſſenger hem met
               Ful cōnyngly theſe lordes two he gret
               And dyd his meſſage, aſkyng hem anon
               Yf yt they were broken or ought wo begon
               Or had nede of lodeſmen or vytayle
               For ſocour they ſhulde nothyng fayle
               For it was vtterly the quenes wyl
               Iaſon anſwered mekely and ſtyll
               My lady (ꝙ he) thanke I hertely
               Of her goodneſſe, vs nedeth truly
               Nothyng as now, but that we wery be
               And come for to playe out of the ſee
               Tyl that the wynde be better in our way
               This lady rometh by the clyffe to play
               with her meyne, endlonge the ſtronde
               And fyndeth this Iaſon, & this other ſtond
               In ſpekyng of this thyng as I you tolde
               This Hercules and Iaſon gan beholde
               How yt the quene it was, & fayre her gret
               Anon ryght as they with this lady met
               And ſhe toke hede, & knewe by her manere
               By her arraye, by wordes and by chere
               That it were gentlemen of great degree
               And to the caſtel with her ledeth ſhe
               Theſe ſtraūge folk, & doth hem great honor
               And aſketh hem of trauayle and of laboure
               That they haue ſuffred in the ſalte ſee
               
                  So that within a daye, two or thre
               She knewe by the folke yt in his ſhyppes be
               That it was Iaſon full of ronomee
               And Hercules that had the great loos
               That ſoughten the auentures of Colcos
               And dyd hem honour more than before
               And with hem dealed euer longer the more
               For they ben worthy folke wtouten lees
               And namely mooſt ſhe ſpake wt Hercules
               To hym her hert bare, he ſhulde be
               Sad, wyſe, and true of wordes auyſee
               withouten any other affection
               Of loue, or any other ymagynacion
               This Hercules hath this Iaſon prayſed
               That to the ſun he hath it vp rayſed
               That half ſo true a man there nas of loue
               Vnder the cope of heuen that is aboue
               And he was wyſe, hardy, ſecret and ryche
               Of theſe .iii. pointes ther nas non him lyche
               Of fredome paſſed he, and luſtyhede
               All tho that lyuen, or ben deed
               Therto ſo great a gentleman was he
               And of Theſſalye lykely kynge to be
               There nas no let, but that he was agaſt
               To loue, and for to ſpeake ſhamefaſt
               Hym had leuer him ſelfe to murdre & dye
               Than that men ſhulde a louer hym eſpye
               As wolde god that I had iyeue
               My blood and fleſh, ſo yt I myght lyue
               with yu nones, yt he had ought where a wyfe
               For his eſtate, for ſuche a luſty lyfe
               She ſhulden lede, with this luſty knyght
               And al this was cōpaſſed on the nyght
               Betwixt him Iaſon, & this Hercules
               Of theſe two here was a ſhrende lees
               To come to houſe vpon an innocent
               For to bedote this quene was her entent
               And Iaſon is as coye as is a mayde
               He loketh pytouſly, but nought he ſayd
               But frely yaue he to her counſaylers
               Yeftes great, and to her offycers
               As wolde God I leyſer had and tyme
               By proceſſe, all his woing for to ryme
               But in this houſe, yf any falſe louer be
               Right as him ſelf now doth, right ſo did he
               with faynyng, and wt euery ſubtyl dede
               Ye get nomore of me, but ye wol rede
               Thoriginall that telleth all the caas
               The ſoth is this, yt Iaſon wedded was
               Vnto this quene, & toke of her ſubſtaunce
               whatſo him lyſt vnto his purueyaunce
               And vpon her begat chyldren two
               And drough his ſayle, & ſaw her neuer mo
               A letter ſent ſhe hym certayne
               which were to longe to wryten & to ſayne
               And hym reproueth of his great vntrouth
               And prayeth hym on her to haue ſom routh
               And on his chyldren two, ſhe ſayd him this
               That they be lyke of all thyng ywys
               To Iaſon, ſaue they couth nat begyle
               And prayed god, or it were longe whyle
               That ſhe that had his hert yreft her fro
               Muſt fynden hym vntrue alſo
               And that ſhe muſt both her chyldren ſpyll
               And all tho that ſuffreth hym his wyll
               And true to Iaſon was ſhe al her lyfe
               And euer kept her chaſte, as for his wyfe
               Ne neuer had ſhe ioy at her hert
               But dyed for his loue of ſorowes ſmerte
               To Colcos come is this duke Iaſon
               That is of loue deuourer and dragon
               As Matyre appeteth forme alway
               And from forme to forme it paſſen maye
               Or as a well that were botomleſſe
               Ryght ſo can Iaſon haue no pees
               For to deſyren through his appetyte
               To done with gentyl women his delyte
               This is his luſt and his felicitie
               Iaſon is roomed forth to the cytie
               That whylom cleped was Iaſonicos
               That was the maſter towne of al Colcos
               And hath ytolde ye cauſe of his comyng
               Vnto Otes, of that countrey kynge
               Praying him yt he muſt done his aſſaye
               To get the fleeſe of golde, yf that he may
               Of which the kynge aſſenteth to his boone
               And doth hym honour, as it is to doone
               So ferforth, yt his doughter and his heyre
               Medea, which that was ſo wyſe and fayre
               That fayrer ſaugh there neuer man wt eye
               He made her done to Iaſon company
               At meate, and ſyt by hym in the hall
               Nowe was Iaſon a ſemely man withall
               And lyke a lorde, and had a great renoun
               And of hi loke as royall as a lyoun
               And goodly of his ſpeche, and familiere
               And coude of loue al the craft & arte plenere
               withouten boke, wt eueryche obſeruaunce
               And as fortune her ought a foul miſchaūce
               She woxe enamored vpon this man
               Iaſon (ꝙ ſhe) or ough I ſe or can
               As of this thyng, ye which ye ben about
               Yea and your ſelfe I put in moche dout
               For whoſo woll this auenture atcheue
               
                  He may nat wele aſterten, as I leue
               withouten deth, but I his helpe be
               But natheleſſe, it is my wyll (ꝙ ſhe)
               To forthren you, ſo that ye ſhall nat dye
               But tournen ſound home to your Theſſaly
               My ryght lady (ꝙ this Iaſon) tho
               That ye haue of my deth or of my wo
               Any regarde, and done me this honour
               I wote wel that my myght ne my labour
               May nat deſerue it in my lyues daye
               God thanke you, there I ne can ne may
               Your man am I, and lowly you beſeche
               To ben my helpe, withouten more ſpeche
               But certes for my deth ſhall I nat ſpare
               Tho gan this Medea to hym declare
               The peril of this caſe fro poynt to poynt
               Of his battayle, and in what diſioynt
               He mote ſtande, of which no creature
               Saue only ſhe, ne myght his lyfe aſſure
               And ſhortly ryght to the poynt for to go
               They ben accorded fully betwixe hem two
               That Iaſon ſhal her wed as true knyght
               And terme yſet to come ſoone at nyght
               Vnto her chambre, and make there his othe
               Vpon the goddes that he for lefe or loth
               Ne ſhulde her neuer falſen nyght ne day
               To ben her huſbond whyle he lyue may
               As ſhe that from his deth hym ſaued here
               And herevpon at nyght they met yfere
               And doth his oth, and goth with her to bed
               And on the morowe vpwarde he hym ſped
               For ſhe hath tauȝt him how he ſhal not fayl
               The fleeſe to wyn, and ſtynten his battayle
               And ſaued hym his lyfe, and his honour
               And gat hym a name as a conquerour
               Right thrugh the ſleight of her enchaūtmēt
               Now hath Iaſō the fleeſe, & home is wēt
               with Medea, and treaſoures ful great won
               But vnwyſt of her father ſhe is gone
               To Theſſaly, with duke Iaſon her lefe
               That afterward hath brouȝt her to miſchef
               For as a traytour he is from her go
               And with her left yonge chyldren two
               And falſely hath betrayed her, alas
               And euer in loue a chefe traytour he was
               And wedded yet the thyrde wyfe anon
               That was the doughter of kynge Creon
               This is the mede of louynge and guerdon
               That Medea receyued of duke Iaſon
               Right for her trouth, and for her kyndneſſe
               That loued hym better thā her ſelf I geſſe
               And left her father, and her heritage
               And of Iaſon this is the vaſſalage
               That in his dayes nas neuer none yfounde
               So falſe a louer going on the grounde
               And therfore in her letter thus ſhe ſayde
               Firſt whā ſhe of his falſeneſſe hym vnbraid
               why lyked me thy yelowe heer to ſe
               More than the boundes of myne honeſtie
               why lyked me thy youth and thy fayrneſſe
               And of thy tonge, ye infinite graciouſneſſe
               O haddeſt thou in thy conqueſt deed ybe
               Ful mykel vntrouth had there dyed wt the
               wel can Ouyde her letter in verſe endyte
               which were as now to longe for to wryte.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the legende of Hipſyphile and Medea. And here foloweth the legende of Lucreſſe of Rome.
               
                  NOw mote I ſayne thexilyng of kynges
               Of Rome, for her horrible doinges
               Of the laſt king Tarquinivs
               As ſayth Ouyde and Tytus Liuius
               But for that cauſe tell I nat this ſtory
               But for to prayſen, and drawen in memory
               The very wyfe, the very Lucreſſe
               That for her wyfehode & her ſtedfaſtneſſe
               Nat only that theſe paynyms her cōmende
               But that cleped is in our legende
               The great Auſtyn, that hath compaſſioun
               Of this Lucrece that ſtarfe in Rome toun
               And in what wyſe, I wol but ſhortly treat
               And of this thyng I touche but the great
               whan Ardea beſieged was about
               with Romaynes ye full ſterne were & ſtout
               Full longe lay the ſiege & lytle wroughten
               So yt they wer half ydle as hem thoughtē
               
               And in his play Tarquinius the yonge
               Gan for to iape, for he was lyght of tonge
               And ſayd, that it was an ydle lyfe
               Noman dyd there more than his wyfe
               And let vs ſpeake of wyues that is beſt
               Prayſe euery man his owne as him leſt
               And with our ſpeche let vs eaſe our hert
               A knyght (that hyght Colatyn) vp ſtert
               And ſayd thus, nay ſyr, it is no nede
               To trowen on the worde, but on the dede
               I haue a wyfe (ꝙ he) that as I trowe
               Is holden good of all that euer her knowe
               
                  Go we to Rome to nyght, and we ſhul ſe
               Tarquinius anſwerd, that lyketh me
               To Rome be they come, and faſt hem dight
               To Colatyns houſe, and downe they lyght
               Tarquinius, and eke this Colatyne
               The huſbond knewe ye efters well and fyne
               And full priuely into the houſe they gone
               Nor at the gate, porter was there none
               And at the chambre dore they abyde
               This noble wyfe ſat by her beddes ſyde
               Diſcheueled, for no malyce ſhe ne thought
               And ſoft woll ſayth Liui that ſhe wrought
               To kepen her fro ſlouth and ydleneſſe
               And bad her ſeruaūtes done her beſyneſſe
               And aſketh hem what tydynges heren ye
               How ſayth men of the ſiege, how ſhal it be?
               God wold the walles were fallen adowne
               Myn huſbōd is to longe out of this towne
               For which drede doth me ſo to ſmerte
               Ryght as a ſwerd, it ſtyngeth to myne hert
               whan I thynke on this or of that place
               God ſaue my lord, I pray him for his grace
               And therwithall ful tenderly ſhe gan wepe
               And of her werke ſhe toke nomore kepe
               But mekely ſhe let her eyen fall
               And thylke ſemblaunt ſate her wel withall
               And eke her teares ful of heuyneſſe
               Embeleſed her wyfelye chaſtneſſe
               Her countenaunce is to herte digne
               For they accordeden in dede and ſigne
               And with that worde her huſbōd Colatin
               Or ſhe of hym was ware came ſtertlyng in
               And ſayd, drede the nat for I am here
               And ſhe anon vproſe with blyſful chere
               And kyſſed hym, as of wyues is the won
               Tarquinius this proude kynges ſonne
               Conceyued hath her beautye and her chere
               Her yelewe heer, her bountie, & her manere
               Her hewe, her wordes yt ſhe hath cōplayned
               And by no craft her beauty was nat fayned
               And caught to this lady ſuche deſyre
               That in his hert he brent as any fyre
               So woodly, that his wyt was al forgoten
               For wel thought he ſhe ſhulde nat be goten
               And aye the more he was in diſpayre
               The more coueyteth, and thought her fayre
               His blynde luſt was all his couetyng
               On morowe whā the byrde began to ſynge
               Vnto the ſiege he cōmeth full priuely
               And by hym ſelfe he walketh ſobrely
               The ymage of her recordyng alway newe
               thus lay her heer & thus freſh was her hew
               Thus ſate, thus ſpan, this was her chere
               Thus fayr ſhe was, & this was his manere
               All this conceyte his herte hath newe ytake
               And as the ſee, with tempeſt al to ſhake
               That after whan the ſtorme is al ago
               Yet wol the water quap a day or two
               Right ſo, though yt her forme were abſent
               The pleſaunce of her forme was preſent
               But natheleſſe nat pleſaunce, but delyte
               Or an vnryghtfull talent with deſpyte
               For maugre her, ſhe ſhal my lemman be
               Hap helpeth hardy man alway (ꝙ he)
               what ende that I make, it ſhalbe ſo
               And gyrt hym wt his ſwerde, & gan to go
               And he forth ryght, tyl to Rome he come
               And al alone his way that he hath nome
               Vnto the houſe of Colatyne ful ryght
               Down was ye ſun, & day hath loſt his light
               And in he come, vnto a priuy halke
               And in the nyght full theuelye can he ſtalke
               whan euery wight was to his reſt brought
               Ne no wight had of treaſō ſuche a thought
               whether by windowe, or bo other gyn
               with ſwerde ydrawe ſhortly he cōmeth in
               There as ſhe lay, this noble wife Lucreſſe
               And as ſhe woke, her bed ſhe felt preſſe
               what beeſt is that (ꝙ ſhe) that wayeth thus
               I am the kynges ſonne Tarquinius
               (ꝙ he) but & thou crye, or any noyſe make
               Or yf thou any creature awake
               By thilke god that formed man of lyue
               This ſwerd through thyne hert I ſhal riue
               And therwithall vnto her throte he ſterte
               And ſet the ſworde all ſharpe on her hert
               No word ſhe ſpake, ſhe hath no myght therto
               what ſhal ſhe ſayne, her wyt is al ago
               Ryght as a wolfe yt fayneth a lambe alone
               To whom ſhall ſhe cōplayne or make mone
               what, ſhal ſhe fyght with an hardy knyght
               wele wot men a woman hath no myght
               what, ſhal ſhe crye, or how ſhal ſhe atterte
               That hath her by ye throte wt ſwerde at hert
               She aſketh grace, and ſayd al yt ſhe can
               No wolt thou nat (ꝙ this cruel man)
               As wyſely Iupiter my ſoule ſaue
               I ſhall in the ſtable ſlee thy knaue
               And laye hym in thy bed, and loude crye
               That I the fande in ſuche auoutry
               And thus thou ſhalt be deed, and alſo leſe
               Thy name, for thou ſhalt nat cheſe
               This romaynes wyues louedē ſo her name
               At thilke tyme, and dredden ſo the ſhame
               
                  That what for fere of ſlaūder & dred of deth
               She loſt both at ones wyt and breth
               And in a ſwough ſhe ſay, & woxe ſo deed
               Men myghten ſmyte of her arme or heed
               She feleth nothing neither foule ne fayre
               Tarquinius that art a kynges heyre
               And ſhuldeſt, as by lynage and by ryght
               Done as a lorde, and a very knyght
               why haſt thou done deſpyte to cheualrye?
               why haſt thou done thy lady vylanye?
               Alas of ye this was a vylaynous dede.
               But now to ye purpoſe, in the ſtory I rede
               whan he was gone, & this miſchaūce is fall
               This lady ſent after her frendes all
               Father, mother, & huſbond all yfere
               And diſcheueled with her heer clere
               In habyt ſuche as women vſed tho
               Vnto the burying of her frendes go
               She ſat in hall, with a ſorowfull ſyght
               Her frendes aſken what her aylen myght
               And who was deed, & ſhe ſat aye wepynge
               A word for ſhame ne may ſhe forth out brīg
               Ne vpon hem ſhe durſt nat beholde
               But at the laſt of Tarquiny ſhe hem tolde
               This ruful caſe, & al this thyng horryble
               The wo to tel, were impoſſible
               That ſhe and all her frendes make at ones
               All had folkes hertes, ben of ſtones
               It myght haue maked hem vpon her rewe
               Her hert was ſo wyſely and ſo trewe
               She ſayd, that for her gilt ne for her blame
               Her huſbād ſhuld not haue the ſoule name
               That wolde ſhe nat ſuffren by no waye
               And they anſwerde all vnto her faye
               That they foryaue it her, for it was ryght
               It was no gylt, it laye not in her myght
               And ſayden her ſamples many one
               But all for nought, for thus ſhe ſayde anon
               Be as be may (ꝙ ſhe) of forgyuyng
               I wyll not haue no forgyft for nothynge
               But priuely ſhe caught forth a knyfe
               And therwithall ſhe raft her ſelfe her lyfe
               And as ſhe fell adowe, ſhe caſt her loke
               And of her clothes, yet hede ſhe toke
               For in her fallyng, yet ſhe had a care
               Leſt that her fete, or ſuche thynges lay bare
               So wel ſhe loued clenneſſe, and eke trouth
               Of her had all the towne of Rome routh
               And Brutus hath by her chaſt bloud ſwore
               That Tarquin ſhuld ybaniſhed be therfore
               And all his kyn, and let the people call
               And openly the tale he tolde hem all
               And openly let cary her on a bere
               Through al the town, yt men maye ſe & here
               The horryble dede of her oppreſſioun
               Ne neuer was ther kyng in Rome towne
               Syns thilke day, & ſhe was holden there
               A ſaynt, and euer her day yhalowed dere
               As in her lawe: and thus endeth Lucreſſe
               The noble wyſe Tytus bereth wytneſſe
               I tell it, for ſhe was of loue ſo trewe
               Ne in her wyl ſhe chaunged for no newe
               And in her ſtable hert, ſad and kynde
               That in theſe women men may al day fynd
               There as they caſt her hert, ther it dwelleth
               For wel I wot, that Chryſt him ſelf telleth
               That in Iſrael, as wyde as is the londe
               That ſo great fayth in al ye londe he ne fond
               As in a woman, and this is no lye
               And as for men loke ye ſuche tyrannye
               They done all day, aſſay them whoſo lyſt
               The treweſt is full brotell for to tryſt.
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the legende of Lucrece of Rome, and here foloweth the legende of Ariadne of Athenes.
               
                  IVdge infernall Mynes, of Crete kynge
               now cōmeth thy lot thou comeſt on the rynge
               Nat for thy ſake onlye, wrytten is this ſtorye
               But for to cleape ayen vnto memorye
               Of Theſius the great vntrouth of loue
               For which the goddes of heuen aboue
               Ben wroth, & wrath hath take for thy ſyn
               Be red for ſhame, now I thy lyfe begyn
               Mynos yt was the myghty kyng of Crete
               That had an hundred cyties ſtrong & great
               To ſchole hath ſent his ſon Androgeus
               To Athenes of the which it happed thus
               That he was ſlayne lerning philoſophye
               Ryght in that citie, nat but for enuye
               The great Mynos of the which I ſpeke
               His ſonnes deth is come for to wreke
               Alcathoe he beſieged harde and longe
               But natheleſſe the walles be ſo ſtronge
               And Niſus, that was kynge of that cytie
               So chyualrous, that lytel dredeth he
               Of Mynos or his hoſte, toke he no cure
               Tyl on a daye befel an auenture
               
                  That Niſus doughter ſtode vpon the wall
               And of the ſiege ſawe the maner all
               So happed it, that at ſcarmiſhyng
               She caſt her herte vpon Mynos the kinge
               For his beautie, and his chiualrye
               So ſore, that ſhe wende for to dye
               And ſhortly of thys proceſſe for to pace
               She made Mynos wynnen thylke place
               So that the cite was al at his wyll
               To ſauen whom hym lyſte, or els ſpyll
               But wyekedly he quyt her kyndneſſe
               And let her drenche in ſorowe and diſteſſe
               Nere that the goddes had of her pyte
               But that tale were to longe as now for me
               Athenes wan thys kyng Mynos alſo
               As Alcathoe, and other townes mo
               And this the effecte, ye Mynos hath ſo driuē
               
               Hem of Athenes, that they mote hym yeuen
               Fro yere to yere, her owne chyldren dere
               For to be ſlayne, as ye ſhal after here
               This Mynos hath a mōſter, a wicked beeſt
               That was ſo cruel, that wythout areeſt
               whā yt a mā was brought in to his preſence
               He nolde him eate, there helpeth no defence
               And euery thyrde yere, wythouten doute
               They caſten lotte, as it came aboute
               On ryche and poore, he muſt his ſonne take
               And of hys chylde he muſt preſent make
               To Mynos, to ſaue hym or to ſpyll
               Or let his beeſte deuoure him at his wyll
               And this hath mynos done right in diſpyte
               To wreke his ſonne was ſet al hys delyte
               And make hem of Athenes hys thral
               Fro yere to yere, whyle he lyuen ſhal
               and whō he ſayleth whan this toun is won
               This wycked cuſtome is ſo longe yronne
               Tyl of Athenes kyng Egeus
               Mote ſenden hys owne ſonne Theſeus
               Sens that the lotte is fallen him vpon
               To ben deuoured, for grace is there non
               and forth is ladde this woful yonge knight
               vnto the coūtre of king Mynos ful of might
               And in a priſon fettred faſt is he
               Tyl the tyme he ſhulde yfreten be
               wel maiſt thou wepe, O woful Theſeus
               That art a kynges ſonne & dampned thus
               Me thynketh this, that thou art depe yhold
               To whom that ſaued the fro cares colde
               And nowe yf any woman helpe the
               wel oughteſt thou her ſeruaunt for to be
               And ben her trewe louer yere by yere
               But nowe to come ayen to my matere
               The toure, there this Theſeus is throwe
               Downe in the bottome derke & wonder low
               was ioynyng to the wal of a foreyne
               Longyng vnto the doughtren tweyne
               Of Mynos, that in her chambres grete
               Dwelten aboue the mayſtre ſtrete
               Of the towne, in ioye and in ſolas
               Not I nat howe, it happed par caas
               As Theſeus complayned hym by nyght
               The kynges doughter, that Ariadne hyght
               And eke her ſuſter Phedra, herden al
               Hys complaynte, as they ſtode on the wal
               And loked vpon the bryght moone
               Hem lyſte not to go to bedde ſo ſoone
               And of hys wo they had compaſſion
               A kynges ſonne to be in ſuch priſon
               And ben deuoured, thought hem great pyte
               Than Ariadne ſpake to her ſuſter fre
               And ſayd: Phedra leue ſuſter dere
               This woful lordes ſonne may ye not here
               How pitouſly he complayneth hys kynne
               And eke hys poore eſtate that he is inne?
               And gyltleſſe, certayne nowe it is routh
               And yf ye wol aſſent by my trouth
               He ſhal ben holpen howe ſo that we do
               Phedra anſwerde, ywys me is as wo
               For hym, as euer I was for any man
               And to hys helpe the beſte rede that I can
               Is, that we done the gayler priuely
               To come and ſpeake wyth vs haſtely
               And don thys woful mā wyth hym to come
               For yf he may this monſter ouercome
               Thā were he quyte, ther is non other boote
               Let vs wel taſte hym at hys herte roote
               That yf it ſo be, that he a weapen haue
               where that he is lyfe dare kepe or ſaue
               Fyghten wyth thys fende, and hym defende
               For in the priſon, there as he ſhal diſcende
               Ye wote wel, that the beeſt is in a place
               That is not derke, & hath rōme & eke ſpace
               To welde an axe, or ſwerde, ſtaffe, or knyfe
               So that me thynketh he ſhulde ſaue his life
               If that he be a man, he ſhal do ſo
               And we ſhal make hym balles eke alſo
               Of wexe & towe, that whan he gapeth faſte
               Into the beeſtes throte he ſhal hem caſte
               To ſleke his honger, and encomber his teth
               And ryght anon, whan that Theſeus ſeth
               The beeſt acheked, he ſhall on hym leepe
               To ſleen him, or they comen more to heepe
               Thys weapen ſhal the gayler, or that tyde
               Ful priuely within the priſon hyde
               
                  And for the houſe is crencled to and fro
               And hath ſo queynte wayes for to go
               For it is ſhapen as the maſe is wrought
               Therto haue I a remedye in my thought
               That by a clewe of twyne, as he hath gone
               The ſame way he may returne anone
               Folowyng alway ye threde as he hath come
               And whan thys beeſt is ouercome
               Than may he flyen away out of this ſtede
               And eke the gayler may he wyth him lede
               And hym auaunce at home in hys countre
               Sens that ſo great a lordes ſonne is he
               Thys is my rede, yf that ye dare it take
               what ſhulde I lenger ſermon of it make
               The gayler cometh, and with him Theſeus
               whan theſe thynges ben accorded thus
               Downe ſate Theſeus vpon hys kne
               The ryght lady of my lyfe (ꝙ he)
               I ſorouful man, ydampned to the deth
               Fro you, whyles that me laſteth breth
               I wol not twynne, after thys auenture
               But in your ſeruyce, thus I wol endure
               that as a wretch vnknow, I woll you ſerue
               For euermore, tyl that myne herte ſterue
               Forſake I wol at home myne heritage
               And as I ſayd, bene of your courte a page
               If that ye vouchſafe that in thys place
               Ye graunt me to haue ſuch a grace
               that I may haue, nat but my meate & drinke
               And for my ſuſtynaunce yet wol I ſwinke
               Right as you lyſte, yt Mynos ne no wyght
               Sens that he ſaw me neuer with euen ſight
               Ne no man els ſhal me eſpye
               So ſlyly, and ſo wel I ſhal me gye
               And me ſo wel diſfygure, & ſo lowe
               That in this worlde there ſhal no man me know
               To haue my lyfe, and to haue preſence
               Of you, that none to me thys excellence
               And to my father ſhal I ſende here
               Thys worthy man, that is your gaylere
               And hym ſo guerdon, that he ſhal wel be
               One of the greateſt men of my countre
               And yf I durſt ſayne, my lady bryght
               I am a kynges ſonne, and eke a knyght
               As wolde god, yf that it myght be
               Ye weren in my countre al thre
               And I wyth you, to beare you companye
               Than ſhulde ye ſene yf that I therof lye
               And yf that I profer you in lowe manere
               To ben your page, & ſeruen you ryght here
               But I you ſerue as lowly in that place
               I praye to Mars to yeue me ſuch grace
               That ſhames deth on me there mote fal
               And dethe and pouerte to my frendes al
               And that my ſpirite by nyght mote go
               After my deth and walke to and fro
               That I mote of traytoure haue a name
               For which my ſpirite mote go to do me ſhame
               And yf I clayme euer other degre
               But ye vouchſafe to yeue it me
               As I haue ſayde, of ſhames death I dey
               And mercy lady, I can naught els ſey
               A ſemly knyght was thys Theſeus to ſe
               And yonge, but of twenty yere and thre
               But who ſo had yſene hys countenaunce
               he wold haue wept for routh of his penaūce
               For which this Ariadne in thys manere
               Anſwerde to hys profer and to hys chere
               A kynges ſonne, & eke a knyght (ꝙ ſhe)
               To bene my ſeruaunt in ſo lowe degree
               God ſhylde it, for the ſhame of women al
               And lene me neuer ſuch a caſe befal
               And ſende you grace, & ſleyght of herte alſo
               You to defende, & knyghtly to ſleen your foe
               And leene here after I may you fynde
               To me, and to my ſuſter here ſo kynde
               That I ne repente nat to yeue you lyfe
               Yet were it better I were your wyfe
               Syth ye ben as gentyl borne as I
               And haue a realme nat but faſte by
               Than yt I ſuffred youre gentylleſſe to ſterue
               Or that I let you as a page ſterue
               It is no profyte, as vnto your kyurede
               but what is yt, that mā woll nat do for drede
               And to my ſuſter ſyth that it is ſo
               That ſhe mote gone with me, yf that I go
               Or els ſuffre dethe as well as I
               That ye vnto your ſonne as trewely
               Done her be wedded, at your home coming
               Thys is the final ende of al thys thyng
               Ye ſwere it here vpō al that may be ſworne?
               Ye lady myne (ꝙ he) or els to torne
               Mote I be, wt the Mynotaur or to morow
               And haueth here of myn hert blod to borow
               If that ye wol, yf I had knyfe or ſpeare
               I wolde it letten out, and theron ſweare
               For that at erſte, I wotte ye wolde me leue
               By Mars, that is chefe of my beleue
               So that I myght lyuen, and nat fayle
               To morowe for to taken my batayle
               I nolde neuer fro thys place flye
               Tyl that ye ſhulde the very profe ſe
               For nowe, yf that the ſoth I ſhal you ſay
               I haue loued you ful many a day
               
                  Though ye ne wyſt not, in my countre
               And aldermoſte deſyred you to ſe
               Of any erthly lyuynge creature
               Vpon my trouth I ſweare, and you aſſure
               Thys ſeuen yere I haue your ſeruaunt be
               Nowe haue I you, and alſo haue ye me
               My dere herte, of Athenes Ducheſſe
               Thys lady ſmyleth at hys ſtedfaſtneſſe
               And at hys hertely wordes and at his chere
               And to her ſuſter ſayd in thys manere
               And ſothly ſuſter myne (quod ſhe)
               Nowe be we ducheſſes both I and ye
               And ſykerde to the regals of Athenes
               And both hereafter lykely to be quenes
               And ſaued fro hys deth a kynges ſonne
               As euer of gentyl women is the wonne
               To ſaue a gentyl man, enforth her myght
               In honeſt cauſe, and namely in his right
               me thīketh no wyght ought vs herof blame
               Ne bearen vs therfore an yuel name
               And ſhortly of thys mater for to make
               Thys Theſeus of her hath leaue ytake
               And euery poynte was perfourmed in dede
               As ye haue in this couenaunt herde me rede
               his wepē, his clew, his thing yt I haue ſayd
               was by the gayler in the houſe ylayd
               Ther as the Mynotaur hath his dwellyng
               Ryght faſte by the dore, at hys entryng
               And Theſeus is ladde vnto hys deth
               And forth vnto thys Mynota
                     •
                  re he geth
               And by the teachyng of this Adriane
               He ouercame thys beeſt, and was hys bane
               And out he cometh by the clewe agayne
               Ful priuely, whan he thys beeſt hath ſlayne
               And the gayler gotten hath a barge
               And of hys wyues treaſure gan it charge
               And toke hys wyfe, and eke her ſuſter fre
               And by the gayler, and wyth hem al thre
               Is ſtole away out of the lande by nyght
               And to the countre of Enupye hym dyght
               There as he had a frende of hys knowyng
               There feeſten they, there daūſen they & ſing
               And in hys armes hath thys Adriane
               That of ye beeſt hath kepte him fro his bane
               And get hym there a noble barge anone
               And of hys countrey folke a ful great wone
               and taketh his leaue, & homward ſayleth he
               And in an yle, amydde the wylde ſee
               There as there dwelte creature none
               Saue wylde beeſtes, and that ful many one
               He made hys ſhyppe a londe for to ſette
               And in that yle, halfe a daye he lette
               And ſayd, that on the lande he muſt him reſt
               His maryners haue done ryght as him leſte
               And for to tel ſhortly in thys caſe
               whan Ariadne hys wyfe a ſlepe was
               For that her ſuſter fayrer was than ſhe
               He taketh her in his hand and forth goth he
               To ſhyppe, and as a traytour ſtale away
               whyle that thys Ariadne a ſlepe lay
               And to hys countreywarde he ſayleth blyue
               A twenty dyuelway, the wynde hym dryue
               And founde hys father drenched in the ſee
               Me lyſt no more to ſpeake of hym parde
               Theſe falſe louers, poyſon be her bane
               But I wol turne agayne to Adriane
               That is wyth ſlepe for weryneſſe ytake
               Ful ſoroufully her herte may awake
               Alas, for the myne herte hath pyte
               Ryght in the dawnyng awaketh ſhe
               and gropeth in the bed, & fonde ryght nouȝt
               Alas (ꝙ ſhe) that euer I was wrought
               I am betrayed, and her heere to rente
               And to the ſtronde bare fote faſt ſhe went
               And cryed: Theſeus myne herte ſwete
               where be ye that I may not with you mete?
               And myght thus wyth beeſtes bene yſlayne
               The holow rockes anſwerde her agayne
               No man ſhe ſawe, and yet ſhone the moone
               And hye vpon a rocke ſhe went ſoone
               And ſawe his barge, ſaylyng in the ſee
               Colde woxe her herte, & ryght thus ſayd ſhe
               Meker than ye, fynde I the beeſtes wyld
               Hath he nat ſynne, that he her thus begylde
               ſhe cryed, O turne agayne for routh & ſynne
               Thy barge hath not al hys meyne inne
               Her kerchefe on a pole ſtycked ſhe
               Aſcaunce he ſhulde it wele yſe
               And him remembre that ſhe was behynde
               and turne agayne, & on the ſtronde her finde
               But al for naught, his way he is gone
               And downe ſhe fel a ſwowne on a ſtone
               And vp ſhe ryſt, and kyſſed in al her care
               The ſteppes of his fete, there he hath fare
               And to her bedde ryght thus ſhe ſpeketh tho
               Thou bedde (ꝙ ſhe) yt haſt receyued two
               Thou ſhalt anſwere of two, and not of one
               where is the greater parte, away gone
               alas, wher ſhal I wretched wight become?
               For though ſo be that bote none here come
               Home to my countrey dare I not for drede
               I can my ſelfe in thys caſe nat rede
               what ſhulde I tel more her cōplaynyng
               It is ſo longe▪ it were an heauy thyng
               
                  In her epiſtle, Naſo telleth all
               But ſhortly to the ende tell I ſhall
               The goddes haue her holpen for pyte
               And in the ſigne of Taurus men may ſe
               The ſtones of her crowne ſhyne clere
               I wyl no more ſpeake of this matere
               And thus thys falſe louer can begyle
               His trew loue, the dyuel quyte him his wyle
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the legende of Ariadne and here foloweth the legende of Phylomene.
               
                  THou yeuer of the formes that haſt wrought
               The fayre world, & bare it in thy thought
               Eternallye, er thou thy werke began
               why madeſt thou vnto the ſlaunder of man
               Or al be that it was not thy doyng
               As for that fende, to make ſuch a thyng
               why ſuffredeſt yu that Tereus was bore?
               That is in loue ſo falſe and ſo forſwore
               That fro this worlde vp to the fyrſte heuen
               Corrumpeth, whan ye folke his name neuen
               And as to me, ſo griſlye was hys dede
               That whan that I thys foule ſtorye rede
               Myne eyen wexen foule, and ſore alſo
               Yet laſteth the venyme of ſo longe ago
               That infecteth hym that wolde beholde
               The ſtorye of Tereus, of whyche I tolde
               Of Trace was he lorde, & kynne to Marte
               The cruel god that ſtante wyth blody darte
               And wedded had he wyth blyſful chere
               kynge Pandyonis fayre doughter dere
               That hyght Progue, floure of her countre
               Though Iuno lyſte nat at the feeſt be
               Ne Hymeneus, that god of weddyng is
               But at the feeſt redy bene ywys
               The furys thre, with al her mortal bronde
               The oule al night aboute the balkes wonde
               That prophete is of wo, and of miſchaunce
               Thys reuel, ful of ſonge and ful of daunce
               Laſte a fourtenyght, or lytel laſſe
               But ſhortly of thys ſtorye for to paſſe
               (For I am wery of hym for to tel)
               Fyue yere hys wyfe and he togyther dwel
               Tyl on a day ſhe gan ſo ſore longe
               To ſene her ſuſter that ſhe ſawe not longe
               That for deſyre ſhe nyſt not what to ſay
               But to her huſbonde gan ſhe for to pray
               For goddes loue, that ſhe mote ones gone
               Her ſuſter for to ſene, and come ayen anone
               Or els but ſhe mote to her wende
               She prayed hym yt he wold after her ſende
               And thys was day by day al her prayere
               wyth al hūbleſſe of wiſehode, worde & chere
               This Tereus let make hys ſhyppes yare
               And in to Grece hym ſelfe is forth yfare
               Vnto hys father in law gan he praye
               To vouchſafe, that for a moneth or twaye
               That Phylomene hys wyues ſuſter myght
               On Progne his wife, but ones haue a ſight
               And ſhe ſhal come to you agayne anone
               My ſelfe with her, I wyl both come & gone
               And as my hertes lyfe I wyl her kepe
               This olde Pandion, this king gan wepe
               For tenderneſſe of herte, for to leue
               His doughter gon, and for to yeue her leue
               Of al thys worlde he loued nothyng ſo
               But at the laſte leaue hath ſhe to go
               For Phylomene wyth ſalte teares eke
               Gan of her father grace for to beſeke
               To ſene her ſuſter, that her longeth ſo
               And him enbraceth, wyth her armes two
               And there al ſo yonge and fayre was ſhe
               That whan that Tereus ſawe her beaute
               And of array, that there was none her lyche
               And yet of beaute was ſhe to ſo ryche
               He caſt his 
                     •
                  iry herte vpon her ſo
               That he wolde haue her, howe ſo that it go
               And wyth hys wyles kneled, and ſo prayde
               Tyl at the laſt Pandion thus ſayde
               Nowe ſonne (ꝙ he) that art to me ſo dere
               I the betake my yonge doughter dere
               That beareth the key of al myne hertes lyfe
               And grete wel my doughter, and thy wyfe
               And yeue her leaue ſomtyme for to pley
               That ſhe maye ſe me ones or I dey
               And ſothly he hath made hym ryche feeſt
               And to hys folke, the moſte and eke the leeſt
               that with him came, & yafe him giftes grete
               And hym cōueyeth through yt maiſter ſtrete
               Of Athenes, and to the ſee hym brought
               And turneth home no malyce he ne thought
               The ores pulleth forth the veſſell faſte
               And in to Trace arryueth at the laſte
               And vp in to a foreſt he her ledde
               
                  And to a caue priuely hym ſpedde
               And in thys derke caue, yf her lyſte
               Or nought, he badde her for to reſt
               Of which her herte agroſe, and ſayde thus?
               where is my ſuſter, brother Tereus?
               And there wythal ſhe wepte tenderly
               And quoke for feare pale and pytouſly
               Ryght as the lābe, that of the wolfe is bittē
               
               Or as the culuer, yt of the Egle is ſmytten
               And is out of hys clawes eſcaped
               Yet it is a ferde, and a waped
               Leſte it be hente eftſones: ſo ſate ſhe
               But vtterly it may none other be
               By force hath thys traytour done a dede
               That he hath refte her of her maydenhede
               Maugre her heed, by ſtrength & by his myȝt
               Lo here a dede of men, and that a ryght
               She cryed ſuſter wyth ful loude ſteuen
               And father dere helpe me god in heuen
               Al helpeth not, and yet thys falſe thefe
               Hath done thys lady yet a more miſchefe
               For feare, leſte ſhe ſhulde hys ſhame crye
               And done hym openly a vyllany
               And wyth hys ſwerde her tonge of kerfe he
               And in a caſtel made her for to be
               Ful priuely in priſon euermore
               And kept her to hys vſage and to hys ſtore
               So that ſhe ne myght neuer more aſtarte
               O ſely Phylomene, wo is in thyne herte
               Huge bene thy ſorowes, and wonder ſmert
               God wreke the, and ſende the thy bone
               Nowe is tyme I make an ende ſone
               Thys Tereus is to hys wyfe ycome
               And in hys armes hath his wyfe ynome
               And pytouſly he wepte, and ſhoke hys heed
               And ſwore her, that he foūde her ſyſter deed
               For which thys ſely Progne hath ſuch wo
               That nygh her ſorouful hert brake in two
               And thus in teeres lette I Progne dwell
               And of her ſuſter forth I woll you tell
               Thys woful lady ylerned had in youth
               So that ſhe worken and enbrauden couth
               And weauen in ſtole the radeuore
               And it of women hath be woued yore
               And ſothly for to ſayne, ſhe hath her fyl
               Of mete and drynke, of clothyng at her wyl
               And couth eke rede wel ynough and endyte
               But wyth a penne ſhe coulde nat write
               But letters can ſhe weaue, to and fro
               So that by the yere was al a go
               She had wouen in a ſtames large
               how ſhe was brouȝt fro Athenes in a barge
               And in a caue howe that ſhe was brought
               And all the thynge ye Tereus hath wrought
               She waue it well, & wrote the ſtorye aboue
               Howe ſhe was ſerued for her ſuſters loue
               And to a man a rynge ſhe yaue anone
               And prayed hym by ſignes for to gone
               Vnto the quene, and bearen her that cloth
               And by ſigne ſwore many a othe
               She ſholde him yeue what ſhe getten myȝt
               This man anone vnto the quene him dight
               And toke it her, and al the maner tolde
               and whā yt Progne hath this thing beholde
               No word ſhe ſpake, for ſorow & eke for rage
               But fayned her to gone on pylgrymage
               To Baccus temple, and in a lytle ſtounde
               Her dombe ſuſter ſyttyng hath ſhe founde
               wepyng in the caſtel her ſelfe alone
               Alas the wo, conſtraynte, and the mone
               that Progne vpō the dombe ſuſter maketh
               In armes eueryche of hem other taketh
               And thus I let hem in her ſorowe dwell
               The remenaunt is no charge to tel
               For thys is al & ſome, thus was ſhe ſerued
               That neuer agylte, ne deſerued
               Vnto thys crewel man, that ſhe of wyſte
               Ye may beware of men yf that you lyſte
               For al be that he wolde not for ſhame
               Done as Tereus, to leſe hys name
               Ne ſerue you as a murtherer or a knaue
               Ful lytle whyle ſhul ye trewe hym haue
               that wol I ſayn al were he now my brother
               But yt ſo be that he may haue another
            
            
               ¶Here endeth the legende of Phylomene, and here foloweth the legende of Phillis.
               
                  BY proue, as wel as by auctorite
               That wycked fruite commeth of wycked tre
               That may ye finde, if that it lyketh you
               But for thys ende I ſpeke thys as nowe
               To tel you of falſe Demophon
               In loue a falſer herde I neuer non
               But it were hys father Theſeus
               
                  God for hys grace fro ſuch one kepe vs
               Thus theſe women prayen, that it here
               Nowe to the effecte turne I of my matere
               Dyſtroyed is of Troye the cite
               Thys Demophon came ſaylyng in the ſee
               Towarde Athenes, to hys paleys large
               with him came many a ſhip & many a barge
               Ful of folke, of whych ful many one
               Is wounded ſore, and ſicke and wo begone
               And they haue at the ſeige longe ylayne
               Behynde him came a wynd, and eke a raine
               that ſhofe ſo ſore, hys ſayle myght nat ſtōde
               Him were leuer than al the worlde alonde
               So hunteth hym the tempeſt to and fro
               So derke it was, he coulde no where go
               And wyth a waue bruſten was hys ſtere
               Hys ſhip was rente ſo lowe, in ſuch manere
               That carpenter coulde it not amende
               The ſee by nyght as any torche brende
               For woode, and poſſeth hym vp and downe
               Tyl Neptune hath of him compaſſioun
               And Thetis Chorus, Tryton, and they al
               And maden hym vp on londe to fal
               wherof that Phillis lady was and quene
               Lycurgus doughter, fayrer vnto ſene
               Than is the floure agayne the bright ſonne
               Vnneth is Demophon to londe ywonne
               weake & eke wery, and hys folke forpyned
               Of weryneſſe, and alſo enfamyned
               And to the deth he was almoſt ydryuen
               His wyſe folke counſayle haue him yeuen
               To ſeken helpe and ſocour of the quene
               And loken what hys grace myght bene
               And maken in that lande ſome cheueſaunce
               And kepen hym fro wo, and fro miſchaunce
               For ſycke he was, and almoſt at the dethe
               Vnneth myght he ſpeke, or drawe brethe
               And lythe in Rodopeya him for to reſt
               whā he may walke, hym thouȝt it was beſt
               Vnto the countre to ſeken for ſocour
               Men knewe hym well, and dyd him honour
               For at Athenes duke and lorde was he
               As Theſeus hys father hath ybe
               That in hys tyme was great of renoun
               No man ſo great in al hys regioun
               And lyke hys father of face and of ſtature
               And falſe of loue, it came hym of nature
               As doth the foxe Renarde, the foxes ſonne
               Of kynd he coulde his olde fathers wonne
               wythout lore, as can a drake ſwymme
               whan it is caught, & caryed to the brymme
               this honorable quene phillis doth him chere
               Her lyketh wel hys ſporte and hys manere
               But I am agroted here beforne
               To write of hem yt in loue bene forſworne
               And eke to haſt me in my legende
               which to performe, god me grace ſende
               Therfore I paſſe ſhortly in thys wyſe
               Ye haue wel herde of Theſeus the gyſe
               In the betrayeng of fayre Adriane
               That of her pyte kept hym fro hys bane
               At ſhorte wordes, ryght ſo Demophon
               The ſame way, & the ſame pathe hath gone
               That dyd hys falſe father Theſeus
               For vnto Phillis hath he ſworne thus
               To wedden her, and her hys trouth plyght
               And pyked of her al the good he myght
               whā he was hole & ſounde, and had his reſt
               And doth wyth Phillis, what ſo yt hym leſt
               As wel I coulde, yf that me lyſt ſo
               Tellen al hys doyng to and fro
               He ſayd to hys countrey mote he ſayle
               For there he wolde her weddyng apparayle
               As fyl to her honoure, and hys alſo
               And openly he toke hys leaue tho
               And to her ſwore he wolde not ſoiourne
               But in a moneth agayne he wolde retourne
               And in that lande let make hys ordynaunce
               As very lorde, and toke the obeyſaunce
               wel and humbly, and hys ſhyppes dyght
               And home he goth the next way he myght
               For vnto Philles yet came he nought
               And that hath ſhe ſo hard and ſore ybought
               Alas as the ſtorye doth vs recorde
               She was her owne deth wyth a corde
               whan ſhe ſawe that Demophon her trayed
               but fyrſt wrote ſhe to him, & faſt him prayed
               He wolde come and delyuer her of payne
               As I reherce ſhal a worde or twayne
               Me lyſt nat vouchſafe on hym to ſwynke
               Diſpenden on hym a penne ful of ynke
               For falſe in loue was he, ryght as his ſyre
               The dyuel ſette her ſoules both on a fyre
               But of the letter of Phylles wol I write
               A word or twayne, althouȝ it be but lyte
               Thyn hoſteſſe (ꝙ ſhe) O Demophon
               Thy Phillis, which that is ſo wo begon
               Of Rhodopeye, vpon you mote complayne
               Ouer the terme ſette betwyxt vs twayne
               That ye ne holden forwarde, as ye ſayde
               Your ancre, whych ye in our hauen layde
               Hyght vs, that ye wolde comen out of dout
               Or that the moone ones went about
               But tymes foure, ye mone hath hyde her face
               
                  Sens thylke daye ye wente fro thys place
               And foure tymes lyght the worlde agayne
               But for all that, yet ſhall I ſothly ſayne
               Yet hath the ſtreme of Scython not brought
               From Athenes the ſhyp, yet came it nought
               And yf that ye the terme reken wolde
               As I or other trewe louers do ſholde
               I playne not (god wote) beforne my day
               But all her letter wrytten I ne may
               By order, for it were to me a charge
               Her letter was ryght longe, and therto large
               But here and there, in ryme I haue it layde
               There as me thought that ſhe hath wel ſayd
               She ſayd, the ſayles cometh not agayne
               Ne to the worde, there nys no fey certayne
               But I wote why ye come not (quod ſhe)
               For I was of my loue to you ſo fre
               And of the goddes that ye haue ſwore
               That her vengeaunce fall on you therfore
               Ye be not ſuffyſaunt to beare the payne
               To moche truſted I, well may I ſayne
               Vpon your lynage, and your fayre tonge
               And on your teeres, falſly out wronge
               Howe coude ye wepe ſo by crafte? (quod ſhe)
               Maye there ſuche teeres fayned be?
               Nowe certes, yf ye wold haue in memorie
               It ought be to you but lytell glorie
               Ta haue a ſely mayde thus betrayde
               To god (ꝙ ſhe) pray I, and ofte haue prayde
               That it be nowe the greateſt pryce of all
               And moſte honour, that euer you ſhal befall
               And when thyne olde aunceters paynted be
               In whych men may her worthyneſſe ſe
               Then praye I god, thou paynted be alſo
               That folke may reden, forth by as they go
               Lo thys is he, that wyth hys flatterye
               Betrayed hath, and done her villanye
               That was hys trew loue, in thought & dede
               But ſothly of o poynt yet maye they rede
               That ye ben lyke your father, as in thys
               For he begyled Ariadne ywys
               wyth ſuch an arte, and ſuche ſubtelte
               As thou thy ſeluen haſte begyled me
               As in that poynt, all though it be not feyre
               Thou foloweſt certayne, and arte his heyre
               But ſens thus ſynfulfy ye me begyle
               My body mote ye ſene, wythin a whyle
               Ryght in the hauen of Athenes fletynge
               wythouten ſepulture and buryenge
               Though ye ben harder then is any ſtone
               And whē thys letter was forth ſent anone
               And knewe how brotel & how falſe he was
               She for dyſpayre fordyd her ſelfe alas
               Such ſorowe hath ſhe, for ſhe beſet her ſo
               Beware ye women of your ſubtyll foe
               Sens yet thys daye, men maye enſample ſe
               And truſteth nowe in loue no man but me.
            
            
               Here endeth the legende of Phillis, and here foloweth the legende of Hipermeſter.
               
                  IN Grece whylom weren brethren two
               Of whych that one was called Danao
               That many a ſonne hath of hys body wonne
               As ſuch fals louers oft cō-
               Amonge hys ſonnes all there was one
               That aldermoſte he loued of euerychone
               And whē this chyld was borne, this Danao
               Shope hym a name, and called hym Lyno
               That other brother called was Egiſte
               That was of loue as falſe as euer hym lyſte
               And many a doughter got he in hys lyfe
               Of whych he got vpon hys ryght wyfe
               A doughter dere, and dyd her for to call
               Hypermeſtra, yongeſt of hem all
               The whych chylde of her natiuite
               To all good thewes borne was ſhe
               As lyked to the goddes or ſhe was borne
               That of the ſhefe ſhe ſhulde be the corne
               The werdes that we clepen deſtyne
               Hath ſhapen her, that ſhe muſte nedes be
               Pytous, ſadde, wyſe, trewe as ſtele
               And to thys woman it accordeth wele
               For though yt Venus yaue her great beaute
               wyth Iupiter compowned ſo was ſhe
               That conſcience, trouth, & drede of ſhame
               And of her wyfehode for to kepe her name
               Thys thought her was felicyte as here
               And reed Mars, was that tyme of the yere
               So feble, that hys malyce is hym rafte
               Repreſſed hath Venus hys crafte
               And what wyth Venus, & other oppreſſion
               Of houſes, Mars hys venym is a don
               That Hypermeſter dare not handle a knyfe
               In malyce, though ſhe ſhulde leſe her lyfe
               But natheleſſe, as heuen gan tho turne
               
                  Two badde aſpectes, hath ſhe of Saturne
               That made her to dye in pryſon
               And I ſhall after make mencion
               Of Danao and Egyſtes alſo
               And though ſo be yt they were brethren two
               For thylke tyme nas ſpared no lynage
               It lyked hem to maken mariage
               Betwyxte Hypermeſtre, and hym Lino
               And caſten ſuche a daye it ſhalbe ſo
               And full accorded was it vtterly
               The aray is wrought, the tyme is faſt by
               And thus Lyno hath of hys fathers brother
               The doghter wedded, & ech of hē hath other
               The torches brennen, & the lampes bryght
               The ſacrifyce ben full redy dyght
               Thenſence out of the fyre reketh ſoote
               The floure the leefe, is rent vp by the roote
               To maken garlandes and crownes hye
               Full is the place of ſounde of mynſtralcye
               Of ſonges amourous of mariage
               As thylke tyme was the playne vſage
               And thys was in the paleys of Egyſte
               That ī his houſe was lord, right as him lyſt
               And thus that daye they dryuen to an ende
               The frendes taken leue, & home they wende
               The nyght is comen, ye bryd ſhal go to bedde
               Egyſte to hys chambre faſt hym ſpedde
               And pryuely let hys doughter call
               when yt the houſe voyded was of hem all
               He loketh on hys doughter with glad chere
               And to her ſpake, as ye ſhall after here
               My ryght doughter treſour of myne herte
               Sens fyrſt yt day, that ſhapē was my ſherte
               Or by the fatall ſuſter had my dome
               So nye myne herte neuer thynge ne come
               As thou Hypermeſtre, doughter dere
               Take hede what thy father ſayeth the here
               And werke after the wyſer euermo
               For alderfyrſt doughter I loue the ſo
               That all the worlde to me nys halfe ſo lefe
               Ne nolde rede the to thy myſchefe
               For all the good vnder the colde moone
               And what I mene, it ſhalbe ſayd right ſoone
               wyth proteſtacion, as ſayne theſe wyſe
               That but thou do, as I ſhall the deuyſe
               Thou ſhalt be deed, by him yt al hath wrouȝt
               At ſhort wordes thou ne ſcapeſt nought
               Out of my paleys, or that thou be deed
               But thou conſent, and werke after my reed
               Take thys to the fearfull concluſyon
               Thys Hypermiſter caſte her eyen doun
               And quoke as doth the leefe of aſpe grene
               Deed wext her hewe, & lyke as aſſhen to ſene
               And ſayd: lorde and father all your wyll
               After my myght, god wote I ſhall fulfyll
               So it be to me no confuſyon
               I nyll (quod he) haue none excepcion
               And out he caught a knyfe, as raſour kene
               Hyde thys (ꝙ he) that it be not yſene
               And when thyne huſbande is to bedde go
               whyle that he ſlepeth, cutte hys throte a two
               For in my dremes it is warned me
               Howe that my neuewe ſhall my bane be
               But whych I not, wherfore I woll be ſyker
               Yf thou ſay nay, we two ſhall haue a byker
               As I haue ſayd, by him that I haue ſworne
               This Hipermiſter hath nigh her wyt forlorn
               And for to paſſen harmleſſe out of yt place
               She graūted hī, ther was none other grace
               And wythal a coſtrel taketh he tho
               And ſayd, herof a draught or two
               Yeue hym drynke, when he goeth to reſte
               As he ſhall ſlepe as longe as euer the leſte
               The narcottikes and a pies ben ſo ſtronge
               And go thy way, leſt yt hym thynke to longe
               Out cometh ye bryd, & with ful ſobre chere
               As is of maydens ofte the manere
               To chābre brought, with reuel & with ſonge
               And ſhortly, leſt thys tale be to longe
               Thys Lino and ſhe beth brought to bedde
               And euery wyght out at the dore him ſpedde
               The nyght is waſted, and he fell a ſlept
               Full tenderly begynneth ſhe to wepe
               She ryſt her vp, & dredfully ſhe quaketh
               As doth the braūche, that zephirus ſhaketh
               And huſhte were all in Argone that cyte
               As colde as any froſt nowe wexeth ſhe
               For pyte by the herte ſtrayned her ſo
               And drede of deth doth her ſo moche wo
               That thryſe downe ſhe fyll, in ſuche a were
               She ryſte her vp, and ſtakereth here & there
               And on her handes faſt loketh ſhe
               Alas, ſhall myne handes bloody be
               I am a mayde, and as by my nature
               And by my ſemblaunt, and by my veſture
               Myne handes ben not ſhapen for a knyfe
               As for to reue no man fro hys lyfe
               what dyuell haue I wyth the knyfe to do?
               And ſhall I haue my throte corue a two?
               Then ſhall I blede alas, and be ſhende
               And nedes thys thynge mote haue an ende
               Or he or I mote nedes leſe our lyfe
               Nowe certes (quod ſhe) ſens I am hys wyfe
               And hath my fayth, yet is it bette for me
               
                  For to be deed, in wyſely honeſte
               Then be a traytour, lyuynge in my ſhame
               Be as be may, for erneſt or for game
               He ſhall awake, and ryſe and go hys way
               Out at thys gutter, er that it be day
               And wept full tenderly vpon hys face
               And in her armes gan hym to embrace
               And hym ſhe roggeth, and awaketh ſofte
               And at the wyndowe lepe he fro the lofte
               whē ſhe hath warned hym, & don hym boote
               Thys Lino ſwyfte was, and lyght of foote
               And from her ran, a full good paas
               Thys ſely woman is ſo weake, alas
               And helpeleſſe, ſo that er ſhe ferre wente
               Her cruell father dyd her for to hente
               Alas Lyno, why arte thou ſo vnkynde
               why ne haſte thou remembred in thy mynde
               And taken her, and ledde her forth wyth the
               For when ſhe ſawe that gone away was he
               And that ſhe myght not ſo faſte go
               Ne folowen hym, ſhe ſate downe ryght tho
               And tyll ſhe was caught, & fettred in priſon
               Thys tale is ſayd for thys concluſyon.
            
            ¶Thus ende the legendes of good women.
         
         
            ¶A goodly Balade of Chaucer.
            
               
                  MOther of norture, beſt be loued of all
               And freſheſt floure, to whō good thrift god ſēde
               Your chylde, yf it luſt you me ſo to call
               All be I vnable my ſelfe ſo to pretende
               To your dyſcrecion I recomende
               Myne herte and all, wyth euery circūſtaūce
               All hooly to be vnder your gouernaunce
            
            
               Moſte deſyre I, and haue, and euer ſhall
               Thing, which might your herts eaſe amēde
               Haue me excuſed, my power is but ſmall
               Natheleſſe of ryght ye ought to cōmende
               My good wyll, whych fayne wolde entende
               To do you ſeruyce, for all my ſuffyſaunce
               Is holy to be vnder your gouernaunce
            
            
               Meulx vn: in herte, whych neuer ſhall apall
               Aye freſhe & newe, & ryght glad to dyſpende
               My tyme in your ſeruyce, what ſo befal
               Beſechynge your excellence to defende
               My ſympleneſſe, yf ignoraunce offende
               In any wyſe, ſyth that myne affyaunce
               Is holy to ben vnder your gouernaunce
            
            
               Dayſy of lyght, very grounde of comforte
               The Sunnes doughter (ye hyght) as I rede
               For whē he weſtreth, farwel your dyſporte
               By your nature anone ryght for pure drede
               Of ye rude nyght, yt wyth his boyſtous wede
               Of darkeneſſe, ſhadoweth our emyſpere
               Then cloſen ye, my lyues lady dere
            
            
               Dawynge the daye, to hys kynde reſorte
               And Phebꝰ your father, wt his ſtremes rede
               Adorneth the morowe, conſumynge the ſorte
               Of myſty cloudes, that wolden ouerlede
               Trewe humble hertes, wyth her myſtyhede
               Nere comforte a dayes, when eyen clere
               Dyſcloſe and ſprede my lyues lady dere
            
            
               Ie vouldray: but great god dyſpoſeth
               And maketh caſuell by hys prouidence
               Suche thinge, as mās frele wytte purpoſeth
               All for the beſt, yf that our conſcience
               Not grutche it, but in humble pacience
               It receyue, for God ſayeth wythout fable
               A faythfull herte euer is acceptable
            
            
               Cautels, who ſo vſeth gladly gloſeth
               To eſchewe ſuche it is ryght hygh prudence
               what ye ſayd ones, my herte oppoſeth
               That my wrytynge iapes in your abſence
               Pleaſed you moche better then my preſence
               Yet can I more, ye be not excuſable
               A faythfull herte euer is acceptable
            
            
               Quaketh my penne, my ſpyrit ſuppoſeth
               That in my writing ye fynd wol ſome offēce
               Myn hert welkneth thus ſone, anon it riſeth
               Now hotte, now colde, and efte in feruence
               That myſſe is, is cauſed of negligence
               And not of malyce, therfore beth mercyable
               A faythfull herte euer is acceptable.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶Lenuoye.
                  ¶Forth cōplaynt, forth lackynge eloquence
                  Forth lytell lettre of endytynge lame
                  I haue beſought my ladyes ſapience
                  Of thy behalfe, to accepte in game
                  Thyne inabilite, do thou the ſame
                  Abyde, haue more yet: Ie ſerue Ioueſſe
                  Now forth, I cloſe the in holy Venus name
                  The ſhall vncloſe my hertes gouernereſſe.
               
               ¶FINIS.
            
            ¶Thus endeth thys balade: And here foloweth the boke of Boecius de conſolatione philoſophie.
         
         
            
            
               
                  ¶Boetius de conſolatione Philoſophie.
               
            
            
               
               
               The fyrſt boke of Boecius.
               
                  
                     
                        Carmina qui quondam ſtudio florente peregi
                        Flebilis heu meſtos cogor inire modos.
                     
                  
                  
                     ALas, I wepynge am conſtrayned to begyn vers of ſoroufull mater, that whylom in flouriſſhynge ſtudye made delitable dytees For lo, rendynge muſes of poetes, endyten to me thynges to be written, and drery teeres. At laſt no drede ne myght ouercome tho muſes, that they ne weren felowes and folouden my way, that is to ſay: whan I was exiled, they that weren of my youthe whylom weleful and grene, comforten nowe ſoroufull wyerdes of me olde man: for elde is comen vnwarely vpon me, haſted by ye harmes that I haue, and ſorowe hath cōmaunded hys age to be in me. Heeres hore arne ſhadde ouertymelyche vpon my heed▪ and the ſlacke ſkynne trembleth of myn empted body. Thylke dethe of men is weleful, that ne cometh nat in yeres that beſwete but cometh to wretches often ycleped. Alas, alas, with howe deefe an eere dethe cruel turneth awaye fro wretches, and nayeth for to cloſe wepynge eyen. Whyle fortune vnfaythfull fauoured me wyth lyght goodes, the ſoroufull houre, that is to ſaye, the dethe, had almoſte dreynt myn heed: But nowe for Fortune cloudy hathe chaunged her deceyuable chere to mewarde, myne vnpytous lyfe draweth alonge vnagreable dwellynges. O ye my frendes, what or wherto auaunted ye me to ben welefull? for he that hath fallen, ſtode in no ſtedfaſt degre.
               
               
                  
                     Hec dum mecum tacitus ipſe reputarem, queremoniam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         lachrimabilem ſtili officio deſignarem: aſtitiſſe mihi ſupra verticem viſa eſt mulier reuerendi admodum vultus, oculis ardentibus, & vltra communem. &c.
                  
                  
                     IN the meane whyle that I ſtyl recorded theſe thynges with my ſelfe, and marked my wepely complaynt wyth offyce of poyntell: I ſaugh ſtondynge abouen the hyght of myne heed, a woman of full great reuerence by ſemblaunte: Her eyen brennynge, and clere ſeyng ouer the commen myght of men, wyth a lyuely colour, & wyth ſuche vigour and ſtrength, that it ne myght nat ben nempned, all were it ſo that ſhe were full of ſo great age, that men ne wolden nat trowē in no maner that ſhe were of our elde. The ſtature of her was of doutous iugemēt, for ſomtyme ſhe conſtrayned and ſhronke her ſeluen lyke to the commen meſure of men: And ſomtyme it ſemed that ſhe touched the heuen wyth the height of her heed. And whā ſhe houe her heed hyer, ſhe perced the ſelfe heuen, ſo that the ſyght of men lokynge was in ydell: her clothes were maked of ryght delye thredes and ſubtyll crafte of perdurable matiere. The whiche clothes ſhe had wouen wyth her owne handes, as I knewe well after by her ſelfe declaryng, and ſhewyng to me the beaute: the which clothes a derkneſſe of a forleten and diſpyſed elde had duſked & derked, as it is wonte to derke by ſmoked ymages. In ye nethereſt hēme or bordure of theſe clothes, men redde ywouen therin a grekiſhe A. that ſignifieth the lyfe Actyue, and aboue that letter in the hyeſt bordoure a grekyſſhe C. that ſignyfyeth the lyfe Contemplatyfe. And bytwene theſe two letters there were ſene degrees nobly wrought in maner of ladders, by which degrees men might clymben from the nethereſt lettre to the vppereſt: Natheleſſe handes of ſome men hadden kerue that clothe by violence or by ſtrength, and euerych man of hem had borne awaye ſuche peces as he myght geten. And forſothe thys foreſayde woman bare ſmale bookes in her right hande, and in her lyfte hande ſhe bare a ſceptre. And whan ſhe ſawe theſe poetycall muſes approchyng aboute my bed, and enditynge wordes to my wepynges, ſhe was a lytell amoued, and glowed wyth cruell eyen. Who (ꝙ ſhe) hath ſuffred approchen to thys ſycke man theſe comen trompettes, of whych is the place, that men callen Theatre, the whiche onelye ne aſwagen nat hys ſorowes with remedies, but they wold feden and nouriſhe hym wyth ſwete venym? Forſothe that ben tho that with thornes and prickynges of talētes of affections, which that ben nothing fructuous nor profytable, diſtroyen the corne

plentuous of fruites of reaſon. For they holden hertes of men in vſage, but they ne delyuer no folke fro maladye. But yf the muſes had wythdrawen fro me wyth youre flatteryes anye an vnconnynge and vnprofytable man, as ben wonte to fynde comenly among the people, I wolde well ſuffre the laſſe greuouſly. For why, in ſuche an vnprofytable man, myne ententes were nothyng endamaged. But ye wythdrawen fro me this man, that hathe ben nouryſſhed in my ſtudyes or ſcholes of Eleaticis and of Achademicis in Grece. But goth nowe rather awaye ye mermaydens, whyche that ben ſwete tyll it be at the laſte, and ſuffreth thys man to be cured and heled by my muſes, that is to ſaye, by my notefull ſciences. And thus thys companye of muſes yblamed, taſten wrothly the chere downwarde to the erthe, and ſhewynge by reedneſſe her ſhame, they paſſed
                        •
                     n ſoroufully the threſſholde. And I of whome the ſyght plounged in teeres was derked, ſo that I ne might nat knowe, what that woman was of ſo imperyall auctorite, I woxe all abaſſhed and ſtonyed, and caſt my ſyght downe to the erthe, and began ſtyll for to abyde what ſhe wolde done afterwarde. Than came ſhe nere and ſet her downe vpon the vttereſt corner of my bedde, and ſhe beholdynge my chere that was caſte to the erthe, heauy and greuous of wepyng, cōplayned wyth theſe wordes (that I ſhall ſayne) the perturbacion of my thought.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Heu 
                              
                                 
                              
                              quam
                            precipiti merſa profundo,
                        Mens hebet, & propria luce relicta,
                        Tendit ad externas ire tenebras:
                        Terrenis quoties flatibus acta,
                        Creſcit in immenſum noxia cura.
                        Hic quondam celo liber aperto. &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     ALas, how the thought of this man dreynt in ouerthrowyng depneſſe, dulleth & forletteth his propre clereneſſe, mynting to gone in to forayne derkeneſſe, as ofte as hys anoyous buſynes wexeth without meſure, that is driuen wyth worldely wyndes. This man that whylom was free, to whom the heuen was open and knowen, and was wonte to gone in heuenly pathes, and ſawe the lightneſſe of the reed ſunne, and behelde the ſterres of the colde moone, and whiche ſterre in heauen vſeth wandrynge recourſes yflytte by dyuers ſpheres. Thys man ouercomer had comprehended all this thynge by nombre of acomptyng in aſtronomye. And ouer this he was wont to ſeken the cauſes, whence ye ſownyng wyndes mouen, and beſyen the ſmothe water of the ſee. And what ſpyrite tourneth the ſtable heuen. And why the ſterre ryſeth out of the reed eſte, to fallen in the weſtren wawes. And what attempreth the luſty houres of the fyrſt ſommer ceaſon, and hyghteth and apparayleth the erth wyth roſy floures. And who maketh the plentuous Autumpne in full yeres fleten wyth heuy grapes. And eke thys man was wonte to tell the dyuers cauſes of nature that were hydde. Alas howe lightly is empted the lyght of hys thought, and hys necke is preſſed wyth heuy cheynes, and beareth hys chere enclyned a downe for the great weight, and is conſtrayned to loken on the fole erthe.
               
               
                  
                     Sed magis medicine (inquit) tempus eſt 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         querele.

                           Boe.
                           Tū vero totis in me intenta luminibus.
                        
                        
                           Philo.
                           Tune ille es (a
                                 •
                              t) qui noſtro quondam lacte nutritus, noſtriseducaius alimē
                              tis, ī virilis animi robur cuaſeras▪ &c.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     BVt tyme is nowe of medicine (ꝙ ſhe) more thā complaynte: Forſothe than ſhe entendyng to me warde wyth all the lokyng of her eyen ſayde. Ar
                        •
                     e not thou he (ꝙ ſhe) that whylom I nouriſhed with my mylke, and foſtred wyth my metes, were eſcaped and comen to the corage of a parfayte man? Certes I yaue the ſuche armures, that yf thou thy ſelfe ne haddeſt fyrſte caſte hem awaye, they ſhulden haue defended the in ſykerneſſe, that may nat be ouercomen. Knoweſt thou not me? why art thou ſtil? is it for ſhame or for aſtonyeng? It were me leuer it were for ſhame, but it ſemeth me that aſtonyenge hathe oppreſſed the. And whan ſhe ſawe me not onely ſtyll,

but rather wythout offyce of tonge and all dombe, ſhe layde her hande ſoftely vpon my breſte, and ſayde: Here is no peryll (ꝙ ſhe) he is fallen in to a lytarge, whiche that is a comune ſyckneſſe to hertes that ben diſceyued. He hath a lytell foryeten him ſelfe. But certes he ſhall lightly remembren hym ſelfe, yf ſo be that he hath knowen me or nowe. And that he maye doone ſo, I wyll wype hys eyen a lytell that be derked by the cloude of mortall thynges. Theſe wordes ſayd ſhe, and wyth the lappe of her garnemē
                     
                        •
                      yplited in a froūce ſhe dried myne eyen that weren full of the wawes of my wepynges.
               
               
                  
                     Tunc me diſcuſſa liquerunt nocte tenebre: Luminibuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         prior redit vigor. Vt cum precipiti glomerantur ſidera choro. Nimboſiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         polus ſtetit imbribus. Sol latet, ac non dum celo venientibus aſtris. &c.
                  
                  
                     THus whan that nyght was diſcuſſed away, derkeneſſe for lete me, and to myne eyen repayred agayn her firſt ſtrēgth And right as by enſample, as the ſonne is hydde whan the ſterres ben couerde with cloudes, by a ſwyfte wynde that hyght Chorus, and the firmament ſtante derked by wete plungy cloudes. And that the ſterres not aperen vpon the heuen, ſo that the nyght ſemeth ſprad vpon the erthe. If than the wynde that hight Boreas, yſent out of the caue of the coūtrey of Trace, beateth thys nyght, that is to ſayne, chaſeth it awaye, and diſcouereth the cloſed daye, than ſhyneth Phebus yſhaken with ſodayne lyght, and ſmyteth with hys beames in marueylyng eyen.
               
               
                  
                     Haud aliter triſticie nebulis diſſolutis, hauſi celum, & ad cognoſcendā medicantis faciem, mentem recepi. Ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vbi in eā deduxi oculos, intuitum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         defixi, reſpicio nutricem meam, i
                           •
                         cuius ab adoleſcentia. &c.
                  
                  
                     RIght ſo and no other wyſe, ye cloudes of ſorowe diſſolued & done away, I toke heuen and receyued mynde to knowen the face of my phiſycien: ſo that I ſette myne eyen vpon her and faſtned my lokyng. I behelde my norice Philoſophie in whoſe houſe I had conuerſed fro my youthe, and I ſayde thus. O thou mayſtreſſe of al vertues diſcended from the ſouerayne ſete, why art thou comen in to this ſolitary place of myne exile? Arte thou comen for thou arte made coulpable wyth me of falſe blames? O (quod ſhe) my norice, ſhulde I forſake the nowe, and ſhulde I not parten with the by comen trauayle ye charge that thou haſte ſuffred for enuy of my name? Certes it were not lefull ne ſyttyng to Philoſophie to leten wythout company the way of him yt is innocent: Shuld I than redoute my blame, and agriſe as though there were befallen a new thyng? For troweſt thou that Philoſophie be nowe alder fyrſte aſſayled in peryls by folke of wycked maner? Haue I not ſtryuen wyth full great ſtryfe in olde tyme before the age of my Plato, ayenſt the foolehardyneſſe of folye? And eke the ſame Plato lyuyng, hys mayſter Socrates deſerued victorie of vnryghtfull dethe in my preſence. The herytage of the whyche Socrates, the heritage is to ſayne the doctryne, of the whyche Socrates in hys opinyon of felycite, that I cleape welefulneſſe: whan that the people of Epycuriens and Stoiciens, & many other enforced them to go rauiſhe, euery man for hys parte, that is to ſayne: that eueryche of hem wolde drawen to the defence of hys opinyon the wordes of Socrates. They as in partye of their praye to drawen me cryenge and debatynge therayenſt, and coruen and renten my clothes that I had wouen wyth myne owne handes. And wyth tho clothes that they had araced out of my clothes they wenten awaye, wenynge that I had gone wyth hem euerye dele. In whyche Epicuryens and Stoiciens for as moche as there ſemed ſome traces and ſteppes of my habyte: The folye of wenyng tho Epicuryens and Stoiciens my famyliers, peruerted ſome through the erroure of the wycked multytude of hem: Thys is to ſayne for they ſemed Philoſophers they werē purſued

to the dethe and ſlayne. So yf thou haſt not knowen the exilynge of Anaxagoras, ne the enpoyſonynge of Socrates, ne the turmentes of zeno, for they weren ſtraungers, yet myghteſt thou haue knowen the Sen
                        •
                     
                     cas, the Canios, and the Soranos: Of whyche folke the renomme is neyther ouer olde ne vnſolempne. The whyche men nothynge els ne brought to the dethe, but onely for they were enformed of my maners, and ſemeden moſte vnlyke to the ſtudyes of wycked folke. And for thy thou oughteſt not to wondren, though that I in the bytter ſee be dryuen wyth tempeſtes blowynge aboute. In the whych this is my moſte purpoſe, that is to ſayn to diſpleſen wicked men. Of which ſhrewes all be the hooſte neuer ſo great, it is to diſpyſe, for it is not gouerned with no leader of reaſon, but it is rauyſhed onely by fletynge errour, fol
                        •
                     ly and lightly. And yf they ſomtyme make an hooſte ayenſte vs, aſſayle vs as ſtrenger: oure leder draweth togyther hys richeſſes in to hys tour, and they ben ententyfe aboute ſarpleris or ſachelles vnprofytable for to taken. But we that ben hygh abouen, ſyker frome all tumulte and woode noyſe, warneſtored and encloſed in ſuch a paleys, whyther as that claterynge or anoyeng foly may not attayne, we ſcorne ſuche raueners and henters of fouleſt thynges.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Quiſquis compoſito ſerenus euo,
                        Factum ſub pedibus egit ſuperbum:
                        Fortunam
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            tuens vtrā
                           
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            rectus,
                        Inuictum potuit tenere vultum. &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     WHo ſo it be that clere of vertue, ſad, and well ordynate of lyuyng, that hath put vnderfoot the proude wyerdes, & loketh vpryght vpon eyther fortune, he maye holden hys chere vndyſcomfyted. The rages ne the manaces of the ſee commonynge and chaſynge vnware heate frome the bottome, ne ſhall nat moue that man, ne the vnſtable mountayne that hyght Veſenus, that writheth out through hys broken chymeneyes ſmokynge fyres, ne the waye of thonder leyte, that is wonte to ſmyten hygh toures ne ſhall nat moue that man. Wherto than wretches drede ye tyrauntes, that ben wood and felonous wyth any ſtrength? Hope after nothynge, ne drede thou not: and ſo ſhalte thou diſarmen the ire of thylke vnmyghty tyraunte. But who that quakynge dredeth or deſyreth thynge that is not ſtable of hys right, that man that ſo doth hathe caſte awaye his ſhilde, and is remoued fro his place, and enlaſeth him in the chayne, wyth the whyche he may be drawen.
               
               
                  
                     Sentis ne (inquit) hec? at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         animo illabuntur tuo? Expers ne es lyre? Quid fles? Quid lachrimis manas? Si operā medicantis expectas, oportet vt vulnus detegas tuum. &c.
                  
                  
                     FElyſt thou (ꝙ ſhe) theſe thynges? and entren they aught in thy corage? Arte thou lyke an aſſe to the harpe? Why wepeſt thou? Why ſpylleſt tho teeres? If thou abydeſt after helpe of thy leche, ye behoueth diſcouer thy wounde. Tho I had gathered ſtrength in my corage and anſwerde and ſayd, and nedeth it (ꝙ I) of reherſynge or of amonicion, and ſheweth it not ynough by hym ſelfe the ſharpneſſe that wexeth woode ayenſt me? Ne moueth it not the to ſe the 
                        •
                     ace or the maner of thys place? Is this the librarye that thou haddeſt choſen for a ryght certayne ſyege to the in myne houſe, there as thou dyſputeſt oft wyth me of the ſcience of thynges, touchynge dyuynite and touchynge mankynde? Was than myne habyte ſuche as it is nowe? was my face or chere ſuche as is now, whan I ſought wyth the ſecretes of nature, whan thou enformedeſt my maners and the reaſon of all my lyfe, to thenſample of the ordre of heauen? Is not thys the guerdon that I referre to the, to whom I haue be obeyſaunt? Certes thou enformedeſt by the mouthe of Plato thys ſentence, that is to ſayne: that comen thynges or comynaltees weren bliſfull, yf they that had ſtudyed all fully to wyſdome gouerneden thylke thynges: or els yf

it ſo befell that the gouernours of comynaltees ſtudiden to get wyſedome, thou ſaydeſt eke by the mouthe of the ſayde Plato, that it was a neceſſarye cauſe, wyſe men to taken and deſyren the gouernaunce of comen thynges, for that the gouernemētes of cytes yleft in the handes of felonous tourmentours, cytezeins ne ſhulden not bryngen in Peſtilence and diſtruction to good folke. And therfore I folowynge thylke auctours deſyred to put forthe in execution and in acte of comen adminiſtracion thylke thynges, that I had lerned of the among my ſecrete reſtyng whyles, thou and god that put in the thoughtes of wyſe folke, ben knowynge wyth me, that nothynge ne brought me to maiſtrye or dignyte but the comen ſtudye of all goodneſſe. And therfore cometh it that bytwene wyked folke and me haue ben greuous dyſcordes, that ne myghten not be releaſed by prayers: for this lyberte hath the fredom of cōſcience, that the wrathe of more myghty folke hathe alwaye ben diſpyſed of me for ſauacyon of ryght. Howe ofte haue I reſyſted and wythſtande that man that hyght Canigaſt, that made alway thaſſaute aienſt the proſper fortunes of poore feoble folke? Howe ofte eke haue I put of or caſte out hym Triguyl prouoſt of the Kynges houſe, bothe of the wronges that he had begonne to done, and eke fully perfourmed? Howe often haue I couered and defended by ye auctorite of me put ayenſt peryls, that is to ſayne: put myne auctorite in peryl for the wretched poore folke that the couetyſe of ſtraungers vnpunyſhed turmenteden alwaye wyth miſeaſes and greuaūces out of nombre? Neuer man yet drowe me fro ryght to wronge. Whan I ſawe the fortunes and the rycheſſes of the people of the prouynces ben harmed and amenuſed, eyther by priuy rauynes or by comen trybutes or cariages, as ſory was I as they that ſuffreden the harme. Gloſe. Whan that Theodorike Kynge of Gothes in a deed yere had hys garners full of corne, and commaunded that no man ſhulde bye no corne tyll hys corne were ſolde, and at a greuous dere price: Boece wythſtode that ordynaunce, and ouercame it, knowynge all thys the kyng Theodorike hym ſelfe. Coempcion is to ſay comen achate or byenge togyther, that were aſtablyſſhed vpon the people by ſuche a maner impoſycion, as who ſo bought a buſſhell of corne, he muſte yeuen the Kynge the fyfthe parte. Textus. whā it was in the ſore hongry tyme, there was eſtablyſſhed greuous and vnprofytable coempcion, that men ſene well it ſhulde greatlye turmenten and endomagen al the prouynce of Campayne. I toke ſtryfe ayenſt the Prouoſt of the pretorie for the comen profyte. And the knowynge of it, I ouercame it, ſo that the coempciō was not aſked ne tooke effecte.
                  Paulyne a counſaylour of Rome, the rycheſſes of the whyche Paulyne the houndes of the paleys, that is to ſaye, thoffycers wolden haue deuoured by hope and couetyſe: yet drawe I out of the iawes of hem that gapeden. And for as moche as the payne of the accuſacion aiuged beforne ne ſhulde not ſodaynly henten ne punyſhen wrongfully Albyne a coūſaylour of Rome, I put me ayenſt the hates and indignacions of the accuſour Ciprian. Is it not than ynough ſens that I haue purchaſed great diſcordes ayenſt my ſelfe? But I ought be more aſſured ayenſt other folke, that for the loue of ryghtwyſneſſe I neuer reſerued nothyng to my ſelfe to hem warde of the Kynges hall, by whych I were the more ſyker. But through tho ſame accuſours accuſynge I am condempned. Of the nombre of whiche accuſours one Baſilius yt whylom was chaſed out of ye kynges ſeruice is nowe compelled in accuſynge of my name for nede of forayne money. Alſo Opilion and Gaudencius haue accuſed me: Albe it ſo that the iuſtyce regall had whylom demed them bothe to gone in to exyle for her trecheryes and fraudes without nombre. To which iudgement they nolden not obey, but defended hem by the ſykerneſſe of holy houſes, that is to ſayne, ſtedden in to ſeyntwary: And than whan this was apperceyued by the kyng, he cōmaunded but if they voyded the cyte of Rauenne by certayne daye aſſigned, that menne ſhulde markē hem on ye forheed with an hote yron, and chaſen hem out of the town. Nowe what thyng ſemeth might be lykened to this cruelte, for certes this ſame daye was receyued the accuſyng of my name by thylke ſame accuſours? what may be ſayd hereto? Hathe my ſtudye and my connynge deſerued thus, or els the foreſayde dampnacion of me made them ryghtfull accuſours or no? Was not

I had greythed deth to al good men, algates fortune a ſhamed of thys? Certes all had nat fortune ben aſſhamed ye innocence was accuſed, yet ought ſhe haue had ſhame of ye fylthe of myne accuſours. But aſke thou in ſome of what gylte I am accuſed. Men ſayne that I wolde ſauen the companye of the ſenatours. And deſyreſt thou to heren in what maner I am accuſed, that I ſhulde haue diſtourbed the accuſoure to bearen letters, by whyche he ſhulde haue made the ſenatours gyltye ayenſt the kynges royall mayeſte? O mayſtreſſe, what demeſt thou of thys? ſhal I forſake thys blame, that I ne be no ſhame to the? Certes I haue wolde it (that is to ſaye) the ſauacion of the ſenate, ne I ſhall neuer lette to wylne it, and that I confeſſe and am a knowe, but thentente of the accuſoure to ben diſtourbed ſhall ceaſe. Shall I cleape that a felonye or a ſynne that I haue deſyred the ſauacyon of the ordre of the ſenate? And certes had thylke ſame ſenate doone through her decretes and her iugemē
                     tes as though it were a ſynne and a felonye, that is to wylne the ſauacyon of them. But folye that lyeth alwaye to hym ſelfe, maye not chaunge the meryte of thynges, ne I trowe not by the iugement of Socrates that it were lefull to me to hyde the ſothe, ne aſſente to leaſynges: but certes howe ſo euer it be of this, I put it to geſſen or pryſen of the iugement of the and of wyſe folke, of whych thynge all the ordynaunce and the ſothe (for as moche as folke that ben to comen after oure dayes ſhall knowen it) I haue put it in ſcripture and in remembraunce. For touchynge the letters falſely made, by whyche letters I am accuſed to haue hoped the fredome of Rome, what apertayneth me to ſpeken therof. Of whyche letters the fraude had ben ſhewed apertely, yf I had had lybertye for to haue vſed and ben at confeſſyon of myne accuſours, the whyche thynge in all nedes hathe great ſtrength. For what other fredom may men hopen? Certes I wold that ſome other fredome myght be hoped, I wolde than haue anſwerde by the wordes of a man that hyght Camus: for whan he was accuſed of Canyus, Ceſar Germanes ſonne, that he was knowynge and conſentynge of a coniuracion ymade agaynſte him. Thys Canyus anſwerde thus: yf I had wyſte it, thou haddeſt not wyſte it. In which thynge ſorowe hath not ſo dulled my wytte, that I playne onely that ſhreude folke apparaylen felonyes agaynſte vertue, but I wō
                     der greatly howe that they maye perfourme thynges that they haue hoped for to doone, for why ne wyll ne ſhreudeneſſe that cometh perauenture of oure defaute. But it is lyke a monſtre and a meruayle howe that in the preſente ſyght of god, maye ben acheued and perfourmed ſuche thynges, as euerye felonous manne hath conceyued in hys thought ayenſt innocentes. For whyche thynge one of thy famylyers not vnſkylfully aſked thus. If god is: whence comen wycked thynges But all had it ben lefull that felonous folke, that nowe deſyren the bloode and the dethe of al good men, and eke of the Senate, haue wylned to gone diſtroyen me, whome they haue ſene alwaye batayllen and defenden good men, and eke all the ſenate, that had not deſerued of the fathers (that is to ſayne of the ſenatours) that they ſhulden wyll my deſtruction. Thou remembreſt well as I geſſe that whan I wolde done or ſayne any thyng thou thy ſelfe alwaye preſente ruledeſt me. At the cytye of Verone whan that the kynge gredy of comen ſlaughter, caſte hym to tranſporten vpon all the order of the ſenate the gylte of hys royall mayeſtye, of the whyche gylte that Albyne was accuſed, wyth howe great ſykerneſſe of peryll to me, defended I all the ſenate? Thou wotteſt well that I ſaye ſothe, ne I ne auaunted me neuer in prayſynge of my ſelfe. For alwaye whan any wyght receyueth precyous renome in auauntynge of hym ſelfe or hys werkes, he amennſeth the ſecree of hys conſcience. But nowe thou mayſte well ſene to what ende I am comen for myne innocencye, I receyue payne of falſe felonye, for gwerdone of verye vertue. And what open confeſſyon of felonye had euer iudges ſo accordaunte in cruelte, that is to ſayne, as myne accuſynge hathe, that eyther errour of mannes wytte, or els condicyon of fortune, that is vncertayn to all mortall folke ne ſubmytted ſome of hem, that is to ſaye, yt it ne enclyned ſome iuge to haue pyte or cōpaſſyon. For all though I had ben accuſed that I wold brenne holy houſes, and ſtrāgle preeſtes with wycked ſwerde, or that

I had greythed deth to al good mē, algates the ſentence ſhuld haue puniſhed me preſent confeſſed and conuict. But now I am remoued from the cyte of Rome almoſt. V.C.M. paas, I am wythoute defence dampned to proſcrepcion and to deathe, for the ſtudyes and bountyes that I haue doone to the Senate. But o wel bene they worthy of merite, as who ſaith: nay ther myght yet neuer non of hem be conuicte of ſuche a blame as mine is. Of whych treſpace myne accuſours ſeen full wel the dignite, for they wolde derken it wyth medlyng of ſome felonye. They baren me on honde and ſayde, that I had polute & defouled my cōſcience wyth ſacrilege for couetyſe of dignitie: and certes thou thy ſelfe that arte planted in me, chacedeſt out of the ſiege of my corage al couetiſe of mortal thinges, ne ſacrilege ne had no leaue to haue a place in me before thyne eyen. For thou droppedeſt euerye daye in myne eares and in my thought thylke commaundement of Pythagoras, that is to ſaye: Men ſhall ſeruen to God, and not to goddes. Ne it was not conuenient ne none nede to takē helpe of the fouleſt ſpirites, I that thou haſt ordeigned and ſette in ſuche excellence that thou madeſt me lyke to God, and ouer thys the ryght cleane ſecrete chābre of myne houſe, that is to ſaye my wyfe, and the company of myne honeſte frendes, and my wyues father, as well holy as worthy to be reuerenſed for his dedes, defenden me from al ſuſpection of ſuch blame. But oh malice. For they that accuſen me takē of the philoſophy feyth of ſo great blame for they trowen that I haue had affynite to malefyce or enchauntement, bycauſe that I am replenyſhed and fulfylled wyth thy teachynges and enformed of thy maners. And thus it ſuffyceth not onelye yt thy reuerence ne aueyle me naught, but yf thou of thy frewyll rather be blemyſhed wyth myne offencion. But certes to the harmes that I haue, there betydethe yet thys encreaſe of harme, that the geſſynge and the iugement of much folke ne lokē no thyng to the deſertes of thinges, but onely to the auēture of fortune, and iudgen that onely ſuche thynges bene purueyed of God, whyche that temporall wylfulneſſe cōmaūdeth. Gloſa. As thus, that yf a wyght haue proſperite, he is a good mā and worthy to haue that proſperyte, & who ſo hathe aduerſite, he is a wycked man, and God hath forſake hym, and he is worthy to haue that aduerſyte. Thys is the opinion of ſome folke, and therof cometh that good geſſyng fyrſte of all thynge forſaked wretches. Certes it greueth me to thynke ryght nowe in dyuers ſentences that the people ſayth of me: And thus moch I ſaye, yt the laſt charge of contraryous fortune is thys, that whan anye blame is layde vpon a catyfe, men wenen that he hathe deſerued that he ſuffrethe And I that am put awaye from good men, and diſpoyled of dignites, and defouled of my name by geſſynge haue ſuffred turmentes for my good dedes. Certes me ſemeth yt I ſe the felonous couynes of wicked mē haboūden in ioy & in gladneſſe: & I ſe that euery lorel ſhapeth hym to fynde newe fraudes for to accuſe good folke & I ſe yt good folke be ouerthrowen for drede of my peryll, and euery luxurious turmētour dare done al felonye vnpunyſhed, and be excited therto by yeftes, and innocentes be not onely diſpoyled of ſykerneſſe, but of defence. And therto me lyſt to crien to god in thys maner.
               
               
                  
                     O ſtelliferi conditor orbis, qui perpetuo nixus ſolio, rapido celum turbine verſas, legem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         pati ſydera cogis, vt nūc pleno lucida cornu. Totis fratris obuia flammis condat ſtellas luna minores: Nūc obſcuro pallida cornu Phebo proprior lumina pardat. &c.
                  
                  
                     THou maker of ye whele that beareth the ſterres, whyche that arte faſtned to thy perdurable chayre, and turneſte the heuen wyth a rauyſhing ſweyghe, and conſtrayneſte the ſterres to ſuffre thy lawe: ſo that yu mone ſomtyme ſhynyng wyth her ful hornes metynge wyth all the beames of thy ſunne her brother, hydeth the ſterres yt bene leſſe. And ſomtime whā the mone pale, with her derke hornes approcheth the ſūne leſeth her lyghtes: and yt the euyn ſterre Heſperus, whyche that in the fyrſt tyme of the nyght bryngeth fyrſt her colde aryſynge, cometh eft ayen her vſed courſe, and is pale by the morow at ryſynge of the ſunne, and than yclyped Lucifer. Thou reſtrayneſte the daye by ſhorter

dwellynge in the tyme of the coulde wynter that maketh the leaues fall. Thou deuydeſt the ſwyft tydes of the nyght, when the hote ſommer is comen. Thy myghte attempreth the variaunte ſeaſons of the yere, ſo that zephirus the debonayre wynd bryngeth ayen in ye fyrſt ſōmer ſeaſon the leues yt the winde that hyght Boreas, hath refte away in Antumpne, that is to ſaye, the laſt ende of ſommer, and the ſeedes yt the ſterre that hyghte Arcitures ſewe, bewoxen high cornes, whā the ſterre Sirius enchafeth hem. There is nothynge vnbounden from thys olde lawe, ne forletteth the werke of hys propre eſtate. O thou gouernour, gouernynge al thynges by certayne ende, why refuſeſt thou onely to gouerne the werkes of men by dewe maner: why ſuffreſt thou, that ſlyding fortune tourneth ſo great enterchaunges of thynges, ſo that anoyous paine that ſhulde duly puniſh felons, punyſheth innocentes: And folke of wycked maners ſytten in high chayres, and annoyeng folke treden (& ye vnryghtfully) on the neckes of holy mē. And vertue clere & ſhynyng naturelly, is hyde in derke derkeneſſes and the rightful man beareth the payne and the blame of the felons. Ne the forſweryng, ne the fraud couerde and kempt with a falſe coloure, ne annoyeth not to ſhreudeneſſe, the whyche ſhreudneſſe, whan hem lyſt vſen her ſtrēgth, they reioyſen hem to put vnder hem the ſouerayne kynges, whiche that the people wythout nombre dreden. O thou what ſo euer thou be that knytteſte all bondes of thynges, loke on theſe wretches, erthes, we men that bene not a foule parte, but a fayre parte of ſo great a werke: we bene tourmented in this ſee of fortune. Thou gouernoure, wythdrawe and reſtreyne the rauyſhing flodes, and faſten and ferme theſe erths ſtable wyth thylke bonde, wyth whyche thou gouerneſt heauen that is ſo large.
               
               
                  
                     Hec vbi cōtinuato dolore delatraui: illa vultu placido, nihil
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         meis queſtu b
                           •…
                        s mota. Phi. Cum te (inquit) me
                        
                           ••
                        m, lacrimantem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vidiſſem: illico miſerum exulem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         cognoui. Sed 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         id longinquum eſſet exilium. &c.
                  
                  
                     WHan I had wyth a continual ſorowe ſobbed or broken oute theſe thynges, ſhe wyth her chere peſible, and nothynge amoued with my complayntes ſayde thus. whan I ſaye the (quod ſhe) ſoroufull and wepynge, I wyſte anone that thou were a wretche and exiled: But I wyſte neuer howe ferre thyne exyle was, yf thy tale ne had yſhewed it me. But certes al be thou ferre fro thy countrey, thou narte not put oute of it, but thou haſte fayled of thy way and gone amyſſe. And if thou haſte leuer for to wene that thou be put oute of thy countrey, than haſte thou put out thy ſelfe, rather than anye other wyghte hathe, for no wyghte (but thou thy ſelfe) ne myght neuer haue doone that to the: For yf thou remembre the of what countrey thou arte borne, it nys not gouerned by Emperours ne by gouernement of multitude, as weren the countreyes of hem of Athenes, but one Lorde and one kynge, and that is God, that is Lorde of thy countrey, whych that reioyſeth hym of the dwellynge of hys cytezeyns and not for to put hem in exyle. Of the whyche Lorde it is a fredome to be gouerned by the brydle of hym and obeye to hys iuſtice. Haſte thou forgotten thylke olde law of thy citye, in the whyche citye it is ordayned and eſtablyſhed, that what wyghte hathe leuer founde therin hys ſeate, or hys houſe than els where, he maye not be exiled by no right from that place? For who ſo that is conteyned wythin the paleys of thylke citye, there is no drede that he may deſerue to be exiled. But who ſo letteth the wyll tenhabyte there he forletteth alſo to deſerue to be a Citezeyn of thylke Citye. So that I ſaye, that the face of thys place ne mouethe me not ſo mykell, as thyne owne face. Ne I ne aſke nat rather the walles of thy lybrarye, apparayled and wrought wyth yuore & with glaſſe, than after the ſeate of thy thought, in which I put not whylome bookes, but I put that, that maketh bookes worthy of pryce or precyous: that is to ſaye ſentence of my bokes. And certaynly of thy deſertes beſtowed in comen goodes, thou haſte ſayde ſothe: but after the multitude of thy good dedes thou haſt ſayd fewe. And of the honeſtie or of the falſeneſſe of thynges yt bene oppoſed ayenſt

the, thou haſte remembred th
                        •
                     nges that be knowen to al folke. And of the felonyes and fraudes of thyne accuſours, it ſemeth the to haue touched it forſoth ryghtfully & ſhortly al myghten tho ſame thynges vetter & more plentuouſly bene couth in the mouthe of the people that knoweth al this. Thou haſt eke blamed greatly & complayned of the wrong ful dede of the Senate. And thou haſt ſorowed for my blame and thou haſt wopen for the damage of thy renoune that is apeyred: and thy laſt ſorowe enchaſed ayen fortune, complayneſt the guerdons be not euēly yolden to the deſertes of folke. And in thy latter ende of thy woode muſe, thou praydeſte that thylke peace that gouerneth the heuen ſhulde gouerne the earth. But for that many tribulacions of affections haue aſſayled the and ſorowe and yre and wepyng to drawen the diuerſly, as yu art now feoble of thought myghtyer remedyes ne ſhullen not yet touchen the, for which we wyllen ſomdele vſen lyghter medicynes, ſo that thylke paſſyons that bene waxen harde in ſwellynge by perturbations flowyng in to thy thought, mowen waxe eaſy & ſoft to receyue the ſtrength of a more myghtye and more egre medicyne by an eaſyer touchynge.
               
               
                  
                     Cum Phebi radiis graue cancri ſidus meſtuat, tum qui largo negantibus, ſuleis ſemina credidit, eluſus Cereris fide, quarnas pergat ad arbores Nun
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         purpureū nemus lecturus violas petas. &c.
                  
                  
                     WHā that the heuy ſterre of the Cancre enchaſeth by ye beames of Phebus: that is to ſayne, whan that Phebus the ſonne is in the ſygne of the Cancre, who ſo yeueth than largelye hys ſedes to ye feldes that refuſen to receiue hem, lette hym gone begyled of truſt that he had to hys corne, to akehornes of okes. If thou wylte gather violettes, ne go thou nat to the purple wodde, whan the felde chyrkynge agriſeth of colde, by the felneſſe of the wynde that hyght Aquilone. If thou deſyreſt or wylte vſen grapes, ne ſeke thou not a gloutons hande to ſtrayne & preſſe the ſtalkes of the vyne in the fyrſt ſommer ceaſon. For Baccus the God of wyne, hathe rather yeuē hys yeftes to Autumpne the later ende of ſommer. God tokeneth and aſſigneth the tymes ablyng hem to her proper offyces, ne he ſuffreth not the ſtoūdes, which that hym ſelfe hathe deuided and conſtrayned to bene ymedled togither: and for thy he that forletteth certayne ordynaunce of doyng by ouerthrowing way, he hath no glad iſſue or ende of hys werkes.
               
               
                  
                     Primum igitur, pateris ne me pauculis rogationibus ſtatum tue mētis attingere, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tētare? vt quis modus ſit tue curacionis intelligam. &c.
                  
                  
                     FIrſt woldeſt thou ſuffre me to touch and aſſay the eſtate of thy thought by a few demaundes, ſo that I may vnderſtande by, the maner of thy curaciō? Aſke me (quod I) at thy wyll, that thou wolte, and I ſhall anſwere. Tho ſayde ſhe thus: whether weneſte thou (quod ſhe) that thys worlde be gouerned folyſhly by happes and fortunes, or els weneſt thou that there be in it any gouernement of reaſon?
                  
                     B.
                     Certes (quod I) I ne trowe nat in no maner that ſo certayne thynges ſhulde be moued by fortunous fortune, but I wote well that God, maker and mayſteris gouernour of his werke, ne was neuer yet daye that myghte put oute of the ſothneſſe of that ſetence.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     So is it (quod ſhe) for the ſame thynge ſange thou a lytell here beforne, and bewayledſt and wepteſt, that onelye men were put out of the cure of God, for all other thynges thou ne douteſte not, that they nere gouerned by reaſon. But ough, I wonder certes greatly why yt thou arte ſycke, ſens that thou arte put in ſo holſome a ſentence: But let vs ſeken deper. I coniecte that there lacketh I not what. But ſaye me thys. Sens that thou ne douteſte not that thys worlde be gouerned by God, wyth which gouernayle takeſte thou hede yt it is gouerned? Vnneth (ꝙ I) knowe I the ſentence of thy queſtyon, ſo that I ne maye not yet anſweren to thy demaūdes. I was not diſceiued (quod ſhe) that there ne fayled

ſomwhat, by whyche the malady of perturbacion is crepte in to thy thought, ſo as the ſtrēgth of thy paleis ſhynyng is opē: but ſay me thys. Remembreſt thou what is thende of thynges? and whyder thentencion of all kinde tēdeth? I haue herde tolde it ſomtime (ꝙ I) But dreryneſſe hath dulled my memorye. Certes (ꝙ ſhe) thou woteſt well whence al thynges be comen and proceden. I wote wel (ꝙ I) and anſwered, that god is beginnynge of al. And howe maye thys be (ꝙ ſhe) that ſens thou knoweſte the begynnynge of thynges, that thou ne knoweſt nat what is the ende of thynges, but ſuche ben the cuſtomes of perturbation, and thys power they hanne that they may moue a man from hys place, that is to ſay, from the ſtableneſſe and perfection of hys knowyng, but certes they maye nat all arace hym, ne alien hym in all: but I wolde that thou woldeſte anſwere to this. Remembreſt thou that thou art a mā?
                  
                  
                     B.
                     why ſhuld I not remembre that (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Maiſt thou not tel me thā (ꝙ ſhe) what thynge is a man? Aſkeſt thou not me (ꝙ I) whether yt I be a reaſonable mortal beaſte, I wote well and confeſſe that I am it. wyſt thou neuer yet yt thou were any other thyng (quod ſhe)? No (quod I). Nowe wel know I (quod ſhe) other cauſe of thy malady, and that ryght great: Thou haſt left for to knowen thy ſelfe what thou art, thorow whych I haue playnly founden the cauſe of thy maladye, or els the entre of recouerynge of thy heale. For why? For thou arte confounded wyth foryetynge of thy ſelfe: For thou ſoroudeſte that thou arte exiled of thy propre goodes. And yu ne wyſte what is thende of thinges, for thy demeſte thou that felonous and wycked mē, be myghty and welful: and for thou haſte foryeten by whyche gouernementes the worlde is gouerned, for thy weneſt thou that theſe mutacions of fortune fleten wythout gouernour. Theſe ben the cauſes not onlye to maladye, but certes greate cauſes to deathe: But I thanke the auctour and the maker of heale, that nature hathe not al forleten the. I haue great nouryſhing of thyne heale, and that is the ſoth ſentence of gouernaunce of the worlde, that thou byleueſt that the gouernyng of it is not ſubiect ne vnderput to the foly of theſe happes auē
                        turous but to the reaſonne of god, and therfore dout the nothing, for of this lytle ſparke thyne heate of lyfe ſhall ſhyne. But for as moch as it is not time yet of faſter remedies and the nature is of thoughtes thus diſceyued, that as ofte as they caſte away ſoth opinions, they clothen hem in falſe opinions. Of the whych falſe opinions the darkeneſſe of perturbacion wexeth vp, that cōfoundeth the very inſyght. And that derkeneſſe ſhal I ſomwhat aſſaye to makē thynne and weake by lyght and meanelyche remedyes, ſo that after that the darkeneſſe of diſceyuyng thinges be done away, thou may know the ſhynyng of very lyght.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Nubibus atris cōdita nullum fundere poſſunt ſydera lumen. Si mare voluens turbidus auſter miſceat eſtū Vitrea dudum, par
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſerenis. &c.
                  
                  
                     THe ſterres couered with blacke cloudes ne mowe yeten adoun no lyght, yf the trouble wynde that hight Auſter, turning and walowyng the ſee medleth the heate, that is to ſayne the boylynge vp from the bottome. The wawes that were whylom clere as glaſſe, & lyke to the fayre bryght dayes, withſtant anone the ſyghtes of men, by the filth and ordure that is reſolued. And the fleting ſtreme that reyleth downe diuerſly from hygh mountaygnes is arreſted and reſiſted oft time by thencoūtryng of a ſtone, that is departed and fallen from ſome rocke And for thy, if thou wylt loken & deme ſothe wyth clere lyght, and holden the way wyth a right path, weyue thou ioy, driue fro drede fleme thou hope, ne let no ſorowe approche, that is to ſayne: Let none of theſe foure paſſions ouercome or blende the. For cloudye & darke is thylke thoughte and bounde wyth brydels, where as theſe thynges reignen.
               
               ¶Explicit liber primus.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        POſt hec pauliſper obticuit, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vbi attentionem meam modeſta taciturnitate collegit, ſic exorſa eſt. Si penitus egritudinis tuc cauſas, habitum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        . &c.
                  
                  
                  The ſeconde boke of Boecius.
                  
                     AFter thys ſhe ſtynte alytell, & after that ſhe had gadered by a temper ſtylneſſe myne attē
                     tion, as who ſo myght ſayne thus. After theſe thynges ſhe ſtynt a lytle, and ſhe aperceyued by a temper ſtylneſſe, that I was ententyfe to heren her, ſhe began to ſpeake in thys wyſe. Yf I (quod ſhe) haue vnderſtāden and knowen vtterly, the cauſes and the habite of thy malady, thou languyſheſt and art defected for deſyre & talent of thy rathar fortune. She that ylke fortune onely that is chaunged as thou fayneſt to the warde, hathe peruerted the clereneſſe and the eſtate of thy courage. I vnderſtonde the fele or manyfolde colours and diſceytes of thylke merueylous monſtre fortune, and ſhe vſeth full flateryng familiaryte wyth hem that ſhe enforceth to begyle, ſo longe, tyl that ſhe confounde with vnſufferable ſorowe, hem that ſhe hath lefte in diſpayre vnpurueyed. And if thou remembreſt wel the kynde, the maners, and the deſerte of thylke fortune, thou ſhalt well know that as in her thou neuer ne haddeſt, ne haſt yloſt any fayre thynge: But (as I trowe) I ſhal not greatly trauaylen to done the remē
                     bren on theſe thynges. For thou were wont to hurtelen & diſpyſen her wyth many wordes, whan ſhe was blandyſhynge and preſent, and purſudeſte her with ſentences that weren drawen oute of myne entre, that is to ſay, of myn enformacyon: but no ſodayne mutation ne betydeth not wythout a maner chaūgyng of corages. And ſo it is befal, that thou art a lytyl departed fro the peace of thy thought, but nowe is time that thou drynke and ataſte ſome ſofte and delytable thinges ſo yt whan they be entred wythin the, it mowen make waye to ſtrenger drynkes of medictus. Come nowe forth therfore the ſuaſion of ſwetneſſe rethoryen, whych that goth onelye the ryght waye, whyle ſhe forſakethe not myne eſtatutes. And wyth Rethoryke come forthe muſyke a damoſel of our houſe, that ſyngeth nowe lyghter modes or prolacions and nowe heuyer. What ayleth the man▪ what is it that hath caſt the into murnyng and in to wepyng? I trowe that thou haſte ſene ſome newe thynge and vncouthe? Thou weneſt that fortune be chaūged ayen me▪ but thou weneſte wronge yf that thou wene alway tho ben her maners. She hath rather kepte as to the warde, her proper ſtableneſſe in the chaungynge of her ſelfe: ryght ſuche was ſhe flatterde the and dyſceyued the, wyth vnlefull lykynges and falſe welefulneſſe. Thou haſte nowe knowen and atteynte the doubtous or double vyſage of thylke blynde goddeſſe fortune. She that yet couerethe and wymplethe her to other folke, hathe ſhewed her ſelfe euerye deale to the: If thou apporueſt her and thinkeſt that ſhe is good, vſe her maners and playne the not, and thou agryfeſte her falſe trechexye, diſpyſe and caſte awaye her that playeth ſo harmefullye, for ſhe that is nowe cauſe of ſo muche ſorow to the, ſhulde be to the cauſe of peace and of ioy. She hath forſaken the forſothe, the which that neuer man maye be ſyker that ſhe ne ſhall forſaken hym. Gloſe. But nathleſſe ſome bokes haue the text thus Forfoth ſhe hathe forſaken the, ne there nys no man ſyker that ſhe ne hathe not forſaken. Holdeſte thou than thylke welefulneſſe precyous to the that ſhall paſſen, and is preſent deare worthe to the, whyche that nys not fayethfull for to dwell, and whan ſhe gothe awaye that ſhe bryngeth a wyght in ſorow. For ſens ſhe maye not be wyth holden at a mannes wyll, ſhe makethe hym a wretche whan ſhe depertethe fro hym. what other thynge is ſtyttyng fortune, but a maner ſhewynge of wretcheneſſe that is to come. Ne it ſufficeth not onely to loken on thyng that is preſent before the eyen of a man, but wiſdome loketh and meaſureth thende of thynges, and the ſame chaungynge from one to another, that is to ſayne, from aduerſyte in to proſperyte, makethe that the manaces of fortune ne bene not for to dreden, ne the flateryng to be deſyred. Thus at the laſt it behouethe the to ſuffren wyth euen wyll in pacience, al that is done wythin the floure of fortune, that is to ſay in this worlde, ſyth thou haſt ones put thy necke vnder ye yoke of her. For if thou wolt writen a lawe of wending & of dwellyng to fortune, whyche that thou haſte choſen frely to bene thy lady: Art thou not wrongfull in that, and makeſte fortune wrothe and aſper by thyne impacience, and yet thou mayſt not chaungen her?
                  If thou cōmytteſt and be takeſte thy ſayles to the wynde, thou ſhalte be ſhouen, nat

thyder that thou woldeſte, but whyder that the wynde ſhoueth the. If thou caſteſte thy ſeedes in the feldes, thou ſhouldeſte haue in mynd yt the eares ben amonges otherwhile plenteous, & otherwhile bareyn. Thou haſt betaken thy ſelfe to the gouernaunce of fortune, and for thy it behoueth the to ben abeyſaunt to the maners of thy lady. Enforceſte thou the to areſten or wyth holdē the ſwyftneſſe and the ſweygh of her turning whele? O thou fole of all mortall fooles, yf fortune began to dwell ſtable, ſhe ceſſed than to ben fortune.
               
               
                  
                     Hec cum ſuperba verterit vices dextra, exeſtuantis more fertur Euripi. Dudū tremendos ſe
                           •
                        a proterit reges humilem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         victi ſubleuat fallax vultū. Nō illa dura meſiros audit, haud curat fletus. &c.
                  
                  
                     WHā Fortune wyth a proud ryght hande with turned her chaunging ſtoundes, ſhe fareth lyke the maners of the boylynge Eurype.
                  Gloſa Euripe is an arme of the ſee, ye ebbeth and ſloweth, and ſomtyme the ſtreme is on o ſyde and ſomtyme on that other
                  Text. She crewel fortune caſteth adoun kinges that whylom weeren ydrad, and ſhe diſceiuable enhaunceth vp the humble cheer of hym that is diſcomfyted, ne ſhe nether hereth ne recketh of wretched wepynges. And ſhe is ſo harde, that ſhe laugheth & ſcorneth the wepyng of hem, the which ſhe hath maked to wepe with her frewil. Thus ſhe playeth and thus ſhe proueth her ſtrēgthes, and ſheweth a great wonder to al her ſeruaūtes yf that a wyghte is ſeen welefull, and ouerthrowe in an hour.
               
               
                  
                     Vellem autem pauca tecum Fortune ipſius verbis agitare. Tu igitur an ius poſtulet animaduerte. P. Quid tu o homo ream me agis quotidianis querelis. &c.
                  
                  CErtes I wolde pleden wyth the a fewe thynges, vſyng the wordes of fortune: take hede now thy ſelfe, yf that ſhe aſke ryght.
                  O thou man, wherfore makeſte thou me gyltye by thine euerye dayes playnynges? what wronge haue I done the? what goodes haue I beraft the yt were thyne? Striue or pleate wyth me before what iudge that yu wylt, of the poſſeſſion, of rycheſſes, or of dignites, & yf thou mayſt ſhewen me, that euer any mortall man hathe receyued anye of tho thynges to bene hys in proper, than wyll I graunt frely, that thylke thynges were thyn whyche that thou aſkeſt. whan that nature brought the forth out of thy mothers wōbe I receyued the naked and nedye of all thynges, and I nouriſhed the with al my rycheſſes, and was redye and ententyfe thorowe my fauoure to ſuſtayne the: and that maketh the nowe impacient ayenſt me. And I enuyronned the wyth all habondaunce and ſhynyng of al goodes, that bene in my right now it lyketh me to wythdrawe myn honde Thou haſt had grace as he that hathe vſed forayne goodes. Thou haſte no ryghte to playne the, as though thou haddeſte vtterly forlorne, al thy thinges. why playneſte thou thā? I haue done the no wronge. Richeſſes, honours, and ſuch other thinges ben of my right. My ſeruauntes knowen me for her lady: they come wyth me, & departed whan I wende. I dare wel afferme hardely, yt yf tho thinges, of whiche thou playneſte that thou haſt forlorne had ben thyne, thou ne haddeſt not lorn hem. Shal I thā be defended only to vſe my right? Certes it is leful to ye heuen to make clere daies & after that to ouercome tho ſame dayes wyth derke nyghtes. The yere hath eke leaue to apparayle the vyſage of ye erth, now wt floures, & nowe with frute and to cōfounde hem ſomtyme with raynes and wyth colde. The ſee hath eke his right to bene ſomtyme calme and blandyſhynge, with ſmoth water and ſomtyme to be horrible wyth wawes and wyth tempeſtes. But couetyſe of men, that maye not be ſtaunched ſhall it bynde me to be ſtedfaſte, ſythen that ſtedfaſtneſſe is vncouthe to my maners? Such is my ſtrength, and ſuch play I play comenly. I turne the whirlyng whele wyth the tournyng cerkle. I am glad to chaungen the loweſte to the hyeſt, and the hyeſt to the loweſt. worthe vp yf thou wolte, ſo it be by thys lawe, that thou ne holde not that I do the wronge, thoughe thou diſcende adowne whan the reaſonne of my playe aſketh it.

wiſt thou nat how Creſus king of Lidiens of which kynge Cyrus was ful ſore agaſt a lytle beforene that this Creſus was caught of Cyrus, and led to the fyre to be brent, but that a rayne diſcended from heauen that reſcowed him? And is out of minde how that Paulus conſull of Rome, whan he had taken the kynge of Perciens, weped pytouſly for the captiuitie of the ſelfe kynge? what other thynge bewaylen the cryinge of tragedyes, but onely the dedes of fortune, that wt an aukewarde ſtroke ouertourneth the realmes of great nobley. Gloſe. Tragedye is to ſayne, a ditee of a proſperite for a tyme that endeth in wretchedneſſe. Learnedſt not thou in Grece whan thou were yonge, that in the entrie or in the ſeller of Iupiter, there ben couched two tonnes, that one is full of good, that other is ful of harme?
                  what ryght haſte thou to playne, yf thou haſt taken more plēteouſly of the good ſyde that is to ſayne, of rycheſſe and proſperitie? And what eke yf I be not al departed from the? what eke if thy mutable yeueth ye right full cauſe of hope to haue yet better thynges Natheleſſe, diſmaye the not in thy thought And thou that art put in the cōmune realm of all, ne deſyre not to lyuen by thyne owne propre ryght.
               
               
                  
                     Si quātas rapidis flatibus incitus Pontus verſat arenas: Aut quot ſtelliferis edita noctibus celo ſydera fulgent: Tantas fundat opes, nec retrahat manum pleno copia cornu: Humanum miſeras had ideo genus Ceſſet ſlere querelas. &ce
                  
                  
                     THoughe plentye goddeſſe of rycheſſe hylde a downe with a ful horne, and withdrawe not her hande, as many rycheſſe as the ſee turneth vpwarde ſandes, whan it is moued with rauyſhyng blaſtes, or els as many rycheſſes as there ſhynen bryght ſterres in the heuen on the ſterry nyghtes: yet for all ye mankynde wold not ceſſe to wepe wretched playntes. And al be it ſo, that god receyued her prayers, and yeueth hem as foole large moche golde, and apparayleth coueytous folk with noble or clere honours: yet ſemeth hym haue gotten nothing. But alway cruel rauyne deuouryng all that they haue gottē ſheweth other gapynges, that is to ſay, gapen and deſyren yet after more rycheſſes. what brydles myght witholden to any certayne ende the diſordinate couetyſe of men, whan euer the rather that it fleeth in large yeftes, the more brenneth in hem the luſt of hauyng? Certes he that quakyng and dredfull weneth hym ſelfe nedy, he ne lyueth neuermore ryche.
               
               
                  
                     His igitur, ſi pro ſe tecū, verbis for tuna loqueretur, quod profecto cōtra hiſceres, non haberes. At ſi quid eſt, quo querelam tuam iure tuearis, proferas oportet. &c.
                  
                  
                     THerfore yf that fortune ſpake wt the for her ſelfe in this maner, for ſothe thou ne haddeſte not what thou myghteſt anſwere. And yf thou haſt any thing, wherwith thou mayſt ryghtfully defenden thy cōplaynte, it behoueth the to ſhewen: & I wol yeuen to ye ſpace to tellen it.
                  
                     Boece.
                     Certaynly (quod I) than, theſe ben fayr thynges, and anoynted with hony ſwetneſſe of rethoryke and muſycke, & only whyle they be hearde and ſowne in eares, they ben delicious. But to wretches it is a deper felyng of harme, this is to ſayne, that wretches felen the harme, that they ſuffre more greuouſly, than the remedyes or ye delytes of theſe wordes may gladden or cō
                        fort hem. So that whan theſe thynges ſtinten for to ſowne in eares, ye ſorow that is in ſet greueth the thought.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Right ſo it doth (ꝙ ſhe) For theſe ne ben yet no remedyes of the maladye, but they bene a maner noryſſhyng of thy ſorowes, that rebell ayenſt thy curacion. For whan tyme is I ſhall moue & aiuſt ſuch thinges that percen hem ful depe But natheleſſe that thou ſhalt not wylne to leeten thy ſelfe a wretche. Haſte thou foryeten the nombre and the maner of thy welfulneſſe? I ſpeake nat how yt the ſoueraigne men of the cytie toke the in cure, and keping whan thou were orpheſyn of father and of mother, and were choſen in affinitie or princes of the cytie. And thou begā rather to belefe and dere, thā for to be a neyghbour, the

which thyng is the mooſte precyous kynde of any propinquite or alyaunce that may bē who is it that ne ſayd tho that thou ne wer ryght welefull, with ſo great nobley as thy fathers in lawe, and with the chaſtite of thy wyfe, and with thoportunitie and nobleſſe of thy maſculyne chyldren, that is to ſayne, thy ſonnes. And ouer all this (me lyſt to paſſen of comē thynges) how thou hadſt in thy youth dignityes, that were warned to olde men, but it deliteth me now to comen to the ſynguler vpheapyng of thy welefulneſſe. Yf any frute of mortall thynges maye haue any wyght or pryce of welefulneſſe, myghteſt thou euer foryeten for anye charge of harme that myght befall, the remembraūce of thylke daye, that thou ſawe thy two ſonnes made counſaylours, and lad togyther from thy houſe, vnder ſo greate aſſemble of ſenatours, and vnder the blytheneſſe of the people▪ and whan thou ſawe hem ſet in the courte in hye chayres of dignities. Thou rethorien or pronouncer of kynges prayſynges deſeruedſt glory of wyt and of eloquēce whan thou ſyttynge betwene thy two ſonnes counſaylours, in the place that hyghte Cyrco, and fulfylleddeſt the byddyng of the multitude of people that was ſprad aboute the with ſo large prayſynge and laude, as men ſynge in vyctoryes. Tho yaue thou to fortune as I trowe, that is to ſaye, tho feodeſt thou fortune with glorious, and deceyueddeſt her, whan ſhe acoyed and noryſſhed the as her owne delyces. Thou bare awaye of fortune a yeft, that is to ſaye, ſuche guerdon that ſhe neuer yafe to priuate man wylte thou therfore laye a rekenynge wyth fortune? She hath nowe fyrſt twinked vpō the with a wycked eye. Yf thou conſydre the nombre and the maner of thy blyſſes and of thy ſorowes, thou mayeſt nat forſaken that narte yet blyſfull. For yf therfore thou weneſt thy ſelfe not welefull, for thou thynges that ſemeden ioyfull bene paſſed, there nys not why yu ſhuldeſt ſeme thy ſelfe a wretche, for thynges that ſeme now ſory, paſſed alſo Art thou nowe comen a ſodayne geſte into the ſhadow or tabernacle of this lyfe? or troweſt thou that any ſtedfaſtneſſe be in mans thynges? whan oft a ſwyft houre diſſolueth the ſame man, that is to ſaye, whan the ſoul departed from the body. For although that ſelde is there any fayth that fortunous thinges wolde dwellen, yet natheleſſe, the laſte day of mans life is a maner deth to fortune and alſo to thilke that hath dwelt. And therfore what weneſt thou darre recke, yf thou forlette her in dyinge, or els that ſhe fortune forlette in flyinge awaye.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Cum polo phebus roſeis quadrigis Lucem ſpergere ceperit: Pallet albentes hebetata vultus Flaminis ſtella prementibus. &c.
                  
                  
                     WHan Phebus the ſunne begynneth to ſpred his clereneſſe with roſen charyottes, than the ſterre dymmed paleth her whyte cheres by the flambes of the ſunne, that ouercommeth the ſterre lyghte, that is to ſayne, whan the ſunne is ryſen, the daye ſterre wexeth pale, and leſeth her lyght: For the great lyghtneſſe of the ſunne, whan the wodde wexeth rodye of roſen floures in the fyrſt ſomer ſeaſon, through the breth of the wynde zepherus that wexerh warme, if the cloudye wynde Auſter blowe fellyche, than goth awaye fayreneſſe of thornes. Ofte the ſee is cleare and calme with mouynge floudes, and ofte the horryble wynde Aquilon moueth boylynge tempeſtes, and ouerwhelueth the ſee. Yf the fourme of this worlde is ſo ſelde ſtable, and yf it turneth by ſo many entrechaunges: wylte thou than truſten in the tomblynge fortunes of men? wylt thou trowen on flyttyng goodes? It is certayne and eſtablyſſhed by lawe perdurable, that nothynge that is engendred is ſtedfaſte, ne ſtable.
               
               
                  
                     Tum ego, vera in
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        , cōmemoras o virtutum omnium nutrix: nec inficiari poſſum proſperitatis mec veliſſimum curſum. Sed hoc eſt quid. &c.
                  
                  
                     THan ſaid I thus: O norice of al vertues, thou ſayſt ful ſoth ne I may not forſake ye right ſwift courſe of my proſperite that is to ſayne, that the proſperitye, ne be comen to me wondre ſwyftlye and ſoone
                  
                     But this is a thynge that greatly ſmerteth me, whan it remēbreth me. For in all aduerſites of fortune the moſt vnſely kynd of contraryous fortune is to haue ben weleful.
                  
                     P.
                     But that thou abyeſt thus (ꝙ ſhe) ye turment of thy falſe opinion, yt mayſt thou not rightfully blamen ne aretten to thynges, as who ſayth, that thou haſt yet many haboudaunces of thynges. Textus. For al be it ſo that the ydle name of auēturous welfulneſſe moueth yt nowe it is leful that thou reken with me of how many thynges thou haſt yet plē
                        tie. And therfore yf that thylke thynge that thou haddeſt for more precious in all thy rycheſſe of fortune be kepte to the yet by the grace of god vnwēmed & vndefouled mayſt thou than playne ryghtfully vpon the myſchefe of fortune, ſythē thou haſt yet thy beſt thynges? Certes yet lyueth in good poynte thilke precious honour of mankynde. Symachus thy wyues father, which that is a man made of all ſapience, and vertue, the which mā thou woldeſt bye with yt price of thyne owne lyfe, he bewayleth the wrōges that men doone to the, and not for him ſelfe. For he lyueth in ſykerneſſe of anye ſentence put ayenſte hym. And yet lyueth thy wyfe, that is attempre of wyt, and paſſynge other women in clenneſſe of chaſtitie. And for I wolde cloſen ſhortelye her bountyes, ſhe is like her father: I tel the, that ſhe lyueth loth of this lyfe, and kepeth to the only her goſt, and is al mate and ouercomen by wepynge and ſorowe for deſyre of the. In the whiche thyng only I mot graūten the, that thy wil fulneſſe is amenuſed.
                     what ſhall I ſayne eke of thy two ſonnes counſailours, of which as of children of her age there ſhyneth the lykeneſſe of the wytte of her father and of her elde father? And ſythen the ſouerayne cure of all mortall folke is to ſauen her owne lyues, yf thou knowe thy ſelfe, thy goodes make the more welful for yet bene there thynges dwelled to the warde, that noman douteth that they ne bē more dereworth to the thā thyne owne life.
                     And for thy, drye thy teeres, for yet is not euery fortune hateful to thewarde, ne ouer great tempeſt, ne hath not yet fallen vpō the whan thyne ancres cleuen faſt: that neither wol ſuffren the cōfort of this tyme preſent, ne the hope of tyme commyng to paſſen, ne to faylen.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     And I praye (ꝙ I) that faſte mote they holden: for the whyles that they holden, howſoeuer that thynges ben, I ſhal wel fleten forth and eſcapē. But thou mayeſt well ſene how great apparayles, and araye, that me lacketh that be paſſed awaye from me.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     I haue ſomwhat auaunced & farthered the (quod ſhe) yf that thou anoye not or forthynke not of all thy fortune, as who ſayth, I haue ſomwhat comforted the ſo that thou tempteſt not the thus with all thy fortune, ſythen thou haſte yet thy beſte thynges. But I may not ſuffren thy delices that playneſt ſo wepyng and anguyſhous, for that there lacketh ſomwhat to thy welfulneſſe. For what man is he that is ſo ſad, or of greate perfyte welefulneſſe, that he ne ſtryueth and playneth on ſome halfe ayen the qualitie of his eſtate? for why ful anguiſhious thing is the condicion of mans goodes. For eyther it cōmeth not al togyther to a wyght, or els it ne laſteth not perpetuell. For ſome man hath greate rycheſſe, but he is aſſhamed of his vngentyll lynage. And ſome man is renomed of nobleſſe of kynred, but he is encloſed in ſo greate anguyſſhe of nede of thynges, that him were leauer that he were vnknowe. And ſome man aboundeth both in rycheſſe and nobleſſe, but yet he bewayleth his chaſte lyfe, for he ne hath no wyfe. And ſome man is, and ſelily maryed, but he hath no chyldren, and nomiſheth his rycheſſes to ſtraunge folke. And ſome man is gladded with children, but he wepeth ful ſore for the treſpaſſe of his ſonne, or of hys doughter. And for this there ne accordeth no wyght lyghtly to the condicion of h
                           •
                        s fortune. For alwaye to euerye man there is in ſomwhat, that vnaſſayed, he ne wote nouȝt or els he dredeth, that he hath aſſayed. And adde this alſo, that euery weleful man hath a full delycate felyng: ſo that but yf all thynges be fallen at his owne wyll, he is impacient, or is not vſed to haue none aduerſitie, anon he is throwen downe for euerye lytell thynge. And full lytle thynges ben tho that withdrawen the ſumme, or the perfection of blyſfulneſſe fro hem that ben mooſt fortunate. Howe many men troweſt thou wolde demen hem ſelfe to be almooſte in heuen, yf they myghten attayne to the leeſt partie of ye rēnaunt of thy fortune? This ſame place

that thou clepeſt exyle, is countreye to hem that enhabyten here.
                  
                  And for thy nothyng wretched, but whā thou weneſt it, as who ſayth: Thou thy ſelf ne no wyght els nis a wretche, but whā he weneth hym ſelfe he is a wretche by reputacyon of his corage. And ayenwarde: Al fortune is blyſful to a man, by the agreabylitie or by the egallitie of hym that ſuffreth it. what man is that, that is ſo welefull, that nolde chaungen his eſtate whā he hath loſt his patience? The ſwetneſſe of mans welefulneſſes is ſpraynt with many bitterneſſes The whiche welefulneſſe, although it ſeme ſwete and ioyfull to hym that vſeth it, yet maye it not ben witholden, that it ne goeth awaye whan it woll.
                  Than is it well ſene howe wretched is the blyſfulneſſe of mortall thynges, that neither it dureth perpetuel with hem, that euerye fortune receyuen agreablye or egally, ne it delyteth nat in all to them that bene anguyſſhyous.
                  O ye mortall folke, what ſeke ye than blyſfulneſſe out of your owne ſelfe, whyche is put in your ſelfe? Erroure and follye confoundeth you. I ſhall ſhewe the ſhortlye the poynt of ſoueraygne blyſfulneſſe.
                  Is there any thyng to the more precyous than thy lyfe? Thou wylt anſwer, naye.
                  Than, yf it ſo be that thou arte myghtye ouer thy ſelfe, that is to ſayne, by tranquyllitie of thy ſoule, than haſte thou thynge in thy power, that thou noldeſt neuer leſē: Ne fortune maye not bynemme it the. And that thou mayeſt know, that blyſfulneſſe ne may not ſtande in thynges that been fortunous and temporel, now vnderſtande and gather it togyther thus.
                  Yf blyſfulneſſe be the ſoueraygne good of nature that lyueth by reaſon: ne thylke thynge is not ſoueraynge good that maye be taken awaye in any wyſe.
                  For more worthye thynge is and more digne thylke thynge that maye not be take away. Than ſheweth it well that the vnſtableneſſe of fortune, maye not attayne to receue very blyſfulneſſe.
                  And yet moreouer what man that this tomblynge welefulneſſe leadeth, eyther he wote that it is chargeable, or els he wote it not? And yf he wot it not, what blyſfull fortune maye there be in the blyndeneſſe of ignoraunce? And yf he wot, that it is chaūgeable, he mote alwaye bene adradde, that he ne leſe that thynge, that he ne doubteth not but that he maye leſen it. As who ſayeth, he mote alwaye be agaſt, leaſt he leſe that, that he woteth ryght wel he may leſe. For which the continuell drede that he hath, ne ſuffreth hym not to be welefull. Or els if he leſe it, he weneth to be deſpyſed and forleten. Certes eke that is a full lytle good, that is borne with euen herte whan it is loſte, that is to ſayne, that men doo more force of the loſſe, than of the hauynge.
                  And for as moch as yu thy ſelf art he, to whō it hath be ſhewed and preued by full manye demonſtrations as I wote well, that the ſoules of menne, ne mowen not dyen in no wyſe. And eke ſyns it is clere and certayne, that fortunous welefulneſſe endeth by the deth of the body: it may not be doubted that yf death maye take awaye blyſfulneſſe, that all the kynde of mortall thyng ne diſcendeth into wretchedneſſe by the ende of deth.
                  And ſythen we knowe well, that manye a man hath ſought the frute of blyſfulneſſe, not onely with ſuffrynge of death, but eke with ſuffrynge of paynes and tourmentes: how myght than this preſent lyfe make men bliſfull, ſyns that thylke ſelfe lyfe ended it ne maketh folk no wretches.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           QViſquis volet perennem
                        Cautus pouere ſedem,
                        Stabiliſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            nec ſonori
                        Sterni flatibus Euri
                        Et fluctibus minantem
                        Curat ſpernere pontum
                        Montis cacumen alti
                        Bibulas vitet arenas. &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     WHat maner of folke, ware and ſtable that wyll founden hem a perdurable ſeate, and ne wyl not be caſte downe, wyth the loude blaſtes of the wynde Eurus,

and wil diſpyſe the ſee menaſyng with floudes: Lette hym eſchewe to buylden on the coppe of the moūtaygne, or in the moyſt ſandes. For yf the fell wynde Auſter tourmenteth the coppe of the mountaygnes wt all her ſtrengthes, and the loſe ſandes refuſen to beare the heauy weyghtes.
                  And for thy, yf thou wylt flyen the peryllous auenture, that is to ſaye, of the worlde haue mynde certaynlye to ſet thyne houſe of a mery ſeate in a lowe ſtone.
                  For although the wynde troublynge the ſee, thondre with ouerthrowyng, thou that arte putte in quyete, and welefull, by ſtrength of thy paleys, ſhalt leade a cleare age, ſcornynge the woodneſſe and the yres of the ayre.
               
               
                  
                     Sed quoniam rationum iam in te mearum fomenta deſcendunt, paulo validioribus vtendum puto. Age enim. Si iam caduca ac momentaria fortune. &c.
                  
                  
                     BVt, for as moche as the nouryſſhynges of my reaſon deſcenden nowe into the, I trowe it wer tyme to vſen a lytle ſtrenger medicens. Now vnderſtand here, all were it ſo, that ye yeftes of fortune ne were not brytle ne tranſytorye, what is there in hem that maye be thyne in any tyme? or els that it ne is foule, yf that it be loked and conſydred perfectlye. Rycheſſes ben they precyous by the nature of them ſelfe, or elles by the nature of the? what is mooſte worth of rycheſſe? is it not golde or myght of moneye aſſembled? Certes that golde and that money ſhyneth and yeueth better renoume to hem that diſpenden it, than to thylke folke that mokeren it: for auaryce maketh alwaye muckerers to ben hated, and largeſſe maketh folke cleare of renoume. For ſyth that ſuche thynges as ben tranſferred from one man to an other, ne maye not dwell with no manne, certes, than is that moneye precyous, whan it is tranſlated in to other folke, and ſtynten to be hadde by vſage of large yeuynge of hym that hath yeuen it. And alſo yf al the money that is ouer all in all the worlde, were gathered towarde one man, it ſhoulde make al other men to be neadye as of that. And certes a voyce all hole, that is to ſayne, without amenuſyng, fulfylleth together the hearynge of moche folke. And whan they bene apaſſed, nedes they maken hem poore, that forgone tho rycheſſes.
                  O, ſtrayte and nedye clepe I theſe rycheſſes, ſyns that many folke ne maye not haue it all, ne all ne it not comen to one man with out pouertie of all other folke. And the ſhynynge of gemmes, that I call precyous ſtones, draweth it not the eyen of folke to hem warde, that is to ſayne, for the beautye? But certes, yf there were beautie or bountie in ſhynynge of ſtones, thylke clereneſſe is of the ſtones hem ſelfe, and not of men. For which I wonder greatly, that men maruailen on ſuche thynges. For why, what thyng is it, that yf it wanteth mouynge and ioynture of ſoule and body, that by ryght might ſemen a fayre creature to hym that hathe a ſoule of reaſon? For all be it ſo, that gemmes drawen to hem ſelfe a lytle of the laſte beautie of the worlde, thorowe the entente of her creatoure, and the diſtinction of hem ſelfe, yet for as mykel as they ben put vnder your excellencie, they ne haue not deſerued by no way, that ye ſhulde maruelen on hem. And the beauty of feldes delyteth it nat mikell vnto you?
                  
                     B.
                     why ſhulde it not delyten vs, ſith that it is a ryght fayre porcion of the right fayre werke, that is to ſayne, of this world? And ryght ſo ben we gladed ſomtyme of the face of the ſee, whan it is clere: And alſo marueylen we on the heauen and on the ſterres, and on the ſonne and on the moone.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Aperteyneth (ꝙ ſhe) any of thylke thynges to the why dareſt thou glorifye the in the ſhynyng of any ſuche thynges? Art thou diſtyngued and embelyſed by the ſpryngynge floures of the fyrſt ſommer ſeaſon? Or ſwelleth thy plentye in frutes of ſommer? why arte thou rauyſhed with ydell ioyes? why embraceſt thou ſtraunge goodes, as they were thyne? Fortune ne ſhall neuer make, that ſuch thinges ben thyne, that nature of thynges hath maked forayne from the? Sothe it is, that

withouten doute the frutes of the erth owē to be to the noryſſhynge of beeſtes. And yf thou wylt fulfyll thy nede after that it ſuffiſeth to nature, than is it no nede that thou ſeke after the ſuperfluitye of fortune. For with full fewe thynges with full lytle thynges nature hathe her apayed. And yf thou wolt achoken the fulfyllyng of nature with ſuperfluityes: Certes, thylke thynges that thou wolt threſten and pouren into nature, ſhullen be vnioyful vnto the, or els anoyous weneſt thou eke, that it be a fayre thynge to ſhyne with dyuers clothynges? Of whiche clothynge, yf the beautye be agreable to loken vpon, I woll maruaylen on the nature of the mater of thylke clothes, or els on the workeman that wrought hem. Doth alſo a longe route of meynye make the a blyſfull man? the which ſeruauntes yf they ben vycious of condicions, it is a great charge and diſtruction to the houſe, and a great enemye to the lorde hym ſelfe. And yf they ben good men, how ſhall ſtraunge and forayne goodneſſe be put in the nombre of thy rycheſſes? So that by all theſe forſayde thynges, it is clerely ſhewed, that neuer one of thylke thinges that thou accomptedſt for thy goodes, nas not thy good. In which thynges if ther be no beautye to be deſyred, why ſhouldeſte thou be ſory to loſe them? or why ſhouldeſte thou reioyſe the to holden hem? For yf they ben fayre of theyr owne kynde, what appertayneth that to the? for alſo well ſhoulden they haue been fayre by hem ſelfe, thoughe they were departed from all thy rycheſſes. For why? fayre ne precyous were they not, for that they comen amonge thy rycheſſes. But for they ſemed fayr and precyous, therfore thou haddeſt leuer reken hem amōgeſt thy rycheſſes. But what deſyreſt thou of fortune with ſo greate afare? I trowe thou ſekeſt to dryue away nede with abundaunce of thynges: but certes it tourneth you all in to the contrarye. For why, certes it neadeth of full many helpynges to kepen the dyuerſities of precious hoſtilementes. And ſothe it is, that of many thynges they haue nede, that many thynges haue. And ayenwarde, of lytle thynge nedeth hym that meaſureth his fyll, after the nede of kynde, and not after thoutrage of couetiſe. It is ſo than, that ye men haue no propre good ſette in you, for ſuche ye moten ſeke outwarde in forayne, and ſubiect thynges. So is than the condicion of thynges turned vp ſo downe, that a man that is a deuyne beeſt, by meryte of his reaſon, thynketh that hym ſelfe nys neither fayre ne noble, but yf it be through poſſeſſiō of hoſtilimētes, that ne han no ſoules: And certes, all other thynges ben apayed of her owne beauties: But ye men that be ſemblable to god by your reaſonable thought deſyren to apparaylen your excellent kynde of ye loweſte thynges. Ne ye vnderſtonden not how greate a wronge is done to your creatoure: For he wolde that mankynde were moſt worthy and noble of any erthly thing
                           •
                         and ye threſten downe youre dignityes benethen the loweſt thynges.
                  
                  For yf that all the good of euerye thynge be more precyous, than is thylke thynge, whoſe that the good is, ſyth ye demen that the fouleſt thynges ben youre goodes: than ſubmytten ye, and put your ſeluē vnder the fouleſt thynges by your eſtimation: and certes this betydeth not without youre deſerte For certes, ſuche is the condition of all man kynde, that onelye whan it hath knowynge of it ſelfe, than paſſeth it in nobleſſe all other thynges. And whan it forletteth the knowinge of it ſelfe, than it is broughte benethen all beeſtes. For why, all other lyuynge beeſtes han of kynde to knowen nat hem ſelfe, but whan that men letten the knowynge of hem ſelfe, it commeth hem of vyce. But how brode ſheweth the erroure and the follye of you men, that wenen that any thynge maye ben apparayled with ſtraunge apparelmentes▪ but forſoth that maye not be done. For yf a wyght ſhyneth with thynges that ben put to hym: As thus. Yf thylke thynges ſhynen with whiche a man is apparelled: Certes thylke thynges been commended, and prayſed, with whiche he is apparelled, but natheleſſe, thynge that is couered and wrapped vnder that, dwelleth in his fylth. And I denye that thylke thyng be good, that anoyeth hym that hath it. Gab I of this? Thou wolt ſaye naye. Certes, ryches haue anoyed full oft hem that han had tho rycheſſe: ſytht that euerye wycked ſhrewe is for his wyckedneſſe the more gredye after other folkes rycheſſes, whereſoeuer it be in any place, be it golde or precious ſtones, and weneth him

onlye moſt worthy that hath hem. Thou thā that ſo beſy dredreſt now the ſwerde and the ſpeare, yf thou haddeſt entred in the pathe of this lyfe auoyde wayfaryng man, than woldeſt thou ſyng beforne the thefe, as who ſaith a poore man that beareth no rycheſſe on him by the waye, may boldly ſyng beforne theues for he hath nat wherof to be robbed. O precyous and ryght clere is the blyſfulneſſe of mortall richeſſe, that whan thou haſt goten it, than haſt thou lorne thy ſekerneſſe.
               
               
                  
                     Felix nimium prioretas, Contenta fidelibꝰ aruis, Nec inerti perdita luxu Facili que ſera ſolebat Ieiunia ſoluete glande, Nec bacchia munera norat Liquido confundere melle, Nec lucida vellera ſerum. &c.
                  
                  
                     BLyſfull was the fyrſte age of men, they helden hem apayde wyth the metes that ye trewe feldes broughten forth, they ne deſtroyed nor diſceyued nat hem ſelfe wyth outrage, they weren wonte lyghtlye to ſlaken her hunger at euyn wyth 
                        ••
                     rhornes of okes, they ne coude nat medel yu yefte of Bacchus to the clere hony, that is to ſayne they coulde make no piement or clarre: Ne they coude nat medell the bryght fleeces of the countre of Seryens wyth the venym of Tiry, thys is to ſayn, they coude nat dyen whyte fle
                        •
                     es of Syrien coūtre with the blode of a maner ſhelfyſſh, that men fynden in Tyrie, wyth which blode men dyen purple, they ſlepten holſome ſlepes vpon the graſſe, and dronken of the rennyng waters, and lyen vnder the ſhadowes of the hye Pyne trees. Ne no geſte or ſtraunger ne carfe yet the hye ſee wyth oores or wyth ſhyppes, ne they ne hadden ſeyn yet no newe ſtrondes to leden marchaundyſe in to dyuers countrees. Tho weren the cruel claryons full huſt and full ſtyl. Ne blode yſhad by egre hate, ne had deyed yet armures. For where to, or whiche woodneſſe of enemyes wolde fyrſt mouen armes, whan they ſawen cruell woundes, ne none meedes be of blode yſhad? I wolde that oure tymes ſhulde turne ayen to tholde maners. But the anguiſhous loue of hauyng in folke burneth more cruellye than the mountayn of Ethna, that ay brēneth. Alas, what was he that firſt dalfe vp the gobbettes or the weyghtes of golde, couered vnder erthe, and the precious ſtones that wolden haue be hydde? He dalfe vp precious peryls, that is to ſayne, that he that hem fyrſt vp dalfe, he dalfe vp a precious peryll, for why, for the preciouſneſſe of ſuche thyng hath many man ben in peryll.
               
               
                  
                     Quid autem de dignitatibus, potentia
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         diſſeram, quas vos, vere dignitatis, ac poteſtatis inſcii, celo exequatis? Que ſi in improbiſſimum quem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ceciderint. &c.
                  
                  
                     BVt what ſhall I ſaye of dignytees & powers, the whiche ye men that neyther knowen very dignyte ne very power, areyſen hem as hyghe as the heuen▪ the whyche dignytes and powers, yf they comen to any wycked mā, they done as great domages and diſtructions, as dothe the flambe of the mountayne Ethna, whā the flambe waloweth vp, ne no deluuy ne dothe ſo cruell harmes. Certes ye remembre wel (as I trow) that thylke dignyte that men cleape the imperye of counſaylours, the whyche whylom was begynnyng of fredom, your elders coueyted to haue done away that dignyte for the pryde of the counſaylours. And ryght for that ſame youre elders before that tyme had done awaye out of the cyte of Rome the kynges name, that is to ſayne, they nolde haue no lenger no Kynge. But nowe, yf ſo be that dignytees & powers ben yeuen to good men, the whyche thyng is full ſelde, what agreable thynges is there in tho dignytees & powers, but onely the goodneſſe of folke that vſen hem? And therfore is it thus, that honour cometh not to vertue bycauſe of dignyte: and ayenwarde, honoure cometh to dygnyte for cauſe of vertue. But whiche is thylke your dereworth power that is ſo clere and ſo requyrable? O ye erthlye beeſtes, conſyder ye not ouer whyche thynge that it ſemeth that ye haue power? Nowe yf thou ſawe a mouſe amonge other myce, that chalenged to hym ſelfwarde right and power ouer all other myce, howe greate

ſcorne woldeſt thou haue of it? Gloſa. So fareth it by men, the bodye hathe power ouer the body: for yf thou loke well vpon the body of a wight, what thyng ſhalt thou fynd more freel than is mankynde? the whyche men ful ofte be ſlayne by bytyng of flyes, or els wyth entryng or crepyng wormes in to the priuytees of mannes bodye. But where ſhall men fynden any man that may exerciſen or haunten any ryght vpon an other man, but onely on hys bodye, or els vpon thynges that ben lower than the body, the whiche I clepe fortunes poſſeſſyons?
                  Mayſte thou haue euer any commaundemēt ouer a free corage? Mayſte thou remeue fro the eſtate of hys propre reſte, a thought that is cleuynge togyder in hym ſelfe by ſtedfaſt reſon?
                  As whylom a tyraūt wened to confounde a free man of corage, & he wende to conſtrayn hym by tourmentes, to maken hym diſcoueren and accuſen folke, that wyſten of a coniuracyon, whyche I cleape a confederacye that was caſte ayenſt thys tyraunt: but thys freman bote of hys owne tonge, and caſte it in the vyſage of thylke woode tyraunt. So that the turmentes that this wood tyraūt wende to haue made mater of cruelte, thys wyſe mā made it mater of vertue. But what thynge is it that a man maye do to an other man, that he ne maye receyuen the ſame thyng of other folke in hym ſelfe? Or thus: what maye a man don to folke, that folke ne maye doone to hym the ſame? I haue herde tolde of Buſirides that was wonte to ſleen hys geſtes, that herbroden in hys houſe: and he was ſlayne hym ſelfe by Hercules that was hys geſte. Regulus had taken in batayle manye men of Affryke, and caſte hem into fetters: but ſone after he muſte yeuen hys handes to be bounde wyth the cheynes of hem that he had whylom ouercomen. Weneſt thou than, that he be myghty that hath power to doone a thyng, that other ne maye done in hym that he hathe in other? And yet more ouer, yf ſo were that theſe dignytes or powers hadden any propre or naturel goodnes in hem, neuer nolde they comen to ſhrewes. For contraryous thynges ne ben wont to ben yfelouſhypped togythers. Nature refuſeth that contraryous thynges ben ioyned. And ſo as I am in certayne that wicked folke haue dignytees ofte tyme, thā ſheweth it wel that dignytees & powers ne ben not good of her own kynde, ſens that they ſuffren hem ſelfe to cleauen or ioynen hem ſelf to ſhrewes. And certayne the ſame thyng may I moſte dignely iugen and ſayne of all the yeftes of fortune, that moſte plenteouſly comen to ſhrewes, of whiche yeftes I trow it ought be conſydred that no mā douteth that he is ſtronge, in whome he ſeeth ſtrength: and in whom ſwyftneſſe is, ſothe it is that he is ſwifte. Alſo muſyke maketh muſyciens, and phyſike maketh phyſiciens, and rethoryke eke rethoriciens. For why, the nature of euery thynge maketh hys propertye, ne it is not entremedled wyth theffecte of cō
                     traryous thynges. But certes rycheſſes may not reſtrayne auarice vnſtanched. Ne power ne maketh nat a man mighty ouer hym ſelfe, which that vicious luſtes holden diſtrayned wyth chaynes that ne mowē not be vnbounden. And dignitees, that be yeuen to ſhreude folke, not only ne maketh hem not digne, but ſheweth rather all openly, that they ben vnworthy & indigne. And it is thus. For certes ye haue ioye to cleape thynges with falſe names, that bearen hem in al the countraye, the which names ben ful ofte reproued by the effecte of the ſame thynges. So that theſe ylke rycheſſes ne oughtē not by right to be cleped rycheſſes, ne ſuche power ne ought not to be cleped power, ne ſuche dignyte ne ought not to be cleaped dignyte. And at laſte I may cō
                     clude the ſame thynge of all the yeftes of fortune: In whyche there nys nothyng to be deſyred, ne that hath in him ſelfe naturel bountye, as it is well yſene, for neyther they ioynē hem not alwaye to good men, ne maken hem alwaye good, to whom they ben ioyned.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Nouimus, quantas dederit ruinas
                        Vrbe flammata, patribuſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ceſis,
                        Fratre qui quondā ferus interempto,
                        Matris effuſo maduit cruore.
                        Corpus & viſu gelidum pererrans,
                        Ora non tinxit lachrymis: ſed eſſe,
                        Cenſor extincti potuit decoris. &c.
                     
                  
                  WE haue wel knowen, howe many great harmes and diſtructions were doone by themperour Nero. He lete brennen the cyte of Rome, and made ſlee the ſenatours,

and he cruell whylō ſlough his brother. And he was made moyſte wyth the bloode of hys mother, that is to ſaye, he let ſleen and ſlytten the wombe of hys mother, to ſene where he was conceyued, and he loked on euery halue of her deed colde body, ne no teere wette hys face, but he was ſo herd herted that he might be domes man or iuge of her deed beautye. And natheleſſe yet gouerned thys Nero by ſceptre all the people that Phebus maye ſene commyng fro his vttreſt aryſyng, tyl he hyde hys beames vnder ye wawes, that is to ſayne he gouerned all the peoples by ſceptre imperyall, that the ſonne gothe aboute fro Eeſt to weſt. And eke thys Nero gouerned by ſceptre all the peoples that be vnder the colde ſterris that hyghten the Septentrions: that is to ſayne, he gouerned al the peoples that be vnder the partye of the Northe. And eke Nero gouerned all ye peoples that ye violent wynde Nothus ſkorelyth and baketh the brennyng ſandes by hys drie heate, that is to ſaye, all the peoples in the Southe. But yet ne might not all hys power tourne the woodneſſe of thys wycked Nero. Alas it is a greuous fortune, as ofte as a wycked ſwerde is ioyned to cruel venim, that is to ſay, venemous cruelte to lordſhyppe.
               
               
                  
                     Tum ego. Scis (in
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        ) ipſa, minimū nobis ambicionem mortalium rerum fuiſſe dominatam. Sed materiam gerendis rebus optauimus, quo ne virtus tacita conſeneſceret. P. Et ilia. Atqui hoc vnum eſt. &c.
                  
                  
                     THā ſayd I thus. Thou woteſt wel thy ſelfe, that the couetyſe of mortall thynges ne hadden neuer lordſhype in me. But I haue wel deſyred mater of thī
                     ges to doone, as who ſayth, I deſyre to haue mater of gouernaunces ouer comynaltees, for vertue ſtyll ſhulde not elden: that is to ſayn, that leſte er that he wext olde, hys vertue that laye now ſtyll, ne ſhuld not peryſſhe vnexercyſed in gouernaunce of commune: for whyche men myght ſpeken or writen of hys good gouernement. P.
                  Forſothe (ꝙ ſhe) and that is a thynge that may drawen to gouernaunce ſuche hertes as ben worthy and noble of her nature: But natheleſſe it maye not drawen or tellen ſuche hertes as ben ybrought to the full perfection of vertue, that is to ſayne couetyſe of glorye and renome, to haue wel adminiſtred the cō
                     mune thynges, or doone good deſertes to profyte of the cōmune. For ſe nowe and conſyder, howe lytell and howe voyde of all pryce is thylke glorye, cercayne thynge is as thou haſte lerned by the demonſtracion of Aſtronomye, that all the enuyronnyng of the erth aboute, ne halte but the reaſon of a pricke, at the regarde of the greatneſſe of the heuē, that is to ſayn, that yf here were maked compariſon of the erth to the gretneſſe of heuen, men wolde iudgen in all that ne helde no ſpace. Of the whyche lytell regyon of this worlde, the fourthe parte of the erthe is inhabyted wyth lyuynge beeſtes that we knowen, as thou haſte thy ſelf ylerned by Ptholome that proueth it. And yf thou haddeſt wythdrawen and abated in thy thought for thylke fourthe partye, as moche ſpace as the ſee and the mareys conteynen and ouergone: as moch ſpace as the regyon of drought ouerſtretcheth, that is to ſayne ſandes and deſertes, well vnneth ſhulde there dwellen a ryght ſtrayte place to the habitacion of men. And ye that be enuyronned and cloſed wyth the leſte prycke of thylke prycke, thynken ye manifeſten or publyſhen your renome and doone youre name for to ben borne forthe. But your glorie that is ſo narowe and ſo ſtrayte throngen in to ſo lytell boundes, howe mykell conteyneth it in larges and in great doynge. And alſo ſette therto, that manye a nacyon diuers of tonge and of maners, and eke of reaſon of her lyuyng, ben inhabyted in the cloſe of thylke habytacle, the whyche nacyons what for diffyculte of wayes, and what for diuerſyte of langage, and what for defaulte of vnuſage, and entrecomunyng of marchaundyſe: not onely the names of ſynguler men ne may not ſtretchen, but eke the fame of cyties may not ſtretchen. At the laſte, certes in the tyme of Marcus Tullius as hym ſelfe writte in hys boke that the renome of the commune of Rome ne had not yet paſſed ne clomben ouer the mountayne that hyght Caucaſus, & yet was Rome wel waxen and redoubted of the Parthes,

and eke of other folke enhabytynge aboute. Seeſt thou not than howe ſtrayte and howe compreſſed is thylke glorie that ye trauaylen aboute to ſhewen and to multeplye? Maye than the glorye of a ſynguler romayne ſtretchē thyder as the fame of the name of Rome maye not clymben ne paſſen? And eke ſeeſt thou not that the maners of diuers folke and her lawes ben dyſcordante amonges hem ſelfe, ſo that thylke thynge that ſome men iuge worthy of prayſing, other folke iugē that, that is worthy of tourment? And herof cometh it that though a man delyteth hym in prayſynge of hys renome, he maye not in no wyſe bryngen forth ne ſpreden hys name to manye maner peoples, and therfore euerye man ought to be apayde of hys glorye that is publyſhed among hys owne neyghbours, and thylke noble renome ſhall be reſtrayned wythin the boundes of tho maner folke. But howe many a man that was ful noble in his tyme, hath the wretches and nedy foryetyng of wryters put out of mynde and done away all be it ſo that certes thylke thynges profyten lytell, the whyche thynges and writynges longe and derke elde do away bothe hem and eke her auctours. But ye men ſemen to getten you a pardurabylite whan ye thynkē in tyme comynge fyoure ame ſhall laſten. But natheleſſe, yf thou wylte make comparyſon to the endleſſe ſpaces of eternyte, what thyng haſte thou, by whyche thou mayſt reioyſen the of longe laſtinge of thy name? For yf there were made comparyſon of the abydyng of a moment to ten thouſande wynter, for as moche as bothe tho ſpaces ben ended, for yet hathe the momente ſome porcion of it all though it be lytell? But natheleſſe thylke ſelfe nombre of yeres, and eke as many yeres as therto may be multyplyed, ne may not certes be cōparyſoned to the perdurabylite that is endeleſſe. For of thynges which that haue ende may be made comparyſon, but of thynges whiche that ben withouten ende, to thinges that haue ende may be maked no comparyſon. And for thy is it yt all though renome as of longe tyme as euer the lyſte to thynkē, were thought, to the regarde of the eternyte that is vnſtauncheable and infynite, it ne ſhulde not only ſeme lytell, but playnly ryght nought. But ye ſemen certes ye can do nothyng a ryght but yf it be for the audyence of the people, and for ydle rumours. And ye forſaken the great worthyneſſe of conſcience & of vertue, and ye ſeken your guerdones of the ſmall wordes of ſtraunge folke. Haue nowe here and vnderſtand in the lyghtneſſe of ſuch pryde and veyne glorie, howe a man ſkorned feſtynally and meryly ſuche vanyte. Whylome there was a man that had aſſayed with ſtryuynge wordes an other man, the whiche not for vſage of verye vertue, but for proude vayne glorie, had taken vpon hym falſely the name of a philoſopher. This rather mā that I ſpake of, thought he wolde aſſaye, wheder he thylke were a phyloſophre or no, that is to ſaye, yf that he wolde haue ſuffred lightly in pacience, the wrōges that were done to him. Thys fayned philoſophre toke pacience a lytell whyle: and whan he had receyued windes of outrage, he as in ſtryuynge ayen and reioyſynge of hym ſelfe, ſayde at laſte thus. Vnderſtandeſt thou not, that I am a philoſophre? That other man anſwerd agayne betyngly and ſayd: I had well vnderſtande it, yf thou haddeſt holden thy tonge ſtyll. But what is to theſe noble worthy men, for certes of ſuche folke ſpeke I that ſeken glorye wyth vertue. What is it (ꝙ ſhe) what atteyneth fame to ſuche folke, whan the body is reſolued by the dethe at the laſt? for yf ſo be that men dyen in all, that is to ſay body and ſoule, the whyche thynge oure reaſon defendeth vs to byleue: than is there no glorie in no wyſe. For what ſhulde thylke glorye 
                        〈◊〉
                     , whan he, of whome thylke glorye is ſayde to be, nys ryght naught in no wyſe. And yf the ſoule whyche that hathe in it ſelfe ſcience of good werkes, vnbounden frome the pryſon of therthe, wendeth frely to the heuen, diſpyſeth it not than all erthlye occupacyon, and beynge in heuen reioyſeth that it is exempt from all erthly thynges? as who ſayth, than recketh the ſoul neuer of no glorie of renome of thys worlde.
               
               
                  
                     Quicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſolam mente precipiti petit, Summum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         credit gloriam, Late patentes etheris cernat plagas, Artum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         terrarum ſitum, Breuem replere non valentis ambitum. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     WHo ſo that with ouerthrowing thought onely ſeketh glorye of fame, and weneth that it be ſouerain good, let him loken vpō the brode ſhewynge countreys of ye heuē, & vpō the ſtrayt ſeete of this erthe, and he ſhal be aſhamed of thencreaſe of hys name, that maye not fulfyll the lytell compas of the erthe. O what coueyten proude folke to lyften vp her neckes in ydle in the deedly yoke of thys worlde? For all though that renome yſprad paſſyng to forne peoples, goth by diuers tonges, & all though great houſes of kynredes ſhynen by clere tytles of honours, yet natheleſſe deth diſpyſeth all hygh glorie of fame, and dethe wrappeth togythers the hygh heedes and the lowe, and maketh egall and euen the hyeſte wyth the loweſt.
                  Where wonnē nowe the bones of trewe Fabricius? what is nowe Brutus, or ſterne Caton? The thynne fame yet laſtyng of her ydle names, is marked wyth a fewe letters. But all though that we haue knowen the fayre wordes of the fame of hem, it is not yeuen to knowe hem that ben deed & conſumpt. Lyggeth than ſtyll all vtterly vnknowable, ne fame ne maketh you not knowe. And if ye wene to lyue the lenger for wynde of youre mortall name, whan one cruell daye ſhall rauyſhe you: than is the ſeconde dwellynge to you cloſe. The fyrſte dethe he clepeth here the departyng of the body, and the ſeconde dethe here the ſtyntynge of the renome of fame.
               
               
                  
                     Sed ne me inexorabile contra fortunam gerere bellum putes, eſt aliquando, cum de hominibus fallax illa non nihil bene mereatur: tum ſciliret cum ſe aperit. &c.
                  
                  
                     BVt for as moch as thou ſhalt not wenē (ꝙ ſhe) that I beare an vntretable batayle ayenſt fortune, yet ſomtyme it befalleth that ſhe (deceyuable) deſerueth to haue ryght good thanke of men: and that is whan ſhe her ſelfe openeth, and whan ſhe diſcouereth her frōte, and ſheweth her maners. Perauenture yet vnderſtandeſt thou not that I ſhall ſaye. It is a wondre that I deſyre to tel, and therfore vnneth maye I vnplyten my ſentence wyth wordes. For I deme that contraryous fortune profyteth more to men than fortune debonayre. For alwaye whan fortune ſemeth debonayre, than ſhe lyeth falſly, byhetyng the hope of welfulneſſe. But forſothe contraryous fortune is alway ſothfaſte, whā ſhe ſheweth her ſelfe vnſtable through her chaungyng. The amiable fortune diſceyueth folke: the contrarye fortune teacheth. Thamyable fortune blyndeth with ye beautie of her falſe goodes, the hertes of folkes that vſen hem. The contrary fortune vnbyndeth hem, with the knowynge of freele welefulneſſe. Thamyable fortune mayſt thou ſene alway wyndy and flowynge, and euer myſknowynge of her ſelfe. The contrary fortune is attempre and reſtrayned and wyſe, thorowe exerciſe of her aduerſyte. At the laſte amyable fortune wyth her flatterynges, draweth myſwandrynge men fro the ſouerayne good: the contraryous fortune leadeth ofte folke ayen to ſothefaſte goodes, and haleth hem ayen as wyth an hoke. Weneſt thou than that thou oughteſt to leten this a lytell thyng, that this aſpre and horryble fortune hathe dyſcouered to the, the thoughtes of thy trewe frendes? For why, thys ylke fortune hathe departed and vncouered to the bothe the certayne vyſages, and eke the doutous viſages of thy felowes. Whan ſhe departed away fro the, ſhe toke away her frendes and laft the thy frendes. Now whan thou were ryche and weleful, as the ſemed, wyth howe mykel woldeſt thou haue bought the full knowynge of this that is to ſayne, the knowynge of thy verye frendes? Nowe playne the not than of rycheſſe lorne, ſyth thou haſte founde the moſte precyous kynde of rycheſſe, that is to ſayne, thy very frendes.
               
               
                  
                     Quod mundus ſtabili fide, Concordes variat vices, Quod pugnācia ſemina, Fedus perpetuum tenent. &c.
                  
                  
                     THat the world with ſtable fayth varyeth accordable chaungynges, that the contraryous qualitees of elementes holdē amonge hem ſelfe alyaunce perdurable,

that Phebus the ſonne wyth hys golden charyot bryngeth forth the roſy day, that the moone hath commaundement ouer the nyghtes: whych nyghtes Eſperus the euen ſterre hath, that yu ſee gredy to flowen conſtrayneth wyth a certayne ende hys floodes, ſo that it is not lefull to ſtretche hys brode termes or boundes vpon the erthe: Al this ordynaunce of thynges is bounden wyth loue, that gouerneth erthe and ſee, and alſo hath cōmaundement to the heuen. And yf thys loue ſlaked the bridels, all thinges that nowe louen hem togythers wolden make batayle cōtinuelly, & ſtryuen to fordone the facion of this world, the whyche they nowe leden in accordable faith, by fayre mouynges. This loue holdeth togyder people ioyned wyth an holye bonde, and knytteth ſacrament of mariage of chaſte loues. And loue endeth lawes to true felawes. O welefull were mankynde yf thylke loue that gouerneth the heuē, gouerned your corages.
               
               ¶Here endeth the ſeconde boke, and foloweth the thyrde.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        I Am cantum illa finierat, cum me audiendi auidum, ſtupētem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         arrectis adhuc auribus carminis mulcedo defixerat. Ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         paulo poſt O inquam ſummum laſſorum ſolamē animorum, quantum me. &c.
                  
                  
                     BY thys ſhe had ended her ſonge: whā the ſwetneſſe of her dyte had through perced me, that was deſyrous of herkening. And I aſtonyed had yet ſtreyght myne eeres, yt is to ſayne to herken the bette what ſhe ſhulde ſaye, ſo that a lytell here after I ſayde thus. O thou that arte ſouerayne comforte of corages anguiſhous, ſo thou haſt remounted and noriſſhed me with the weight of thy ſentences, & wyth delyte of ſyngyng, ſo that I trowe not that I be vnperegal to the ſtrokes of fortune as who ſaythe, I dare well nowe ſuffren all thaſſautes of fortune, and well defende me from her. And tho remedies, which that thou ſaydeſt here beforn, that weren ryght ſharpe, not only that I am not agryſen of hem now, but I deſyrous of herynge, aſke greatly to heren the remedyes. Than ſayde ſhe thus. That feled I well (ꝙ ſhe) whan that thou ententyfe and ſtyl, rauyſhedeſt my wordes: and I abode tyl thou haddeſt ſuche habyte of thy thought, as thou haſte nowe, or els tyll that I my ſelfe had maked it to the ſame habyte, whiche that is a more very thynge. And certes the remenante of thynges that ben yet to ſay ben ſuche, that fyrſt whan men taſte hem they ben bytynge: But whan they ben receyued wythin a wyght, than ben they ſwete. But for thou ſayeſt that thou art ſo deſyrous to herken hem, wyth howe great brennynge woldeſt thou glowen, yf thou wyſtes whyder I wolde leden the?
                  
                     B.
                     whyder is that (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     To thylke very blyſfulneſſe (ꝙ ſhe) of which thyne herte dremeth. But for as moch as thy ſyght is occupyed and diſtourbed of erthly thinges, thou maiſt not yet ſene thylke ſelfe welefulneſſe.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Do (ꝙ I) and ſhewe me what thylke very welfulneſſe is, I praye the without taryeng.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     That wol I gladly don (ꝙ ſhe) for cauſe of the. But I wol fyrſte marken by wordes, and I wyl enforcen me to enforme the thylke falſe cauſe of blyſfulneſſe, whych that thou more knoweſt: ſo that whā thou haſte beholden thylke falſe goodes, and turned thyne eyen ſo to that other ſyde, thou maye knowen the clereneſſe of very blyſfulneſſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Qui ſerere ingenuum volet agrū, Liberat arna prius fruticibus. Fal. erubos, filicem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         reſecat. &c.
                  
                  
                     WHo ſo wol ſowe a felde plenteous, let hym fyrſte delyueren it of thornes, and kerue a ſonder wyth hys hoke the buſhes and the ferne, ſo that the corne may comē heuy of eres & of greyues Hony is ye more ſwete yf mouthes haue firſt taſted ſauours that be wycke. The ſterres ſhinen more agreably, whan the wynde Nothus leteth hys plungye blaſtes. And after that Lucyfer the daye ſterre hathe chaſed awaye the darke nyght, the daye the fayrer leadeth the roſen horſe of the ſonne. And

ryght ſo thou, beholdynge fyrſte the falſe goodes begyn to wythdrawe thy necke fro the earthly affections, & afterwardes the verye goodes ſhullen entren into thy corage.
               
               
                  
                     Tum defixo paululum viſu, et velut in anguſtam ſue mentis ſedem recepta, ſic cepit P. Omnis mortalium cura quā multiplicium ſtudiorum labor exercet. &c.
                  
                  
                     THo faſtened ſhe a lytell the ſyght of her eyen, & ſhe wyth drewe her ſyght, as it were in to the ſtrayte ſeete of her thought: and began to ſpeke ryght thus. All the cures (ꝙ ſhe) of mortall folke, whych yt trauaylen hem in many maner ſtudyes, gone certes by dyuers wayes: but natheleſſe they enforcē hem all to comen onely to thende of blyſfulneſſe. And blyſfulneſſe is ſuche a good, that who ſo hath goten it, he ne maye ouer that thynge more deſyre. And thys thinge forſoth is ſo ſouerayne good, that it conteyneth in hym ſelfe all maner of goodes, to the whyche good yf there fayled any thynge, it myght not ben ſouerayne good, for then were ſome good oute of thys ſouerayne good, that myght be deſyred. Nowe is it clere and certayne, that blyſfu
                        •
                     neſſe is a parfyte ſtate, by the congregacion of all goodes, the which blyſfulneſſe (as I haue ſayd) all mortall folke enforcen hem to get by dyuers wayes. For why, the couetyſe of euery good is naturelly planted in the hertes of men: but the myſwandrynge erroure, miſledeth hem into falſe goodes Of ye which men, ſome of hem wenē that ſouerayne good be to lyuen without nede of any thynge. And other men demen, ye ſouerayne good be ryght dygne of reuerence, and enforcen hem to be reuerenced amōge her neyghbours by the honours that they haue gotte. And ſome folke there ben that holden that ryghte hye power be ſouerayne good, & enforcen hem for to reignen, or els to ioynen hem to hem that reygnē And it ſemeth to other folke, that nobleſſe of renome be the ſouerayne good, & haſten hem to getten hem glorious name by the artes of werre or of peace. And many folke meſuren and geſſen, that ſouerayne good be ioye and gladneſſe, and wenen that it be ryght blyſful thyng to plūgen in voluptuous delytes. And there ben ſome folke, that entrechaungen the cauſes and ye endes of theſe forſayd goodes: As they that deſyren rycheſſes to haue power & delites, or els they deſyre power for to haue money, or for cauſe of renōme. In theſe thynges and ſuche other is tourned al the entencion of deſyrynges and werkes of mē, as thus: Nobleſſe and fauoure of people, which that yeueth to al men, as it ſemeth hem, a maner clereneſſe of renomme: and wyfe & chyldren, that mē deſyren, for cauſe of delyte and merineſſ. But forſoth frendes ne ſhullen not be rekened amōge the goodes of fortune, but of vertue, for it is a full holy maner thynge. All theſe other thynges forſoth be taken for cauſe of power, or els for cauſe of delyte. Certes nowe am I ready to referren the goodes of the body, to theſe forſayd thynges abouen For it ſemeth that ſtrength and greatneſſe of bodye yeuen power and worthyneſſe, & that beaute and ſwyftneſſe yeuen glorye and renomme: and helth of bodye ſemeth to yeuen delyte. In all theſe thynges it ſemeth onely that blyſfulneſſe is deſyred: for why, thylke thynge that euerye man deſyreth moſte ouer all thynges, he demeth that it be ſouerayne good. But I haue dyſfyned, that blyſfulneſſe is ſouerayne good, for whyche euery wyght demeth that thylke eſtate yt he deſyreth ouer all thynges, that it be blyſfulneſſe. Now haſt thou thē before thyne eyen almoſt al the purpoſed forme of the welefulneſſe of mankinde that is to ſayne, rycheſſe, honours, power, glorye and delytes, the whych delyte only cō
                     ſydered he Epicurus, and iuged and eſtablyſſhed that delyte is the ſouerayne good: for as moche as all other thynges, as hym thought byrefte awaye ioye and myrth from the herte But I returne agayne to the ſtudyes of men of whyche men the corage alwaye reherſeth and ſeketh ye ſouerayne good, all be it ſo that it be wyth a dyrked memorye, but he note by whych pathe, ryghte as a dronken man note nought by whych path he may returne home to hys houſe. Semeth it then that folke forleyen and erren to enforcen hem to haue nede of nothing? Certes there is none other thing that maye ſo moche performen blyſfulneſſe, as an eſtate plenteous of all goodes, that ne hath nede of none other thynge, but that is

ſuffyſaunt of hym ſelfe vnto hym ſelfe. And folyen ſuche folke then that wenen, yt thylke thyng that is ryght good, that it is eke ryght worthy of honour & of reuerence: certes nay. For that thynge nys neyther foule ne worthy to be deſpyſed, that well nygh all the entencion of mortall folke trauaylen to get it. And power eke ought not to be rekened amō
                     ges goodes. What els? For it nys not to wene, that thylke thynge that is moſte worthy of all thynges be feble & wythout ſtrēgth And clereneſſe of renome, ought that to bene dyſpyſed? Certes there may no man forſake, that all thynge that is right excellent and noble, that it ne ſemeth be ryght clere renomed. For certes it nedeth not to ſaye, that blyſfulneſſe be anguyſhous ne drery, ne ſubiect to greuaunces ne ſorowes, ſens that in ryght lytell thynges folke ſeken to haue and to vſen that maye delyten hem. Certes theſe ben the thynges that men wyllen and deſyren to geten: & for thys cauſe deſyren they rycheſſes, dygnytees, regnes, glorye, and delytes. For therby wenen they to haue ſuffyſaunce, honour, power, renome, and gladneſſe. Then is it good that men ſeken thus by ſo many dyuers ſtudyes, in whych deſyre it maye not lyghtly be ſhewed, howe great is the ſtrength of nature For howe ſo men haue diuers ſentences and dyſcordynges, algates men accorden al in louynge the ende of good.
               
               
                  
                     Quantas rerum flectit habenas Natura potens, quibus immenſum Legibus orbē prouida ſeruet, Stringat
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ligans irreſoluto, Singula nexu, placet arguto, Fidelibus lentis promere cantu. &c.
                  
                  
                     IT lyketh me to ſhewe by ſubtyl ſonge with ſlacke and delytable ſowne of ſtrynges, how that nature myghtely enclyneth & flytteth the gouernemēt of thinges & by ſuche lawes ſhe purucyable kepeth the great world, & how ſhe byndyng reſtrayneth al thynges by a bonde yt may not be vnbounden. Al be it ſo yt the lyons of the countrey of Pene beren the fayre chaynes, and takē meates of the handes of folke, that yeuen it hem, and dreden her ſturdye mayſters, of whyche they be wonte to ſuffre beatinges, yf that her horrible mouthes ben bledde, that is to faine of beeſtes deuoured: her corage of tyme paſſed that hath bene ydle and reſted repayreth ayen, and they roren greuouſly, and remembren on her nature, and ſlaken her neckes frō her chaynes vnbounde, and her maiſtre fyrſt to torne wyth blody tethe, aſſayeth the wood wrathes of hem, that is to ſayne, they frettē her mayſter. And the ianglynge byrde that ſyngeth on the hye braūches, that is to ſayne in the wodde, and after is encloſed in a ſtrayt cage, all though the plyenge beſyneſſe of mē yeue hem honyed drynkes, and large meates wyth ſwete ſtudye: yet natheleſſe yf thylke byrde ſkyppynge out of her ſtrayte cage, ſeeth the agreable ſhadowes of the woddes, ſhe defouleth wyth her fete her meate yſhadde, and ſeketh on mornyng only the wodde, and twytereth deſyrynge the wodde wyth her ſwete wyſe. The yerde of a tre that is haled adown by myghty ſtrēgth boweth redyly the croppe adowne: but yf that the hande that is bare let it gone agayne, anone the croppe loketh vpryght to the heauen. The ſonne Phebus that falleth at euen in the weſtren wawes, returneth ayen eftſones hys carte by a pryue pathe there as it is wonte aryſe. All thynges ſek
                        •
                     n ayen to her propre courſe, and all thynges reioyſen on her retournynge agayne to her nature: ne none ordinaunce is betakē to thynges, but that hath ioyned the ende to the begynnyng, and hath made the courſe it ſelfe ſtable, yt it chaunge not fro hys propre kynde.
               
               
                  
                     Vos quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         a tertena animalia, te nui licet imagine, veſtrum tamē principium ſomniatis. Verum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         illum be atitudinis finem, licet minime perſpicaci. &c.
                  
                  
                     CErtes alſo ye men that bene earthly beeſtes dreamē alway your begynnynge, althoughe it be wyth a thyne ymaginacyon, and by a maner thought all be it not clerely ne perfytly ye loken from a ferre to thylke verye fyne of blyſfulneſſe. And therfore naturell entencyon leadeth you to thylke verye good, but many maner errours myſtourneth you therfro. Cōſyder nowe yf that be thylke thynges, by which a mā weneth to get him bliſfulnes

yf that he maye comen to thylke ende, that he weneth to come to by nature. For yf that money, honours, or theſe other forſayd thynges bryngen to men ſuche a thynge that no good ne fayle them ne ſemeth to fayle: Certes thē woll I graunt that they be maked blyſful by thynges that they haue gotten. But yf ſo be that thylke thynges ne mowen not performe that they byheten, and that there be defaut of many goodes, ſheweth it not then clerelye yt falſe beute of blyſfulneſſe is knowen and atteynt in thylke thynges? Fyrſt and forwarde thou thy ſelfe, that haddeſt haboundaunce of rycheſſe not longe agone, I aſke the that in thabundaunce of all thylke rycheſſe, yf thou were neuer anguyſhous or ſorye in thy corage of any wronge or greuaūce, that betyde the in any ſyde
                  
                     B.
                     Certes (ꝙ I) it ne remembreth me not, that euer I was ſo free of my thought, that I ne was alwaye in anguyſhe of ſomwhat.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     And was that not (ꝙ ſhe) for that the lacked ſomwhat that thou noldeſte not haue lacked? or els thou haddeſt yt thou noldeſt haue had?
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Ryght ſo it is (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Then deſyredeſt thou the preſence of ye one, & thabſence of that other.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     I graunt well (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Forſoth (ꝙ ſhe) then nedeth there ſomwhat that euery man deſyreth.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Yea there nedeth (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) and he yt hath lacke or nede of ought, nys not in euery way ſuffyſaunt to hym ſelfe.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     No (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     And thou (ꝙ ſhe) in al the plēte of thy rycheſſe had deſt thylke lacke of ſuffyſaunce?
                  
                  
                     B.
                     What els (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Then maye not ryches maken that a man nys nedy, ne that he be ſufficiēt to him ſelfe: and yet that was it that they behetē as it ſemed. And eke certes I trowe that this be greatly to conſyder, that money hathe not in hys owne kynde, that it ne maye bene bynomed of hem that haue it maugre hem.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     I knowe it well (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Why ſhuldeſt thou not beknowen it (ꝙ ſhe) when euery day the ſtrenger folke bynomen it frō the febler maugre hem? Fro whence come els all theſe forayne complayntes, quarels, or pleadynges, but for that men aſken her money that hath ben benomed hem by ſtrength or by gile, and alway maugre hem?
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Ryght ſo it is (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Then hath a mā nede (ꝙ ſhe) to ſeken him forayn helpe, by whych he maye defende his money.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Who maye ſaye nay (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) and hym neded none help, yf he ne had no money that he myght leſe.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     That is douteles (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Then is thys thynge turned in to the contrary (ꝙ ſhe) for ryches, that men wenen ſhulde maken ſuffyſaunce, they maken a man rather haue nede of forayne helpe. Whych is the maner or ye gyſe (ꝙ ſhe) that rycheſſe may dryuen away nede? Ryche folke may they neither haue hōger ne thurſt? Theſe ryche men maye they fele no colde on theyr limmes in wynter: but yu wilt anſwere that riche men haue ynough, wherwith they may ſtaūchen her honger, & ſlaken her thurſt and done awaye colde. In thys wyſe maye nede ben cōforted by rycheſſe, but certes nede ne maye not al vtterly be done awaye. For yf thys nede that alwaye is gapynge and gredy be fulfylled wyth the rycheſſe and any other thyng, yet dwelleth then a nede that mote be fulfylled. I holde me ſtyll, and tell not howe that lytell thynge ſuffyſeth to nature: but certes to auarice ſuffiſeth notynough of nothing For ſynne that rycheſſe ne maye not all done awaye nede, and they makē theyr owne nede what maye it then be, that ye wenen that rycheſſes mowen yeuen you ſuffyſaunce?
                  
               
               
                  
                     Quamuis fluente diues auri gurgite Non expleturas cogat auarus opes. &c.
                  
                  
                     AL were it ſo, that a noble couetous man had a ryuer or a gutter fletynge al of gold, yet ſhuld it neuer ſtaunche hys couetyſe: and all though he had his necke charged wyth precious ſtones of the reed ſee and though he do eere hys feldes plenteous wyth an hundred oxen, neuer ne ſhal hys bytynge beſynes forleten hym whyle he lyueth, ne the lyght rycheſſes ne ſhal not bearen him company when he is deed.
               
               
                  
                     Sed dignitas honorabilem, renerendū
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , cui prouenerint, reddunt Nū vis ea eſt magiſtratibus, vt vtētium mentibus virtutes inſerant, victa depellant. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     BVt dygnitees to whome they be comen, maken they hym honourable and reuerente? haue they not ſo great ſtrengthe that they maye putten vertue in hertes of folkes, that vſen the lordſhyp of hem, or elles may they done away the vyces? Certes they be not wonte to done away wyckedneſſe, but they be wonte rather to ſhewe wyckedneſſe. And therof cometh it yt I haue ryght greate dyſdayne, that dygnitees ben yeuen to wycked men. For whych thynge Catullus cleped a counſell of Rome (that hyght Nonius) poſtome of boche, as who ſayeth, he cleped him a congregacion of vyces in hys breſt, as a poſtome is full of corrupcion: al were Nonius ſet in a chayre of dygnitee. Seeſt thou not then, howe great vylonies dignitees done to wycked men? certes vnworthyneſſe of wycked men ſhulde be the laſſe ſene, yf they nere renomed of none honoure. Certes thou thy ſelfe ne myghteſt not be brought wyth as many peryls as thou myghteſt ſuffre, that thou woldeſt beare the magyſtrate wyth decorate that is to ſayne, that for peryl that myght be fall the by oſtence of the kynge Theodryke, thou noldeſt not be felowe in gouernaunce with Decorate, when thou ſawe that he had wicked corage of a licorous ſhrew and of an accuſour. Ne I maye not for ſuche honours iugen hem worthy of reuerence, that I deme and holde vnworthy to haue thylke ſame honours. Nowe yf thou ſawe a man that were fulfylde of wyſedome, certes thou ne myghteſt not deme that he were vnworthy to the honoure, or els to the wyſdome of whych he is fulfylled.
                  
                     B.
                     No (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) dygnytees aperteynen properly to vertue, & vertue tranſporteth dygnite anone to thylke man, to which ſhe her ſelfe is conioyned. And for as moche as honours of people ne maye not make folke dygne of honoure, it is well ſene clerly, that they ne haue no propre beautye of dygnitee. And yet men oughten take more hede in thys: for yf a wyghte be in ſo moche the more outcaſte, that he is dyſpyſed of moſte folke, ſo as dygnytee ne may not maken ſhrewes worthy of no reuerēce, then maketh dygnite ſhrewes rather diſpiſed thē praiſed, the whyche ſhrewes dygnite ſheweth to moche folke. And forſoth not vnpunyſhed, yt is to ſayne, that ſhrewes reuengen hem ayen warde vpon dignitees. For they yelden ayen to dygnytees as great guerdons, when they dyſpotten & defoulen dygnitees wyth her bylonye. And for aſmoch as thou now knoweſt that thylke very reuerence ne may not comen by theſe ſhadowy tranſytorye dygniters, vnderſtande now thus: that yf a man had vſed and had many maner dygnitees of conſuls, and were perauenture comen amōge ſtraūge nacions, ſhulde thylke honoure maken hym worſhypfull and redouted of ſtraunge folke? Certes yf that honour of people were a naturell yefte to dygnitees, it ne myghte neuer ceſſen no where amonge no maner folke to done hys offyce. Ryght as a fyre in euery contrey ne ſtynteth not to enchaufen and maken hote. But for as moche as for to bene honourable or reuerēt, ne cometh not to folke of her propre ſtrength of nature, but only of ye falſe opinion of folke, that is to ſayne, that w
                           ••
                        en that dygnitees makē folke dygne of honours anone therfore when they comen there as folke ne knowen not thylke dygnytes, her honours vanyſhen awaye and that anone. But that is amonge ſtraunge folke mayeſt thou ſayne. Ne amonges hem there they were borne, ne dured not thylke dygnitees alwaye Certes the dygnite of the prouoſtry of Rome was whylom a great power: nowe is it nothynge but an ydle name, and the rent of the ſenatorie a great charge. And yf a wyght whylom had thoffyce to taken hede to the d
                           •
                        
                        tayles of the people, as of corne and of other thinges, he was holden amonges hem great But what thinge is more nowe outcaſt then thylke prouoſtry. As I haue ſayd a lytle here beforne, that thylke thynge that hath no propre beaute of it ſelfe, receiueth ſomtyme price and ſhynynge, and ſomtyme leſeth it by thopinion of vſaunces. Nowe yf that dygnyters then ne mowe not make folke dygne of reuerence, and yf that dygnites were foule of her wyll, by the fylthe of ſhrewes, and yf dygnytees leſen her ſhynynge by chaūgynge of tymes, and yf they wexen foule by eſtimacyon of people, what is it yt they han in hem ſelfe of beaute, that ought to be deſyred? as who ſayeth, none: then ne mowen they yeuen no beaute of dygnite to none other.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Quamuis ſe tyrio ſuperbus oſtro Comeret ei niueis lapillis. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     AL be it ſo, that the proude Nero wyth all his wode luxure, kembe hym & apparelled hym wyth fayre purpure of Tyre, and wyth whyte peerles. Algates yet therof he hatefull to all folke, thys is to ſaye that all was he behated of all folkes, yet thys wycked Nero had great lordſhyppe. And yaf whylom to the reuerent Senatours the vnworſhypful ſeates of dygnitees. Vnworſhypfull ſeates he cleapeth here, for that Nero that was ſo wycked yane the dygnitees.
                  Who wolde then reaſonably wenen, that blyſfulneſſe were in ſuche honours, as bene 
                        •
                     euen by bycious ſhrewes.
               
               
                  
                     An vero regna, regum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         familia ritas efficere potentem valent? Quid 
                           ••
                        . &c.
                  
                  
                     BVt reygnes & familiaritees of kynges, maye they maken a mā to bene myghty? Howe els? When hys blyſfulneſſe dureth perpetually. But certes the olde age oftymes paſſed, and eke of preſent tyme nowe, is full of enſamples, howe ye kynges haue chaunged into wretchedneſſe, out of her welfulneſſe. O, a noble thing & a clere thyng is power, that nys not founden myghtye to kepe it ſelfe. And yf that power of realmes be authour and maker of blyſfulneſſe, yf thylke power lacketh on any ſyde, amenuſeth it not thylke blyſfulnes, and bryngeth in wretchedneſſe▪ But yet al be it ſo, that the realmes of mankynde ſtretchen brode, yet mote there 
                        •
                     ede ben moche folke, ouer whych that euerye kynge ne hath no lordſhyp ne cōmaundement. And certes vpon thylke ſyde that power falleth, whych that maketh folke blyſful Ryghte on that ſame ſyde no power entreth vnderneth that maketh hem wretches. In thys maner then moten kynges haue more porcion of wretchednes then of welefulneſſe
                  A tyraunt that was kynge of Cecyle, that had aſſayed yt peryll of hys eſtate, ſhewed by ſimilitude the dredes of realmes by gaſtneſſe of a ſwearde, that honge ouer the heed of his ſamylyer. What thynge is then thys power that maye not done awaye the hytynges of beſyneſſe, ne eſchewe the pryckes of drede?
                  And certes yet wolden they lyuen in ſykerneſſe, but they maye not. And yet they gloryfyen hem in her power. Holdeſt thou then that thylke man be myghtye, that thou ſeeſt that he wolde done that he may not done? And holdeſt thou then hym a myghtye man, that hath enuyronned hys ſydes wyth mē of armes or ſergeaūtes, and dreddeth more hem that he maketh agaſt, then they dreden hym, and that is put in the handes of hys ſeruauntes, for he ſhulde ſeme myghtye? But of familyers or ſeruauntes of kynges, why ſhulde I tell the any thynge, ſyth that I my ſelfe haue ſhewed the, that realmes hem ſelfe bene full of great febleſſe? The whych famylyers certes the royal power of kynges in hole eſtate and in eſtate abated, full ofte throweth adowne.
                  Nero conſtrayned Senecke hys famylyer and hys mayſter, to cheſen on what death he wolde dye. Antonius commaunded yt knyghtes ſlowen wyth her ſwordes Papinian his familyer, whych Papinyan had ben lōgtyme full myghty amonges hem of the courte, and yet certes they wolden both haue renounced her power. Of whych two Seneck enforced hym to yeuen to Nero hys rycheſſe, and alſo to haue gone into ſolytarye exyle. But when the great weyght, that is to ſayne, of lordes power or of Fortune, draweth hem that ſhullen fall, neyther of hem ne myght do that he wolde. what thynge is then thylke power, that though men haue it, yet they ben agaſte and when thou woldeſt haue it, thou art not ſyker? And yf thou woldeſt forleten it, thou mayeſt not eſchewen it. But whether ſuche men ben frendes at nede, as bene counſayled by fortune, and not by vertue? Certes ſuche folke as welefull fortune maketh frendes, cō
                     trarious fortune maketh hym enemyes. And what peſtilence is more myghtye for to anoy a wyght, then a famylyer enemye?
               
               
                  
                     Qui ſe volet eſſe potentem, Animos domet ille feroces: Nec victa libi dine colla. &c.
                  
                  WHo ſo woll be myghtye, he mote daūten hys cruel corages, ne put not hys necke ouercomen, vnder the foule raynes of lecherye.

For all be it ſo, that ye lordſhyp ſtretch ſo ferre, that the countreye of Inde quaketh at thy cōmaundemētes, or at thy lawes. And that the laſt yle in the ſee, that hight Tyle, bethrale to the: yet yf thou mayſt not putten awaye thy foule derke deſyres, and dryuē oute fro the, wretched cōplayntes: Certes it nys no power that thou haſte.
               
               
                  
                     Gloria vero 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         fallax ſepe, 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         turpis eſt. Vnde non iniuria tragicus exclamat. O gloria gloria millibus mortalium nihil aliud facta, niſi auri um inflatio magna. &c.
                  
                  
                     BVt glorye, howe dyſceyuable & howe foule is it oft? For whych thynge, not ſkylfully a tragedye that is to ſayne, a maker of dytees yt hyghten tragedies, cryed & ſayd: O glorye glorye (ꝙ he) thou narte no thyng els to thouſands of folkes, but a ſweller of eares. For many haue ful great renome by the falſe opinion of the people.
                  And what thynge may be thought fouler then ſuche prayſynge? For thylke folke that ben prayſed falſely, they mooten nedes haue ſhame of her prayſynges. And yf that folke haue getten hem thanke or prayſynge by her deſertes: What thynge hath thylke pryſe eched or encreaſed to the conſcyence of wyſe folke, that meaſuren her good, not by the rumoure of the people, but by the ſothfaſtneſſe of conſcience? And yf it ſeme a fayre thynge, a man to haue encreaſed and ſprad hys name, then foloweth it, that it is demed to bene a foule thynge, yf it ne be yſprad and encreaſed But as I ſayd a lytell here before, that ſythe there mote nedes ben many folkes, to whych folke the renome of a man ne may not comen it befalleth, that he that thou weneſt be glorious and renomed, ſemeth in the next parte of therthes, to ben wythout glory and wythout renome. And certes amonges theſe thynges I ne trowe not that the pryſe and the grace of the people, nys neyther worthy to bene remembred, ne cometh of wyſe iugement, ne is ferme perdurably. But nowe of thys name of gentyleſſe: What man is it that ne maye well ſene howe vayne and howe flyttynge it is? For yf the name of gyntyleſſe be referred to renome and clereneſſe of lynage, then is gentell name but a forayne thynge, that is to ſay, to hem that glorifyen hem of her lynage. For it ſemeth that gentyles be a maner prayſynge, that cometh of the deſertes of aunceſters. And yf prayſyng maketh gentylles, thē moten they nedes ben gentyll, that ben prayſed. For whych thynge it foloweth, that yf thou ne haue no gentylneſſe of thy ſelfe, that is to ſayne pryſe, that cometh of thy deſerte, forayne gentylleſſe ne maketh the not gentyll. But certes yf there be any good in gentylleſſe, I trowe it be all onely thys: that it ſemeth as that a maner neceſſite be impoſed to gentylmen, for that they ne ſhulde not outragen or forleauen fro the vertues of her noble kynred.
               
               
                  
                     Omne hominū genus in terris Simili ſurgit ab ortu. Vnus enim rerum pater eſt. Vnus cuncta miniſtrat. &c.
                  
                  
                     AL the lynage of men, that ben in erthe ben of ſemblable byrth. One alone is father of thinges: one alone miniſtreth all thynges: He yafe to ye ſun hys beames: He yafe to the moone her hornes: he yafe to men the earth: he yafe the ſterres to the heuen: he encloſed wyth membres the ſoules that comen frome hys hye ſeate. Then comen all mortall folke of noble ſeed. Why noyſen ye or boſten of your elders? For yf ye loke your begynnyng and god your father authour & your maker, then nys there no forelyued wyght or vngē
                     tyll, but yf he nouryſhe hys corage vnto vyces, and forlete hys proper byrth.
               
               
                  
                     Quid autem de corporis voluptatibus loquar, quarum appetentia quidem plena eſt anxietatis. &c.
                  
                  
                     BVt what ſhall I ſayne of delyces of body, of whych delyces the deſyrynges ben ful of anguyſhes, and the fulfyllynges of hem ben ful of penaūce? How gret ſickneſſes & how gret ſorowes vnſuffrable, ryght as a maner fruyte

of wyckedneſſe ben thylke delyces wonte to bryngen to the bodyes of folkes that vſen hem? of which delyces I not what ioy may ben had of her moning. But this wot I wel that whoſoeuer woll remēbren hym of his lurures, he ſhall well vnderſtand, that the iſſues of delyces ben ſorowfull and ſorye.
                  And yf thylke delyces nowe maken folke blyſful, thā by ye ſame cauſe motē theſe beeſtes ben cleped blyſfull, of which beeſtes all the entention haſteth to fulfyl her bodily iolitie. And the gladneſſe of wyfe and chyldrē were an honeſt thynge, but it hath ben ſayd that it is ouer mokel ayenſt kynde, that children haue ben founden tourmenters to her fathers, I not how many. Of whiche chyldren how bytyng is euery condicion, it neadeth not to tellē it the, that haſt or this time aſſayed it, and art yet now anguiſhous. In this tyme approue I the ſentence of my diſciple Euripidis that ſayd, that he that hath no chyldren, is welefull by infortune.
               
               
                  
                     Habet hoc voluptas omnis ſtimulis agit fruentes: A pium
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         par volā
                        tium vbi gratia mella fuit: Fugit et nimis teuaci ferit icta corda morſu &c
                  
                  
                     EVery delyte hath this, that it an guyſſheth hem with pryckes yt vſen it. It reſembleth to theſe fliynge flyes that we clepen bees, that after that he hath ſhed hys agreable honyes, he flyeth awaye, and ſtyngeth the hertes of hem that bene ſmytten with bytyng ouerlonge holden.
               
               
                  
                     Nihil igitur dubium eſt, quin he ad beatitudiuem vie deuia quedam ſint: nec perducere eo quem
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         valeant. &c.
                  
                  
                     NOw is it no dout than, that theſe wayes ne be a maner miſleadynges to blyſfulneſſe: ne that they ne mowen not leaden folke thider as they beheten to leeden hem. But with howe greate harmes theſe forſayde wayes ben enlaced, I ſhall ſhewe you ſhortly.
                  For why, yf thou enforceſt the to aſſemble moneye, thou muſt byreuen hym his money that hath it. And yf thou wolte ſhynen with dignities, thou muſt beſechen and ſupplyen hem, that yeuen tho dygnities. And yf thou coueyteſt by honour to goone beforne other folkes, thou ſhalte defoule thy ſelfe thorowe humbleſſe of aſkynge. Yf thou deſyreſt power, thou ſhalt by awaytes of thy ſubiectes anoyuſly be caſt vnder by many paryls. Aſkeſt thou glorye▪ thou ſhalte ben ſo diſtracte by aſpre thynges that thou ſhalt forgone ſikerneſſe. And yf thou woldeſt leden thy lyfe in delytes, euery wight ſhall deſpiſen the, & forleē the as thou yt art thrall to thyng, yt is ryght foule & bryttel, yt is to ſayne, ſeruaunt to thy bodye. Nowe is it than well yſene, how lytle and howe bryttel poſſeſſyon they coueyten, that putten the goodes of the bodye aboue her owne reaſon. For mayſt thou ſurmounten theſe olyfauntes in greatneſſe or in weyght of body? or mayſt thou be ſtrē
                     ger than the bull? Mayeſt thou be ſwyfter than the tygre? Beholde the ſpaces and the ſtableneſſe and ye ſwyfte courſe of heauen, & ſtynt ſomtime to wondren on foule thinges The which heauen certes nis not rather for theſe thynges to be wondred vpon, than for the reaſon by which it is gouerned. But the ſhynyng of thy fourme, that is to ſayne, the beautye of thy bodye, howe ſwyftly paſſing is it, and howe tranſitorie? certes it is more flyttynge than the mutabylitie of floures of the ſommer ſeaſon. For ſo as Ariſtotel telleth, that yf that men hadde eyen of a beaſte that hyght lynx, ſo that the lokynge of folke myght peercen thorowe tho thynges that withſtonden it. who ſo loked than in then: trayles of the body of Alcibiades, that was full fabre in the ſuperfycie without, it ſhuld ſeme ryght foule.
                  And for thy, yf thou ſemeſt fayre, thy nature ne maketh not that, but the diſceiuaūce of febleneſſe of the eyen that looken. But prayſe the goodes of the body as moche as euer ye lyſt, ſo yt thou knowe algates yt what ſo it be, that is to ſayne, of the goodes of the bodye, whyche that thou wondreſte vpon maye bene deſtroyed or els diſſolued by the heate of a feuer of thre dayes. Of which for ſayd thinges I may reducen this ſhortly in a ſumme, that theſe wordly goodes, which yt ne mowen yeuen yt they behighten, ne ben

not parfyte by the congregation of all goodes, that they ne be not wayes ne pathes yt bryngen men to blyſfulneſſe, ne maken men to be blyſfull.
               
               
                  
                     Heu heu q̄ miſeros tramite deuios abducit ignorantia: Non aurum in viridi queritis arbore. &c.
                  
                  
                     ALas, which follye, and whiche ignoraunce myſleadeth wandryng wretches from the path of very good. Certes, ye ſeken no gold in grene trees, ne ye gadren not precyous ſtones in vynes, ne ye ne hyden not your gynnes in hye mountaynes to catchen fyſh: of the which ye maye maken ryche feeſtes.
                  And yf ye lyke to hunt to Roes, ye ne go not to the foordes of the water that hyght Thyrene. And ouer this, men know wel the crekes and the cauernes of the ſee yhid in ye ſloudes, & knowen eke which water is moſt plenteous of white perles, & knowen which water aboundeth moſt of red purpure that is to ſayne, of a maner ſhelfyſh, with which men dyen purpure: and knowen which ſtrō
                     des abounden mooſt of tendre fyſſhes, or of ſharpe fyſſhes, that hyght Echynes. But folke ſuffren hem ſelfe to ben ſo blynde, that hem ne retchen not to knowe where thylke goodes ben yhid, whiche that they coueten, but plungen hem in earth, and ſeken there thylke good that ſurmounteth the heauen, that beareth the ſterres. what prayer maye I maken that be digne to the nyce thoughtes of men? But I praye that they coueyten rycheſſe and honoures, ſo that whan they haue gotten tho falſe goodes, wyth greate trauayle, that therby they mowen knowen the very goodes.
               
               
                  
                     Hactenus mendacis formam felici tatis oſtendiſſe ſufficerit, ꝙ ſi perſpicaciter intuearis, ordo eſt deinceps, &c
                  
                  
                     IT ſuffyſeth that I haue ſayde hytherto, the fourme of falſe welefulneſſe, ſo yt yf thou loke now clerely: the ordre of myne entention requyreth from hēce forth to ſhewen the very welfulneſſe.
                  
                     B.
                     For ſothe (ꝙ I) I ſe well now, that ſuffyſaunce maye not cōmen by riches, ne power by realmes, ne reuerence by dignities, ne gentleſſe by glory, ne ioye by delyces.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     And haſte thou well knowen the cauſes (ꝙ ſhe) why it is?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Certes me ſemeth (ꝙ I) that I ſe hem, ryght as though it were through a lytle clyfte: But me were leauer knowen hem more openly of the.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) the reaſon is alreadye. For thylke thyng that ſymply is one thynge without anye deuyſyon, the errour and folly of mankynde deuydeth and departeth it & myſleadeth it, and tranſporteth from very and parfyte good to goodes that be falſe and vnparfyte. But ſay me this: weneſt thou, that he that hath nede of power, that hym ne lacketh nothynge?
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Nay (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) yu ſayſt aryght for yf ſo be that there is a thing that in any parte be febler of power, certes as in that it mote nedes be nedy of forayne helpe.
                  
                  
                     Bocce
                     Ryght ſo it is (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Suffiſaunce and power ben of one kynde.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     So ſemeth, ꝙ I
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     And demeſt thou (quod ſhe) that a thynge that is of this maner, that is to ſay ſuffyſaunt and myghtye, ought been diſpyſed, or els that it be ryght digne of reuerence aboue all thynges?
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Certes (ꝙ I) it is no dout that it is ryght worthye to be reuerenced.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Let vs adden (ꝙ ſhe) reuerence to ſuffyſaunce and to power, ſo that we demen yt theſe thre thynges he all one thynge.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Certes quod I, let vs adden it yf we wyl graūt the ſoth.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     what demeſt thou (ꝙ ſhe) than is that a darke thyng and not noble, that is ſuffyſaūt, reuerent, and myghty? or els that it is ryght noble and ryght clere by celebrat of renoume? Cōſydre thā, ꝙ ſhe, as we haue graunted here beforne, that he that ne hath no nede of nothyng, and is mooſt myghtye and moſt digne of honour, yf hym nedeth any clereneſſe of renoume, which clereneſſe he myght not graunten of hym ſelfe: ſo for lack of thylke cleareneſſe he myght ſemen the febler on any ſyde, or the more outcaſte.
                     Gloſe. That is to ſaye, naye: For who ſo that is ſuffyſaunt myghtye, and reuerente, cleareneſſe of renoume foloweth of the forſayde thynges: he hath it all readye of hys ſuffyſaunce.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     I may not quod I, denye it, but I mot

graunten as it is, that this thynge is ryght celebrable by clereneſſe of renoume and nobleſſe.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     Than foloweth (quod ſhe) that we adden clereneſſe of renoume to the foreſayde thynges, ſo that there be amonges hem no dyfferencee.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     This is a conſequence (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     This thinge than (ꝙ ſhe) that ne hath nede of no forayne thynge, and that maye doo all thynge by hys ſtrengthes, and that is noble and honourable, is it not a mery thyng and ioyfull?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     But whence (quod I) that anye ſorowe myghte come to this thynge that is ſuche: certes, I maye not thynke.
                  
                  
                     Philoſop.
                     Than mote we graunten (ꝙ ſhe) that this thynge be full of gladneſſe, yf the forſayde thynges be ſothe. And certes, alſo mote we graunten, that ſuffiſaunce, power, nobleſſe, reuerēce and gladneſſe be onelye dyuers by names, but her ſubſtaunce hath no diuerſitie.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     It mote nedelye be ſo (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philoſophia.
                     Thylke thynge than (quod ſhe) that is one, and ſymple in hys nature, the wyckedneſſe of men departeth and deuydeth it. And whan they enforcen hem to getten partye of a thynge, that ne hath no part they ne getten hem neyther thylke partye, that nys none, ne the thynge all the whole that they deſyre.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     In whiche manere quod I.
                  
                  
                     Philoſphia.
                     Thilke man, quod ſhe, that ſe
                           •
                        heth rycheſſe to flyen pouertie: he ne trauayleth hym not for to get power, for he hath leauer be darke and vyle, and eke with draweth from hym ſelfe manye naturell delytes, for he nolde leeſe the moneye that he hath aſſēbled. But certes, in this maner, he ne getteth hym no ſuffyſaunce, yt power for letteth, and that moleſtie prycketh, and that fylthe maketh outcaſte, and that darkeneſſe hydeth. And certes, he that deſyreth onelye power, waſteth and ſcattreth rycheſſe, and deſpyſeth delyces and eke honour that is wt out power, ne he ne prayſeth glory nothyng. Certes, thus ſeeſt thou wel, that many thinges faylen to hym: For he hath ſomtyme default of many neceſſities, and many anguiſſhes byten hym. And whan he may not don tho defautes away, he forleteth to be mightye, and that is the thyng that he moſt deſyreth. And ryght thus maye I make ſemblable reaſons of honour, of glory, and of delytes. For ſo euerye of theſe forſayde thynges is the ſame that theſe other thynges bene, that is to ſayne all one thynge. whoſoeuer ſeketh to getten that one of theſe, and not yt other, he ne getteth not that he deſyreth.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     what ſayeſt thou, that yf that a man couete to getten all theſe thynges togyther.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) I wolde ſaye that he wolde get hym ſouerayne blyſfulneſſe, but that ſhal he fynde in tho thynges that I haue ſhewed, that mowe not yeuen that they beheten.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Certes, no (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Than (quod ſhe) ne ſhullen men not by no way ſeken blyſfulnes in ſuche thynges as men wenen, that they ne mowe gyuen but one thynge ſyngulerly of all that men ſeken.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I graunt well (ꝙ I) ne none ſother thyng may be ſayd.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Now haſt thou than (ꝙ ſhe) the fourme and the cauſe of falſe welefulneſſe: Nowe turne and flyt agayn to thy thought, for ther ſhalt thou ſene anon thylke very blyſfulneſſe, that I haue behyght the.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Certes (quod I) it is clere and open, though it were to a blinde man: And that ſhewedſt thou me a litle here beforne, whan thou enf
                           •
                        rcedeſt the to ſhewe me the cauſes of the falſe welefulneſſe. For (but yf I be begyled) than is thylk very bliſfulneſſe and parfyte, that perfytely maketh a man ſuffyſaunt, myghty, honourable, noble and full of gladneſſe. And for thou ſhalt well knowe, that I haue wel vnderſtanden theſe thynges within my hert: I know wel that thylke blyſfulneſſe that men verelye yeuen one of the forſayde thynges, ſyns they bene all one: I knowe doutleſſe, that thylke thynge is ful of blyſfulneſſe.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     O my norice (quod ſhe) by this opynyon I ſay, that thou arte blyſfull, yf thou put this therto that I ſhall ſayne.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     what is that (quod I)?
                  
                  
                     Phy.
                     Troweſt thou that there be anye thynge in this erthly mortall tomblyng thynges, that maye bryngen this eſtate?
                  
                  
                     Bo.
                     Certes (quod I) I trowe it not: and thou haſt ſhewed me well that ouer thylke good ther nis nothing more to ben deſyred.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Theſe thynges thā (quod ſhe) that is to ſayne, erthly ſuffyſaūce and power, and ſuche thynges erthlye, they ſemen likeneſſe of very good, or els it ſemeth that they yeuen to mortall folke a maner of goodneſſe, that ne be not parfyte: but thylke good that is very and parfyt, that may they not yeuen.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     I accorde me well (ꝙ I).
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Than (ꝙ ſhe) for as moch as thou haſt knowen,

which is thilke verye blyſfulneſſe, and eke which thylke thynges ben, that lyen falſlye blyſfulneſſe, that is to ſaye, that by diſceyte ſemen very goodes: Nowe behoueth the to know whence and where thou mow ſeke thylke very blyſfulneſſe.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Certes, ꝙ I that deſyre I greatly, and haue abydē lōge tyme to herken it.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     But for as moch (quod ſhe) as it lyketh to my diſciple Plato in hys boke of Thimeo, that in ryght lytle thinges men ſhulden beſeche the help of God: what iudgeſt thou that be nowe to doone, ſo that we may deſerue to fynde the ſeate of thylke ſoueraygne god?
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Certes (ꝙ I) I deme that we ſhullen clepe to the father of al godges, for withouten hym nys there nothyng founded aryght.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Thou ſayeſt aryght (ꝙ ſhe) and began anon to ſyngen ryght thus.
                  
               
               
                  
                     O qui perpetua mundum ratione gubernas. Terrarum celi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſator, qui tempus ab euo, ire iubes, ſtabliſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         manens das cuncta moueri. Quem non externe pepulerunt fingere cauſe. &c.
                  
                  
                     O Thou father ſoueraygne and creatour of heuen and of erthes that gouerneſt this worlde by perdurable reaſon, that commaundeſt the tymes to gone, ſyth that age had begynnynge. Thou that dwelleſt thy ſelfe aye ſtedfaſt and ſtable, and yeueſt all other thynges to be meued, ne foreyne cauſes ne ceſſeden yt neuer to compoun werke of flottring mater but only the forme of ſoueraygne good yſet within the withoute enuye, that meued the frely. Thou that art alderfayreſt, bearynge the fayre worlde in thy thought: formedeſt this world to thy lykeneſſe ſemblable of the fayre worlde in thy thought. Thou draweſt all thynge on thy ſoueraygn enampler, and commaundeſt that this worlde perfetlyche ymaked, haue frely and abſolute his perfyte partyes. Thou byndeſt the elementes by nō
                     bres proporcionables, that the colde thynges mowen accorden wyth the hoote thynges, and the drye thynges with the moyſte: That the fyre that is pureſt, ne fle not ouerhye, ne that the heuyneſſe ne drawe notte adowne ouerlow the erthes that be plonged in the waters. Thou knytteſt togyther the meane ſoule of treble kynde mouyng al thinges, and deuideſt it by membres acccording And whan it is thus deuyded, it hath aſſembledde amouynge into roundes, it goeth to turne agayne to hym ſelfe, and enuyroneth a full depe thought, and turneth the heauen by ſemblable ymage. Thou, by euen lyke cauſes enhaunceſt the ſoules and the leſſe lyues, and hablynge hem to heyght by lyght waynes or cartes. Thou ſoweſt hem into heuen and into erth, and whan they be conuerted to the by thy benigne lawe, thou makeſt hem retourne ayen to the by ayen leding fyre. O father, yeue thou to the thought to ſtyen vp into thy ſtrayte ſete, and graūt him to enuyronne the well of good. And ye lyght yſounde graunt hym to fyxen the clere ſyghtes of his corage in the: and ſcatre thou, and to breake the weyghtes and the cloudes of erthly heuyneſſe, & ſhyne thou by thy brightneſſe, for thou clerenſſe art thou arte peſyble reſt to debonayre folke, thou thy ſelfe art begynnynge, bearer, leader, path and terme to loke on the that is our ende.
               
               
                  
                     Quoniam igitur, q̄ ſit imperfecti que etiam perfecti boni forma vidiſti nunc demonſtrandum reor. &c.
                  
                  
                     FOr as moche than, as thou haſt ſene which is the fourm of good, that nys not parfyt and the forme of good which that is parfyte, nowe trowe I that it were good to ſhewe in what this perfection of blyſfulneſſe is ſet And in this thynge I trowe that we ſhall fyrſt enquyre for to weten, yf that any ſuche maner good as thylke good as thou haſt d
                        •
                     
                     fynyſhed a lytle here beforne, that is to ſayn ſoueraygne good, may be founden in the nature of thinges. For that vayne ymaginacion of thought ne diſceiue vs not, and put vs out of the ſothfaſtneſſe of thilke thynge that is ſubmytted to vs. But it maye not be denyed that thylke ne is, and that is ryght as a well of all goodes. For al thyng that is cleped imparfyte, is proued imparfyte, by the amenuſynge of perfection of thynge that is parfyte. And herof cōmeth it, that in euerye thyng generall, yf that men ſene any thyng that is vnparfyte: certes thilke thyng generall,

there mote be ſome thynge that is perfyte. For yf ſo be that perfection is done awaye, menne maye not thynke ne ſaye from whence thylke thynge is, that is cleped imperfyte. For the nature ne toke nother beginnyng of thynges amenuſed and imperfyte, but it procedeth of thynges that ben al hole abſolute, and diſcendeth ſo downe into the vttreſt thynges, & in to thynges empty and without frute. But as I haue ſhewed a lytell here beforne, that yf there be a blyſfulneſſe that be freyle and vayne, & imparfyte, there maye no man dout, that there nis ſomblyſfulneſſe, that there is ſadde, ſtedfaſt and parfyte.
                  
                     B.
                     This is concluded (ꝙ I) fermely and ſothfaſtly.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     But conſydre alſo (ꝙ ſhe) in whome this bliſfulneſſe inhabyteth. The cōmune accorde and conceyte of the courage of men proueth and graunteth, ye god prince of all thynges is good. For ſo as nothynge may be 
                           •
                        houȝt better than good, it may not be douted than, that he that nothing nis better thā he nis good. Certes, reaſon ſheweth that god is ſo good, that it proueth by very force, that parfyte good is in hym. For yf God nis ſuche, he ne maye not ben prince of all thyng. For certes, ſomthyng poſſeſſynge in it ſelfe parfyte good, ſhulde be more worthy than God: and it ſhulde ſemen that thilk thynge were fyrſt and older than God. For we haue ſhewed apertly, that all thynges yt bene parfyte, ben fyrſt, or thinges that bene imparfyte. And for thy, for as moch as that my reaſon or my proceſſe ne goo not awaye without an ende, we owē to graunten that the ſouerayne good is ryghtfull of ſouerayn parfyte good. And we haue eſtablyſſhed, yt the ſouerayne good is very blyſfulneſſe, thā mote it nedes be, that verye blyſfulneſſe is ſet in ſouerayne good.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     This take I well (quod I) ne this ne maye not be withſayde in no maner.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     But I praye the (quod ſhe) ſe now how thou mayeſt prouen holily, and without corruption, this that we haue ſaid that the ſouerayne God is full of ryght ſouerayne good.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     In which maner (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     weneſt thou ought (ꝙ the) that the father of al thinges hath taken thilke ſouerayn good any where out of hym ſelfe? Of which ſouerayne good, men proueth that he is full. Ryght as thou mighteſt thinkē, that god yt hath blyſfulneſſe in hym ſelfe, and thilk bliſfulneſſe that is in hym were dyuers in ſubſtaunce. For yf thou wene, yt God hath receyued thylke good out of hym ſelf, thou mayſt wene, that he that yaue thilke good to God be more worthye than God. But I am beknowe and confeſſe, and that ryght dignly, that God is right worthy aboue al thinges And yf ſo be, yt this good be in him by nature but that is dyuers from hym by wenynge reaſon, ſyns we ſpeken of God prynce of all thynges. Fayne who ſo fayne maye, who was he that conioyned theſe thynges togyther. And eke at the laſt ſe well, that a thing that is dyuers fro anye thynge, that thylke thynge nys not that ſame thyng, for which it is vnderſtonden to ben dyuers. Than foloweth it wel, that thylke thynge yt by his nature is dyuers from ſouerayne good, that thynge is not ſouerayne good. But certes, it were a felonous curſedneſſe to thynken, yt of hym that nothynge nis more worth. For alwaye of all thynges the name of hem ne maye not ben better than her begynner. For which I maye concluden by ryght very reaſon, that thylke that is begynnyng of al thinges, thilke ſame thyng is ſouerayne God in his ſubſtaunce.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Thou haſt ſayd ryghtfully (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     But we haue graūted (quod ſhe) that the ſouerayne good is blyſfulneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     That is ſoth (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philoſophye.
                     Than (quod ſhe) we moten nedes graunten and confeſſen, that thilke ſame ſouerayne good be God.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Certes (quod I) I ne maye not denye ne withſtande the reaſons purpoſed: and I ſe well that it foloweth by ſtrength of the premiſſes.
                  
                  
                     Phylo.
                     Loke nowe (quod ſhe) yf this be proued yet more fermely thus, that there ne mowē not ben to ſouerayne goodes that bene dyuers amonge hem ſelfe. For certes, the goodes that ben dyuers amonge hem ſelfe, that one is not that the other is. Than ne mowen neither of hem be parfyte, ſo as eyther of hem lacketh to other, but that that nys not parfyte, men maye ſene apertly that it nys not ſouerayne. The thynges than that ben ſoueraynly good, ne mowen by no waye be dyuers. But I haue well concluded, that blyſfulneſſe and God bene the ſouerayne good, for whyche it mote neades bene that ſouerayne blyſfulneſſe is ſouerayne dignitie.
                  
                  
                     Boce.
                     Nothynge (quod I) is more ſothefaſt

than this, ne more ferme by reaſon, ne a more worthye thynge than god may not be concluded.
                  
                  
                     Philoſophy.
                     Vpon theſe thinges than (quod ſhe) ryght as theſe geometriciēs whan they haue ſhewed theyr propoſitions ben wonte to bryngen in thynges that they clepen porriſmes or declaracions of forſaid thynges, ryght ſo woll I yeue the here as a corallarye, or a mede of crowne. For why, for as moche as by the gettynge of blyſfulneſſe, men bene maked blyſfull: and blyſfulneſſe is dignitie. Than is it manifeſt and open, that by the gettynge of dignitie men bē maked blyſfull, ryght as by the gettynge of iuſtyce. And by the gettyng of ſapyence they be maked wyſe, ryghte ſo nedes by the ſemblable reaſon, whan they haue gotten dyuinitie, they be made goddes. Than is euerye blyſfull man a god. But certes, by nature there nys but one god, but by the participacion of the diuynitie, there ne letteth, ne dyſtourbeth nothynge, that there ne be manye goddes.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     This is (quod I) a fayre thynge and a precious, clepe it as thou wilt be it Corollarye, or Porriſme, or Mede of crowne, or declarynge.
                  
                  
                     Philoſophy.
                     Certes (quod ſhe) nothynge nys fayrer than is the thynge that by reaſon ſhoulde be added to theſe forſayde thynges.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     what thyng (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Phyloſoph.
                     So (quod ſhe) as it ſemeth, that blyſfulneſſe contayneth manye thynges, it were for to weten whether that all theſe thynges maken or conioynen as a maner bodye of blyſfulneſſe, by the diuerſite of partyes, of membres, or els yf anye of all theſe thynges be ſuche that it accomplyſſhe by hym ſelfe the ſubſtaunce of blyſfulneſſe. So all theſe other thinges ben referred and brought to blyſfulneſſe, that is to ſay, as to the chefe of hem.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I wolde (quod I) that thou madeſt me clerely to vnderſtande what thou ſayeſt, and what thou recordeſte me the forſayde thynge.
                  
                  
                     Philoſophye.
                     Haue I not iudged (quod ſhe) that blyſfulneſſe is good?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Yes forſoth (quod I) and that ſoueraigne good.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Adde than (quod ſhe) thylke good that is made blyſfulneſſe to all the forſayde thynges. For thylke ſame blyſfulneſſe, that is demed to be ſoueraygne ſuffyſaunce, thylke ſelfe is ſouerayne power ſouerayne reuerence, ſouerayne clereneſſe or nobleſſe, and ſouerayne delyte. what ſayeſt thou than of al theſe thynges, that is to ſay ſuffyſaunce, power, and theſe other thynges? Ben they than as membres of blyſfulneſſe, or ben they referred and brought to ſouerayne good, ryght as al thynges that ben brought to the chefe of hem?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I vnderſtonde well (quod I) what thou purpoſeſte to ſeke: but I deſyre for to herken, that thou ſhewe it to me.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Take now thus the diſcretion of this queſtion (quod ſhe.) Yf all theſe thynges (quod ſhe) weren membres to felicitie, than weren they dyuers that one from that other: and ſuche is the nature of partyes or of membres, that dyuers membres compownen a bodye.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Certes (ꝙ I) it hath well be ſhewed here beforne, that all theſe thynges ben all one thinge.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Than ben they mo membres (quod ſhe.) For els it ſhulde ſeme, that bliſfulneſſe were conioyned all of o membre aloone, but that is a thynge that maye not be done.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     This thyng (quod I than) 
                           ••
                        s not doutous but I abyde to hearken the remnaunt of thy queſtyon.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     This is open and clere (ꝙ ſhe) that all other thynges ben referred and brought to good. For therfore is ſuffyſaūce requyred, for it is demed to be good, and for thy is power requyred, for men trowen alſo that it be good. And this ſame thynge mowen we thynken and coniecten of reuerence, of nobleſſe and of delyte. Than is ſouerayne good, the ſumme and the cauſe of all that ought to ben deſyred. For why, thylke thyng that withholdeth no good in it ſell, ne ſemblaunce of good, it ne maye nor well in no maner be deſyred ne requyred. And contrarye: For though that thynges by her nature ne ben not good, algates yf men wenen that they ben good, yet ben they deſyred as though they were verelye good. And therefore it is ſayde, that men ought to wene by ryght, that bountie bene the ſouerayne fyne and the cauſe of all the thynges that bene to requyren. But certes, thilke that is cauſe for which mē requiren any thing, it ſemeth that thilke ſame thyng be moſt deſyred, as thus: Yf that a wyghte wolde ryden for cauſe of heale, he ne deſyreth not ſo moch ye mouinge to ryden as the effecte of his heale. Nowe than ſyns that al thynges ben requyred for the grace of good, they ben not deſyred of al folke more than the ſame good.
                     
                        But we haue graunted that blyſfulneſſe is that ſame thynge, for whyche that all theſe other thynges bene deſyred. Than is it thus that certes only blyſfulneſſe is required and deſyred. By whych thynge it ſheweth clerelye, that of good and blyſfulneſſe is all one & the ſame ſubſtaunce.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I ſe not (quod I) wherfore that men myghte diſcorden in thys.
                  
                  
                     Philoſoph.
                     And we haue ſhewed, that God and very blyſfulneſſe is all one thynge.
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     That is ſoth (ꝙ I).
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Than mowe we conclude ſykerly, that the ſubſtaunce of God is ſet in thylke ſame good, and in none other place
                  
               
               
                  
                     Huc oēs pariter venite capti, Quos fallar ligat improbis catenis, Terrenas habitans libido mentes. Hic erit vobis requies laborum. &c.
                  
                  
                     COmeth all togyther nowe ye that bene ycaughte, & bounde wyth wicked chaynes, by the deceyuable delyte of earthlye thynges inhabytinge in your thought. Here ſhall be the reſt of youre laboure: here is the hauen ſtable in quyet peſyble. This alone is the open refute to wretches, that 
                        •
                     s to ſayne, that ye that be combred and deceyued wyth worldly affectious, cometh nowe to thys ſouerayn good that is God: that is refute to hem that wyllen comen to hym. All the thynges that the ryuer Tagus yeueth you wyth hys golden grauels, or els all the thynges that the riuer Hennus yeueth wyth hys reed brynke: or ye Indus yeueth, that is nexte the hote partye of the worlde, that medleth the grene ſtones wyth the whyte: ne ſhulde not cleren the loking of your thought, but hyden rather your blynd corage within her derkeneſſe. All that lyketh you here & excyteth and moueth your thoughtes, the earth hath noryſhed it within his lowe caues. But ye ſhynyng, by which the heuen is gouerned, and whence that his ſtrength, that eſcheweth the derke ouerthrowyng of ye ſoule, & who ſo euer may knowen thylke lyghte of blyſfulneſſe, he wyll ſayne, that the whyte beames of the ſūne ne be not clere.
               
               
                  
                     Aſſentior (iu
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        ) cūcta enim firmiſſi mis nexa rationibus cōſtant. Tū illa, quanti, inquit, tu eſtima bis, ſi bonum ipſum, quid ſit, agnoueris▪ &c.
                  
                  
                     
                        BOece.
                     I aſſente me (quod I) for al thinges ben ſtrō
                        gly bounden wyth ryght ferme reaſons.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Howe muche wylte thou prayſen it (ꝙ ſhe) yf that thou knowe what thylke good is?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I wol prayſe it (quod I) by price wythout ende, yf it ſhall betyde me to knowe alſo togyther god that is good.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) that ſhal I do the by very reaſon, if that thoſe thinges, that I haue cōcluded a lytle here beforne, dwellē onelye in her graūtyng.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     They dwellen graūted to the (ꝙ I) yt is to ſayne, as who ſayth, I graunt to thy forſayd concluſyons.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     I haue ſhewed the (ꝙ ſhe) that the thinges that ben required of many folke ne bene not very goodes ne perfite. For they bene diuers that one frō ye other. And ſo as eche of hem is lacking to other, they ne haue no power to brynge a good, that is full and abſolute. But than at erſte bene they very good, whā they bene gathered togyder all in to one forme, and in to one werkynge: ſo that thylke thynge that is ſuffyſaunt, thylke ſame is power, and reuerence, nobleſſe, and myrth. And forſothe but yf all theſe thynges be all one ſame thynge, they ne haue not wherby that they mowe be put in the nombre of thynges that ought to be required and deſired.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     It is ſhewed (ꝙ I) ne hereof maye there no man douten.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     The thynges than (ꝙ ſhe) that ne bene no goodes, whan they bene diuers, & whan they begynnen to be al one thyng, than bene they goodes, ne cometh it not thā by the gettyng of vnyte, that they be maked goodes.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     So ſemeth it (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     But al thynge that is good (ꝙ ſhe) graunteſte thou that it be good by the participation of good or no?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I graunt it (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Than muſt thou graūted (quod ſhe) by ſemblable reaſon that one and good be one ſame thynge. For of thynges, of whyche the effecte nys not naturelly diuers, nedes her ſubſtaunce muſt be one ſame thyng.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I ne

maye not denye it, (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Haſte thou not knowen well (ꝙ I) that all thynge that is, hath ſo longe hys dwellyng and his ſubſtaunce, as longe as it is one, but whan it forletteth to bene one, it muſte nedes dyen and corrumpen togyther?
                  
                  
                     B.
                     In which maner (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Ryght as in beeſtes (quod ſhe) whan the ſoule and the bodye bene conioyned in one, and dwellen togyther, it is cleped a beeſt: and whan her vnite is diſtroyed by the dyſceueraūce of that one from that other, than ſheweth it wel yt it is a deed thing and it is no lenger no beaſt. And the body of a wight whyle it dwelleth in one fourme by coniunction of membres, it is well ſene that it is a fygure of mankynde: And yf the partyes of the bydye be deuyded and diſceuered that one from that other, that they diſtroye the vnite, ye body forleteth to be, that it was beforne. And who ſo wold renue in the ſame maner by all thynges, he ſhulde ſene yt without dout euery thynge is in hys ſubſtaunce, as longe as it is one. And whan it forleteth to be one, it dyeth and periſheth.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     whā I conſyder (quod I) manye thynges, I ſe none other.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Is there any thyng (ꝙ ſhe) that in as muche as it lyueth naturelly, that forleteth the talent or the apetyte of his beynge, and deſyreth to come to deathe and to corruption?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     If I conſyder (quod I) the beaſtes that haue anye maner nature of wyllyng and nyllyng, I ne fynde no beeſt but yf it be conſtrayned fro wythout forthe, that forleteth or dyſpyceth the entencion to lyuen and to duren, or that wyll hys thankes haſten hym to dyen. For euerye beaſte trauayleth hym to defende and kepe the ſauacion of hys lyfe, and eſcheweth death and dyſtruction. But certes I doute me of herbes and trees, that ne haue no felynge ſoules, ne no naturell workynges, ſeruynge to appetytes, as beaſtes haue: whether they haue appetyte to dwelle, and to duren.
                  
                  
                     Philoſoph.
                     Certes (quod ſhe) therof dare the not doute. Nowe loke vpon the herbes and trees, for they wexen fyrſte in ſuche place as bene couenable to hem: in whyche places they mowe not dyen ne dryen, as longe as her nature maye defende hem. For ſome of hem wexen in feldes, & ſome wexen in moū
                        taignes, and other wexe in mareys, and other cleauen on rockes, and ſome wexen plē
                        teous in ſondes. And yf any wyght enforce hym to beare hem in to other places, they wexen drye. For nature yeueth to euerye thynge that is conueniente to hym, and trauayleth that they ne dye, as longe as they haue power to dwellen and to lyuen. what wylte thou ſayne of thys, that they drawen all her nouryſhynges by her rootes, ryghte as they haddē her mouthes yploūged within the earthes, and ſheaden by her maryes her wodde and her barke? And what wylte thou ſayne of thys, that thylke thynge that is ryghte ſofte, as the marye is, that is alwaye hydde in the ſeate all within, and that is defended from wythoute by the ſtedfaſtneſſe of wodde, and that the vttereſte barkes is put ayenſt the diſtemperaunce of the heauen, as a defendoure, myghtye to ſuffr
                           ••
                         harme? And thus certes mayſte thou well ſene, howe great is the dyligence of nature: For all thynges renouelen and publyſhed hem wyth ſeede ymultyplyed. Ne there nys no man, that ne wote well that they ne bene ryghte as a foundemente and edefyce, for to duren not onely for a tyme, but ryghte as for to dure perdurably by generatiō. And yt thinges eke, that men went ne haue no ſoules, ne deſyre they not by ſemblable reaſon to kepen that is hys, that is to ſayne, that is accordynge to her nature in conſeruation of her beyng and enduryng? For wherfore els beareth lyghtneſſe the flambes vp, and the weyghte preſſeth the earth adowne, but for as muche as thylke places and thylke mouinges be couenable to eueryth of hem. And forſothe euery thynge kepeth thylke, that is accordynge & propre to hym, ryght as thynges that bene contraryous and enemies corrumpen hem. And yet the harde thinges (as ſtones) cleauen and holden her parties togyther right faſt & harde, and defenden hem in withſtādyng, that they ne departen lyghtly and yeuen place to hem, that breaken or deuydē hem: but nathleſſe they retournen ayen ſoone in to the ſam thynges from whence they be araced. But fyre f
                           •
                        eeth and refuſeth all deuyſyon. Ne I ne treate not nowe here of wylful mouinges of the ſoule that is knowyng, but of naturell entention of thynges, as thus: Ryght as we ſwalowen the meate that we receyuen, and ne thynke not on it, and as we draw our breath in ſlepyng, that

we weten whyle we ſlepen. For certes in the beeſtes the loue of her lyuynges ne of her beynges, ne cometh not of the wylnynges of the ſoule, but of the begynnynges of nature for certes thoroughe conſtraynynge cauſes wyll deſyreth & embraſeth ful oft tymes the deth, that nature dredeth, that is to ſayn as thus: that a man maye be conſtrayned ſo by ſome cauſe, that his wyl deſyreth and taketh the deathe, whyche that nature hateth & dredeth full ſore. And ſome tyme we ſene the contrary, as thus: yt the wyll of a wyght diſturbeth and conſtrayneth that, that nature alwaye deſyreth and requyreth, that is to ſay yt werkes of generacion, by the which generacion onely dwelleth and is ſuſteyned the longe durabylite of mortall thynges, as thus. Thys charite and this loue that euery thynge hathe to hym ſelfe, ne cometh not of the mouynge of the ſoule, but of the entencion of nature. For the purueyaunce of God hathe yeuen to thynges, that bene create of hym thys, that is a full great cauſe to lyuen and to duren, for whyche they deſyren naturelly her lyfe, as longe as euer they mowen: for whych thou mayſt not dreden by no maner, that all thynges that bene anye where, that they ne requirē naturelly the ferme ſtableneſſe of perdurable dwellyng, and eke the eſchewyng of diſtruction.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I cōfeſſe (ꝙ I) that I ſe wel now, and certaynly withouten dout, the thinges that a whyle ago ſemeden vncertaine to me
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     But (ꝙ ſhe) thylke thynge that deſyreth to be and dwell perdurablye, he deſyreth to bene one: for yf that one were diſtroyed, certes beynge ſhulde there none dwellen to no wyght.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     That is ſothe (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Than (quod ſhe) deſyren all thynges one
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I aſſent (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     And I haue ſhewed (ꝙ ſhe) that thilke ſame one is, thilke that is good.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Yea forſoth (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     All thynges than (quod ſhe) requyren good, and thylke maiſt thou diſcriuen thus: Good is thylke thynge that euery wyght deſyreth
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     There ne maye be thoughte no more very thynge (quod I) for eyther all thynges be referred and brought to naught, and floteren wythout gouernoure diſpoyled of one as of her propre heade, or els yf there be any thynge, to whyche that all thynges tenden and hyen to, that thynge muſte be the ſouerayne good of all goodes.
                  
                  
                     Philoſoph.
                     Than ſayde ſhe thus: O my norice (ꝙ ſhe) I haue great gladneſſe of the, for thou haſte fixed in thy herte the myddell ſothfaſtneſſe, that is to ſayue the prycke, but thys thynge hath be diſcouered to the, in that thou ſaydeſte, that thou wyſteſt not a lytel here beforne.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     what is that (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     That thou ne wyſteſt not (quod ſhe) whych was the ende of thynges, & certes that is the thynge that euery wyght deſyreth. And for as muche as we haue gathered and comprehended, that good is thylke thynge that is deſyred of all, than mote we nedes confeſſen, that good is the fyne of all thynges.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Quiſquis profunda mēte veſtigat verum, Cupit
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nullis elle deuiis falli, Iu ſe reuoluat intimi lucem viſus. &c.
                  
                  
                     WHo ſo ſekethe ſothe by a depe thought, and coueteth to bene diſceyued by no miſwayes, let hym rollen and treaten wyth hym ſelfe, the lyght of hys inwarde ſyght: and let hym gatheren ayen enclynynge in to a compaſe the longe mouynges of hys thoughtes. And let hym teachen hys corage, that he hath encloſed & hyde in hys treaſours, all that he hath compaſſed or ſought fro without: And than thylke thynge that the blacke cloudes of errour whylome had couered, ſhal lyght more clerely than Phebus hym ſelfe ne ſhyneth. Gloſa. who ſo wyl ſeke the depe groundes of ſothe in hys thoughte, and woll not be diſceyued by falſe propoſicions, that gone a myſſe from the trouth, let hym wel examine and rolle wythin hym ſelfe, the nature & proprietes of the thynge. And lette hym yet efteſones examyne and rollē hys thoughtes by good deliberacion, or that he deme. And let hym teachen hys ſoule, that it hath by naturel pryncyples kyndlyche yhydde wythin it ſelfe, all the trouth, the which he ymagineth to bene in thynges wythout: and than al the darkeneſſe of hys myſknowynge, ſhall ſeme more enydently to the ſyght of hys vnderſtā
                     dynge, than the ſunne ne ſemeth to the ſight without forth. For certes the body bringing the weyght of foryeting, ne hath not chaced

out of your thought all the clereneſſe of your knowynge, for certaynlye, the ſeede of ſothe holdeth and cleaueth wythin your corage, & it is awaked and excited by the wyndes and by the blaſtes of doctrine. For wherfore els demen ye of your owne wyl yt ryghtes whā ye be aſked, but if ſo were that the noriſhing of reaſon ne lyued, yplunged in the depe of your herte, that is to ſayne, howe ſhuld men demen the ſothe of any thynge that were aſked, and yf there nere a roote of ſothfaſtneſſe that were yplunged and hyd in naturel princyples, the whyche ſothfaſtneſſe lyued within the depeneſſe of the thought. And yf ſo be, that the muſe and the doctrine of Plato ſyngeth ſothe, all that euerye wyght lerneth, he ne doth nothynge els than, but recordeth, as men recorden thynges that bene foryeten.
               
               
                  
                     Tum ego, Platoni (in
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        ) vehementer aſſentior. Nam me horum ſam ſecundo commemoras. Primum quod memoriam corporea contagione. &c.
                  
                  
                     THan ſayde I thus. I acorde me gretly to Plato, for thou recordeſt and remēbreſte me theſe thynges yet the ſecond tyme, that is to ſaye, fyrſte whan I left my memory by the contrarious cōiunction of the body with the ſoule: and eftſones afterwarde, whan I loſte it confounded, by thy charge and by the burdone of my ſorow, & than ſayd ſhe thus.
                  If thou loke (quod ſhe) fyrſte the thynges that thou haſte graunted, it ne ſhall not bene ryghte ferre, that thou ne ſhalte remembren the ylke thynge, that thou ſaydeſt that thou nyſteſt nat.
                  
                     Boece.
                     what thynge (quod I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     By whyche gouermente (quod ſhe) that this worlde is gouerned.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I remembre it well (quod I) and I cconfeſſe well, that I ne wyſte it naughte. But all be it ſo, that I ſe nowe from a ferre, what thou purpoſeſt, algates I deſyre yet to herken it of the more playnlye.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Thou ne wendeſt not (ꝙ ſhe) a lytle here beforne, that men ſhuld dout that thys worlde is gouerned by God.
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     Certes (quod I) ne yet ne doute I it nat ne I nyll neuer wene that it were to doute, as who ſayeth, but I wote well that God gouerneth thys worlde. And I ſhall anſweren the by what reaſons I am brought to thys Thys worlde (quod I) of ſo many diuers & contraryous partyes, ne myght neuer haue bene aſſembled in o forme, but yf there were one, that cōioyned ſo many diuers thynges. And ye ſame diuerſite of her natures that ſo diſcorden, that one fro that other muſte departen, and vnioynen the thynges that bene conioyned, yf there ne were one that conteyned, that he hath conioyned and ybounde. Ne the certaine order of nature ne ſhuld nat brynge forth ſo ordeyne mouynges, by places, by times, by doynges, by ſpaces, by qualytees, if ther ne were one that were aye ſtedfaſte dwellinge, that ordeyned and diſpoſed theſe diuerſytees of mouynges. And thylke thynge what ſo euer it be, by whyche that al thynges bene ymaked, and ladde, I clepe hym God, that is a worde that is vſed to al folkes.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Than ſayd ſhe: Syth thou felyſte thus theſe thynges, I trowe that I haue lytle more to done, that thou myghtye of welfulneſſe, hole and ſound, ne ſe eftſones thy countrey. But let vs loken the thynges that we haue purpoſed here beforne. Haue I nat nombred & ſayde (quod ſhe) that ſuffyſaunce is in blyſfulneſſe? And we haue accorded that God is thylke ſame blyſfulneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Yes forſoth (quod I).
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     And that to gouerne thys worlde (ꝙ ſhe) ne ſhall he neuer haue nede of none helpe fro wythout. For els yf he had nede of any helpe, he ne ſhulde not haue no full ſuffyſaunce.
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     Yes thus it more nedes be (quod I).
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Then ordeined he by him ſelfe alone al thinges (quod ſhe).
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     That may not be denied (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     And haue ſhewed thee God is the ſame good.
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     It remembreth me well (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Than ordeyneth he al thynges by thylke good (quod ſhe) ſyth he whyche we haue accorded to be good gouerneth all thynges by hym ſelfe. And he is a key and a ſteyre, by whyche the edifyce of thys worlde is kepte ſtable & wythoute corrumpynge.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I accorde me greatly (ꝙ I) And I haue apperceyued alytle beforne, that yu woldeſt ſaye thus. All were it ſo, yt it were by a thynne ſuſpeccyon.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     I trowe wel (quod ſhe). For as I trowe, thou ledeſt nowe more ententyflye thyne eye, to loken the very goodes. But nathleſſe, ye thing that

I ſhalll tell the, yet ne ſheweth not laſſe to lo
                        
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     what is that (quod I).
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     So as men trowe (quod ſhe) and that right fully, that God gouerneth al thinges by the key of his goodneſſe. And al theſe ſame thinges that I haue taughte the haſten hem by naturel entēcyon to come to good, ther may no man doubten that they ne bene gouerned voluntaryly. And that they ne cōuerten hem of her owne good wyll to her ordeynoure. As that they bene accordyng and inclinyng wher gouernour and to her kynge.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     It mote nedes be ſo (quod I) for the realme ne ſhulde not ſeme blyſfull, yf there were a 
                           •
                        oke of myſdrawynges in dyuers partyes, or the ſauing of obediente thynges, ne ſhuld not be then.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Is there nothynge (quod ſhe) yt kepeth hys nature, that enforceth hym to gone ayenſt God?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     No, quod I.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd yf yt any thinge enforced hym to wythſtande God, myghte it auaylen at laſte ayen hym that we haue graunted to be almyghty by the right of bliſfulneſſe?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Certes 
                           ••
                        od I, all vtterlye it ne myghte not auayle hym.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Then is there nothyng, quod 
                           〈◊〉
                         that eyther maye or wyll wythſtande to hys ſouerayne God.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I trowe not, ꝙ I.
                  
                  
                     Philyſo.
                     Then, quod ſhe, is thylke the ſouerayne God, that all thynges gouernethe ſtrongly, and ordeyneth hem ſoftly.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Then ſayd I thus, I delyte me, quod I, not onely in thendes or in the ſumme of the reaſons that thou haſte concluded and proued, but thylke wordes that thou vſeſte, delyten 
                           〈◊〉
                         much more, ſo that at laſte fooles, yt ſomtyme renden greate thynges, oughten bene aſhamed of hem ſelfe, that is to ſayne, that we fooles that reprehēden wyckedly ye thinges that touchen goddes gouernaunce, we oughten bene aſhamed our ſelfe. As I. that 
                           •
                        ard that God refuſeth onely the werkes of men, and ne entermeteth not of it.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Thou haſte well herde, quod ſhe, the fables of the poetes, how the gyauntes aſſayleden heuen, wt the goddes: but forſothe the debo
                        
                           •••
                        e force of God dyſpoſed hem as it was worthy, yt is to ſayn, diſtroyed ye graūtes as it was worthy. But wylt yu that we reyionē togither thylke ſame reaſons? For perauenture of ſuch cōiunction may ſterten vp ſome fayre ſparke of ſoth.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Do, ꝙ I, as lyſte.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     
                        
                           •
                        eneſt thou, quod ſhe, yt God ne be almyghty?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     No man is in doute of it certes, ꝙ I.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     No wyght ne douteth it, yf he be in hys mynde, ꝙ ſhe. But he that is almyghty, there nys nothynge that he ne may.
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     That is ſoth, quod I.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     May God do yuel, quod ſhe?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Nay forſoth, quod I,
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Than is yuell nothynge (ꝙ ſhe) ſyth that he ne maye done none yuell, that maye done all thynges.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Scorneſt thou me (ꝙ I) or els playeſt thou, or deceyueſt thou me, that haſte ſo wonnen wyth thy reaſons the houſe of Dedalus ſo entrelaſyng that it is vnable to be vnlaced, yt thou otherwhyle entreſt there thou iſſueſt, and otherwhyle iſſueſt there thou entreſt? Ne foldeſt thou not togyther by replication of wordes a maner wonderfull cercle or enuyronnyng of ye ſimplicite dyuine? For certes a lytle here beforn whan thou began at blyſfulneſſe, thou ſaydeſt that it is ſouerayne good, and that god is the blyſfulneſſe, for whyche thou yaue me as a couenable yefte, that is to ſaine, that no wyght nys blyſful, but if he be god alſo ther wyth, and ſaydeſt eke, that ye forme of good is the ſubſtaunce of God and of blyſfulneſſe. And ſaydeſt that thylke one is thylke ſame good, that is requyred and deſyred of al the kynde of thinges. And thou prouedeſt in diſputyng, that God gouerneth all the thinges of the worlde, by the gouernaunce of bountye: And ſaydeſt that al thinges wold obeyen to hym, & ſaydeſt that the nature of yuell is nothynge. And theſe thynges ſhewdeſt thou not wyth no reaſons taken fro wythout, but by proues in cercles and homlyche knowynge. The whyche proues drawen to hem ſelfe her fayth and her accorde eueriche of hem of other.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Than ſayde ſhe thus I ne ſcorne not, ne playe, ne diſ
                           •
                        eyue the: but I haue ſhewed the thynge that is greateſte ouer al thynges, by the yefte of god, that we whylom prayden. For thys is the fourme of dyuine ſubſtaunce, that is ſuch, that it ne ſlydeth not into vttereſt forayne thynges, ne receyueth not no ſtraunge thynges in hym. But right as Permenides ſayden in greke, of thylke diuine ſubſtaunce: He ſayd thus, that thylke dyuine ſubſtaunce turneth the world & the mouable cercle of thynges, whyle the ylke dyuine ſubſtaunce kepeth it ſelfe wythout mouynges, that is to ſayne, that he moneth neuer mo, & yet it moueth al other thynges

But nathleſſe, yf I haue ſtyred reaſons that be not taken fro wythoute the compace of the thynge, of the whyche we treaten, but reaſons that ben beſtowed within compace there nys not why thou ſhuldeſt meruaylen ſyth thou haſt lerned by the ſentence of Plato, that nedes the wordes mote bene coſyns to the thynges, of whyche they ſpeken.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Felix qui potuit boni, fontem viſe relucidū. Felix qui potuit grauis. &c.
                  
                  
                     BLyſſed is that man that may ſene the clere welle of good: Blyſfull is he that maye vnbynden hym from the boundes of heuy earth. The poete of Thrace Orpheus, yt whylom had ryght greate ſorowe, for the death of hys wyfe. After that he had maked & conſtrayned by hys wepely ſonges, the wodes mouable to rēne, and had maked the ryuers to ſtonden ſtyl, and had maked the hartes & hyndes to ioynen dredeleſſe her ſydes to cruell lyons, to herken hys ſonge, and had maked that the hare was not agaſte of ye hoūde whych was pleaſed by ſonge: So whan the mooſt ardaunt loue of hys wyfe, brende the entrayles of hys breſte, ne the ſonges yt had ouercomen all thynges, ne myghten not aſwagen her lorde Orpheus, he playned hym of the heauen goddes, which that were cruell to hym, he went hym to the houſes of the he: And he tempered hys blandyſhyng ſong
                        •
                     s, b
                        •
                      reſonnynge of ſtrynges, and ſpake & longe in wepynge, all that euer he had receyued and laued out of the noble welles of his mother Caliope the goddeſſe. And he ſange wyth as muche as he myght of wepynge, & wyth as much as loue, that doubled his ſorowe myght yeuen hym and teach hym, and cōmoned the hell, and requyred & beſoughte by ſwete prayer, the lordes of ſoules in hell of releaſynges, that is to ſaye, to yelden him hys wyfe. Cerberus the porter of hell, wyth hys thre heades was caught, & all abaſhed of the new ſonge. And ye thre goddeſſes, Furyes and vengereſſes of felonyes, that tourmenten & agaſtē the ſoules by anoye woxen ſoroufull and ſorye, and teares wepten for pyte. Tho was not the heade of Ixion tonemented, by the ouerthrowynge whele. And Tantalus, that was diſtroyed by the woodneſſe of longe thurſt, diſpyſed the floodes to drynke. The foule that hyght Vultur, that eateth the ſtomake or the gyſerne of Tityus is ſo fulfylled of hys ſonge, that it nyll eaten ne tyren no more. At the laſte the Lorde and iuge of ſoules was moued to myſerirordies and cryed: we bene ouercomē (ꝙ he) yeue we to Orpheus hys wyfe to beare hym company, he hath well ybought her by hys ſonges and hys dyties: but we wyll putten a law 
                        〈◊〉
                      thys, and couenaunte in the yefte, that is to ſayn, yt tyl he be out of hel, yf he loke behinde hym, that hys wyfe ſhall come agayne vnto vs. But what is he that maye yeue a law to louers? loue is a greater law and a ſtronger to him ſelfe than any lawe that mē may yeuen. Alas, whan Orpheus and hys wyfe were almoſt at the termes of the night, that is to ſayne, at the laſte boundes of hell, Orpheus loked backewarde on Eurydice hy
                        •
                      wyfe, and loſte her, and was deade. Thys table apertayneth to you all, who ſo euer deſyreth or ſeketh to lede his thought in to the ſouerayne daye, that is to ſaye to clereneſſe of ſouerayne good. For who ſo euer be ſo ouercomen that he fixe his eyen into the pytte of hell, that is to ſayne: who ſo euer ſette hys thoughtes in erthly thynges, all yt euer he hath drawē of ye noble good celeſtiall, he leſeth it, whan he loketh to the helles, thys is to ſayne into lowe thynges of the earth.
               
               ¶Thus endeth the thyrde boke of Boece, and here after foloweth the fourth.
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                        HEc cum philoſophia dignita te vultus, et oris grauitate ſeruata, leniter, ſuauiter 
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ceciniſſet, Tum ego nondum penitus inſiti meroris oblitus. &c.
                  
                  
                     WHen Philoſophie had ſongen ſoftly & delectably the forſayd thynges kepyng ye dignite of her chere, & the weyghte of her wordes, I thē that ne had all vtterly foryeten the wepyng and the mournynge that was ſet in myne herte, forbrake the entencion of her, that entended yet to ſayne ſome other thynges.
                  O (quod I) thou that arte gydereſſe of verye lyght, the thinges that thou haſt ſayd me hytherto, ben to me ſo clere and ſhewynge by the dyuyne lokynge of hem, and by thy reaſons, that they ne mowen ben ouercomen. And thylke thynges, that thou toldeſt me, all be it ſo that I had whylom foryeten hem, for 
                        •
                     he ſorowe of the wronge that hath be done to me: yet neuertheleſſe they ne weren not vtterly vnknowen to me. But thys ſame is namely a ryght greate cauſe of my ſorowe, ſo yt as the gouernour of thynges is good, yf that yuels mowē ben by any wayes: or els yf that yuels paſſen wythout punyſhyng, the which thyng only, how worthy is it to ben wōdred vpon. Thou conſydreſt it well thy ſelfe certaynly. But yet to this thynge there is yet an other thynge ioyned more to be wondred vpon. For felonye is empereſſe, and floureth ful of rycheſſe, and vertue nys not all only wyth out medes, but it is caſt downe, and eke fortroden vnder the fete of felonous folke: and it abyeth the tourmentes in ſtede of wycked f
                        •
                     ions. Of all whyche thynges there is no wyght maye maruaylen ynough ne complaynen, that ſuch thynges be done in the reygne of god, that al thynges wote, and al thynges maye, and ne wyl not only but good thinges Then ſayd ſhe thus: Certes (quod ſhe) that were a great maruayle, & an abaſhyng wyth out ende, and well more horrible then al the monſters, yf it were as thou weneſt, that is to ſayne, that in the ryghte ordayne houſe of ſo moch a father and an ordaynour of meyne that the veſſels that ben foule and vyle, ſhuld ben honoured and heryed, and the precious veſſels ſhuld ben defouled and vyle. But it is not ſo, for yf the thynges, that I haue concluded a lytel here beforne, ben kept hole and vnaraced, thou ſhalte well knowe by the authorite of god (of the whoſe reygne I ſpeke) that certes the good folke be alwaye myghty and ſhrewes ben alwaye outcaſte and feble. Ne the vyces be neuer more wythout payne ne the vertues ne be not wythout mede. And that blyſfulneſſe cometh alway to good folke and infortune cometh alway to wicked folke And thou ſhalt well knowen many thynges of thys kynde, that ſhuld ceaſen thy playntes and ſtrengthen the wyth ſtedfaſt ſadneſſe. And for thou haſt ſene the forme of very blyſfulneſſe by me that haue whylom ſhewed it the, and thou haſte knowen in whome blyſfulneſſe is ſet: althynge treated, that I trow be neceſſary to put forth, I ſhall ſhewen the the waye, that ſhall bryngen the ayen vnto thyne houſe: and I ſhall fyxe fethers in thy thought, by which it maye aryſen in heyght, ſo that all tribulation ydone awaye, thou by my gydynge and by my pathe, and by my fledes, ſhalte mowen retourne hole and ſounde into thy countrey.
               
               
                  
                     Sunt etenim penne volueres michi, Que celſa conſcendunt polt Quas ſibi cli velox mens induit. &c.
                  
                  
                     THen for thy ſwyfte fethers yt ſurmounten the heyght of the heuen, when the ſwyft thought hath clothed it in tho feathers, it dyſpiſeth the hatefull erthes, and ſurmounteth the roū
                     deneſſe of the great ayre, and it ſeeth the cloudes behynde hys backe, & paſſeth the heyghte of the regyon of the fyre, that enchaufeth by the ſwyfte mouynge of the fyrmament, tyll that he aryſeth into the houſes, that bearen the ſterres, and ioyneth the waye wyth the ſunne Phebus, and felowſhyppeth the waye of the olde colde Saturnus, & he ymaked a knyght of the clere ſterre, that is to ſayē, whē the thought is made goddes knight, by the ſekynge of clere trouthe to comen to the verye knowlege of god. And thilk ſoule rēneth by ye
                     
clerke of ſterrres, in al the places there as the ſhynynge nyght is ypaynted, that is to ſayne the nyght that is cloudleſſe. For on nyghtes that be cloudleſſe, it ſemeth that the heauen were paynted wyth dyuers ymages of ſterres. And whē he hath done there ynough, he ſhall forleten the laſte heuen, and he ſhall preſen and wenden on the backe of the ſwyft fyrmament, and he ſhal be maked parfyte of the worſhypfull lyght of god. There holdeth the lorde of thinges the ſceptre of hys might, and attempreth the gouernementes of the worlde and the ſhynynge iuge of thynges, ſtable in hym ſelfe, gouerneth ye ſwyft carte or wayne that is to ſayne, the cyrculer mouynge of the ſunne. And yf thy waye ledeth ye ayen, ſo that thou be brought thyder, then wylt thou ſaye, that is the countrye that thou requyreſt, of whych thou ne haddeſt no mynde: but nowe it remembreth me well, here was I borne, here wol I faſtē my degre, here wol I dwel. But yf the lyketh then to loken on the darkeneſſes of the earth, that thou haſte forleten, then ſhalte thou ſene, that theſe felonous tyrauntes, that the wretched people dredeth nowe, ſhullen ben exyled from thylke fayre countrey.
               
               
                  
                     Tū ego pape inquā, vt magna promittis. Nec dubito, qui poſſis efficere tu modo quē exitaneris, ne moreris.
                  
                  
                     THen ſayd I thus: O I wōder me that thou beheteſt me ſo great thinges. Ne I ne doute not that thou ne mayſt well performe that thou beheteſt: but I praye the thys that thou ne tarye not, to tel me thylke thynges, that thou haſt moued.
                  
                     Ph.
                     Fyrſt (ꝙ ſhe) thou muſte nedes knowe, that good folke ben alway ſtrōge and myghtye, and the ſhrewes ben feble and deſerte, and naked of all ſtrengthes. And of theſe thynges certes eueryche of hem is declared and ſhewed by other. For as good & euell ben two contraries, yf ſo be that good be ſted faſte, then ſheweth the febleſſe all openly. And yf thou knowe clerely the frelneſſe of yuel, the ſtedfaſtneſſe of good is knowen. But for as moche as the fayth of my ſentence ſhal be the more ferme and haboundaunt, I woll gone by that one way and by that other, and I woll conferme the thynges that ben purpoſed nowe on thys ſyde, and nowe on that ſyde. Two thynges there ben, in whyche the effecte of all the dedes of mankynde ſtandeth that is to ſayne, wyll and power: and yf that one of theſe two fayleth, there nys nothynge that maye be done. For yf that wyll lacketh, there nys no wyghte that vndertaketh to do that he wol not done: And yf power fayleth the wyll nys but ydle, and ſtante for naught. And therof cometh it, that yf thou ſe a wight that wolde getten that he maye not getten, thou mayſt not doute that power ne fayleth hym to hauen that he wolde.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Thys is open and clere (quod I) ne it ne maye not bene denyed in no maner
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     And yf thou ſe a wyght (quod ſhe) that hath done that he wolde done, thou nyll not doute, that he ne hath had power to done it.
                  
                  
                     Bo.
                     No (quod I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     And in that that euerye wyght maye in that mē holden hem mighty to done a thinge In ſo moche as a man is myghtye to done a thynge, in ſo moche men holde hym myghty: and in that that he ne maye, in that men demen hem to be feble.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I confeſſe it well (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Remembre the (quod ſhe) 
                           〈◊〉
                         I haue gathered and ſhewed by the forſayde reaſons that all the entencion of the wyll of mankynde, whyche that is ladde by dyuers ſtudyes, haſteth to comen to blyſfulneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     It remembreth me wel (quod I) that it hath bene ſhewed.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     And recordeth the nought then (quod ſhe) that blyſfulneſſe is thylke ſame good that men requyren, ſo that when blyſfulneſſe is requyred of all?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     It recordeth me not (quod I.) For I haue it alwaye in my memorie fyxed.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     All folke then (quod ſhe) good and eke badde enforcen hem wythout dyfference of entencion to comen to good.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Thys is very conſequence (quod I).
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     And certayne is (quod ſhe) that by gettynge of good be men maked good.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     That is certayne (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Then getten good men that they deſyren.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     So it ſemeth (quod I.)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     But wycked folke (quod ſhe) yf they getten the good that they deſyren, they ne mowen not be wycked.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     So it is (quod I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Then ſo as that one & that other (quod ſhe) deſyren the good, and the good folke getten the good, and not the wycked folke: Then it is no doute that the good folke ne be myghty

and wycked folke be feble.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Who ſo that euer douteth of thys, he ne maye not cō
                        ſyder the nature of thynges ne the cōſequēce of reaſons.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     And ouer thys, quod ſhe, yf that there ben two thynges that haue one ſam purpoſe by kynde, and that one of hem purſueth and perfourmeth that ſame thynge by naturell offyce, and that other ne may not do
                           ••
                         thylke offyce naturell, but foloweth by other maner, thē is couenable to nature, him that accomplyſheth hys purpoſe kyndly, and yet he ne accomplyſheth not hys owne purpoſe: whether of theſe two demeſt thou for more meghtye?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Yf that I coniecte quod I, that thou woldeſt ſaye, algates I deſyre yet to herken it more playnlye of the.
                  
                  
                     P
                           •
                        iloſo.
                     Thou nyl
                           •
                        e not thē denye, quod ſhe, 
                           〈◊〉
                         the mouement of goynge nys in men by kynde.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     No forſoth, quod I.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Ne thou douteſt not, quod ſhe, that thylke naturell offyce of goynge, ne be the offyce offere▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I ne doute it not, quod I.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Then, quod ſhe, yf that a wyghte 
                           •
                        e myghtye to moue and goeth vppon hys 
                           •
                        ete, and another, to whome thylke naturel offyce of fete lacketh, enforſeth hym to go crepy
                           •
                        ge on hys hande, whyche of theſe two oughte to be holden the more myghtye by ryght.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Knytte forth, quod I, the remnaunt.
                  
                  
                     Philoſophia.
                     For no wyght ne douteth▪ that he that may gone by naturel offyce of 
                           •
                        ete, ne be more myghtye then he that ne maye not. But the ſouerayne good, quod ſhe, that i
                           •
                         euen lyke purpoſed to the good and to the badde. The good folke ſeken it by naturell offyce of vertues, and ſhrewes enforcen hem to getten it by dyuers couetyſes of earthly thynges, whyche that nys no naturell offyce to getten thylke ſouerayne good. Troweſt thou that it be any otherwyſe?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Naye, quod I. For the conſequence is open and ſhewynge of thynges that I haue graū
                        ted, that nedes good folke moten ben myghtye, and ſhrewes moten bene feble and vnmyghtye.
                  
                  
                     Philoſophia.
                     Thou renneſt aryght beforne me, quod ſhe, and thys is the iudgemente, that is to ſayne, I iuge of ryghte, as theſe leches bene wonte to hopen of ſycke folke, when they apperceyuen, that nature is redreſſed and wythſtandeth to the maladye. But for I ſe the nowe all redy to the wythſtandynge, I ſhal ſhewe the more thylke and continuell reaſons. For loke howe greatlye ſheweth the febleneſſe and infyrmite of wycked folke, that ne mowen not comen to that her naturell entencion leadeth hem: And yet almoſte thylke naturell entencion conſtrayneth hem. And what were to demen then of ſhrewes, yf thylke naturell helpe had forlettē hem, the whyche naturell helpe of entencion goeth alwaye beforne hem, and is ſo greate, that vnneth it maye be ouercomen? Conſyder then howe great defaute of power, and howe greate febleſſe there is in wycked felonous folke, as who ſayeth, ye greater thynge that is coueyted, and the deſyre not accomplyſhed, of the laſſe myght is he that coueyteth it, and maye not accomplyſhe. And for thy philoſophie ſayeth thus by ſouerayne good: Ne ſhrewes ne requyren not lyght medes ne vayne games, whych they ne maye not folowen ne holdē, but they faylen of thylke ſūme of the heyght of thynges, that is to ſayne, ſouerayne good. Ne theſe wretches ne comen not to theffecte of ſouerayne good, the which they enforcen hem onely to getten by nyghtes and by dayes, in gettynge of whych good the ſtrēgth of good folke is ful wel yſent. For ryght as thou myghteſt demen hym myghty of goynge, yt goeth on hys fete tyll he myght comen to thylke place, fro the whyche place there ne laye no waye further to be gone: ryghte ſo muſte thou nedes demen hym for ryght myghty, whych that getteth and attayneth to the ende of all thynges, whyche that bene to deſyren, beyonde the whyche ende there nys nothynge to deſyre. Of the whych power of good folke men maye cōclude, that we wycked men ſemen to be barayne and naked of all ſtrength. For why forletten they vertues & folowen vyces, nys it not for that they ne knowen not the goodes? But what thynge is more feble and more caytyfe, then is the blyndneſſe of ignoraunce? or els they knowē wel whych thynges they oughtē folowen, but lechery and couetyſe ouerthroweth hem myſturned. And certes ſo dothe dyſtemperaunce to feble men, that mowe not wraſt len ayen theſe vices. Ne knowe they not wel that they forletten the good wylfullye, and tournen hem wylfully to vyces. And in thys wyſe they ne forletē not onely to be myghty, but they forleten al vtterly in any wyſe for to

ben. For they that forletē the comune fyne of all thynges that ben, they forleten alſo therwythall for to ben. And perauenture it ſhuld ſemen to ſome folke, that thys were a maruayle to ſayne, that ſhrewes, whych that conteynen the more partes of men, ne bene not, ne haue no beynge. But natheles it is ſo, and thus ſtante thys thinge. For they that be ſhrewes, I denye not, but that they be ſhrewes, but I denye ſymply and playnly that they ne be not, ne haue no beynge. For ryght as thou myghteſt fayne of the carayne of a man, that it were a deed man: ſo graunt I wel forſoth that vicious folke ben wycked, but I ne may not abſolutely and ſymplye graunt that they ben. For thylke thynge that with holdeth ordre and kepeth nature, thylke thynge is and hath beynge. But what thynge fayleth that, that is to ſaye, he that forleteth naturel order he forleteth thylke beynge that is ſet in hys nature? But thou wolt ſayne, yt ſhrewes mowen. Certes that ne denye I not: but certes her power ne dyſcendeth not of ſtrength, but of febleneſſe, for they mowen done wyckedneſſe, the whyche they ne myght not, yf they myghten dwellen in the forme and in the doynge of good people. And thylke power ſheweth euydently, yt they mowē ryght naught For ſo as I haue gadred and proued a lytell here beforn, that euyll is not, and ſo as ſhrewes may only but ſhreudneſſe. Thys concluſyon is al clere, that ſhrewes ne mowe ryght naught, ne haue no power. And for as moch as thou vnderſtandeſt whych is the ſtrength of this power, I haue defynyſhed a lytel here beforne, that no thynge nys ſo myghty as ſouerayne good.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     That is ſoth (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     And thylke ſouerayne good maye done none euell.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Certes no (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Is there any wyght thē (ꝙ ſhe) that weneth that men mowen done al thynges?
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     No man (ꝙ I) but yf he be out of hys wyt.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     But certes ſhrewes mowen don yuels (quod ſhe)
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Yea wolde god (quod I) that they ne myghten done none
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Then (quod ſhe) ſo as he that is myghty to done onely good thinges, he maye done all thynges, and they that bene myghtye to done yuell thynges, ne mowen not all thynges, then is it open thynge and manyfeſt, that they that mowen done yuell ben of laſſe power. And yet to proue this cōcluſyon there helpeth me thys, that I haue ſhewed here beforne, that all power is to be nombred amonge thinges that men oughten requyre. And I haue ſhewed that all thynges that oughten bene deſyred be referred to god, ryghte as to a maner heyght of her nature: but for to mowen done yuell and felonye, ne maye not ben referred to god. Then is not yuell of the nombre of thynges that oughten to bene deſyred and requyred. Then is it open and clere that the power ne the mouynge of ſhrewes nys no power. And of all theſe thynges it ſheweth well that the go
                           •
                        d folke ben certaynly myghty, and the ſhrewes doutleſſe vnmyghty. And it is clere and opē that thylke ſentence of Plato is very & ſoth, that ſayeth that onely wyſemen maye don
                           •
                         that they deſyren, and ſhrewes mowen h
                           •••
                        ten that hem lyketh, but that they deſyre
                           •
                        , that is to ſayne to come to ſouerayne good, they ne haue no power to accomplyſhe that For ſhrewes done what hem lyſte, when b
                           •
                         tho thynges in whych they delyten, they wenen to attayne to thylke good that they deſyren, but they ne getten ne attayne not thert
                           •
                         for vyces ne comen not to blyſfulneſſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Quos vides ſedere celſos Sol
                           •
                         culmine regis Purpura claros intente. &c.
                  
                  
                     WHo ſo that the couertures of he
                        •
                      vayne apparaylles myght ſtrypen of theſe proude kynges, that tho
                        •
                      ſeeſt ſytten an hygh in her chayres glytterynge in ſhynynge purpure, enuyronned wyth ſorowfull armures, manaſſynge wyth cruell mouth, blowynge by woodneſſe of herte, he ſhulde ſene that thylke lordes be
                        •
                     
                     ren wythin her corages full ſtrayte chaynes: for letherye tourmenteth hem on that one ſyde wyth gredye venymes and troublable yre, that arayſeth in hem the floode of troublynges, tourmenteth on that other ſyde, her thoughte or ſorowe halte hem wery and ycaught, or ſlydynge and dyſceyuynge hope tourmenteth hem. And therfore ſythe thou ſeeſt one heed, that is to ſayne, one tyraunt bearen ſo many tyrannyes, then ne dothe thylke tyraunt not that he deſyreth ſyth he is caſte downe wyth ſo many wycked lordes, that is to ſayne, ſo many vyces that haue ſo

wyckedly lordſhyps ouer hym.
               
               
                  
                     Vides ne igitur quādo in ceno probra voluantur, que probitas luce reſplendeat, in quo perſpicuum eſt nun
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         bonis premia. &c.
                  
                  
                     SEeſt thou not thē in how greate fylthe theſe ſhrewes ben ywrapped, and wyth whyche clereneſſe theſe good folke ſhynen? In this ſheweth it well that to good folk ne lacked neuer mo her medes, ne ſhrewes 
                        ••
                     en neuer more tourmentes. For of al thinges that be done, thylke thynge for whyche 
                        ••
                     y thynge is done, it ſemeth as by ryghte, that thylke thynge be ye mede of that, as thus yf a man renneth in the ſtadye or in the forlonge for the crowne: then lyeth the mede in the crowne for whych he rēneth. And I haue 
                        •
                     hewed that blyſfulneſſe is thylke ſame good for whych that all thynges ben done. Thē is thylke ſame good purpoſed to the werkes of mankynde, ryght as a cōmune mede, whych mede ne maye not be dyſceuered from good folke: For no wyght as by ryght, from thenſforth that hym lacketh goodneſſe, ne ſhall be cleped good: for whyche thynge folke of good maners her medes ne forſake hem neuer mo 
                        •
                     or al be it ſo that ſhrewes waxen as woode as hem lyſt ayenſt good folke, yet neuertheleſſe the crowne of wyſemen, ne ſhall not fallen ne fadē fro forayne ſhreudneſſe, ne benym men not fro ye corage of good people her pro
                     
                        ••
                      honour. But yf any wyght reioyſed hym of goodneſſe, that he had taken fro wythout, is who ſayeth, yf a man had hys goodneſſe if any other mā then of hym ſelfe: certes he yt 
                     
                        •
                     aue hym thylke goodneſſe, or els ſome other wyght myghte bynome it hym. But for as moche as to euery wyght hys propre bounte 
                        •
                     eueth hym hys mede, then at erſt ſhal he fayken of mede when he forleteth to be good. And at the laſt, ſo as al medes ben requyred, for mē wenen yt they be good, who is he that 
                        •
                     olde deme, that he that is ryght myghtye of good, were parteleſſe of mede? And of what mede ſhal he be reguerdoned? Certes ofright fayre mede & ryght great, abouen all medes. Remembre the of thilke noble corallarie yt I yaue the a lytell here beforne, & gather it togyther in thys maner. So as god hym ſelfe is blyſfulneſſe, then is it clere & certayne, that all good people ben maked blyſfull, for they ben good, and thylke people that ben blyſful, it accordeth and is couenable to be goddes. Then is ye mede of people ſuche, that no day ne ſhall enpayren it, ne no wyckedneſſe ſhall dryken it, ne power of no wyght ne ſhall not amenuſe it, that is to ſayne, that bene maked goddes. And ſyth it is thus, that good mē ne faylen neuer more of her mede, certes no mā ne may doute of the vndepartable payne of ſhrewes, that is to ſayne, yt the payne of ſhrewes departeth not from hem ſelfe neuer mo. For ſo as good and euell, and payne & medes be contrarye, it mote nedes be, that ryght as we ſe betyden in guerdone of good, that alſo mote the payne of the yuel anſwere by the cō
                     trarye partyes to ſhrewes. Nowe then ſo as bountye and prowes ben mede to good folke alſo is ſhreudneſſe it ſelfe tourmēt to ſhrewes Then who ſo euer is enteched and defouled wyth payne, he ne douteth not, that he is enteched and defouled wyth euell. Yf ſhrewes then wollen prayſen hem ſelfe, may it ſemen to hem that they ben wythoutē party of tourment, ſyth they ben ſuche that the vttreſt wickedneſſe, yt is to ſaye, wycked thewes, whych is the vttreſt & worſt kynde of ſhreudneſſe, ne defouleth ne entecheth not hem only, but enfecteth & enuenymeth greatly. And alſo loke on ſhrewes, that ben the contrarye partye of good men, howe great payne felouſhyppeth and fouleth hem: for thou haſt lerned a lytel here beforne, that all thynge that is and hath beynge, is one, and thylke ſame one is good: then is thys ye conſequence, yt it ſemeth well, that all thynge yt is & hath beynge, is good, yt is to ſayne, as who ſayeth, that beyng, vnite & goodneſſe is al one. And in thys maner it foloweth then, yt al thynge that fayleth to be good, it ſtynteth for to be & for to haue anye maner beyng: wherfore it is yt ſhrewes ſtynten for to be yt they weren. But thylke other forme of mākinde, that is to ſayne, yt fourme of the body wythout, ſheweth that theſe ſhrewes weren whylom men, wherfore when they bene peruerted and tourned into malyce, certes thē they haue forlorne the nature of mankynde: But ſo as only bountye & proweſſe maye enhaūſen euery man, ouer men: then mote it nedes be that ſhrewes, whyche

that ſhreudeneſſe hath caſte oute of the condycyon of mankynde, bene put vnder the meryte and deſerte of men. Then betydeth it, that yf thou ſeeſt a wyghte whyche that is tranſfourmed into vyces, thou mayeſt not wene that he be a man: For yf he be ardaunt in auaryce, and that he be a rauenour by vyolence of forayne rycheſſe, thou ſhalte ſayne that he is lyke a wolfe. And yf he be felonous and wythouten reſte, and exercyſe hys tonge to chydynges, thou ſhalte lyken hym to the hounde. And yf he be a pryuy awaytour hydde, and reioyſeth hym to rauyſh by wyles, thou ſhalte ſayne hym lyke to the foxe whelpes. And yf he be diſtempred & quaketh for yre, men ſhall wenen that he beareth the corage of a lyon. And yf he be dredful and flyenge, and dredeth thynges whych that ne oughten not to be dredde, men ſhal hold hym lyke to the harte. And yf he be ſlowe and aſtonyed and lache, men ſhall holde hym lyke to an aſſe. And yf he be lyghte and vnſtedfaſte of corage, and chaungeth aye his ſtudyes, mē ſhall holde hym lyke to the byrdes. And yf he be plonged in foule and vncleane luxuryes, he is wythholden in the foule delyces of the foule ſowe. Then foloweth it, yt he that forleteth bounte and proweſſe, he forleteth to be a man, ſyth he ne maye not paſſen in the condicion of god, he is turned into a beeſt.
               
               
                  
                     Vela Naricii ducis, Et vagas pelago rates, Eurus appulit inſule Pulchra qua reſidens dea, Solis edita ſemine. &c.
                  
                  
                     EVrus the wynde aryued the ſayles of Vlixes duke of the coūtre of Narice and hys wrandrynge ſhyppes by the ſee into ye yle ther as Circes ye fayre goddes doughter of the ſunne dwelleth, that medleth to her newe geſtes, drynkes that ben touched and maked wyth enchaūtemētes. And after that hyr hande myghty ouer the herbes had chaū
                     ged hyr geſtes into dyuers maners, that one of hem is couered hys face wyth forme of a Boor, that other is chaunged into a Lyon of the countre of Marmorike, and hys nayles & hys tethe wexen. That other of hem is newlyche chaunged into a wolfe, and howleth when he wolde wepe, that other goeth debonayrly in the houſe as a Tygre of Inde. But all be it ſo that the godheed of Mercury that is cleped the byrde of Archady hath had mercy of the duke Vlixes beſeged wyth dyuers yuelles, and hath vnbounden hem fro the peſtilence of hys hoſteſſe, algates the rowers & the maryners hadden by thys ydrawen into hyr mouthes, and dronken the wycked drynkes. They that weren woxen ſwyne, hadden by thys ychaunged hyr meate of bread, for to eaten akorne of Ookes. None of hir lymmes ne dwelleth wyth hem hoole, but they haue loſt the voyce and the body, only her thought dwelleth wyth hem ſtable, that wepeth and bewayleth the monſtruous chaungynge that they ſuffren. O ouer lyght hande, as who ſayeth feble and lyght is the hande of Circes the enchauntereſſe, that chaūgeth the bodyes of folke into beeſtes to regarde and to comparyſon of mutacyon that is maked by vyces, at the herbes of Circes ne be not myghty, for al be it ſo that they may chaungen the lymmes of the body, algate yet they may not chaunge the hertes, for wythin is yhyd the ſtrength & the vygoure of mē in the ſecretour of hyr hertes, that is to ſayne, the ſtrength of reaſon, but thylke venymes of vyces to drawē a mā to hem more myghtely then ye venym of Cuces, for vyces bene ſo cruell that they perſen and thorowe paſſen the courage wythin, and though they ne anoye not the body, yet vyces wooden to deſtroyen men by wounde of thought.
               
               
                  
                     Tu ego fateor, in
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        , nec iniuria dici video vicioſos, tam et ſi humani corporis ſpeciem ſeruent. &c.
                  
                  
                     THen ſayd I thus: I confeſſe & am aknowe it (ꝙ I) ne I ne ſe not that men maye ſaye, as by ryght, that ſhrewes ben chaunged in to beeſtes, by the qualite of her ſoules, all be it ſo that they kepen yet the forme of the bodye of mankynde: but I wolde not of ſhrewes, of whych the thought cruell and woode, woodeth alwaye to the deſtruccion of good men, that it were lefull to hem to done that.
                  Certes (quod ſhe) ne it is not lefull to hem

as I ſhall wel ſhewe the in couenable place: but natheleſſe yf ſo were that thilke that men wene ben leful to ſhrewes, were bynommed hē, ſo that they ne myght not anoyen or done harme to good men, certes a great partye of the payne to ſhrewes ſhulde ben alleged and releued. For all be it ſo that it ne ſeme credyble thynge perauenture to ſome folke, that it mote nedes be yt the ſhrewes ben more wretches and ſely, whan they may full doone and parfourme that they coueyten, than yf they myght not accomplyſte that they coueyten: For yf ſo be that it be wretchydneſſe to wylnē to don yuel, than is it more wretchedneſſe to mowē done yuell, without which mowyng, the wretched wyl ſhulde languyſhe without effecte. Than ſythe euerye of theſe thynges hath his wretchydneſſe, that is to ſayne, wyl to done yuell, and mowyng to doone yuell, it mote nedes be that they ſhrewes be conſtrayned by her vnſelyneſſes, that wolen and mowen and parfourmen felonyes and ſhreudneſſes
                  
                     Boece.
                     I acorde me (ꝙ I) but I deſyre greatly, that ſhrewes loſten ſoone thylke vnſelyneſſe, that is to ſayn, that ſhrewes weren d
                           •
                        ſpoyled of mowyng to done yuel.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     So 
                           •
                        ullen they (ꝙ ſhe) ſoner perauenture than thou woldeſte, or ſoner than they hem ſelfe wene: for there nys nothing ſo late in ſo ſhort boundes of thys lyfe, that is longe to abyde, namely to a courage immortell. Of whyche ſhrewes the great hope and the hye compaſſynges of ſhreudneſſe, is ofte deſtroyed by a ſodeyn ende or they be ware. And that thyng eſtablyſhed to ſhrewes, the ende of her ſhreudneſſe, for if that ſhreudneſſe maketh wretches than muſt he nedes be moſt wretche that longeſt is a ſhrewe, the whyche wciked ſhrewes wolde I demyn aldermooſt caytyfes and vnſely, yf her ſhrewdneſſe ne were fynyſſhed at leeſt way by vttereſt dethe, for yf I haue concluded ſothe of the vnſelyneſſe of ſhrewdnes, than ſheweth it plainly, that thilke wretchednes is wythouten ende, the whych is certayn to be perdurable.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Certes (ꝙ I) thys concluſyon is harde & wonderfull to graūte. But I knowe well that it accordeth moche to thynges that I haue graunted here beforne.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Thou haſte (ꝙ ſhe) ryght eſtymacyon of thys. But who ſo euer wene that it be a harde thynge to accorde hym to a concluſyon, it is ryght that he ſhewe that ſomme of yt premiſſes ben falſe, or els he mote ſhewe that the collacyon of propoſycyons nys not ſpedeful to a neceſſarye concluſyon. And yf it ne be not ſo, but yt the premyſſes ben ygraunted, there nys not why he ſhulde blame the argument. For thys thynge that I ſhall tell the nowe, ne ſhall not ſeme laſſe wonderfull, but of the thynges that ben taken. Alſo it is neceſſarye, as who ſaythe it foloweth of that which that is purpoſed beforne.
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     What is that (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) that is, yt theſe wycked ſhrewes be more blyſfull or els laſſe wretches that abyen ye tourmentes that they haue deſerued, than yf no payne of Iuſtyce ne chaſtyſed hem. Ne thys ne ſaye I not nowe, for that any mā might thynke that the maners of ſhrewes ben coryged & chaſtyſed by vengeaunce, and that they be brought to the ryght waye by the drede of tourment, ne for that they yeuen to other folkes enſample to ſtyen fro vyces. But I vnderſtande yet in another maner, that ſhrewes ben more vnſely whan they ne be not punyſhed, all be it ſo that there ne be had no reaſon or law of correction ne none enſample of lokynge.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     And what maner ſhall that ben (ꝙ I) other than hathe be tolde here beforne?
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Haue we not graunted than (ꝙ ſhe) that good folke ben blyſfull, and ſhrewes ben wretches?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     yes (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Than (ꝙ ſhe) yf that anye good were added to the wretchedneſſe of any wyght, nys he not more weleful, than he that ne hathe no medlyng of good in hys ſolitarye wretchednes?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     So ſemyth it (ꝙ I.)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     And what ſayeſt thou than (ꝙ ſhe) of thylke wretche that lacketh al goodes, ſo that no good nys medled in his wretchedneſſe, and yet ouer all hys wyckedneſſe, for whyche he is a wretche, that there be yet another yuell anexed and knyt to hym, ſhall not men demen hym more vnſely, than thylke wretche, of whyche the vnſelyneſſe is releued by the participacyon of ſome good?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Why ſholde he not (ꝙ I.)
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Than certes (ꝙ ſhe) han ſhrewes whan they ben punyſſhed ſomwhat of good anexed to hyr ſhrewdneſſe, that is to ſayne, the ſame payne that they ſuffrē, which that is good, by yt reaſon of Iuſtice. And whā thilke ſame ſhrewes eſcapen without tourmēt, thā haue they ſomwhat more of yuel, yet ouer the wyckedneſſe that they han done, that is to ſayn, defaute of

paynes, whiche defaute of payne thou haſte graunted is yuell, for the deſerte of felonye.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I ne maye not denye it (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Moche more than (ꝙ ſhe) ben ſhrewes vnſelye whan they ben wrongfully delyuered fro payne, than whā they ben puniſhed by rightfull vengeaunce. But thys is open thynge and clere, that it is ryght that ſhrewes ben punyſhed, and it is wyckedneſſe and wronge that they eſcapen vnpunyſhed.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Who might denye it (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     But (ꝙ ſhe) may anye man denye that all that is ryght ne is good: and alſo the contrarye, that all that is wronge is wycked.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Certes (ꝙ I) theſe thynges ben clere ynough, and that we haue concluded a lytell here beforne. But I pray the that thou tel me yf thou accordeſt to letten no tourment to the ſoules, after that the body is ended by the deth, that is to ſayn vnderſtandeſt thou aught, that ſoules haue anye tourment after the dethe of the bodye.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) yea, and that ryght great of whyche ſoules (ꝙ ſhe) I trowe that ſome ben tourmented by aſpreneſſe of payne, and ſome ſoules I trowe ben exercyſed by a pourgynge mekeneſſe, but my counſayle nys nat to determyne of thys paynes. But I haue trauayled and tolde yet hyderto, for thou ſhuldeſt knowe that the mowynge of ſhrewes, whyche mowynge the ſemeth to be vnworthy, nys no mowynge, and eke of ſhrewes, of whyche thou playnedeſt that they ne were nat punyſhed that thou woldeſt ſe that they ne weren neuer mo withouten the tourmentes of her wyckedneſſe. And of the lycence of the mowynge to done yuell, that thou praydeſt that it myght ſone be ended, & that thou woldeſt fayne lernen that it ne ſhulde nat longe endure. And that ſhrewes ben more vnſely yf they were of lenger durynge, and mooſt vnſely yf they weren perdurable. And after thys I haue ſhewed the, that more vnſely ben ſhrewes whan they eſcapen without her ryghtfull payne, than whan they bene punyſhed by ryghtfull vengeaunce. And of thys ſentence foloweth it, that than ben ſhrewes conſtrayned at the laſte with mooſt greuous tourment, whā men wene that they ne be nat punyſhed▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Whan I conſyder thy reaſons (ꝙ I) I ne trowe nat that men ſayn any thynge more verely. And yf I tourne ayen to the ſtudyes of men, who is he to whom it ſhulde ſeme, that he ne ſhulde nat only leuen theſe thynges, but eke gladly herken hem.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) ſo it is, but men maye nat, for they haue theyr eyen ſo wont to the derkneſſe of erthly thynges, that they ne maye nat lyfte hem vp to the lyght of clere ſothfaſtneſſe. But they bē lyke to byrdes of whych the night lyghtneth her lokynges, and the day blyndeth hem. For whā men loken nat the ordre of thynges, but her luſtes and talentes, they wene that eyther the leue or the mowynge to done wyckedneſſe, or els the ſcapynge wythout payne be weleful. But conſyder the iugemēt of the perdurable lawe for yf thou conferme thy courage to the beſt thynges, thou ne haſt no nede of no Iuge to yeuen the pryce or mede, for thou haſt ioyned thy ſelfe to the mooſt excellent thynges. And yf thou haue enclined thy ſtudies to the wycked thynges, ne ſeke no foreyne wrekery out of thy ſelfe, for thou thy ſelfe haſt thriſt thy ſelfe in no wycked thynges, ryght as thou mighteſt lokē by diuers tymes the foule erth and the heuen, & that all other thynges ſtynten fro without, ſo that thou were in neyther ne ſe nothynge more. Than ſholde it ſemen to the, as by only reaſon of lokyng, that thou were nowe in the ſterres & nowe in the erth, but the people loketh nat on theſe thynges. What than, ſhall we than aproche vs to hem that I haue ſhewed that ben lyke to beeſtes? And what woldeſt thou ſayn of thys, yf that a man had al forlorne hys ſight, and had foryeten that he euer ſawe, and wened that no thing fayled him of perfection of mankynde? Nowe we which mightē ſene the ſame thynges, wold we nat ſayne that he were blynde, ne alſo ne accordeth nat the people to that I ſhal ſayn, the which thing is ſuſteyned by as ſtrounge foundementes of reaſon, that is to ſayn, that more vnſely ben they that dō wrō
                        ges to other folke, than they that the wronge ſuffren.
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     I wolde heren thilke ſame reaſons (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Denyeſt thou (ꝙ ſhe) that all ſhrewes ne ben worthy to haue tourment? Nay (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     But (ꝙ ſhe) I am certayne by many reaſons, that ſhrewes ben vnſely.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     It accordeth (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     Than ne douteſt thou not (ꝙ ſhe) that thylke folke that ben worthy of tourment, that they ne be wretches.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     It accordeth well (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     If thou were

thā ſette a iuge or a knower of thynges, whether troweſt thou that men ſhulde tourmenten hem that hathe done wronge, or els hem that ſuffred the wronge?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I doute not (ꝙ I) that I nolde do ſuffycient ſatiſfaction, to hem that haue ſuffred wronge, by the ſorowe of hem that hath doone wronge.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Than ſemeth it (ꝙ ſhe) that the doer of wronge is more wretche, than he that ſuffred wronge.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     That foloweth well (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Than (ꝙ ſhe) by theſe cauſes and by other cauſes, that ben enforced by the ſame rote, that fylth or ſynne by the propre nature of it maketh men wretches, and it ſheweth wel, that the wronges that men don nys nat the wretchedneſſe of hym that receyueth the wronge, but the wretchedneſſe of hym that dothe the wrong. But certes (ꝙ ſhe) theſe oratours or aduocates done all the contrary, for they enforcen hem to commone the Iuges to 
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        e pyte of hem that done the greuaunces and the wronges, the which ſhrewes it were a more couenable thynge, that the accuſours or aduocates, nat wroth, but pyteous and debonayre ledden tho ſhrewes that haue done wronge to the iugement, ryght as men leden ſyke folke to the leche, for that they ſhulden ſekyn out the maladyes of ſynne by tourment. And by thys couenant eyther the entente of aduocates ſhulde ceſſen in all, or els yf the offyce of the aduocates wolde better profyten to men, it ſhuld be tourned in to the habyte of accuſacyō, that is to ſayn, they ſhulden accuſe ſhrewes and nat excuſen hem. And eke the ſhrewes hem ſelfe, yf it were lefull to hem to ſene at any clyfte the vertue that they haue forletten, and ſawen that they ſhuld put ten adowne the fylthes of her vyces by the tourmentes of paynes, they ne oughten nat ryght for ye recompenſacyon, for to getē hem bounte and proweſſe, whiche that they haue loſte, demen and holde that the ylke paynes weren tourmentes to hem, and eke they wolden refuſe the attendaunce of her aduocates, and taken hem ſelfe to her Iuges and to her accuſours, for ye which it betydeth, that as to the wyſe folkes, there nys no place yletten to hate, yt is to ſayne, that hate ne hath no place amonge wyſe men. For no wight nyl haten good men, but yf he were ouer moche a foole and for to haten ſhrewes, it nys no reaſon for ryght as languyſſhynge is maladye of body ryght ſo ben vyces and ſynne maladye of courage. And ſo as we ne deme nat that they whych that ben ſyke of her body, ben worthy to ben hated, but rather worthy of pyte. Wel more worthy nat to ben hated, but for to ben had in pyte ben they, of which the thoughtes ben conſtrayned by felonous wyckedneſſe, that is more cruell than any languyſſhynge of body.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Quid tātos iuuat excitare motus, Et propria fatum ſollicitate manu? Si mortem petitis, propinquat ipſa, Sponte ſua, volucres nec remoratur equos. &c.
                  
                  
                     WHat delyteth you to excyten ſo great mouynge of hatredes, and to haſtē and buſyen the fatal diſpoſycyon of your deth with your propre handes, that is to ſayn, by batayls or conteke? For yf ye axen the dethe, it haſteth hym of hys owne wyll, ne dethe ne taryeth nat hys ſwyfte horſe. And the men that the ſerpentes, and the lyon, and the tygre, and the beere, and the bore, ſeken to ſleen wyth theyr tethe, yet thylke ſame men ſeken to ſleen eueryche of hem other wyth ſwerde. Lo, for her maners ben dyuers and diſcordaunt, they mouen vnryghtful hoſtes & cruel batayles, and wylnen to peryſſhe by entrechaungynge of dartes, but the reaſon of cruelte nys nat ynough rightful, wylte thou thā yelden a couenable guerdon to the deſertes of men? loue rightfully good folkes, and haue pyte on ſhrewes.
               
               
                  
                     Hinc ego video in
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        , que ſit vel felicitas vel miſeria in ipſis proborum at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         improborum meritis conſtituta. Sed in hac ipſa fortuna populari. &c.
                  
                  
                     THys I ſe well (ꝙ I) eyther what bliſfulneſſe, or els what vnſelyneſſe is eſtablyſſhed in the deſertes of good men and of ſhrewes. But in thys ylke fortune of the people I ſe ſomwhat of good, and ſomwhat of yuell. For no

wyſe man had not leuer be exiled poore and nedye, and nameleſſe, than for to dwellen in hys cyte, and ſtouren of rycheſſe, and be redoutable of honour, and ſtronge of power. For in thys wyſe more clerelye and wytneſfullye is the offyce of wyſe men treated, than the blyſfulneſſe of power, and gouernours, is as it were ſhadde amōges the people, that be neyghbours and ſubiectes, ſythe that namely pryſon, lawe, and theſe other tourmentes of laufull paynes, be rather owed to felonous cytezyns: for the whyche felonous cytezyns the paynes be eſtablyſhed, more thā for good people.
                  
                     Boe.
                     than I meruayle greatly (ꝙ I) why that the thynges be ſo myſſe entrechaunged, that tourmentes of felonyes preſſen and confounden good people, & ſhrewes rauyſhen medes of vertue, and ben in honours and great eſtates. And I deſyre eke for to weten of the, what ſemeth the to be the reaſon of thys ſo wrongfull a concluſyon. For I wolde wonder well the laſſe, yf I trowed that all thynges were medled wyth fortunous hap. But nowe crepeth and encreaſeth myn aſtonyenges god gouernour of thynges that ſo as god yeueth oftymes to good men goodes and myrthes, and to ſhrewes yuels and aſpre thynges: and yeueth ayen to good folke hardeneſſe, and to ſhrewes he graūteth hem her wyll, and that they deſyren. What dyfference maye there be bytwene that that god dothe, & happe of fortune, yf men knowe not the cauſe why it is.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Ne it is no meruayle (ꝙ ſhe) though that men wenen, that there be ſomwhat folyſſhe and confuſe, whan the reaſon of the ordre is vnknowen: but although that thou ne knowe not the cauſe of ſo great a dyſpoſycion, natheleſſe, for as moche as god the good gouernour attempreth and gouerneth the world, ne doute the not but all thynges ben don aryght.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Si quis Areturiſidera neſcit, Mergat
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſeras equore flammas, Propin quaſummo cardine labi, Cum nimis ſeleris explicet ortus, Cur legat tardus plauſ
                           •
                        ra Bootes. &c.
                  
                  
                     WHo ſo that knowe not the ſterres of Arcture, turned to ye ſouerayn centre or poynte, that is to ſayne, tourned nyghe to the ſouerayne pole of the fyrmament, and wote not why the ſterre Bootes paſſeth or gathereth hys waynes, & dreucheth hys late 
                        •••
                     
                     bes in ye ſee, and why that Bootes the ſte
                        ••
                     e vnfoldeth hys ouerſwyfte aryſynges, than ſhall he wondrē of the lawe of the hygh 
                        〈◊〉
                     . And eke, yf that be ne know not why that the hornes of the full moone waren pale and infecte, by the boundes of the derke nyght, and howe the moone derke and confuſe, diſcourreth the ſterres that ſhe had couered by her clere vyſage. The comune erroure moueth folkes and maketh wery her baſyns of braſſe by thylke ſtrokes, that is to ſaye, that there is a maner people that hyght Coribantes, that wenen that whā the moone is in the eclypſe that it be enchaunted, and therfore for to 
                        ••
                     ſrue the moone, they beaten bee ba
                        ••
                     ns wyth thylke ſtrokes. Ne no man ne wondreth wh
                        •
                      the blaſtes of the wynde Chorus, beten the ſtrondes of the ſee, by quakyng flodes. Ne no man ne wondreth whan the weyght of the ſnowe, harded by the colde, is reſolued by the brennynge heate of Phebus the ſonne, for here ſene men redily the cauſes. But the cauſes yhydde, that is to ſayne in heuen, 
                        〈◊〉
                      the breſtes of men. The mouable people is aſtonyed of all thynges that comen ſelde and ſodaynly in oure age, but the troubly erroure of oure ignoraunce departeth fro vs, ſo that yf they wyſten the cauſe why that ſuche thynges betyden, ceetes they ſhulde ceaſe to ſe
                        •••
                      wonders.
               
               
                  
                     Ita eſt in
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        . Sed cum tui muneris ſit latentium rerum cauſas euoluere, velataſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         caligine explicare rationes queſo vti hinc decernas. &c.
                  
                  
                     THus it is (ꝙ I) but ſo as thou haſte yeuen or beheyght me to vnwrap the hydde cauſes of thynges, and to diſcouer me ye reaſons couered wt derkneſſe▪ I praye the, that thou deuyſe and iuge me of thys mater, and that thou do

me to vnderſtande it, for this myracle of this wondre troubleth me right greatly. And thā ſhe a lytell what ſmylynge ſayde. Thou cleapeſt me (ꝙ ſhe) to tell that is greateſt of all thynges, that mowen ben aſked, and to the which queſtiō vnneth is there aught ynough to lauen it, as who ſaith, vnneth is there any thyng to anſwere perfetely to thy queſtyon, for the mater of it is ſuch, that whan o doute is determyned and cutte awaye, there waxen other doutes wythout nombre, ryght as the 
                        •
                     eedes of Idre the ſerpent waxen, the which ſerpent Hercules ſlough: ne there ne were no 
                        •••
                     ere ne none ende, but yf a wight cōſtrayned the doutes, by a ryght lyuely and quycke fyre of thought, that is to ſayne, by vygoure and ſtrength of wytte. For in this mater men weren wonte to maken queſtyōs of the ſymplicite of the purueyaunce of god, and of the ordre of deſtyne, and of ſodeyne hap, & of knowenge of predeſtynacyon diuyne. And of the liberte of frewyll, the whiche thynges thou the ſelf apperceyuedeſt wel, of what weight 
                        〈◊〉
                      ben. But for as moch as the knowinges of theſe thynges is a maner porcyon or me
                     
                        ••••…
                      to yt, all be it ſo that I haue lytel tyme to doone it, yet neuertheleſſe I wolde enforcen me to ſhewē ſomwhat of it: but al though the noryſſhynges of dyte of muſyke delyteth the thou muſte ſuffren and forbearen a lytell of thylke delyte, whyle that I wene to the reſons knytte by ordre.
                  
                     Boe.
                     As it lyketh to the (ꝙ I) ſo do.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Tho ſpake ſhe ryght as by another begynnyng, and ſayd right thus. The engendryng of all thynges (ꝙ ſhe) and all the progreſſyons of mouable nature, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         that moueth in any maner, taketh his cauſes hys ordre and hys fourmes, of the ſtableneſſe of diuyne thought: And thylke diuyne thought that is ſet and put in the toure, that is to ſayne, in the heyght of the ſymplicyte of god, ſtablyſheth manye maner giſes to the thynges that ben to done, the whyche maner whan that men loken it, in the pure clenneſſe of the dyuyne intellygence, is cleaped pur
                        
                           ••
                        yaunce. But whan thylke maner is referred by men, to thynges that it moueth or diſponeth, than of olde men it was cleaped deſtenye, the whyche thynges, yf that anye might loketh wel in hys thouȝt, the ſtrength of that one and of that other, he ſhall lyghtly mowe ſene, that theſe two thynges ben diuers. For pourueyaunce is thylke dyuyne reaſon, that is eſtablyſhed in the ſouerayne prynce of thynges, the whych pourueyaunce dyſponeth all thynges. But certes deſtynye is the diſpoſycyon and the ordynaunce cleuynge to mouable thynges, by the whyche diſpoſycyon the pourueyaunce knytteth all thynges in her ordre: For pourueyaunce enbraſeth all thynges to heape, all though they be dyuers, and all though they be infynite, but deſtenye certayne departeth and ordayneth all thinges ſyngulerly, and deuydeth in mouyng, in places, in formes, and in tymes, as thus: Let the vnfoldynge of temporall or dynaunce aſſembled and oned in the lokynge of the diuyne thought be cleaped purueyaūce and thylke ſame aſſemblynge and onynge deuyded and vnfolden, lette that be called deſtenye. And al be it ſo that theſe thynges ben diuers, yet neuertheleſſe hanged that one on that other, for why, the ordre deſtynable procedeth of the ſymplycyte of pourueyaunce. For ryght as a werkeman perceyueth in hys thought, the forme of a thynge that he woll make, and moueth the effecte of the werke, and leadeth that he had loked beforne in his thought ſymply and preſently by corporal or dynaunce: certes ryght ſo god in his purueyaunce dyſponeth ſyngulerlye and ſtably, the thynges that be to done, but he admyniſtreth in maners and in dyuers tymes by deſtenye, thylke ſame thynges that he hath diſponed, than whether deſtenye be exerciſed eyther by ſome diuyne ſpirytes, ſeruauntes to the dyuyne pourueyaunce, or els by ſome ſoule, or els by all nature ſeruyng to god, or els by the celeſtyall mouynges of ſterres, or els by the vertue of aungels, or els by dyuers ſubtyltie of dyuels, or els by any of hem, or els by hem all, the deſtynable ordynaunce is wouen and accomplyſhed. Certes it is open thyng that the pourueyaunce is an vnmonable and ſymple fourme of thynges to doone, and the mouable bonde and the temporall ordynaunce of thynges, whych that the diuyne ſymplicite of pourueyaunce hath ordayned to done, that is deſtenye. For whiche it is that all thynges that ben put vnder deſtenye, ben certes ſubiectes vnto pourueyaunce, to whiche pourueyaunce deſtenye it ſelfe is ſubiecte and vnder, but ſome thinges ben put vnder purueyaūce, that ſurmounten the ordynaunce of deſteny:

And tho ben thylke that ſtablye ben fyxed nyghe to the fyrſt godheed, they ſurmounten the ordre of deſtinable mouablyte. For ryght as cercles turnen aboute a ſame centre or aboute a poynte, thylke cercle that is innereſt or moſte within, he ioyneth to ye ſympleſſe of ye myddle, & is as it were a centre or a poynte to that other cercles, that tournē about him: and thilke that is vttereſt, compaſſed by a larger enuyronnynge, is vnfolde by larger ſpaces, in ſomoche as it is ferthereſt fro the myddeleſt ſymplycite of the poynte. And yf there be any thing that knytteth and felouſhippeth him ſelfe to thylke myddle poynte, it is conſtrayned in to ſymplycite, that is to ſaye, in to vnmouablite, and it ceaſeth to ben ſhadde & flytte dyuerſly. Right ſo by ſemblable reaſon thylke thynge that departeth furthereſt fro the fyrſte thought of god, it is vnfolden and alſo ſubmytted to greater bondes of deſtyne, and in ſo moche is the thynge more free and loce fro dignyte, as it aſketh & holdeth nerre to thylke centre of thynges, that is to ſayne, to god. And yf the thyng cleaueth to the ſtedfaſtneſſe of the thought of god, and be wythout mouynge, certes it ſurmounteth the neceſſyte of deſtenye. Than ſuche comparyſon as is ſkyllynge to vnderſtandynge, and of thynge that was engendred to thyng that is of tyme to eternyte, and of the cercle to the cē
                        tre, ryght ſo is the ordre of mouable deſtyne, to the ſtable ſymplycite of pourueyaunce. Thylke ordynaunce moueth the heuen and the ſterres, and attempreth the elementes togyder amonge hem ſelfe, and tranſformeth hem by entrechaungeable mutacyon. And thylke ſame ordre neweth ayen all thynges growyng and fallyng adowne, by ſemblable progreſſyons of ſedes and of ſexus, that is to ſayne, male and female: and thys ylke ordre conſtrayneth the fortunes and the dedes of men by a bonde of cauſes, not able to be vnbounden: the whiche deſtinable cauſes whan they paſſen out fro the begynnynges of vnmouable purueyaunce, it mote nedes be that they ne be not mutable, as thus: Be the thynges wel gouerned, yf that ye ſymplicite dwelling in the diuyne thought, ſheweth forth the ordre of cauſes vnable to be bowed. And this ordre conſtrayneth by the propre ſtabylite the mouable thynges, or els they ſhulden flete folily. For whiche it is, that thynges ſemen confuſe and troublye to vs men, for we ne mowen not conſyder thylke ordynaunce. Neuertheles, the propre maner of euery thing, dreſſyng him to good diſponeth hem all, for there nys nothyng done for yuell, for thylke thyng that is done by wycked folke, nys not don for yuel. The which ſhrewes, as I haue ſhewed ful plenteouſly ſeke good, but wycked errour miſturneth hem, ne the ordre comyng fro the poynte of ſouerayne good, ne enclynteh not fro hys begynnynge. But thou mayſte ſaye, what vnreſt may ben a worſe confuſyon, thā that good men haue ſomtyme aduerſyte, and ſomtyme proſperyte: and ſhrewes haue now alſo thynges that they deſyren, and nowe thynges that they haten. Whether men ly
                           •
                        e nowe in ſuche holyneſſe of thought, as who ſayth, be men nowe ſo wyſe, that ſuche folke as they demen to be good folke or ſhrewes, that it mote nedes be, that folke be ſuche as they wenen? But in this maner domes of mē diſcorden, that thilke men that ſome folke demen worthy of mede, other folke deme hem worthy of tourment, but let vs graunt: I ſuppoſe that ſome man may well deme or knowe the good people and the badde, maye he th
                           •
                        n knowe and ſe thylke innereſt attemperaunce of corage, as it hath be wonte to be ſayde of bodyes, as who ſaythe: may a man ſpeken of complexions and attempraunce of bodies, ne it ne is not, as who ſayth, but it is lyke a meruayle or a myracle to hem that ne knowen it not, why that ſwete thynges be couenable to ſome bodyes that ben hole, and to ſome people bytter thynges be couenable: & alſo why ſome people ben holpen wt light medicynes▪ and ſome people ben holpen with bytter medicines: but natheleſſe tho that knowen the maner & the attempraunce of heale & of maladie, ne meruayleth it nothyng. But what other thing ſemeth helth of corages but b
                           •••
                        e: & what other thyng ſemeth maladi of corage but vices. Who is els keper of good & driuer a way of yuel, but god the gouernour & leder of thoughtes: the whiche god, whan he hath beholden from the hygh toure of his purueyaunce, he knoweth what is couenable to any wight, & leaneth hem that he wote wel that is couenable to hē. Lo, herof cometh & herof is doone this myracle of the ordre deſtynable whan god that all knoweth doth ſuch thyng, of whych thyng vnknowynge folke ben aſto
                           •
                        nyed,

but for to conſtrayne, as who ſayeth, but for to comprehende and tel a fewe thynges of the dyuine depeneſſe, the whych that mannes reaſon maye vnderſtande. Thylke man that thou weneſt to bene ryght iuſte & ryght kepyng of equite, the contrary of that ſemeth to the dyuine purueyaunce that all wote. And Lucan my familyer telleth, that the victorious cauſe lyked to the gods, & the cauſes ouercome lyketh to Caton. Thanne what ſo euer thou maiſt ſene that is done in this worlde vnhoped or els vnknowen, certes it is the right ordre of thinges, but as to thy wicked opinion, it is a confuſion. But I ſuppoſe ye ſome man be ſo wel thewed, that the dyuine iugement & the iugemēt of mankynde accorden hem togyther of him: but he is ſo vnſtedfaſt of corage, that if any aduerſite come to him, he wol forleten perauēture to contynue innocencie, by the whyche he ne may not withholden fortune: than the wyſe diſpenſacion of god ſpareth hym, the which man aduerſite myghte enpayren, for ye God wyl not hym to trauayle, to whō yt trauayle 
                           ••
                        s not couenable. An other man is perfyte in al vertues, and is an holy man & nygh to God, ſo that the purueyaunce of God wold deme, that it were a felony that he were touched with anye aduerſytees, ſo that he woll 
                           ••••
                        re, that ſuche a man be wyth any bodyly malady moued. But ſo (as ſayd the philoſophie yt more excellent is by me ſaid in great that vertues haue edifyed the body of the holyman, & ofte tyme it betydeth, that ye ſūme of thynges that bene to done is taken to gouerne to good folke, for yt the malice haboū
                        daunt of ſhrewes ſhulde bene abated. And god yeueth and departeth to other folke proſperitees and aduerſitees medled to heape, after the qualyte of her corages, and remordethe ſome folke by aduerſitees, for they ne ſhulde not waxen proude by longe welefulnes. And other folke he ſuffreth to be trauayled wyth harde thinges, for that they ſhulde con
                           •
                        ermen the vertues of corage, by the exer
                        
                           ••
                        taciō of vſage of pacience. And other folke dreden more than they oughten, the whyche they myghten wel bearen, and ſome diſpyſe that they mowe not beare, and thylke folke God leadeth in to experience of hem ſelfe by aſpre and ſoroufull thynges. And manye other folke haue bought honourable renome of this worlde, by the price of gloriouſe deth And ſome men that ne mowe not bene ouercomen by tourment haue yeuen enſample to other folke, that vertue maye not bene ouercomen by aduerſitees. And of all theſe thynges there nys no dout, that they ne ben done rightfully and ordaynly, to the parfite good of hem, to whom we ſene theſe thynges betyde. For certes that aduerſities cometh ſō
                        tyme to ſhrewes, and ſomtyme that they deſyren, it cometh of theſe forſayd cauſes. And of ſorouful thinges that betiden to ſhrewes certes no mā ne wondreth, for all men wene that they haue deſerued it, & that they bene of wicked merite. Of which ſhrewes the turmente agaſteth ſomtyme other to done felonyes: and ſomtyme it amendethe hem that ſuffreth the tourmentes. And the proſperyte that is yeuēto ſhrewes, ſheweth a great argumente to good peple, what thynge they ſhulde demen of thylke welfulneſſe, whyche proſperite mē ſene ofte ſerue to ſhrewes: In whyche thinge I trow that God diſpenſeth for parauenture the nature of ſome mā is ſo ouerthrowyng to yuell and ſo vncouenable, ye the nedy pouerte, of hys houſholde myght rather agreue hym to done felonyes, and to the maladye of hym God putteth remedy to yeuen hym richeſſe. And ſome other man beholdeth hys cōſcience defouled wyth ſynnes and maketh cōparyſon of thys fortune and of hym ſelfe, and dredethe parauenture that the blyſfulneſſe, of whyche the vſage is ioyfull to hym, that the leſynge of thylke blyſfulneſſe ne be not ſorowfull to hym, & therfore he wolde chaunge hys maners: and for he dredeth to leſe hys fortune, he forletethe hys wyckedneſſe. To other folkes welfulneſſe is yeuen vnworthylye, the whyche ouerthroweth hem in to deſtructiō that they han deſerued, and to ſome other folke is yeuē power to puniſhē, for that it ſhal be cauſe of contynuacyon, and exercyſynge to good folkes, and cauſe of turmēt to ſhrewes. For ſo as there nys none aliaunce bitwene good folkes and ſhrewes, ne ſhrewes ne mowen not accorden amonge hem ſelfe: & why not? For yt ſhrewes diſcorden of hem ſelfe by her vices the which vices al to renden her cōſciences, and done oft tyme the thinges, which thynges whan they haue doone hem, they deme that tho thynges ne ſhuld not haue be

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
done, for whyche thynge the ſouerayne purueyaunce hath maked ofte tyme myracle: ſo that ſhrewes haue maked ſhrewes to bene good men. For whā that ſome ſhrewes ſene that they ſuffre wrōgfully felonyes of other ſhrewes, they waxen eſchaufed in to hate of hem that annoyed hem, and retournē to the fruite of vertue. Than they ſtudyen to be vnlike to hem that they haue hated. Certes onely is thys the dyuyne myght, to the whyche myght yuels bene than good, whan it vſeth the yuels couenably, and draweth out the effecte of any good, as who ſayeth, that yuell is good onely to the myghte of God, for the might of god ordeyneth thylke yuel to good For one ordre enbraceth all thynges, ſo that what wyghte departeth from the reaſon of 
                           •
                        hylke ordre that is aſſygned to hym, algates yet he ſlydeth in to another ordre, ſo that nothyng is lefull to foly in the realme of dyuyne purueyaunce, as who ſayeth, nothyng is wythout ordynaunce in the realme of dyuyne pourueaunce, ſyth that the ryght ſtrōg God gouerneth all thynges in thys worlde for it is not leful for men to comprehende by wyt ne vnfolden by worde all the ſubtyl ordynaunce and the dyſpoſycyon of the diuine entent, for only it ought to ſuffyſe to haue loked that God hym ſelfe, maker of al natures ordayneth all thynges to good, whyle that he haſteth to wythholde the thinges that he hath maked in to his ſemblaunce, that is to ſay, for to wythholden ye thinges in to good for he him ſelfe is good. He chaſeth out al yuels fro the bounde of hys comynaltyes, by ye ordre of the neceſſyte deſtynable: for which it foloweth, yt yf thou loke the purueyaunce ordeynynge the thinges that men wenen be outragyous or aboundaunt in erthes, thou ſhalte not ſene in no place nothynge of yuell. But I ſe nowe that thou art charged wyth the weyght of the queſtyon, and wery with length of my reaſon, and that thou abydeſte ſome ſwetenes of ſong, take thā this drauȝt and whan thou art wel refreſhed and refect thou ſhalt be more ſtedfaſt to ſtye in to high er queſtyons or thynges.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Si vis celſi inra tonantis, Plura ſolers cernere mēte, Aſpice ſummi culmina celi.
                  
                  
                     IF thou wyſe wolte demen in thy pure thought, ye rightes or the lawes of the hye thonder, that is to ſayne of God, loke thou & beholde the heyghtes of the ſouerayne heuen: There kepen the ſterres by rightful alyaūce of thinges her olde peace: The ſūne ymoued by his roody fyre, ne dyſtourbeth not the colde circle of the mone ne the ſterre ycleped the Beer that enclyneth his rauyſhing courſes, abouten the ſouerayne heyght of thys worlde. Ne the ſame ſterre Vrſa, nys neuer mo waſſhen in the depe weſtren ſee, ne coueiteth not to dyen his flambes in the ſee of the Occian although it ſe other ſterres yploūged in the ſee: And Heſperus the ſterre boodeth & telleth alway the late nightes: and Lucifer the ſterrre bryngeth agayne the clere daye. And thus maketh loue enterchaūgeable, ye perdurable courſes, & thus is diſcordable batayle yput out of the coūtrey of the ſterres. This accordaunce atempreth by euynlike maners the elementes, that the moyſt thynges ſleyuyng wyth the drye thinges, yeuen place by ſtoundes: and that the colde thinges ioynen hem by fayth to the hote thynges, and that the lyght fyre aryſeth in to heyghte, and the heuy erthes aualen by her weyghtes: by the ſame cauſes the flourye yere yeldeth ſwete ſmelles in the fyrſte ſomer ſeaſon warming and the hote ſomer dryeth the cornes, & Autumpne cometh ayen heuye of apples, & the fletyng rayne bedeweth the wynter, this attemperaunce nouriſheth and bringeth forth al thynges that bereth lyfe in thys worlde, and thylke ſame attemperaunce rauyſhyng hydeth, benymeth, and drencheth vnder the laſte deathe all thynges yborne. Amonges theſe thynges ſytteth the hyghe maker, king and lorde, wele and begynnyng, law & wyſe iuge, to done equyte, and gouerneth and enclyneth the brydles of thinges: And tho thinges that he ſtereth to gone by mouynge, he wythdraweth and areſteth, and affermeth the mouable or wandrynge thynges. For yf that he ne called not ayen the ryght goynge of thinges. And if that he ne cōſtreyned hem nat eftſones in to roundneſſes enclyned, the thynges yt bene nowe cōtynued by ſtable ordynaunce, they ſhulde departen frō her wele that is to ſayne from her begynnynge & fallen, that is to ſayne, tournen into naught.

This is the cōmune loue to al thynges: & all thynges aſken to bene holden by the fyne of good, for els ne myghten they not laſten, yf they ne come not efteſones ayen by loue retourned to the cauſe that hath yeue hem beyng, that is to ſayne God.
               
               
                  
                     Iāne igitur vides quid hec omnia q̄ diximus cōſequantur? Quid nam inquit? Omnem inquit. &c.
                  
                  
                     SEeſt thou not than, what thing foloweth al the thinges that I haue ſayd?
                  
                     Boece.
                     what thynge (quod I)?
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Certes (quod ſhe) all vtterly, that fortune is good
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     And howe maye that be (ꝙ I)? Nowe vnderſtande (ꝙ ſhe). So as al fortune, wheder ſo it be ioyful fortune or aſpre fortune, is yeuē eyther bycauſe of guerdonyng, or els of exerciſyng of good folkes, or els bycauſe to punyſhen, or els chaſtiſen ſhrewes: Than is all fortune good, the whyche fortune is certayn, that it be eyther ryghtful, or els profytable.
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     Forſoth this is a ful very reaſon (ꝙ I). And yf I conſyder the pourueyaunce & the deſtyne that thou taughteſte me alytle here beforne, thys ſentence is ſuſtayned by ſtedfaſte reaſons. But yf it lyke vnto the, let vs nombren hem among thylke thynges, of which thou ſaydeſt a litle here beforne, that they ne were not able to bene wened to the people.
                  
                  
                     P.
                     why ſo (ꝙ ſhe)?
                  
                  
                     B.
                     For that the cō
                        mune worde of men (ꝙ I) miſuſeth this maner ſpeach of fortune, and ſayne ofte tymes, that the fortune of ſome wyght is wicked.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     wylte thou than (quod ſhe) that I approche a lytle to the wordes of the people ſo that it ſeme not to hem that I be not ouer much departed, as fro the vſage of mākinde
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     As thou wolte (quod I).
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     weneſt thou not (quod ſhe) that all thynge that profiteth is good?
                  
                  
                     Boece
                     Yes (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Certes all thynge that exerceth or corrigeth it profyteth.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     I confeſſe wel (quod I)
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Than it is good (quod ſhe).
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     why not (quod I).
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     But thys is the fortune (quod ſhe) of hem that eyther be put in vertue, & bataylen ayenſt aſpre thynges, or els of hem that enclynen and declinen fro vyces, and taken the waye of vertue.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Thys ne may I not denye (quod I).
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     But what ſayeſt thou of the merye fortune that is yeuen to good people in guerdon, demeth ought the people that it be wycked?
                  
                  
                     B
                     Naye forſoth (quod I) but they demen as it is ſothe, that it is ryght good.
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     what ſayeſt thou of the other fortune (ꝙ ſhe) that all thoughe that it be aſpre and reſtrayneth the ſhrewes by ryghtfull tourment, weneth aught the people that it be good?
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     Nay (ꝙ I) but the people demeth that is mooſte wretched of all thynges yt maye be thought
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     ware now and loke wel (quod ſhe) leſte we in folowyng the opinion of the people, haue confeſſed and cōcluded thing which that is vnable to bene wened to the people.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     what is that (quod I).
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     Certes (quod ſhe) it foloweth or cometh of thinges that bene graūted, that al fortune what ſo euer it be, of hem that bene eyther in poſſeſſion of vertue, or in the encreaſe of vertue, or elles in the purchaſynge of vertue, that the ylke fortune is good, and that all fortune is right wicked to hem that dwellen in ſhrewedneſſe, as who ſayeth, and thus weneth not the people.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     That is ſothe (ꝙ I) Albe it ſo that no man dare confeſſe it, ne knowe it.
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     why ſo (quod ſhe). For ryght as the ſtronge man ne ſemeth not to a baſhen or diſdaynē, as oftime as he heareth the noyſe of baytayle: Ne alſo it ſemeth not to the wyſe man to bearen it greuouſlye, as oft as he is ledde in to ſtryfe of fortune. For bothe to that one man and eke to that other, thylke dyffyculte is the matter to that one manne of encreaſe of his gloryouſe renome, and to that other man to conſerue hys ſapyence, that is to ſaye, to the aſpreneſſe of hys eſtate, for therfore is it called vertue for that it ſuſtayneth & enforceth by hys ſtrengthes, ſo that it nys not ouercomen by aduerſyties Ne certes thou that art put in encreaſe or in the heyghte of vertue, ne haſte not comen to fleten wyth delyces, and for to walken in bodyly luſte. Thou ſoweſt or planteſt a full eygre batayle in thy corage ayenſt euerye fortune: For that the ſoroufull fortune cōfound the not, ne that the mery fortune ne corrūpe the not, occupye the meane by ſtedfaſt ſtrēgthes. For all that euer is vnder the meane or al that ouerpaſſeth the meane, dyſpyceth

welefulneſſe, as who ſayeth, it is vicious, & ne hath no mede of hys trauayle, for it is ſet in your hande, as who ſayth, it lyeth in your power what fortune you is leueſt, that is to ſaye good or yuel, for al fortune that ſemeth ſharpe or aſpre, if it ne be exerciſe not ye good folke, ne chaſtyſe the wycked folke, it punyſheth.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Bella bis binis operatus annis, Vltor atrides phrigierumis. &c.
                  
                  
                     THe werker atrides, that is to ſayne Agamemnon, ye wroȝt and contynued the batayle by ten yeare, recouerd & purged in wrekynge, by the diſtruction of Troye, the loſt chābres of maryage in hys brother, that is to ſaye, that Agamemnon wan ayen Heleyne, that was Menelaus wyfe, hys brother. In the meane whyle that thilke Agamemnon deſired to yeuen ſayles to the grekes nauy, and broughte ayen the wyndes by bloude: He vnclothed hym of pyte of father, and the ſorye preeſt yeueth in ſacrifyeng, the wretched cuttynge of the throte of the doughter, that is to ſay that Agamēnon let cutte the throte of hys doughter by the preeſt, to maken aliaunce wyth his goddes, & for to haue wynd wyth whiche he myght wenden to Troye. Itacus, that is to ſaye vlixes, bewepte hys felowes ylorne, the which felowes the feirs Poliphemus lyggynge in hys greate caue, had fretten and dreynt in his empty wombe But nathleſſe Poliphemus woode for hys blynde vyſage yelde to Vlixes ioye, by hys ſorouful teeres, that is to ſaye, that Vlixes ſmote out the eye of Poilphemus that ſtode in the forheed, for whyche Vlixes had ioye, whan he ſawe Poliphemus wepynge and blynde. Hercules is celebrable for hys harde traueyle, he daunted the proude Ceutaurus halfe horſe halfe man, & berafte the dyſpoylyng fro the cruel lyon, yt is to ſay, he ſlough ye lyon, & berafte hym hys ſkynne. He ſmote the byrdes yt hgiht Arpyes with certaine arowes. He rauyſhed apples fro the wakyng dragon: and his hande was the more heauy for the golden metal. He drough Cerberus the hounde of hell by the triple chaynes. He ouercomer, as it is ſaid, hath put an vnmeke lorde fodder to his cruel horſe, that is to ſay Hercules ſlough Dyomedes, and made hys horſe to freten him: & he Hercules ſlough I dra the ſerpente, and brente the venym. And Achileus the floud defouled in his forheed, dreynt his ſhamfaſt vyſage in his ſtrondes that is to ſay, that Achileus coulde tranſfigure hym ſelfe into dyuers lykeneſſe, & as he faught with Hercules, at laſt he turned him into a bull, & Hercules brake one of his hornes: and he for ſhame hyd him in his riuer. And ouer that he Hercules caſt adowne Antheus the gyaunte in the ſtrondes of Lybi
                        •
                     . And Cacus appeyſed the wrathes of Euander, that is to ſay that Hercules ſlought the monſtre Cacus, & appeyſed with that death the wrath of Euander. And the briſtled bore marked with vomes the ſhulders of Hercules, the which ſholders the hye cercle of heuē ſhulde thriſt. And ye laſt of his labours was yt he ſuſteyned the heauen vpon his necke vnbowed, & he deſerued eftſones the heuē to be the laſt ende of trauayle. Goth nowe then ye ſtronge men there as the great enſample 
                        •
                     edeth you. O nyce mē why make ye your backes, as who ſaith: o ye ſlowe & delicate me
                        •
                      why ſe ye aduerſities, & ne fyght not ayenſt hem by vertue, to wynnē ye mede of heuē: 
                        •
                     o
                        •
                      the mede ouercomē, yeueth ye ſterres, yt is to ſayne, that whan that erthly luſt is ouercomen, a man is maked worthye to the heuen.
               
               ¶Here endeth the fourth boke of Boece, & foloweth the fyfth.
            
            
               
                  
                     ¶Dixierat, orationiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         curſum ad alia quedam tractanda at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         expedien da vertebat. B. Tum ego, recta quidem in
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        . &c.
                  
                  
                     SHe had ſayd & turned the courſe of her reaſon to ſome other thinges to be treated & to be ſped.
                  
                     B.
                     Thā ſayd I, certes rightfull is thine amoneſting & ful digne by auctorite. But that thou ſaideſt whylō, that the queſtion of the diuyne purueyaūce, is enlaced wyth manye other queſtions, I vnderſtande well and proue it, by the ſame thyng But I aſke, yf that thou weneſt that hap be any thynge in anye wayes, & yf thou weneſt

that hap be any thyng, what is it?
                  
                  
                     P.
                     Than (ꝙ ſhe) I haſte me to yelden and aſſoylen to the det of my beheſt, and to ſhewē and open the way, by which way thou mayſt come ayen to thy countrey: but al be it ſo yt the thinges whych that thou aſkeſt, bene ryght profytable to knowe, yet bene they dyuers, ſomwhat fro the path of my purpoſe and it is to dout, that thou ne be maked werye by myſſe wayes, ſo that thou ne mayſte not ſuffyſe to meaſure the ryght way.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     Ne dout the ther of nothyng (quod I). For to knowen thylke thynges togyther, in the whiche thynges I delyte me greatly, yt ſhall bene to me in ſtede of reſt, ſyth it nys not to douten of the thynges folowynge, whan euerye thynge of thy deſputacyon ſhall haue bene ſtedfaſte to me, by vndoutous fayth.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Than (ſayde ſhe) that maner wol I done to the, and began to ſpeaken ryght thus. Certes (ꝙ ſhe) yf anye wyght definyſhe hap in thys maner, that is to ſayn, that hap is betiding ybrought forth by folyſh mouynge, & by no knyttyng of cauſes, I conferme that hap nys ryght naught in no wyſe, and I deme all vtterly, that hap nys, ne dwelleth but a voyce, as who ſayeth but an ydell worde, wythout any ſignification of thynge cōmytted to that voyce. For what place myght bene lefte or dwellyng in folye & to diſordinaunce, ſyth that God leadeth and conſtrayneth al thynges by ordre, for this ſentence is very ſoth, that nothynge hath his beyng of naught, to the which ſentence, none of theſe olde folke ne wythſayde neuer, al be it ſo that they ne vnderſtande it not, by God, prince & begynner of workynge but they caſten, as a maner foundemente of ſubiecte material, that is to ſayne, of the nature of all reaſon. And yf that any thynge is waxen or comē of no cauſes thā ſhal it ſeme yt thylke thing is comen or woxen of naught But yf thys ne maye not be done, than is it nat poſſible that hap be any ſuch thing, as I haue definyſhed a lytle here beforne.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     How ſhal it than be (ꝙ I) nys there than no thyng that by ryght may bene cleped eyther hap or els aduenture or fortune? or is there ought, albeit ſo that it is hyd fro the people to which thinge theſe wordes bene couenable?
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Myne Ariſtotle (ꝙ ſhe) in the boke of hys phiſyke, definyſheth thys thynge by ſhort reaſon, & nigh to the ſoth.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     In which maner (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     P.
                     As ofte (ꝙ ſhe) as men done any thynge for grace of any other thynge, & another thynge than thylke thyng that men entenden to done betideth by ſome cauſes, it is ycleped hap, right as a man dalfe the erth bycauſe of tyllynge of the felde, and founde there a gobet of golde bedoluen, than wenē folke that it is befal by fortunous betydyng. But forſoth it nys not of nought, for it hath his propre cauſes, of whych cauſes ye courſe vnforeſeen and vnware, ſemeth to haue maken hap. For if the tyller of the felde ne dolue not in the erth, and yf the hyder of the golde ne had hyd the golde in that place, the golde ne had not bene founde. Theſe bene than the cauſes of the abredgynge of fortuit hap, the whiche abredgyng of fortuit hap cometh, of cauſes of encountrynge and flowyng togyther to hem ſelfe, and not by the entencion of the doer. For neyther the hyder of the golde, ne the deluer of the felde, ne vnderſtoden not that the golde ſhulde haue bene founde. But as I ſayd, it betyde and rāne togyther, that he dalfe there as yt other had hydde the gold Nowe may I thus definiſh hap. Hap is an vnware betydynge of cauſes, aſſembled in thynges that ben done for ſome other thing But thilke order procedinge by vneſchuable betiding togider, which ye deſcendeth frō the wel of purueyaunce, yt ordeyneth al thinges in her places and in her tymes maketh, that the cauſes rennen and aſſemblen togither.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Rupis Achemence ſcopulis vbi verſa ſequentum, Pectoribus fugit ſpicula. &c,
                  
                  
                     TIgris & Eufrates reſoluē and ſpringē of o well, in ye cragges of the roch of the coūtrey of Achemenee, there as the fleynge batayls fixen her dartes returning, in ye breſtes of hem yt folowē him. And ſone after the ſame ryuers Tigris & Eufrates, vnioynē and departen her waters, and yf they comen togyther, & ben aſſembled and cleped togyther into o courſe, thā motē thilk thinges fleten togyther, which that ye water of the entrechaungyng flood bryngeth. The ſhippes & the ſtockes araced with the floud motē aſſēblen, & the waters ymedled, wrappethe or implyeth manye fortunell happes

or maners, the whyche wandrynge happes natheleſſe, thylke declinynge lowneſſe of the earth and the flowynge ordre of the ſlydyng water gouerneth. Ryght ſo fortune that ſemeth, as it fleteth wyth ſlaked or vngouerned brydels, it ſuffreth brydles, yt is to ſayne to bene gouerned, and paſſeth by thylke law that is to ſayne, by the dyuine ordinaunce.
               
               
                  
                     Animaduerto iu
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        , id
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vti tu dicis ita eſſe, conſencio. Sed in hac hereutium. &c.
                  
                  
                     Thys vnderſtāde I wel (quod I) and I accorde me that it is ryghte as yu ſayſt. But I aſke yf ther be any lyberte of fre wyl in thys ordre of cauſes, that cleuen thus togyther in hem ſelfe, or els I wolde wyten, yf that the deſtinal cheyne cōſtrayneth the mouynge of the courages of men
                  
                     Philo.
                     Yes (ꝙ ſhe) there is lyberte of frewyll, ne there was neuer no nature of reaſon, that it ne had lyberte or frewyll. For euery thinge that may naturally vſē reaſon, it hath dome by which it decerneth and demeth euery thyng. Than knoweth it by it ſelfe thinges that ben to flyen, and thynges that bene to deſiren, & thilke thynge that any wyght demeth to bene deſyred, that aſkethe or deſyreth he, and flyeth the ylke thynge that he troweth be to flyen. Wherfore in all thynges that reaſon is, in hym alſo is lyberte of wyllynge & of nylling but I ne ordeyne nat, as who ſayeth, I ne graunt nat, the this liberte be euen lyke in al thynges. For why in the ſoueraynes deuynes ſubſtaunces, that is to ſayne, in ſpirites iugement is more clere & wyll not corrumpe and myghtye redye to ſpeden thynges that bene deſyred. But the ſoules of men moten nedes ben more fre, whan they loken hem in the ſpeculacyon or lokynge of the dyuyne thought, and laſſe fre whan they ſlyden in to the bodyes, and yet laſſe fre whan they bene gathered togyther and cōprehended in erthly membres, but the laſte ſeruage, is whan that they bene yeuen to vices, and haue yfal from the poſſeſſion of her proper reaſon. For after that they haue caſt awaye her eyen fro the lyghte of the ſouerayne ſothfaſtneſſe, to lowe thinges and darke, anone they darken by the cloude of ignoraunce, and be troubled by felonous talentes, to the which talentes whan they approchen and aſſenten, they heapen and encreaſen, the ſeruage whyche they haue ioyned to hem ſelfe. And in this maner they ben caytiues fro her proper lyberte, the whych thyng nathleſſe the lokyng of the diuyne pourueyaūce ſeeth, that al thynges beholdeth and ſeeth fro eterne, and ordeyneth hem euerych in her merytes, as they ben predeſtinate, and it is ſayd in greke, that al thinges he ſeeth, and al thynges he heareth.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Puro clarum lumine phebum Melli
                           ••
                        ui canit oris Homerus. &c.
                  
                  
                     HOmer wyth the honye mouthe, yt is to ſayn, Homer with the ſwete dities ſyngeth, that the ſunne is clere by pure lyght. Natheles yet ne maye it not by ye infirme lyght of hys beames, breken or percen the inward entrayles of the earth, or els of the ſee. So ne ſeeth not God maker of the great worlde to him that loketh al thynges from an high ne vnderſtandeth nothinges by heuyneſſe of erth, ne ye nyght ne withſtandeth nat to him by the blacke cloudes, thylke God ſeeth in o ſtroke of thought all thynges that bene, weren, or ſhul come: & thylke God, for he loketh and ſeeth al thinges alone, thou mayſt ſame that he is the very ſunne.
               
               
                  
                     Tum ego en in
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         difficiliore rurſus ambiguitate confundor. &c.
                  
                  
                     THan ſayde I thus, nowe am I cōfounded by a more harde doute than I was▪
                  
                  
                     Philoſo.
                     what doute is that (quod ſhe) for certes I coniecte by ſuche thinges thou art troubled.
                  
                  
                     B.
                     It ſemeth (quod I) to repugnen and to contrarye greatlye, that God knoweth beforne all thynges, and that there is any fredom or lyberte, for yf ſo be that God loketh al thynges beforne, ne God ne may not bene deceyued in no maner. Thā mote it nedes be, yt all thynges the which that the purueyaunce of God hath ſene beforne to come, for whych if that God knoweth toforne, not onely yt werkes of men but alſo her counſayles and her

wylles, than ne ſhall ther be no libertie of arbytre, ne certes, there ne maye be none other dede, ne no wyll, but thylke whiche that the diuyne purueyaunce that ne may not be diſceyued, hath ſealed beforne, for yf that they myghten wrythen away in other maner thā they ben purueyed, than ne ſhoulde there be no ſtedfaſte preſcience of thynge to comen, but rather an vncertaine opinion: the which thyng to trowen of god, I deme it felonye & vnlefull. Ne I ne proue nat thylke ſame reaſon, as who ſayeth, I ne alowe not, or I ne prayſe not thylke ſame reaſon, by whiche yt ſome men wenen that they mowe aſſoylen and vnknytten the knotte of this queſtyon.
                     For certes they ſeyn, that thyng nis not to comen, for that the purueyaūce of god hath ſeen beforne that it is to comen, but rather ye contrary, and that is this, that for that the thynges is to comen, that therfore ne maye it not ben hyd from the purueyaunce of god And in this maner this neceſſitie ſlideth ayē into the contrarye partye, ne it ne behoueth not nedes, that thinges betyden that bene ypurueyed, but it behoueth nedes, that thynges that bene to comen ben ypurueyed, but as it were ytrauayled, as who ſayth ye thilk anſwer procedeth ryght as though men trauayleden or weren buſye to enquyren, the which thyng is cauſe of the which thinges. As whether the preſcience is cauſe of the neceſſitie of thynges to comen, or els that ye neceſſitie of thynges to comen, is cauſe of the purueyaunce. But I ne enforce me not now to ſhewen it yt the betyding of thinges ywiſt beforne is neceſſary, how ſo or in what maner, that the ordre of cauſes hath it ſelfe, although that it ne ſeme not that the preſciēce bryng in neceſſitie of betydynge, to thynges to comen. For certes yf that any wyght ſytteth, it behoueth by neceſſitie that the opiniō be ſoth of him that coniecteth that he ſytteth and ayen warde alſo is it of the cōtrary, for yf the opynyō be ſoth of any wyght for that he ſytteth, it behoueth by neceſſiitie that he ſyt. Than is here neceſſitie in that one and in that other: for in that one is neceſſitie of ſyttynge, and certes in that other is neceſſitye of ſoth. But therfore ne ſytteth not a wyght for that the opynyon of the ſyttynge is ſoth but the opynion is rather ſothe, for that a wyght ſytteth beforne. And thus although that the cauſe of the ſothe cōmeth of that other ſyde, as who ſayeth, that although the cauſe of ſoth commeth of the ſyttynge, and not of the true opynion, algates yet is there a commune neceſſitie in that one and in that other. Thus ſeweth it, that I may make ſē
                        blable ſkylles of the purueyaunce of God, & of thynges to comen. For although that for that thynges bene to comen, therfore bene they purueyed, and not certes, for they bene purueyed, therfore ne betyde they not, natheleſſe it behoueth by neceſſitie, that eyther the thynges to comen bene ypurueyed of god or els that the thynges that bene purueyed of god betyden. And this thynges onely ſuffyſeth ynough to deſtroien the fredome of our arbytre, that is to ſaye, of our fre wyll. But certes nowe ſheweth it well howe ferre fro the ſoth, and how vp ſodowne is this thing that we ſene that the betydyng of temporal thynges is cauſe of the eterne preſcience.
                     But for to wenen that God purueyeth the thynges to comen: what other thynge is it but for to wene, that thylke thynges that betyde whylom, ben cauſes of thylke ſouerain purueyaunce yt is in God. And hereto adde I yet this thynges, that ryght as whan yt I wote that a thyng is, behoueth by neceſſitie that thylke ſelfe thyng be, and eke whan I haue knowen that any thyng ſhal betydē ſo behoueth it by neceſſitie that thylke ſame thynges betyde. So foloweth it than, that the betydyng of the thynges wyſt beforne, ne may not be eſchued, and at the laſt, if that any wyght wene a thyng to ben otherwyſe than it is, it nys not only vnſcience, but it is diſceyuable opynyon, full dyuers and farre fro the ſoth of ſcience. wherfore yf any thing be ſo to comen, that the betydyng of it ne be not certayne ne neceſſarye, who may weten beforne that thylke thynge is to comen. For ryght as ſcience ne may not be medled with falſeneſſe, as who fayeth, that yf I wote a thyng, it ne may not be falſe that I ne wote it, ryght ſo thylke thynge that is conceyued by ſcyence, ne maye not be none otherwyſe than as it is conceyued, for that is the cauſe why that ſcience wanteth leſynge, as who ſayth, why that wetyng ne receyueth not leſynge of that it wote, for it behoueth by neceſſitie, that euery thyng be ryght, as ſcience comprehendeth it to be.
                     
                        what ſhall I than ſayne, in whiche maner knoweth god beforne al ye thynges to comē yf they ne be not certayne, for yf yt he deame that they ben to comen vneſchuably, and ſo maye be that it is poſſyble, yt they ne ſhullen not comen, god is diſceyued, but not only to trowen yt god is diſceyued, but for to ſpeake it with mouth, it is a felonous ſynne. But if that god wot, that ryght ſo as thynges ben to comen, ſo ſhullē they comē: ſo that he wot egally, as who ſayth indifferently, that thī
                        ges maye be done, or els not ydone. what is thylke preſcience that ne comprehendeth no certayne thyng ne ſtable, or els what dyfference is there betwene the preſciēce of thylk iape worthy deuyning of Tireſie deuynour that ſayd: All that I ſaye (quod he) eyther it ſhalbe, or els it ne ſhall not be, or elles howe moche is worthe the deuyne preſciene more than the opynion of mankynde, yf ſo be that it demeth the thynges vncertayne, as men done. Of the which domes of men, the betyding nis not certayne. But yf ſo be, that non vncertayne thynges ne may ben in him that is ryght certayne well of all thynges, than is the betydyng certayne of thylke thynges which that he hath wyſt be forne fyrmely to comen, for whiche it foloweth that the fredome of the counſayles, and of the werkes of mankynde nys none, ſyth that the thouȝt of God that ſeeth althinges without errour of falſeneſſe, byndeth and conſtrayneth hem to a betydyng by neceſſitie. And yf this thīg be ones ygraunted and receyued, this is to ſayne, yt there nys no fre wyl: than ſheweth it well how great deſtructiō and how great domages there folowen of thynges of mankynde, for in ydle ben there than purpoſed & behyght, meedes to good folke, and paynes to bad folke, ſyth that no mouyng of free corage voluntarye, ne hath not deſerued hem, that is to ſayne, neither mede ne payne. And it ſhulde ſeme than that thylke thynge is alderworſt, whiche that is now demed for aldermooſt iuſt and moſt rightful. That is to ſayn, that ſhrewes ben punyſhed, or els that good folke be yguerdoned, the which folkes ſene that her propre wyl ne ſent hem to that one, ne to that other. That is to ſayne, neyther to good ne harme: but cōſtreyneth hem certayne neceſſitie of thynges to comen, thā ne ſhullen there neuer bene, ne neuer weren vyce ne vertue, but it ſhullen rather be confuſyon of all deſertes medled without diſcretion. And yet there foloweth an other inconuenience, of the whyche there ne maye be thought nomore felonous, ne more wycked and that is thus, that ſo as the ordre of thinges is ydle, and cōmeth of ye purueyaunce of god, ne that nothyng nys lefull to the counſayles of mankynde, as who ſayth, that mē haue no power to don nothyng ne wyll nothynge, than foloweth it that our vyces ben referred to the maker of all good, as who ſayth: than foloweth it, that God ought to haue the blame of our vyces, ſyth he cōſtrayneth vs by neceſſitie to done vyces: thā nys ther no reaſon to hopen in god ne to prayen to god, for what ſhulde any wight hopen to god, or why ſhuld he prayē to god, ſith that the ordynaunce of deſteny, which ye ne maye not ben enclyned, knytteth and ſtreyneth all thynges that men may deſyren. Thā ſhulde there be done away thylke onelye alyaunce bytwene God and man, that is to ſayne, to hopen and to prayen. But by the pryce of ryghtouſneſſe & of very mekeneſſe, we deſeruen the guerdon of diuyne grace, whiche yt is ineſtimable, that is to ſay, that is ſo gret that it ne may not ben ful prayſed, & this is only the maner, that is to ſaye, hope & prayers. For which it ſemeth that mē woll ſpeke with god, and by reaſon of ſupplication bē conioyned to thylke clereneſſe, that nys not approchen no rather or that men ſekē it and impetren it. And yf men ne wene not ye hope ne prayers ne haue no ſtrengthes by the neceſſitie of thynges to comen receyued, what thing is there than by which we mowen bē conioyned and cleauen to thylke ſouerayne prince of thynges. For which it behoueth by neceſſitie that the lignage of mankynde, as thou ſonge a litle here beforne, be departed, and vnioyned from hys well, and faylen of his begynnynge, that is to ſayne, God.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Que nam diſcors fe dera rerum Cauſa reſoluit: quis tanta deus?
                  
                  
                     WHat dyſcordable cauſe hathe to rent and vnioyned the byndyng or the alyaunce of thinges, that is to ſayne, the coniunctions of God and of man?
                  
                     which god hath eſtablyſhed ſo great batayl betwene theſe two ſothfaſt or very thinges that is to ſayne, betwene the purueyaunce of god and free wyl, that they ben ſyngular and deuyded, ne that they ne wollen not ben medled ne coupled togyther? But there nys no diſcorde to the very thynges, but they cleuen away certayn to hem ſelf. But ye thouȝt of man confounded and ouerthrowē by the darke membres of the body, ne maye not by fyre of his darked lokynge, that is to ſayne, by the vigour of his inſyght, whyle ye ſoule is in the bodye, knowen the thyn ſubtel knyttynges of thinges. But wherfore eſchaufeth it ſo by ſo great loue to fynden thylke notes of ſoth ycouered, that is to ſayne, wherfore eſchaufeth the thought of man by ſo greate deſyre, to knowe thylke notifications that ben yhid vnder the couertures of ſoth? wote it ought thylke thynhes that it anguyſhous deſyreth to knowe? As who ſath, naye. For noman ne trauayleth for to weten thynges that he wot: and therfore ye text ſayth thus. But who trauayleth to weten thynges yknowe? and yf that he ne knoweth hem not, what ſeketh thylke blynde thought? what is he that deſyreth any thynges, of whyche he wot ryght nought? As who ſayeth, who ſo deſyrech any thinges, nedes ſomwhat he knoweth of it, or els he ne coude not deſyren it: or who maye folowe thynges yt ne bene not ywyſte, & though yt he ſeke the thynges where ſhal he fynde hem? what wyght that is all vnconnyng and ignoraunt may know the forme that is yfounde?
                  But whan the ſoule beholdeth & ſeeth the hye thought, yt is to ſayn god, thā knoweth it togyther the ſum and ſinguralities, that is to ſayne, the principles, & euerych of hem by him ſelfe. But now while the ſoule is hid in the cloude, and in the darkeneſſe of the mē
                     bres of the bodye, it ne hath not all foryeten it ſelfe, but it wtholdeth the ſum of thynges and leſeth the ſingularities. Than who ſo ye ſeketh ſotheneſſe, he nys in neyther nother habyte, for he wote not all, ne he ne hath nat all foryeten, but yet hym remembreth ye ſum of thinges that he withholdeth, and aſketh counſayle, and retreateth deplyche thynges yſene beforne, that is to ſayne, the greate ſumme in his mynde, ſo that he mowe adoē the partes that he hathe foryeten, to thylke partyes that he hath withholden.
               
               
                  
                     Tum illa: Vetus inquit, hec eſt de prouidētia q̄rela: Marco
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Tullio. &c
                  
                  
                     THan ſayd ſhe, this is (ꝙ ſhe) the olde queſtion of the purueyaūce of God. And Marcus Tullius whan he deuyded the deuynacyons, that is to ſayne in hys bokes that he wrote of deuynacions, he moued greatly this queſtyon, and thou thy ſelf haſt yſought it moche, and vtterly and lōge but yet ne hath it not bene determyned ne eſpyed fermely and diligently of any of you, and the cauſe of this darkeneſſe and of thys difficultie is, for that the mouyng of the reaſon of mankynde ne may not mouen to, that is to ſayne, applien or ioynen the ſimplicitie of the deuyne preſcience, the which ſimplicitie of the deuyne preſcience, yf that mē mighten thynkē it in any maner. That is to ſayn that yf men myghten thynke and comprehē
                     den the thynges yt god ſeeth hym ſelfe, than there dwelled vtterly no dout, the which reſon and cauſe of difficulties, I ſhal aſſay at laſt to ſhewe and to ſpeden, whan I haue fyrſt yſpenden and anſwered to thy reaſons by whiche thou art moued, for I aſke why thou weneſt that thylk reaſons of hem that aſſoylen this queſtion ne be nat ſpedefull ynough ne ſufficiēt, the which ſolucyō or the which reaſō, for yt it demeth, that the preſcience is not of neceſſitie of thynges to come, as who ſayth, any other way thā thus, but that thylke thynges that the preſcience wot beforne, ne maye not vnbetyden, that is to ſayne, that they moten betyde. But than yf that preſcience ne putteth no neceſſitie to thī
                     ges to comen, as thou thy ſelfe haſte confeſſed it, and be knowe a lytle here beforn what cauſe or what is it, as who ſayth, ther may no cauſe be, by which that the endes voluntary of thynges myghten be conſtrayned to certayne betydyng. For by grace of poſition ſo that thou may the better vnderſtāde this that foloweth, I ſuppoſe that there ne be no preſcience: Than aſke I (ꝙ ſhe) in as moche as apperteyneth to that, ſhulden than thynges that comen of free wyll be conſtrayned to betyding by neceſſitie?
                  
                     Boece.
                     Nay (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     
                     Phi.
                     Than ayenwarde (ꝙ ſhe) I ſuppoſe yt there be preſcience, but that it ne putteth no neceſſitie to thinges, than trow I that thilk ſame fredome of wyll ſhall dwellen all hole and abſolute and vnboundē. But thou wilt ſayne, that al be it ſo, that preſcience nis not cauſe of the neceſſitie of betyding to thinges to comen, algates yet it is a ſigne, that the thynges bene to betyden by neceſſitie. By this maner than, althoughe the preſcience had neuer be, yet algates or at leſt way, it is certayne thyng that endes of betydynges of thynges to comen ſhulden be neceſſarye. For euery thynge ſheweth and ſignifyeth onely what the thinge is, but it ne maketh not the thyng that it ſignifyeth. For which it behoueth fyrſte to ſhewe that nothynge ne betydeth, that it ne betydeth by neceſſitie: ſo that it maye appere, that the preſcience is ſygne of neceſſitie, or els yf there nere no neceſſitye, certes, thylke preſcyence ne myght not be ſigne of thynge that nys not. But certes, it is now certayne, that the proue of this yſuſteyned by ſtedfaſt reaſon, ne ſhall not bene lad ne proued by ſygnes ne by argumentes, taken fro without, but by cauſes couenable and neceſſarye. But thou mayſt ſayne, how maye it be that the thynges ne betyden not, that bene purueyed to comen? But certes, ryght as we trowē that the thynges which that the purueyaunce wot beforne, to comē ne be not to betyden. But that ne ſhulde we not demen, but rather although they ſhal betyden, yet ne haue they no neceſſitye of her kynde to betiden: and this mayſt thou lightly apperceiuen by this that I ſhal ſayn. For we ſene manye thynges whan they ben beforne our eyen, ryght as men ſene the carter workynge in the tournyng and in the attempryng or adreſſing of his cartes or chariots and by this maner, as who ſayeth, mayeſt thou vnderſtande of al other workemen. Is there thā any neceſſitie, or who ſayth in our lokynge, that conſtrayneth or compelleth any of thylke thynges to be done ſo?
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Nay (quod I) for in ydle and in vayne were all the effect of crafte, yf that al thynges weren moued by conſtraynynge of our eyen, or of our ſyght.
                  
                  
                     Philoſoph.
                     The thynges than (quod ſhe) that whan that men done hem, ne haue no neceſſitie that men done hem, eke tho ſame thynges fyrſt or they be done, they ben to comen withoute neceſſitye: for why, there be ſome thynges to betyden, of which the endes and the betydinges of hem ben abſolute and quyte of all neceſſitie. For certes, I ne trowe not that anye man wolde ſayne this, that the thynges that men done nowe that they ne were to betyden fyrſte, yer they were doone. And thylke ſame thynges, although men hadden wyſt hem beforne, yet they haue free betydynges. For ryght as ſcience of thinges preſent ne bryngeth in no neceſſitie to thynges that men done, ryght ſo to the preſcience of thynges to commen, ne bryngeth in no neceſſitie to thynges betiden But thou mayeſt ſayne, that of thylke ſame it is douted, as whether that of thylke thinges that ne haue non iſſues and betydinges neceſſaryes, if therof may ben any preſ
                           •••
                        te.
                     For certes, they ſemen to diſcorden, for thou weneſt that yf that thynges bene ſene before that neceſſitie foloweth hem, and yf neceſſitie fayleth hem, they ne myght not bē wyſt before, and that nothyng maye be comprehended by ſcience but certayne. And yf tho thynges ne haue no certayne betydynges, be purueyed as certayne it ſhoulde be darkeneſſe of opynyon, not ſothfaſtneſſe of ſcyence. And thou weneſt that it be dyuers for the holeneſſe of ſcience, that any manne ſhulde deme a thynge to be otherwyſe than it is it ſelfe, and the cauſe of this erroure is, that of all the thynges that euerye wyghte hath knowe, they wene that tho thynges bē knowe onylye by the ſtrength and by the nature of the thynges that ben wyſt or knowe and it is all the contrarye: for all that euer is knowe, it is rather cōprehended & knowe not after his ſtrengthe and his nature, but after the facultye, that is to ſayne, the power and the nature of hem that knowen. And for that this thyng ſhulde nowe ſhewe by a ſhort enſample of roundneſſe of a body otherwyſe than the ſyght of the eye knoweth it, and otherwyſe than the touchynge.
                     The lokynge, by caſtynge of his beames, wayreth and ſeeth from a ferre al the bodye togyther, withoute mouynge of it ſelfe, but the touchynge cleueth to the rounde bodye, and moueth aboute the enuyronnynge, and comprehendeth the partyes by roundeneſſe, and the man him ſelfe otherwyſe beholdeth hym, and otherwayes ymagynacyon, and

otherwyſe reaſon, and otherwiſe inteligēce for the wyt comprehendeth withoutforthe the fygure of the body of man, that is vnſtablyſhed in the matter ſubiect. But the ymaginacion comprehendeth onely the figure wt out the mater. Reaſon ſurmounteth ymaginacion, and comprehendeth by vniuerſal lokyng the cōmune ſpeche, but the eye of intelligence is hygher, for it ſurmounteth the enuyronyng of the vniuerſite, and loketh ouer that, by pure ſubtiltie of thought. Thylke ſame ſymple fourme of man, that is perdurable in the diuine thought, in whiche thys ought greatly to be conſidred, that the hyeſt ſtrength for to comprehenden thynges embraceth and contayneth the lower ſtrength, but ye lower ſtrēgth ne aryſeth not in no maner to the hyer ſtrength. For wyt ne may cō
                        prehende nothyng out of mater, ne that imaginacyon ne loketh not the vniuerſal ſpeces ne reaſon ne taketh not the ſymple fourme, ſo as intelligence taketh it. But intelligence that loketh all abouen, whan it hath comprehended the fourme, it knoweth & demeth all the thynges that ben vnder the fourme, but ſhe knoweth hem in thylke maner, in which it comprehendeth thylk ſame ſimple forme yt ne may neuer ben knowē of none of yt other, that is to ſay, to non of the thre forſayd ſtrengthes of the ſoule, for it knoweth the vniuerſitie of reaſon, and the fygure of ymaginacion, and the ſenſyble material cō
                        ceyued by wyt, ne it vſeth not ne of reaſon, ne of ymaginacion ne of wyt withoutforth but it beholdeth al thynges, ſo as I ſhal ſay by a ſtroke of thought fermely without diſcours of collacion. Certes reaſon whan it loketh any thyng vniuerſall, it ne vſeth not of ymaginacyon ne wyt, and algates yet it cō
                        prehendeth the thynges ymaginable and ſē
                        ſyble, for reaſon is ſhe that diffinyſſheth the vniuerſall of her conceyte ryght thus. Man is a reaſonable two foted beeſt, and how ſo that this knowing is vniuerſal, yet nis ther no wyght that ne wot well that a man is a thynge ymaginable and ſenſyble, and thys ſame conſydreth well reaſon, but that nys not by ymaginacion, nor by wytte, but it loketh it by reaſonable conception. Alſo ymaginacyon, all be it ſo, that it taketh of wytte the begynnyng, to ſene and fourmen the fygures algates, although that wyt ne were not preſent, yet it enuyroneth and comprehē
                        deth all thynges ſenſyble, not by reaſon ſenſyble of demyng, but by reaſon ymaginatife Seeſt thou not than, that al the thynges in knowyng vſen more of her facultie, or of her power, than they done of the facultie or power of thynges that ben to knowen, ne that is no wronge, for ſo as euery iudgement is the dede or doing of hym that demeth, it behoueth that euerye wyght perfourme hys werke and hys intention not of forayne power, but of his propre power.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Quondam porticus at tulit, Obſcuros minium ſenes. &c.
                  
                  
                     THan the porche, that is to ſaye a gate of the towne of Athnes there as philoſophers hadden congregacion to diſpute thilk porche brought ſomtyme olde men full darke in her ſentences, that is to ſay, philoſophers that hyghten ſtoiciens, ye wende that ymages and ſenſibylities, that is to ſay, ſenſyble ymaginacions or els ymagynacyons of ſenſible thynges, wer emprinted into ſoules fro bodyes withoutforth, as who ſayth thylke ſtoiciens wenden that the ſoule had be naked of hym ſelfe, as a myrrour or a clene perchemyne, ſo that al fygures muſten fyrſt comen fro thynges fro wt
                     out into ſoules, and ben emprinted into ſoules, ryght as we ben wonte ſometyme by a ſwyft poyntell to fyxen letters emprinted in the ſmothneſſe or in the playneſſe of the table of waxe, or in the parchemyne that hath no fygure ne note in it. Gloſe. But nowe argueth Boece agaynſt that opynion, & ſayth thus. But yf the thryuynge ſoule ne implyteth nothyng▪ that is to ſayne, ne doth thyng by his propre mouynge, but ſuffreth & lyeth ſubiecte to the fygures & to the notes of bodyes withoutforth, and yeldeth ymages ydel, euyl & vayne in the maner of a myrrour, whence thryueth than or whence commeth thilke knowynge in our ſoule, ye diſcerneth & beholdeth all thynges, and whēce is thilke ſtrēgth that beholdeth the ſynguler thinges or els whēce is the ſtrength that dyuydeth thynges yknowe, & thylke ſtrength that gathered togyther thynges deuyded, & ſtrēgth that choſeth the entrechaunged waye.

For ſomtyme it heaueth the heed, that is to ſay, that it heaueth vp the ententiō to ryght hyghe thynges, and ſomtyme it deſcendeth into ryght lowe thynges: and whan it returneth into hym ſelfe, it reproueth and deſtroyeth the falſe thynges by the true thynges. Certes, this ſtrength is cauſe more effycient and moche more myghty, to ſene and to knowen thynges, than thylke cauſe that ſuffreth and receyueth the notes and fygures impreſſed in maner of mater. Algates the paſſyon, that is to ſaye, the ſuffraunce or the wyt in the quycke body goth before exciting and monyng the ſtrengthes of the thought, ryghte ſo as whan that cleareneſſe ſmyteth the eyen, and moueth hem to ſene, or ryghte ſo as voyce or ſowne hourleth to the eares, and cōmoueth hem to hearken, than is the ſtrength of the thought moued and excyted cleapeth forthe to ſemblable mouynges the ſpeces that it halte within it ſelfe, and addeth the ſpeces to the notes, and to thynges withoutforth, and meddleth the ymages of thynges withoutforth, to thinges hyd with in hym ſelfe.
               
               
                  
                     Quod ſi in corporibus ſenciēdis quā nis efficiant inſtrumenta ſenſuum. &c.
                  
                  
                     BVt what is that, in bodyes to be ſeled, that is to ſay, in the takyng and in the knowing of bodyly thynges. And all be it ſo, yt the qualities of bodyes that be obiect fro withoutforth, mouen and entalenten the inſtrumentes of the wyttes, and all be it ſo, that the paſſyon of the body, that is to ſayne, the wyt or the ſuffraunce goeth beforne the ſtrength or the worchynge corage, the which paſſyon or ſuffraūce clepeth forth the dede of the thought in it ſelfe, and moueth and excyteth in this meane whyle, the fourmes that reſten withinforth, and inſenſyble bodyes, as I haue ſayde, our corages nis not taught or emprynted by paſſyon to knowe theſe thynges, but demeth and knoweth of his owne ſtrēgth the paſſion or ſuffraunce, ſubiect to the body: moche more thā tho thynges ben abſolute and quyte fro all talentes or affections of bodyes, as god or his aungels, ne folowen not in decernynge thynges obiect fro wtoutforth, but they accō
                     plyſſhē and ſpeden the dedes of her thought By this reaſon than there comen many maner of knowynges to dyuers, and to differrynge ſubſtaunces. For the wyt of the body the which wyt is naked and diſpoyled of all other knowynge, thylke wyt cōmeth to beeſtes, the whiche ne mowen not mouen hem ſelfe here and there, as oyſters and muſkels and other ſuche ſhelfyſh of the ſee, that cleuē & ben noryſſhed to rockes, but ye ymaginacion cōmeth of remuable beeſtes, that ſemen to haue talent to flyen or to deſirē any thing But reaſon is alonelye the lynage of mankynde, ryght as intelligence is alonly the diuine nature, of which it foloweth, that thilk knowynge is more worthe than is eyther ſyns it knoweth by his propre nature, not onelye his ſubiecte, as who ſayth: it ne kneweth not alonely that appertayneth properly to his knowyng, but it knoweth the ſubiectes of al other knowynges.
                  But how ſhal it than be, yf that wyt and ymaginacion ſtryuen ayen reaſonynge and ſayne that of thylke vniuerſall thynge that reaſon weneth to ſene, yt it nis ryght nought for wyt and ymaginacion ſayne, that that is ſenſyble or ymagynable, it ne maye not ben vniuerſall. Than is there either the iugement of reaſon ſothe, ne that there nys no thynge ſenſyble, or els for that reaſon wote well, that many thynges be ſubiecte to wyt and to ymaginacyon: than is the conceptiō of reaſon vaine and falſe, which that loketh and comprehendeth, that that is ſenſyble & ſynguler, as vniuerſall. And yf that the reaſon wolde anſwer ayenſt theſe two, that is to ſaye, to wyt and ymaginacion, and ſaye that ſothly ſhe her ſelfe, that is to ſayne reaſon, loketh and comprehendeth by reaſon of vniuerſalitie, both that that is ſenſible, and that that is ymaginable, and thylke two, yt is to ſayne, wyt and ymaginacion, ne mowen not ſtretchen hem ſelfe to the knowing of vniuerſalitie, for that the knowynge of hem, ne maye not exceaden ne ſurmounten the bodyly fygures. Certes of the knowyng of thynges men oughten rather yeuen more credence to the more ſtedfaſt, and to ye more perfyte iudgement in this maner ſtryuyng, than we that haue ſtrēgth of reaſoning and

of ymagynacion, and of wytte, that is to ſay, by reaſon and by ymaginacion, we wolde rather prayſe the cauſe of reaſon, as who ſayth, than the cauſe of wytte and of ymagynacion. Semblable thyng is it, that the reſon of mā
                     kynde ne weneth not that the diuyne intellygēce, beholdeth or knoweth thynges to come, but right as the reaſon of mākynde knoweth hem: for thou arguyſt thus, that yf that it ne ſeme not to men, that ſome thynges haue certayne betydinges, they ne maye not be wyſte before certaynly to betyden, and than is there no preſcience of thylke thynges: & yf we trow that preſcience be in theſe thynges, than is there nothing that betydeth by neceſſyte. But yf we myght haue iugement of the diuyne thought, as we ben parteners of reſon, right ſo as we haue demed, that it behoueth by ymagynacion and wytte, and beneth reaſon, ryght ſo wolde we demen that it were rightfull thing, that mans reaſon ought to ſubmyt it ſelfe to be beneth the diuyne thought, for whyche yf we may, as who ſayth, that yf we may I counſayle that we enhaunce vs in the heyght of thylke ſouerayne intellygence, for there ſhal reaſon wel ſene that that it ne may not behold in it ſelfe, and certes that is thus, in what maner the preſcience of god ſeeth al thynges and diffynyſheth, all though they haue no certayne betydynges: ne this is none opynyon, but rather the ſymplicite of the ſouerayne ſcience, that is not ſhette wythin no maner of boundes.
               
               
                  
                     Quam variis terras animalia per meant 
                           •
                        iguris. Nam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         alia extento ſunt corpore. &c.
                  
                  
                     THe beeſtes paſſen by ye erthes by ful diuers figures, for ſome of hē haue her bodyes ſtrauȝt, and crepen in the duſte, & drawen after hem a trace or a forough contynued, that is to ſaye, as nedders and ſnayles, & other beeſtes, by the wandrynge lyghtneſſe of her wynges beaten the wyndes, and ouer ſwymmen the ſpaces of the longe ayre, by moſt flyeng. And other beeſtes gladen hem ſelfe, to dyggen her traces or her ſteppes in the crthe wyth her goynge or wyth her fete, and to gone eyther by the grene feldes, or els to walken vnder the woodes. And all be it ſo that thou ſeeſt that they diſcorden by dyuers fourmes, algates her faces enclyned heauyeth her dull wyttes, onely the lynage of man heaueth higheſt hys hye heed, and ſtandeth lyght wyth hys vpryght bodye, and beholdeth the erthes vnder hym. And but yf thou erthly man waxeſt yuell out of thy wytte, thys fygure amoneſteth the, that aſkeſt the heuen with thy right vyſage, and haſt areyſed thy forheed to bearen vp on hygh thy corage, ſo that thy thouȝt ne be not heuyed ne put lowe vnder fote, ſyth that thy body is ſo hygh areyſed.
               
               
                  
                     Quoniam igitur vti paulo ante monſtratum eſt, omne quod ſcitur. &c.
                  
                  
                     THerfore than, as I haue ſhewed a lytell here beforn, yt all thing yt is wyſt nys not knowen by thys nature propre, but by ye nature of hē yt cōprehenden it. Let vs loken nowe in as moch as it is lefull to vs, as who ſaith, let vs loken nowe as we may, which that is the eſtate of the diuyne ſubſtaunce, ſo that we may well knowe eke what his ſcience is.
                  The commune iugement of all creatures reaſonables than is, that God is eterne. Let vs conſydre than what is eternyte, for certes that ſhall ſhewen vs togyder the diuyne nature and the diuyne ſcience. Eternyte than is perfyte poſſeſſyon, and all togyder of lyfe intermynable, and that ſheweth the more clerely by the cōparyſon or collacyon of temporall thynges. For all thyng that lyueth in tyme, it is preſent, and procedeth fro preterytees in to futures, that is to ſayne, from tyme paſſed in to tyme comynge: ne there nys nothynge eſtablyſſhed in tyme, that maye enbracen togyther all the ſpace of thys lyfe, for certes yet ne hathe it not taken the tyme of to morowe, and it hath loſt that of yeſterday. And certes in the lyfe of thys daye, ye ne lyuē nomore, but ryght as in thys mouable and tranſytorye moment. Than thylke thynge that ſuffreth temporall condycion, al though that it neuer began to be, ne though it neuer ceaſe to be (as Aryſtoteles demed of the worlde) & although the life of it be ſtretched

wyth infynite of tyme, yet algates nys it no ſuche thynge, as men might trowen by right that it is eterne. For all thought that it comprehende and enbrace the ſpace of the lyfe infynite, yet algates ne embraſeth it not ye ſpace of the lyfe all togyther, for it ne hath not the futures that be not yet: ne it ne hathe no lenger the preteritees that bē don or paſſed. But thylke thyng than, that hath and comprehendeth togyder al the plentie of the lyfe intermynable, to whome there ne fayleth naught of the future, and to whom there nys naught of the preterite eſcaped or paſſed, thylke ſame is ywitneſſed and proued by right to ben etern.
                  And it behoueth by neceſſyte that thylke thynge be alway preſent to him ſelfe, and cō
                     petent, as who ſaythe, alway preſent to hym ſelfe, and ſo mighty, that all be ryght at hys pleaſaunce, and that he haue all preſent the infynyte of ye mouable tyme. Wherfore ſome men trowen wrongfully, that whan they heren that it ſemed to Plato, that thys worlde had neuer begynnynge of tyme, that it neuer ſhall haue faylyng: they wene in thylke maner, that this worlde be maked eterne, wyth hys maker, as who ſaith, they wene that this worlde and god be maked togyther eterne. And that is a wrongfull wenynge, for other thyng it is to be ladde by the lyfe interminable, as Plato graunted to the worlde, and other thyng it is to embrace togyther, al ye preſence of the lyfe that is intermynable, which thynge is clere and manyfeſt to the diuyne thought. Ne it ne ſhulde not ſeme to vs that god is elder than thynges that ben maked by quantyte of tyme, but rather by ye proſperyte of hys ſymple nature. For thys ylke infynyte mouynges of temporall thynges foloweth this preſentary eſtate of this life immouable & ſo as it ne may not countrefayten ne fayne it, ne be euenlyke to it for ye immobilyte, that is to ſay, that is in the eternyte of god, it fayleth & falleth in to mouyng fro the ſymplicite of the preſence of god, & diſencreaſeth in ye infynite quantyte of future & preterite. And ſo as it maye not haue togyther al the plentie of the lyfe, algates yet for as moch as it ceaſeth neuer for to ben in ſome maner, yet it ſemeth ſomdele to vs, that it foloweth & reſembleth thylke thing, that it ne may not attayne to ne fulfyllen, and byndeth it ſelfe to ſome maner preſence of this lytel moment, the which preſence of this lytel and ſwift moment, for that it beareth a maner ymage or lykeneſſe of the aye dwellyng of god: it graunteth to ſuch maner thynges, as it betydeth to, that it ſemeth hem, as theſe thinges haue ben, and ben. And for that the preſence of ſuch lytell moment ne may not dwell, therfore it rauyſhed and toke thinfynite way of tyme, that is to ſay, by ſucceſſyon, and by this maner it is done, for that it ſhulde cōtinue the lyfe in goyng, of yt which lyfe it ne myght not enbrace the plentye of dwellyng. And for thy if we wollen put worthy names to thynges that folowen Plato, let vs ſaye than ſothlye, that god is eterne, and that the worlde is perpetuell. Than ſyth euery iugemēt knoweth and comprehendeth by hys own nature, thynges that ben ſubiect vnto hym, there is to god alwayes an eterne and a preſentarye eſtate. And the ſcyence of hym that ouerpaſſeth all temporall moment, dwelleth in ſymplycite of hys preſence, and enbraſeth and conſydereth all the infynyte ſpaces of tymes preterytes, and of tymes futures, and loketh in hys ſymple knowyng all thynges of preterite, right as they werē ydon preſentlye ryght nowe. If thou wylte than thynken and aduyſe the preſcyence, by which it knoweth all thynges, thou ne ſhalt not demen it as preſcience of thynges to comen but thou ſhalt demen more ryghtfully that it is ſcyence of preſence or of inſtaunce that neuer ne fayleth, for whyche it nys not ycleped preuidence, but it ſhulde rather ben cleaped purneyaunce, whyche is eſtablyſhed ful ferre fro ryght lowe thynges, and beholdeth frome a ferre all thynges, right as it were fro the hye heyght of thynges. Why aſkeſt thou than, or why dyſputeſt thou thā, that thylke thynges ben done by neceſſyte, whyche that ben yſene and yknowen by the deuyne ſyght, ſythe that forſoth men ne maken nat thylke thynges neceſſarye, whyche that they ſene ben ydone in her ſyght, for addeth thy beholdynge any neceſſyte, to thylke thynges which thou beholdeſt preſent?
                  
                     Boe.
                     Naye (ꝙ I)
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     Certes (ꝙ ſhe) than, yf men myghten maken anye digne cōparyſon or collacyon of the preſence dyuyne, and of the preſence of mankynde: right ſo as ye ſene ſome thynges in this temporall preſence, ryght ſo ſeeth god all thynge by his eterne preſence, wherfore this diuyne preſcience ne chaungeth not the nature of the

propertie of thinges, but beholdeth ſuch thinges preſent to him ward, as they ſhulden betyden to you warde in tyme to comen. Ne it ne confoundeth not the iugementes of thynges, but by one ſyght of hys thought he knoweth the thynges to comen, as well neceſſary as not neceſſary. Right ſo whan ye ſene togyther a man walke on the erth, and ye ſunne aryſen in the heuen, all be it ſo that ye ſene togyther that one and that other: yet neuertheleſſe ye demen and diſcernen, that that one is voltūary, and that other is neceſſary: Ryght ſo than the diuyne lokyng, beholding al thinges vnder hym, ne troubleth nat the qualyte of thynges that ben certaynly preſent to him warde, but as to the condycyon of tyme, forſoth they ben future, for whiche it foloweth, that this nys none opinyon, but rather a ſted faſt knowynge yſtrengthed by ſothneſſe, that whan that god knoweth any thynge to be, he ne vnwote nat that thilke thyng wanteth neceſſyte to be, thys is to ſayne, that whan that god knoweth any thynge to betyde, he wote well yt it ne hathe no neceſſyte to betyde. And yf thou ſeyſt here that thylke thynge that god ſ
                           •
                        eth to betyde, it ne maye not vnbetyde, as who ſayth it mote betyde, and thilke thynge that ne may nat vnbetyde, it mote betyden by neceſſyte, & that thou ſtreyn me to this name of the neceſſyte. Certes I wyll well confeſſen and be knowen a thyng of full ſad trouth, but vnneth ſhall there any wyght mowe ſene it or come therto, but yf that he be beholder of the deuyne thought, for I wyll anſwere the thus, that thylke thyng that is future, whē it is referred to the deuyne knowyng, than it is neceſſary. But certes whan it is vnderſtandē in hys own kynde, men ſene it vtterly fre and abſolute fro al neceſſyte. For certes there ben two maners of neceſſytees, that one neceſſyte is ſymple, as thus, that is behoueth by neceſſyte, that all men ben mortall or deedly. Another neceſſyte is condicyonel, as thus, if thou woſt that a man walketh, it behoueth by neceſſyte that he walke, thylke thyng than that any wight hath yknowe to be, it ne maye nat be none otherwyſe than he knoweth it to be. But this condicion ne draweth nat with her thilk neceſſyte ſimple, for certes this neceſſite condicionall, ye propre nature of it ne maketh it nat, but the adiection of the condycyon maketh it. For no neceſſyte ne conſtrayneth a mā to gone, that goth by his propre wyll, al be it ſo that whan he goth, that it is neceſſary that he gothe. Right on this ſame maner than, yf that the purueyaunce of god ſeeth any thyng preſent, thā mote thylke thynge ben by neceſſyte, although that it ne haue no neceſſyte of his owne nature. But certes the futures that betyden by fredom of arbytrie, god ſeeth hem al togyder preſent. Theſe thynges thā if they ben referred to the deuyne ſyght, than ben they maked neceſſary by the condicyon of the deuyne knowyng. But certes, yf thylke thynges ben conſydered by hem ſelfe, they ben abſolute of neceſſyte, and ne forleten not, ne ceſſen nat of the lyberte of her own nature. Thā certes wythout doute all the thynges ſhullen ben don, whyche that god woot beforne that they ben to comen and betyden of free arbytrie, or of frewyll, that al be it ſo that they betyden, yet algates ne leſe they not her propre nature in beynge, by the whyche fyrſt or they weren done, they hadden power not to haue betyde.
                  
                  
                     Boe.
                     What is thys to ſayne than (ꝙ I) that thynges ne be not neceſſarye by her propre nature, ſo that they comen in all maners in the lykeneſſe of neceſſyte, by condicyō of the diuyne ſcience?
                  
                  
                     Philo.
                     This is the difference (ꝙ ſhe) that tho thynges whyche that I purpoſed the a lytell here beforne, that is to ſayn, ſonne aryſyng, and the man walkyng that therwhyles that thylke thynges ben done, they ne myght not ben vndone. Natheleſſe that one of hem or it was done, it behoueth by neceſſyte that it was doone, but not that other. Ryght ſo it is here that the thynges whych that god hath preſent, withouten doute they ſhullen ben, but ſome of hem dyſcendeth of the nature of thynges, as ye ſunne aryſynge, and ſome diſcendeth of the power of the doers, as the man walkynge.
                  
                  
                     Boece.
                     Than ſayde I, no wrong, that yf theſe thynges be referred to the diuyne knowyng, than ben they neceſſarye, and yf they ben conſydred by hem ſelfe, than ben they abſolute fro the bonde of neceſſyte. Ryght ſo as all thynges that apereth or ſheweth to the wyttes, yf thou referre hem to reaſon it is vnyuerſal, and yf thou loke it or refer it to it ſelfe, than is it ſynguler. But nowe yf thou ſayeſt thus, that yf that it be in my power to chaungen my purpoſe, than ſhall I voyden the pourueyaunce of god, whan perauenture I ſhall

haue chaunged the thynges whyche that he knoweth beforne.
                  
                  
                     Phi.
                     Than ſhall I anſweren the thus: Certes thou mayſt wel chaūge thy purpoſe, but for as moche as the preſent ſothneſſe of the diuyne purueyaunce beholdeth that thou mayſte chaunge thy purpoſe, and whether thou chaunge it or no, and why derwarde that thou tourne it, thou ne mayſte not eſchue the diuyne preſcience: right ſo thou ne mayſte not flye the ſyght of the preſent eye all though that thou tourne thy ſelfe by thy fre wyll in to dyuers actiōs. But thou mayſt ſayne ayen to thys thus: Howe ſhall it than be, ſhall not the diuyne ſcience ben chaunged by my dyſpoſycion, whan that I wyll one thyng nowe, and nowe another thyng? And thylke preſcience ne ſemeth it not to entrechaunge ſtoundes of knowing, as who ſaith ne ſhall it not ſemen to vs, that the dyuyne preſcience entrechaungeth hys dyuers ſtoū
                        des of knowynge, ſo that it knowe ſomtyme one thynge, and ſomtyme it knoweth the contrarye of that thynge? Philo.
                     No forſothe (ꝙ ſhe) for the diuyne ſyght renneth beforne and ſeeth al the futures, and clepeth hem ayen, and retourneth hem to the propre preſcience of hys propre knowynge, ne he entrechaungeth not, ſo as thou weneſt the ſtoundes of hys foreknowynge, as nowe this, nowe that: but he dwellyng aye cometh beforne, and enbraſeth at o ſtroke all the mutacions. And this preſcience to compreheden and to ſene all thynges, god ne hath not takē it of the betydinges of thynges to comen, but of hys propre ſymplicite. And hereby is aſſoyled thylke thynges that thou putteſt a lytell here beforne, that is to ſayn, that it is vnworthy thyng to ſayne yt our futures yeuen cauſe of the preſciēce of god. For certes ſtrength of the diuyne ſcience, whyche that enbraſeth all thynges by his preſentarie knowynge, eſtablyſſheth maner to all thynges, and it ne oweth not to latter thynges. And ſythe yt theſe thynges ben thus, that is to ſayne, that neceſſyte is not in thynges by the diuyne preſcience, than is there fredom of arbytrie that dwelleth hole and vnwemmed to mortal mē, ne the lawes ne purpoſen not wycked medes and paynes to the wyllynges of men, that ben vnboundē and quyte of all neceſſyte: And god beholder & foreweter of al thinges dwelleth aboue, and the preſente eternyte of ſyght renneth alwaye wyth the dyuers qualyte of our dedes, diſpenſynge or ordeynyng medes to good men, and tourmentes to wycked mē. Ne in ydell ne in vayne ne ben there not put in god hope and prayers, that ne mowen not ben vnſpedefull, ne wythout effecte, whan they ben ryghtfull.
                     Withſtande than and eſchew thou vices, worſhyppe and loue thou vertues, areyſe thy corage to rightful hopes, yelde thou humble prayers and hyghe. Great neceſſyte of proweſſe and of vertue is encharged and commaūded to you yf ye nyll not diſſimulen, ſyth that ye worchen and doone, that is to ſayne, your dedes and your werkes beforn the eyen of the iuge, that ſeeth and alſo that demeth al thynges. Deo gracias.
                  
               
            
            ¶Thus endeth the boke of Boecius of the conſolacion of philoſophie, and herafter foloweth the dreame of Chaucer.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The dreame of Chaucer.
            
               
                  I Haue gret wōder by thys lyght
               Howe I lyue, for daye ne nyght
               I maye not ſlepe, welnye nought
               I haue ſo many an ydle thought
               Purely for defaute of ſlepe
               That by my trouthe, I take no kepe
               Of nothyng, howe it cometh or gothe
               Ne me nys nothyng lefe nor lothe
               All is ilyche good to me
               Ioye or ſorowe, where ſo it be
               For I haue felyng in no thyng
               But as it were a maſed thyng
               Al day in poynte to fall adoun
               For ſorowfull ymagynacyoun
               Is alway holy in my mynde
               And well ye wote, agaynſt kynde
               It were to lyuen in thys wyſe
               For nature wolde not ſuffyſe
               To none erthly creature
               Not longe tyme to endure
               Without ſlepe, and be in ſorowe
               And I ne maye, ne nyght ne morowe
               Slepe, and this melancolye
               And drede I haue for to dye
               Defaute of ſlepe and heuyneſſe
               Hath ſlayne my ſpyrite of quickneſſe
               That I haue loſte all luſtyheed
               Suche fantaſyes ben in myne heed
               So I not what is beſte to do
               But men myght aſke me why ſo
               I may not ſlepe, and what me is
               But natheleſſe, who aſke thys
               Leſeth hys aſkyng trewly
               My ſeluen can not tell why
               The ſothe, but trewly as I geſſe
               I holde it be a ſyckneſſe
               That I haue ſuffred thys eyght yere
               And yet my boote is neuer the nere
               For there is phiſycien but one
               That may me heale, but that is done
               Paſſe we ouer vntyll efte
               That wyll not be, mote nede be lefte
               Our fyrſt mater is good to kepe
               So whan I ſawe I myght not ſlepe
               Tyll nowe late, thys other nyght
               Vpon my bedde I ſate vpryght
               And bade one reche me a booke
               A romaunce, and he it me toke
               To rede, and dryue the nyght away
               For me thought it better play
               Than play eyther at Cheſſe or tables
               And in thys boke were written fables
               That clerkes had in olde tyme
               And other poetes, put in ryme
               To rede, and for to be in mynde
               whyle men loued the lawe of kynde
               Thys boke ne ſpake, but of ſuche thynges
               Of quenes lyues, and of kynges
               And many other thynges ſmale
               Amonge all thys I fonde a tale
               That me thought awonder thyng.
               This was the tale: There was a kyng
               That hyght Seys, and had a wyfe
               The beſte that myght beare lyfe
               And thys quene hyght Alcyone
               So it befyll, therafter ſone
               Thys kyng woll wenden ouer ſee
               To tellen ſhortly, whan that he
               Was in the ſee, thus in thys wyſe
               Suche a tempeſt gan to ryſe
               That brake her maſte, and made it fall
               And clefte her ſhyp, and dreynt hem all
               That neuer was founde, as it telles
               Borde ne man, ne nothyng elles
               Right thus thys kyng Seys loſte hys lyfe
               Nowe for to ſpeke of Alcyone hys wyfe
               This lady that was lefte at home
               Hath wonder, that the kyng ne come
               Home, for it was a longe terme
               Anon her herte began to yerne
               And for that her thought euer mo
               It was not wele, her thought ſo
               She longed ſo after the kyng
               That certes it were a pytous thyng
               To tell her hertely ſoroufull lyfe
               That ſhe had, thys noble wyfe
               For hym alas, ſhe loued alderbeſt
               Anone ſhe ſent bothe eeſt and weſt
               To ſeke hym, but they founde nought
               Alas (ꝙ ſhe) that I was wrought
               And wher my lorde my loue be deed?
               Certes I nyll neuer eate breed
               I make a vowe to my god here
               But I mowe of my lorde here
               
                  Suche ſorowe thys lady to her toke
               That trewly, I that made thys boke
               Had ſuche pyte, and ſuche routhe
               To rede her ſorowe, that by my trouthe
               I farde the worſe all the morowe
               After to thynken on her ſorowe
               So whan thys lady coude here no worde
               That no man myght fynde her lorde
               Full ofte ſhe ſwowned, and ſayd alas
               For ſorowe, full nyghe woode ſhe was
               Ne ſhe coude no rede but one
               But downe on knees ſhe ſate anone
               And wepte, that pyte was to here
               A mercy ſwete lady dere
               (ꝙ ſhe) to Iuno her goddeſſe
               Helpe me out of thys diſtreſſe
               And yeue me grace my lorde to ſe
               Soone, or wete where ſo he be
               Or howe he fareth, or in what whyſe
               And I ſhall make you ſacrifyſe
               And holy yours become I ſhall
               Wyth good wyll, body, herte and all
               And but thou wolte this, lady ſwete
               Sende me grace to ſlepe and mete
               In my ſlepe ſome certayne ſweuen
               where through that I may knowe euen
               whether my lorde be quicke or deed
               With that word ſhe hynge down the heed
               And fell in a ſwoune, as colde as ſtone
               Her women caught her vp anone
               And brought her in bed all naked
               And ſhe forweped and forwaked
               was wery, and thus the deed ſlepe
               Fell on her, or ſhe toke kepe
               Through Iuno, that had herde her boone
               That made her to ſlepe ſoone
               For as ſhe prayde, ryght ſo was done
               In dede, for Iuno ryght anone
               Called thus her meſſangere
               To do her erande, and he come nere
               whan he was come, ſhe bad hym thus
               Gobet (ꝙ Iuno) to Morpheus
               Thou knoweſt hym well, the god of ſlepe
               Nowe vnderſtande well, and take kepe
               Saye thus on my halfe, that he
               Go faſt in to the great ſee
               And byd hym that on all thynge
               He take vp Seys body the kynge
               That lyeth full pale, and nothynge rody
               Byd hym crepe in to the body
               And do it gone to Alcyone
               The quene, there ſhe lyeth alone
               And ſhewe her ſhortly it is no nay
               Howe it was dreynt thys other day
               And do the body ſpeke ryght ſo
               Right as it was wonned to do
               The whyles that it was alyue
               Go nowe faſt, and hye the blyue.
               This meſſanger toke leue and wente
               Vpon hys way, and neuer he ſtente
               Tyll he came to the darke valey
               That ſtante bytwene rockes twey
               There neuer yet grewe corne ne gras
               Ne tree, ne naught that ought was
               Beeſt ne man, ne nought elles
               Saue that there were a fewe welles
               Came rennynge fro the clyffes adowne
               That made a deedly ſlepynge ſowne
               And rennen downe ryght by a caue
               That was vnder a rocke ygraue
               Amyd the valey wonder depe
               There theſe goddes lay aſlepe
               Morpheus and Eclympaſteyre
               That was the god of ſlepes heyre
               That ſlepte, and dyd none other werke
               Thys caue was alſo as derke
               As hell pytte, ouer all aboute
               They had good leyſer for to route
               To vye who might ſlepe beſt
               Some hynge her chynne vpon her breſt
               And ſlepte vpryght her heed yhed
               And ſome lay naked in her bed
               And ſlepte whyles theyr dayes laſt
               Thys meſſangere come rennyng faſt
               And cryed ho ho, awake anone
               It was for nought, there herde hym none
               Awake (ꝙ he) who lyeth there
               And blewe hys horne ryght in her eere
               And cryed awaketh wonder hye
               Thys god of ſlepe, wyth hys one eye
               Caſt vp, and aſked who clepeth there
               It am I (ꝙ thys meſſangere)
               Iuno bade thou ſhuldeſt gone
               And tolde hym what he ſhulde done
               As I haue tolde you here before
               It is no nede reherſe it more
               And wente hys waye whan he had ſayde
               Anone thys god of ſlepe abrayde
               Out of hys ſlepe and gan to go
               And dyd as he had bydde hym do
               Toke vp the dede body ſoone
               And bare it forthe to Alcione
               His wyfe the quene, there as ſhe lay
               Right euen a quarter before day
               
                  And ſtode ryght at her beddes fete
               And called her ryght as ſhe hete
               By name, and ſayd: My ſwete wyfe
               Awake, let be your ſorowfull lyfe
               For in your ſorowe, there lyeth no rede
               For certes ſwete loue, I am but dede
               Ye ſhall me neuer on lyue yſe
               But good ſwete herte that ye
               Bury my body, for ſuche a tyde
               Ye mowe it fynde, the ſee beſyde
               And farewell ſwete, my worldes blyſſe
               I praye god your ſorowe lyſſe
               To lytell whyle our blyſſe laſteth
               wyth that her eyen vp ſhe caſteth
               And ſawe naught, alas (quod ſhe) for ſorowe
               And dyed wythin the thyrde morowe
               But what ſhe ſayd more in that ſwowe
               I maye not tell you as nowe
               It were to longe for to dwell
               My fyrſt matere I wyll you tell
               wherfore I haue tolde thys thynge
               Of Alcione, and Seys the kynge
               For thus moche dare I ſaye well
               I had be doluen euerydel
               And deed, ryght through defaute of ſlepe
               Yf I ne had red, and take kepe
               Of thys tale nexte before
               And I wyll tell you wherfore
               For I ne myght for bote ne bale
               Slepe, or I had redde thys tale
               Of thys dreynte Seys the kynge
               And of the goddes of ſlepynge
               when I had red thys tale wele
               And ouerloked it euerydele
               Me thought wonder, yf it were ſo
               For I had neuer herde ſpeake or tho
               Of no goddes, that coude make
               Men to ſlepe, ne for to wake
               For I ne knewe neuer god but one
               And in my game, I ſayd anone
               And yet me lyſt ryght euell to pley
               Rather then that I ſhulde dey
               Through defaute of ſlepynge thus
               I wolde gyue thylke Morpheus
               Or that goddes dame Iuno
               Or ſome wyght els, I ne rought who
               To make me ſlepe, and haue ſome reſt
               I wyll gyue hym the alther beſt
               Yeft, that euer he abode hys lyue
               And here onwarde, ryght nowe as blyue
               Yf he woll make me ſlepe a lyte
               Of downe of pure downes whyte
               I woll gyue hym a fether bed
               Rayed wyth golde, and ryght well cled
               In fyne blacke Sattyn doutremere
               And many a pylowe, and euery bere
               Of cloth of raynes to ſlepe on ſofte
               Hym thare not nede to tourne ofte
               And I woll yeue hym all that falles
               To hys chambre and to hys halles
               I woll do paynte wyth pure golde
               And tapyte hem full many folde
               Of one ſute thys ſhall he haue
               Yf I wyſt where were hys caue
               Yf he can make me ſlepe ſone
               As dyd the goddeſſe, quene Alcione
               And thus thys ylke god Morpheus
               Maye wynne of me mo fees thus
               Then euer he wanne, and to Iuno
               That is hys goddeſſe, I ſhall ſo do
               I trowe that ſhe ſhall holde her payde.
               I had vnneth that worde yſayde
               Ryght thus as I haue tolde you
               That ſodeynly I nyſt howe
               Suche a luſt anone me toke
               To ſlepe, that ryght vpon my boke
               I fell aſlepe, and therwyth euen
               Me mette ſo inly ſuche a ſweuen
               So wonderfull, that neuer yet
               I trowe no man had the wyt
               To coone well my ſweuen rede
               No nought Ioſeph wythout drede
               Of Egypte, he that rad ſo
               The kynges metynge Pharao
               No more then coude the leſt of vs
               Ne nat ſcarſly Macrobeus
               He that wrote all the auyſyon
               That he met kynge Scipion
               The noble man the Affrican
               Suche meruayles fortuned then
               I trowe a rede my dremes euen
               Lo thus it was, thys was my ſweuen.
               Me thought thus, that it was Maye
               And in the dawnynge there I laye
               Me met thus in my bed all naked
               And loked forth, for I was waked
               wyth ſmale foules a great hepe
               That had afrayed me out of my ſlepe
               Through noyſe, & ſwetneſſe of her ſonge
               And as me met, they ſate amonge
               Vpon my chambre rofe wythout
               Vpon the tyles ouer all about
               And eueryche ſonge in hys wyſe
               The moſte ſolempne ſeruyſe
               
                  Be note, that euer man I trowe
               Had herde, for ſome of hem ſonge lowe
               Some hygh, and all of one accorde
               To tell ſhortly at o worde
               was neuer herde ſo ſwete ſteuen
               But it had be a thynge of heuen
               So mery a ſowne, ſo ſwete entunes
               That certes for the towne of Tewnes
               I nolde, but I had herde hem ſynge
               For all my chambre gan to rynge
               Through ſyngynge of her ermony
               For inſtrument, nor melody
               was no where herde, yet halfe ſo ſwete
               Nor of accorde halfe ſo mete
               For there was none of hem that fayned
               To ſynge, for eche of hem hym payned
               To fynde out many crafty notes
               They ne ſpared not her throtes
               And ſoth to ſayne, my chambre was
               Full well depaynted, and wyth glas
               were all the wyndowes, well yglaſed
               Full clere, and not an hole ycraſed
               That to beholde it was great ioy
               For holly all the ſtorye of Troy
               was in the glaſynge ywrought thus
               Of Hector, and of kynge Priamus
               Of Achylles, and of kynge Laomedon
               And eke of Medea, and of Iaſon
               Of Parys, Heleyne, and of Lauyne
               And all the walles wyth colours fyne
               were paynte, both texte and gloſe
               And all the Romaunce of the roſe
               My wyndowes were ſhyt echone
               And through the glaſſe the ſunne ſhone
               Vpon my bedde wyth bryght bemes
               wyth many glad gyldy ſtremes
               And eke the welkyn was ſo fayre
               Blewe, bryght, clere was the ayre
               And full atempre, forſoth it was
               For neyther to colde, ne hote it nas
               Ne in all the welkyn was no clowde
               And as I lay thus wonder lowde
               Me thought I herde an hunte blowe
               Taſſay hys great horne, and for to knowe
               whether it was clere, or horſe of ſowne
               And I herde goynge both vp and downe
               Men horſe, houndes, and other thynge
               And all men ſpeake of huntynge
               Howe they wolde ſlee the herte with ſtrēgth
               And howe the herte had vpon length
               So moche enboſed, I not nowe what
               Anone ryght when I herde that
               Howe that they wolde, on huntynge gone
               I was ryght glad, and vp anone
               Toke my horſe, and forth I wente
               Out of my chambre, I neuer ſtente
               Tyll I come to the felde wythout
               There ouer toke I a great route
               Of hunters, and eke of foreſters
               And many relayes and lymers
               And hyed hem to the foreſt faſt
               And I wyth hem, ſo at the laſt
               I aſked one ladde, a lymere
               Say felowe, who ſhall hunte here
               (Quod I) and he anſwered ayen
               Syr, the Emperour Octauien
               (Quod he) and is here faſt by
               A goddes halfe, in good tyme (quod I)
               Go we faſt, and gan to ryde
               when we come to the foreſt ſyde
               Euery man dyd ryght ſone
               As to huntynge fell to doue
               The mayſter hunte, anone fote hote
               wyth his horne blewe thre mote
               At the vncouplynge of hys houndes
               wythin a whyle the herte founde is
               Ihalowed, and rechaſed faſt
               Longe tyme, and ſo at the laſt
               Thys herte rouſed and ſtale awaye
               Fro all the houndes a preuy waye
               The houndes had ouerſhot hym all
               And were vpon a defaulte yfall.
               Therwyth the hunte, wonder faſte
               Blewe a forloyne at the laſte
               I was go walked fro my tre
               And as I wente, there came by me
               A whelpe, that fawned me as I ſtoode
               That had yfolowed, and coude no good
               It came and crepte to me as lowe
               Ryght as it had me yknowe
               Helde downe hys heede, & ioyned his eeres
               And layde all ſmoth downe hys heeres
               I wolde haue caught it anone
               It fledde, and was fro me gone
               As I hym folowed, and it forth wente
               Downe by a floury grene it wente
               Full thycke of graſſe, full ſofte and ſwete
               wyth floures fele, fayre vnder fete
               And lytell vſed, it ſemed thus
               For both Flora, and zepherus
               They two, that make floures growe
               Had made her dwellynge there I trowe
               For it was on to beholde
               As though the erthe enuye wolde
               
                  To be gayer then the heuen
               To haue mo floures, ſuche ſeuen
               As in the welken ſterres be
               It had forget the pouerte
               That wynter, through hys colde morowes
               Had made it ſuffre, and hys ſorowes
               All was foryeten, and that was ſene
               For all the woode was woxen grene
               Swetneſſe of dewe, had made it waxe
               It is no nede eke for to axe
               where there were many grene greues
               Of thycke of trees, ſo full of leues
               And euery tree ſtode by hym ſelue
               Fro other, well ten foote or twelue
               So great trees, ſo huge of ſtrength
               Of fourty or fyfty fedome length
               Cleane wythout bowe or ſtycke
               wyth croppes brode, and eke as thycke
               They were not an ynche a ſonder
               That it was ſhadde ouer all vnder
               And many an harte, and many an hynde
               was both before me, and behynde
               Of fawnes, ſowers, buckes, does
               was full of the wodde, and many roes
               And many ſquyrels, that ſete
               Full hygh vpon the trees and ete
               And in her maner made feeſtes
               Shortly, it was ſo full of beeſtes
               That though Argus, the noble countour
               Sat to reken in hys countour
               And reken wyth hys fygures ten
               For by tho fygures newe al ken
               Yf they be crafty, reken and nombre
               And tell of euery thynge the nombre
               Yet ſhulde he fayle to reken euen
               The wonders me met in my ſweuen
               But forth I romed, ryght wonder faſte
               Donwe the wodde, ſo at the laſte
               I was ware of a man in blacke
               That ſate, and had yturned hys backe
               To an ooke, an huge tree
               Lorde thought I, who maye that be
               what eyleth hym to ſytten here
               Anone ryght, I went nere
               Then founde I ſytte, euen vpryght
               A wonder welfarynge knyght
               By the maner me thought ſo
               Of good mokell, and ryght yonge therto
               Of the age of foure and twenty yere
               Vpon hys berde, but lytell heere
               And he was clothed all in blacke
               I ſtalked euen vnto hys backe
               And there I ſtode, as ſtyll as ought
               The ſothe to ſay, he ſawe me nought
               For why he hynge his heed adowne
               And with a deedly, ſorouful ſowne
               He made of ryme, ten verſes or twelue
               Of a complaynt, to him ſelue
               The moſte pyte, the moſte routhe
               That euer I herde, for by my trouthe
               It was great wonder that nature
               Myght ſuffre any creature
               To haue ſuche ſorowe, and he not deed
               Ful pytous pale, and nothyng reed
               He ſayd a laye a maner ſonge
               without note, without ſonge
               And was this, for ful wel I can
               Reherſe it, right thus it began
               I haue of ſorowe ſo great wone
               That ioye gette I neuer none
               Nowe that I ſe my lady bright
               whiche I haue loued, withal my myght
               Is fro me deed, and is agone
               And thus in ſorowe, lefte me alone
               Alas, deth what ayleth the
               That thou noldeſt haue taken me
               when that thou toke my lady ſwete
               Of all goodneſſe, ſhe had none mete
               That was ſo fayre, ſo freſhe, ſo fre
               So good, that men maye well ſe
               when he had made thus hys complaynte
               Hys ſorowfull herte, gan faſt faynte
               And hys ſpirites wexen dede
               The bloode was fledde, for pure drede
               Downe to hys herte, to maken hym warme
               For well it feled the herte had harme
               To wete eke, why it was adradde
               By kynde, and for to make it gladde
               For it is membre principall
               Of the body, and that made all
               Hys hewe chaunge, and wexe grene
               And pale, for there no bloode is ſene
               In no maner lymme of hys
               Anone therwyth, when I ſawe thys
               He farde thus yuell, there he ſete
               I wente and ſtode ryght at hys fete
               And grette hym, but he ſpake nought
               But argued wyth hys owne thought
               And in hys wytte, dyſputed faſte
               why, and howe hys lyfe myght laſte
               Hym thought hys ſorowes were ſo ſmerte
               And lay ſo colde vpon hys herte
               So through hys ſorowe, & holy thought
               Made hym that he herde me nought
               
                  For he had welnye loſte hys mynde
               Though Pan, that mē clepeth god of kynde
               were for hys ſorowes neuer ſo wrothe
               But at the laſt, to ſayne ryght ſothe
               He was ware of me, howe I ſtoode
               Before hym, and dyd of my hoode
               And had ygret hym, as I beſt coude
               Debonayrly, and nothynge loude
               He ſayd, I praye the be not wrothe
               I herde the not: to ſayne the ſothe
               Ne I ſawe the not, ſyr truely
               Ah good ſyr, no force (quod I)
               I am ryght ſory, yf I haue ought
               Dyſtroubled you, out of your thought
               Foryeue me, yf I haue myſſe take
               Yes, thamendes is lyght to make
               (Quod he) for there lyeth none therto
               There is nothynge myſſayde, nor do
               Lo howe goodly ſpake thys knyght
               As it had be another wyght
               And made it neyther tough ne queynt
               And I ſawe that, and gan me aqueynt
               wyth hym, and founde hym ſo tretable
               Ryght wonder ſkylfull, and reſonable
               As me thought, for all hys bale
               Anone ryght, I gan fynde a tale
               To hym, to loke where I myght ought
               Haue more knowlegynge of hys thought
               Syr (quod I) thys game is done
               I holde that thys herte be gone
               Theſe huntes can hym no where ſe
               I do no force therof (quod he)
               My thought is theron neuer a dele
               By our lorde (quod I) I trowe you wele
               Ryght ſo me thynketh by your chere
               But ſyr, o thynge woll ye here
               Me thynketh in great ſorowe I you ſe
               But certes ſyr, yf that ye
               wolde ought dyſcure me your wo
               I wolde, as wyſe god helpe me ſo
               Amende it, yf I can or may
               Ye mowe proue it by aſſay
               For by my trouth, to make you hole
               I woll do all my power hole
               And telleth me, of your ſorowes ſmerte
               Parauenter it maye eaſe your herte
               That ſemeth full ſycke vnder your ſyde
               wyth that he loked on me a ſyde
               As who ſayeth nay, that wyll not be
               Graunt mercy good frende (quod he)
               I thanke the, that thou woldeſt ſo
               But it maye neuer the rather be do
               No man may my ſorowe glade
               That maketh my hewe to fall and fade
               And hath myne vnderſtandynge lorne
               That me is wo, that I was borne
               May nought make my ſorowes ſlyde
               Not all the remedyes of Ouide
               Ne Orpheus, god of melodye
               Ne Dedalus, wyth hys playes ſlye
               Ne heale me, may no phiſicien
               Naught Ipocras, ne Galien
               Me is wo, that I lyue houres twelue
               But who ſo woll aſſaye hym ſelue
               whether hys herte can haue pyte
               Of any ſorowe, let hym ſe me
               I wretch, that death hath made all naked
               Of all the blyſſe that euer was maked
               I wroth, werſte of all wyghtes
               That hate my dayes, and my nyghtes
               My lyfe, my luſtes, be me lothe
               For all fare and I be wrothe
               The pure death is ſo full my ſo
               That I wolde dye, it wyll not ſo
               For when I folowe it, it wyll flye
               I wolde haue hym, it nyl nat me
               Thys is payne wythout reed
               Alwaye dyenge, and be not deed
               That Teſyphus that lyeth in hell
               Maye not of more ſorowe tell
               And who ſo wyſte all, by my trouthe
               My ſorowe, but he had routhe
               And pyte of my ſorowes ſmerte
               That man hath a fendly herte
               For who ſo ſeeth me fyrſt on morowe
               Maye ſayne he hath mette wyth ſorowe
               For I am ſorowe, and ſorowe is I
               Alas, and I wyll tell the why
               My ſorowe is turned to playnynge
               And all my laughter to wepynge
               My glad thoughtes to heuyneſſe
               In trauayle is myne ydleneſſe
               And eke my reſte, my wele is wo
               My good is harme, and euer wo
               In wrath is turned my playnyng
               And my delyte in to ſorowyng
               Myne heale is turned in to ſickneſſe
               In drede is al my ſykerneſſe
               To derke is turned al my lyght
               My witte is foly, my day is nyght
               My loue is hate, my ſlepe wakyng
               My myrthe and melis, is faſtyng
               My countenaunce is nycete
               And al abawed, where ſo I be
               
                  My peace pleadynge, and in werre
               Alas, howe myght I fare werre
               My boldneſſe is turned to ſhame
               For falſe fortune hath played a game
               At the Cheſſe wyth me, alas the whyle
               The traytereſſe falfe, and full of gyle
               That all behoteth, and nothynge halte
               She goeth vpryght, and yet ſhe halte
               That baggeth foule, and loketh fayre
               The dyſpytous debonayre
               That ſcorneth many a creature
               An ydole of falſe purtrayture
               Is ſhe, for ſhe woll ſone wryen
               She is the monſtres heed ywryen
               As fylthe, ouer yſtrowed wyth floures
               Her moſte worſhyp and her floures
               To lyen, for that is her nature
               wythout fayth, lawe, or meſure
               She falſe is, and euer laughynge
               wyth one eye, and that other wepynge
               That is brought vp, ſhe ſet all downe
               I lyken her to the Scorpiowne
               That is a falſe flatterynge beeſt
               For wyth hys heed be maketh feeſt
               But all amyd hys flaterynge
               wyth hys tayle he wyll ſtynge
               And enuenym, and ſo wyll ſhe ❧
               
               She is the enuyous charite
               That is aye falſe, and ſemeth wele
               So turneth ſhe her falſe whele
               Aboute, for it is nothynge ſtable
               Nowe by the fyre, nowe at table
               Ful many one hath ſhe thus yblent
               She is playe of enchauntement
               That ſemeth one, and is not ſo
               The falſe thefe, what hath ſhe do
               Troweſt thou, by our lorde I wyll the ſay
               At the Cheſſe wyth me ſhe gan to play
               wyth her falſe draughtes full dyuers
               She ſtale on me, and toke my feers
               And when I ſawe my feers away
               Alas, I couth no lenger play
               But ſayd, farewell ſwete ywys
               And farewell all that euer there is
               Therwyth fortune ſayd, checke here
               And mate in the mydde poynt of the checkere
               wyth a paune errant, a
                     •
                  s
               Full craftyer to playe ſhe was
               Then Athalus that made the game
               Fyrſt of the Cheſſe, ſo was hys name
               But god wolde I had ons or twyſe
               Iconde, and knowe the ieoperdyſe
               That coude the Greke Pithagores
               I ſhulde haue playde the bet at ches
               And kepte my feers the bet therby
               And though wherto, for truely
               I holde that wyſhe not worth a ſtre
               It had be neuer the bet for me
               For fortune can ſo many a wyle
               There be but fewe, can her begyle
               And eke ſhe is the laſſe to blame
               My ſelfe I wolde haue do the ſame
               Before god, had I ben as ſhe
               She ought the more excuſed be
               For thys I ſay, yet more therto
               Had I be god, and myght haue do
               My wyll, when ſhe me feers caught
               I wolde haue drawe the ſame draught
               For alſo wyſe, god yeue me reſt
               I dare well ſwere, ſhe toke the beſt
               But through that draught I haue lorne
               My blyſſe, alas that I was borne
               For euermore I trowe truely
               For all my wyll, my luſt holy
               Is tourned, but ye, what to done
               By our lorde it is to dye ſone
               For nothynge I leaue it nought
               But lyue and dye, ryght in thys thought
               For there nys planet in fyrmament
               Ne in ayre ne in earth none element
               That they ne yeue me a yefte echone
               Of wepynge when I am alone
               For when that I aduyſe me wele
               And bethynke me euery dele
               Howe that there lyeth in rekenynge
               In my ſorowe for nothynge
               And howe there lyueth no gladneſſe
               May glad me of my dyſtreſſe
               And howe I haue loſt ſuffyſaunce
               And therto I haue no pleaſaunce
               Then maye I ſaye, I haue ryght nought
               And when all thys falleth in my thought
               Alas, then am I ouercome
               For that is done, is not to come
               I haue more ſorowe then Tantale
               And when I herde hym tell thys tale
               Thus pytouſly, as I you tell
               Vnneth myght I lenger dwell
               It dyd myne herte ſo moche wo
               A good ſyr (quod I) ſay not ſo
               Haue ſome pyte on your nature
               That formed you to creature
               Remembreth you of Socrates
               For he ne counteth not thre ſtrees
               
                  Of nought that fortune coude do
               No (quod he) I can not ſo
               why ſo good ſyr, yes perde (quod I)
               Ne ſaye not ſo, for truly
               Though ye had loſt the feerſes twelue
               And ye for ſorowe murdred your ſelue
               Ye ſhulde be dampned in thys eaſe
               By as good ryght as Medea was
               That ſlough her chyldren for Iaſon
               And Phyllis alſo, for Demophon
               Hynge her ſelfe, ſo welaway
               For he had broke hys terme day
               To come to her: Another rage
               Had Dido, the quene eke of Cartage
               That ſlough her ſelfe, for Eneas
               was falſe, whych a foole ſhe was?
               And Ecquo dyed, for Narciſus
               Nolde not loue her, and ryght thus
               Hath many another foly done
               And for Dalida dyed Sampſon
               That ſlough hym ſelfe wyth a pylere
               But there is no man alyue here
               wolde for her feers make thys wo
               why ſo (quod he) it is not ſo
               Thou woteſt full lytell what thou meneſt
               I haue loſt more then thou weneſt
               Howe that maye be (quod I)
               Good ſyr, tell me all holy
               In what wyſe, howe, why, and wherfore
               That ye haue thus your blyſſe lore
               Blythely (quod he) come ſyt doun
               I tell the vpon a condicioun
               That thou ſhalt holly wyth all thy wyt
               Do thyne entente to herken it
               Yes ſyr: Swere thy trouth therto
               Gladly do then holde here to
               I ſhall ryght blythly, ſo god me ſaue
               Holly wyth all the wyt I haue
               Here you as well as I can
               A goddes halfe (quod he) and began
               Syr (quod he) ſyth fyrſt I couthe
               Haue any maner wyt fro youth
               Or kyndely vnderſtandynge
               To comprehende in any thynge
               what loue was, in myne owne wyt
               Dredeleſſe I haue euer yet
               Be trybutary, and yeue rente
               To loue holly, wyth good entente
               And through pleaſaunce, become hys thrall
               wyth good wyll, body, herte and all
               All thys I put in hys ſeruage
               As to my lorde, and dyd homage
               And full deuoutly I prayde hym to
               He ſhulde beſet myne herte ſo
               That it pleaſaunce to hym were
               And worſhyp to my lady dere
               And thys was longe, and many a yere
               (Er that myne herte was ſet o where)
               That I dyd thus, and nyſte why
               I trowe it came me kyndely
               Paraunter I was therto moſte able
               As a whyte wall, or a table
               For it is redy to ketche and take
               All that men wyll therin make
               whether ſo men woll portrey or paynte
               Be the werkes neuer ſo quaynte.
               And thylke tyme I fared ryght ſo
               I was able to haue lerned tho
               And to haue conde, as well or better
               Paraunter, eyther arte or letter
               But for loue came fyrſt in my thought
               Therfore I forgate it nought
               I chees loue to my fyrſt crafte
               Therfore it is wyth me lafte
               For why, I toke it of ſo yonge age
               That malyce had my corage
               Not that tyme, turned to no thynge
               Through to mokell knowlegynge
               For that tyme, youth my mayſtreſſe
               Gouerned me in ydelneſſe
               For it was in my fyrſt youthe
               And tho full lytell good I couthe
               For al my werkes were flyttyng
               That tyme, and al my though varyeng
               Al were to me ilyche goode
               That I knewe tho, but thus it ſtode
               It happed that I came on a day
               In to a place, there that I ſey
               Trewly the fayreſt companye
               Of ladyes, that euer man with eye
               Had ſene togythers in o place
               Shal I clepe it happe, eyther grace
               That brought me there, not but fortune
               That is to lyen ful comune
               The falſe traytereſſe peruerſe
               God wolde I coulde clepe her werſe
               For nowe ſhe worcheth me ful wo
               And I wol tel ſone why ſo
               Among theſe ladyes thus echone
               Soth to ſayne, I ſawe one
               That was lyke none of the route
               For I dare ſwere, without doute
               That as the ſōmers ſunne bryght
               Is fayrer, clerer, and hath more lyght
               
                  Than any other planet in heuen
               The moone, or the ſterres ſeuen
               For all the worlde, ſo had ſhe
               Surmounted hem al of beautie
               Of maner, and of comlyneſſe
               Of ſtature, and of wel ſet gladneſſe
               Of goodlyhede, and ſo wel beſey
               Shortly what ſhal I more ſey
               By god and by his halowes twelue
               It was my ſwete, ryght all her ſelue
               She had ſo ſtedfaſt countenaunce
               So noble porte, and mayntenaunce
               And loue▪ that wel herde my bone
               Had eſpyed me thus ſone
               That ſhe full ſone in my thought
               As helpe me god, ſo was I cought
               So ſodaynly, that I ne toke
               No maner counſayle, but at her loke
               And at myne herte, for why, her eyen
               So gladly I trowe myne hert ſeyne
               That purely tho, myne owne thought
               Sayd it were better ſerue her for nought
               Than with an other to be wele
               And it was ſoth, for euery dele
               I wyll anon ryght tell the why
               I ſawe her daunce ſo comely
               Caroll and ſynge ſo ſwetely
               Laugh and playe ſo womanly
               And loke ſo debonayrly
               So goodly ſpeke and ſo frendly
               That certes I trowe that neuermore
               Nas ſene ſo blyſful a treſore
               For euery heer on her heed
               Soth to ſaye it was not reed
               Ne neyther yelowe, ne browne it nas
               Me thought mooſt lyke golde it was
               And which eyen my lady had
               Debonayre, good, glad, and ſad
               Symple, of good mokell, not to wyde
               Therto her loke nas nat aſyde
               Ne ouerthwart, but beſet ſo wele
               It drewe and toke vp euery dele
               All that on her gan beholde
               Her eyen ſemed anon ſhe wolde
               Haue mercy, folly wenden ſo
               But it was neuer the rather do
               It nas no counterfeyted thynge
               It was her owne pure lokyng
               That the goddeſſe dame nature
               Had made hem open by meaſure
               And cloſe, for were ſhe neuer ſo glad
               Her lokyng was not folyche ſprad
               Ne wyldly, though that ſhe played
               But euer me thought her eyen ſayde
               By god my wrath is all foryeue
               Therwith her lyſt ſo wel to lyue
               That dulneſſe was of her adrad
               She nas to ſobre ne to glad
               In all thynges more meaſure
               Had neuer I trowe creature
               But many one with her loke ſhe hert
               And that ſate her full lytle at herte
               For ſhe knewe nothyng of her thought
               But whether ſhe knewe or knewe it nought
               Algate ſhe ne rought of hym a ſtre
               To get her loue no nere nas he
               That wōned at home, than he in Inde
               The formoſt was alway behynde
               But good folke ouer all other
               She loued as man may do his brother
               Of which loue ſhe was wondre large
               In ſkylful places that bere charge
               But which a vyſage had ſhe therto
               Alas my hert is wondre wo
               That I ne can deſcryuen it
               Me lacketh both englyſh and wyt
               For to vndo it at the full
               And eke my ſpyrites ben ſo dull
               So great a thyng for to deuyſe
               I haue no wyt that can ſuffyſe
               To comprehende her beauti
               But thus moche I dare ſayne that ſhe
               was whyte, rodye, freſh, & lyuely hewed
               And euery daye her beautie newed
               And nygh her face was alderbeſt
               For certes nature had ſuche leſt
               To make that fayre, that truly ſhe
               was her chefe patron of beautie
               And chefe enſample of all her werke
               And monſtre, for be it neuer ſo darke
               Me thynketh I ſe her euermo
               And yet moreouer though al tho
               That euer lyued, were now alyue
               Ne wolde haue founde to diſcryue
               In al her face, a wicked ſigne
               For it was ſad, ſymple, and benigne
               And ſuche a goodly ſwete ſpeche
               Had that ſwete, my lyues leche
               So frendly, and ſo well ygrounded
               Vpon al reaſon ſo well yfounded
               And ſo tretable to all good
               That I dare ſweare well by the rood
               Of eloquence was neuer founde
               So ſwete a ſownyng facounde
               
                  Ne trewer tonged, ne ſcorned laſſe
               Ne bet coulde heale: That by the maſſe
               I durſt ſweare, though the pope it ſonge
               That there was neuer yet through her tōg
               Man ne woman greatly harmyd
               As for her was all harme hyd
               Ne laſſe flattryng in her worde
               That purely her ſymple recorde
               was founde as true as any bonde
               Or trouth, of any mans honde
               Ne chyde ſhe coulde neuer a dele
               That knoweth all the worlde ful wele
               But ſuche a fayrneſſe of a necke
               Had that ſwete, that bone nor brecke
               Nas ther none ſene, that myſſat
               It was whyte, ſmothe, ſtreyght, & pure flat
               without hole, or canell bone
               And by ſemyng ſhe had none
               Her throte, as I haue now memoire
               Semed as a rounde tour of yuoire
               Of good greatneſſe, and not to grete
               And Fayre whyte ſhe hete
               That was my ladyes name ryght
               She was therto fayre and bryght
               She had not her name wronge
               Ryght fayre ſhulders, and body longe
               She had, and armes euery lyth
               Fattyſh fleſſhy, not great ther with
               Ryght whyte handes, and nayles red
               Rounde breſtes, and of good brede
               Her hyppes were: a ſtreyght flat backe
               I knewe on her none other lacke
               That all her lymmes nere pure ſewyng
               In as ferre as I had knowyng
               Therto ſhe coulde ſo wel playe
               what that her lyſt, that I dare ſaye
               That was lyke to torche bryght
               That euery man maye take of lyght
               Ynough, and it hath neuer the leſſe
               Of maner and of comlyneſſe
               Ryght ſo farde my lady dere
               For euery wyght of her manere
               Myght catche ynough, yf that he wolde
               Yf he had eyen her to beholde
               For I dare ſweare wel, yf that ſhe
               Had amonge ten thouſande be
               She wolde haue be at the beſt
               A chefe myrrour of all the feeſt
               Though they had ſtonde in a rowe
               To mens eyen, that coulde haue knowe
               For where ſo men had played, or waked
               Me thought the felowſhyp as naked
               without her, that I ſawe ones
               As a crowne without ſtones
               Truly ſhe was to myne eye
               The ſoleyn Fenix of Arabye
               For there lyueth neuer but one
               Ne ſuche as ſhe, ne knowe I none
               To ſpeke of goodneſſe, truly ſhe
               Had as moche debonayrtie
               As euer had Heſter in the Byble
               And more, yf more were poſſyble
               And ſoth to ſayne, therwithall
               She had a wyt ſo generall
               So hole enclyned to all good
               That all her wyt was ſet by the roode
               without malyce, vpon gladneſſe
               And therto I ſawe neuer yet a leſſe
               Harmfull, than ſhe was in doing
               I ſay not that ſhe ne had knowyng
               what harme was, or els ſhe
               Had coulde no good, ſo thynketh me
               And truly for to ſpeke of trouth
               But ſhe had had, it had be routh
               Therof ſhe had ſo moche her dele
               And I dare ſayne, and ſwete it wele
               That trouth hym ſelfe ouer all and all
               Had choſe his maner principall
               In her, that was his reſtyng place
               Therto ſhe had the mooſt grace
               To haue ſtedfaſt perſeueraunce
               And eaſye attempre gouernaunce
               That euer I knewe, or wyſt yet
               So pure ſuffraunt was her wyt
               And reaſon gladly ſhe vnderſtode
               It folowed well, ſhe coulde good
               She vſed gladly to do wele
               Theſe were her maners euery dele
               Therwith ſhe loued ſo well ryght
               She wronge do wolde to no wyght
               No wyght myght do her no ſhame
               She loued ſo wel her owne name
               Her luſt to holde no wyght in honde
               Ne be thou ſyker, ſhe wolde not fonde
               To holde no wyght in balaunce
               By halfe worde, ne by countenaunce
               But yf men wolde vpon her lye
               Ne ſende men into walakye
               To Pruyſe, and to Tartarie
               To Aliſandrie, ne into Turkye
               And byd hym faſt, anon that he
               Go hoodleſſe into the drye ſee
               And come home by the Carrenare
               And ſyr, be now ryght ware
               
                  That I may of you here ſayne
               worſhyp, or that ye come agayne
               She ne vſed no ſuche knackes ſmale
               But therfore that I tell my tale
               Ryght on this ſame I haue ſayde
               was hooly all my loue layde
               For certes ſhe was that ſwete wyfe
               My ſuffyſaunce, my luſt, my lyfe
               Myne hope, myne heale, and all bleſſe
               My worldes welfare, and my goodeſſe
               And I holy hers, and euerydale
               By our lorde (ꝙ I) I trowe you wele
               Hardly your loue was wel beſet
               I not how ye myght haue do bet
               Bet, ne not ſo well (quod he)
               I trowe ſyr (quod I) parde.
               Nay leue it wel: Syr ſo do I
               I leue you well, that truly
               You thought that ſhe was the beſt
               And to beholde, the alderfayreſt
               whoſo had loked her with your eyen?
               with myne, nay al that her ſeyen
               Sayde and ſwore, it was ſo
               And though they ne had, I wolde tho
               Haue loued beſt my lady fre
               Though I had had all the beautie
               That euer had Alcibyades
               And all the ſtrength of Hercules
               And therto had the worthyneſſe
               Of Aliſaundre, and all the rycheſſe
               That euer was in Babiloyne
               In Cartage, or in Macedoyne
               Or in Rome, or in Niniue
               And therto alſo hardy be
               As was Hector, ſo haue I ioye
               That Achiles ſlough at Troye
               And therfore was he ſlayne alſo
               In a temple, for both two
               wer ſlayne, he and Antigelius
               And ſo ſayth Dares Frigius
               For loue of Polixena
               Or ben as wyſe as Mynerua
               I wolde euer, without drede
               Haue loued her, for I muſt nede
               Nede▪ nay truly I gabbe nowe
               Nought nede, and I woll tellen howe
               For of good wyll myne hert it wolde
               And eke to loue her, I was holde
               As for the fayreſt and the beſt
               She was as good, ſo haue I reſt
               As euer was Penelope of Grece
               Or as the noble wyfe Lucrece
               That was the beſt, he telleth thus
               The Romayne Titus Lyuius
               She was as good, and nothyng lyke
               Though her ſtories be autentyke
               Algate ſhe was as true as ſhe
               But wherfore that I tell the
               whan I fyrſt my ladye ſeye
               I was ryght yonge, ſoth to ſay
               And ful great nede I had to lerne
               whan myne hert wolde yerne
               To loue it was a great empriſe
               But as my wyt wolde beſt ſuffyſe
               After my yonge chyldly wyt
               without drede I beſet it
               To loue her in my beſt wyſe
               To do her worſhyp, and the ſeruyſe
               That I conde tho, by my trouth
               without faynyng, eyther ſlouth
               For wonder fayne I wolde her ſe
               So mokell it amended me
               That whan I ſawe her a morowe
               I was waryſhed of al my ſorowe
               Of alday after tyl it were eue
               Me thought nothyng myght me greue
               were my ſorowes neuer ſo ſmerte
               And yet ſhe ſyt ſo in myne herte
               That by my trouth, I nolde nought
               For al this worlde, out of my thought
               Leaue my lady, no truly
               Now by my trouth ſyr (quod I)
               Me thynketh ye haue ſuche a chaunce
               As ſhryft without repentaunce
               Repentaunce, nay fye (quod he)
               Shulde I nowe repent me
               To loue, nay certes than were I well
               werſe than was Achitophel
               Or Antenor, ſo haue I ioye
               The traytour that betrayed Troye
               Or the falſe Genellon
               He that purchaſed the trayſon
               Of Roulande, and of Olyuere
               Nay, whyle I am alyue here
               I nyll foryet her neuer mo
               Now good ſyr (quod I) tho
               Ye haue well tolde me here before
               It is no nede to reherſe it more
               Now ye ſawe her fyrſt, and where
               But wolde ye tel me the manere
               To her, which was your fyrſt ſpeche
               Therof I wolde you beſeche
               And howe ſhe knewe fyrſt your thought
               
                  whether ye loued her or nought
               And telleth me eke what ye haue lore
               I herde you tel here before
               ye ſayd, thou noteſt what thou meneſt
               I haue loſt more than thou weneſt
               what loſſe is that (quod I tho)
               Nyl ſhe not loue you is it ſo
               Or haue ye aught done amys
               That ſhe hath lefte you, is it this
               For goddes loue tel me al
               Before god (quod he) and I ſhal
               I ſay right as I haue ſayde
               On her was al me loue layd
               And yet ſhe niſt it not neuer a dele
               Not long tyme, leue it wele
               For be right ſyker, I durſt nought
               For al this worlde, tel her my thought
               Ne I wolde haue wrathed her truly
               For woſte thou why, ſhe was lady
               Of the body that had the herte
               And whoſo hath that may not aſterte
               But for to kepe me fro ydleneſſe
               Truly I dyd my buſyneſſe
               To make ſonges as I beſt coude
               And oft tyme I ſonge hem loude
               And made ſonges, this a great deale
               Although I coude not make ſo wele
               Songes, ne knewe the arte all
               As coude Lamekes ſonne Tuball
               That founde out fyrſt the arte of ſonge
               For as his brothers hamers ronge
               Vpon his anuelt vp and downe
               Therof he toke the fyrſt ſowne
               But grekes ſayne of Pithagoras
               That he the fyrſt fynder was
               Of the arte, Aurora telleth ſo
               But therof noforce of hem two
               Algates ſonges this I made
               Of my felyng, myne hert to glade
               And lo, this was alther ferſt
               I not where it were the werſt
               Lorde it maketh myne hert lyght
               whan I thynke on that ſwete wyght
               That is ſo ſemely on to ſe
               And wyſh to god it myght ſo be
               That ſhe wolde holde me for her knyght
               My lady that is ſo fayre and bryght
               Now haue I tolde the, ſoth to ſay
               My fyrſt ſonge vpon a daye
               I bethought me what wo
               And ſorowe that I ſuffred tho
               For her, and yet ſhe wyſt it nought
               Ne tel her durſt I not my thought
               Alas thought I, I can no rede
               And but I tell her, I am but deed
               And yf I tell her, to ſay ryght ſoth
               I am adrad ſhe woll be wroth
               Alas, what ſhall I than do
               In this debate, I was ſo wo
               Me thought myne hert braſt arwayne
               So at the laſt, ſoth for to ſayne
               I bethought me that nature
               Ne formed neuer in creature
               So moche beautie truly
               And bountie without mercy
               In hope of that, my tale I tolde
               with ſorowe, as that I neuer ſholde
               For nedes, and maugre myne heed
               I muſt haue tolde her, or be deed
               I not well how that I began
               Full euyll reherſe it I can
               And eke as helpe me god withall
               I trowe it was in the diſmal
               That was the ten woundes of Egypt
               For many a worde I ouer ſkypt
               In my tale for pure fere
               Leſt my wordes myſſe ſet were
               with ſorowfull hert and woundes deed
               Softe and quakyng for pure drede
               And ſhame, and ſtyntyng in my tale
               For ferde, and myne hewe all pale
               Full oft I wext both pale and red
               Bowyng to her I hynge the heed
               I durſt not ones loke her on
               For wyt, maner, and all was gone
               I ſayd: mercy, and nomore
               It nas no game, it ſat me ſore.
               So at the laſt, ſoth to ſayne
               whan that myne hert was come agayne
               To tell ſhortly al my ſpeche
               with hole hert I gan her beſeche
               That ſhe wolde be my lady ſwete
               And ſwore, and hertely gan her hete
               Euer to be ſtedfaſt and trewe
               And loue her alway freſhly newe
               And neuer other lady haue
               And all her worſhyp for to ſaue
               As I beſt coude, I ſwere her this
               For yours is all that euer there is
               For euermore myne herte ſwete
               And neuer to falſe you, but I mete
               I nyll, as wyſe god helpe me ſo
               And whan I had my tale ydo
               God wot ſhe accompted not a ſtre
               
                  Of my tale, ſo thought me
               To tell ſhortly, ryght as it is
               Truly her anſwer it was this
               I can not now wel countrefete
               Her wordes, but this was the grete
               Of her anſwer, ſhe ſayd nay
               All vtterly, alas that daye
               The ſorowe I ſuffred and the wo
               That truly Caſſandra that ſo
               Bewayled the deſtruction
               Of Troye, and of Illion
               Had neuer ſuche ſorwe as I tho
               I durſt nomore ſay thereto
               For pure feare, but ſtale awaye
               And thus I lyued full many a day
               That truly I had no nede
               Further than my beds heed
               Neuer a day to ſeche ſorowe
               I founde it redy euery morowe
               For why, I loued her in no gere
               So it befell an other yere
               I thought ones I wolde fonde
               To do her knowe, and vnderſtonde
               My wo, and ſhe well vnderſtoode
               That I ne wylled thynge but good
               And worſhyp, and to kepe her name
               Ouer al thynges, and drede her ſhame
               And was ſo buſy her to ſerue
               And pytie were I ſhulde ſterue
               Sith that I willed none harme iwys
               So whan my lady knewe all this
               My lady yaue me all holy
               The noble yeft of her mercy
               Sauyng her worſhyp by al wayes
               Dredleſſe, I mene non other wayes
               And therwith ſhe yaue me a rynge
               I trowe it was the fyrſt thynge
               But yf myne hert was ywaxe
               Glad, that it is no nede to axe
               As helpe me god, I was as blyue
               Rayſed, as fro deth to lyue
               Of al happes the alder beſt
               The gladdeſt and the mooſt at reſt
               For truly that ſwete wyght
               whan I had wronge, & ſhe the ryght
               She wolde alway ſo goodly
               Foryeue me ſo debonayrly
               In all my youth, in all chaunce
               She toke me in her gouernaunce
               Therwith ſhe was alway ſo trewe
               Our ioye was euery lyche newe
               Our hertes weren ſo euen a payre
               That neuer nas that one contrayre
               To that other, for no wo
               For ſoth ilyche they ſuffred tho
               O blyſſe and eke o ſorowe both
               Ilych they were both glad and wroth
               Al was vs one without were
               And thus we lyued ful many a yere
               So well, I can not tell howe
               Sir (quod I) where is ſhe nowe
               Now (quod he) and ſtynt anon
               Therwith he woxe as deed as ſtone
               And ſayde alas that I was bore
               That was the loſſe, that here before
               I tolde the, that I had lorne
               Bethinke the, how I ſayd here beforne
               Thou woſt ful lytle what thou meneſt
               I haue loſt more than thou weneſt
               God wot alas, ryght that was ſhe
               Alas ſyr how, what may that be
               She is deed: Nay: Yes by my trouth
               Is that your loſſe, by god it is routh.
            
            
               ¶And with that worde ryght anon
               They gan to ſtrake forth, all was done
               For that tyme the hart huntyng
               with that me thought that this kynge
               Gan homewarde for to ryde
               Vnto a place was there beſyde
               which was from vs but a lyte
               A longe caſtell with walles whyte
               By ſaynt Iohn on a ryche hyll
               As me mette, but thus it fyll
               Ryght thus me met, as I you tell
               Than in the caſtell there was a bell
               As it had ſmyt houres twelue
               Therwith I awoke my ſelue
               And founde me lying in my bed
               And the boke that I had red
               Of Alcione and Seys the kynge
               And of the goddes of ſlepyng
               I founde it in myne honde full euen
               Thought I, this is ſo queynt a ſweuen
               That I wolde by proceſſe of tyme
               Fonde, to put this ſweuen in ryme
               As I can beſt, and that anon
               This was my ſweuen, now it is done.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            
            
               
                  MY mayſter. &c. whan of Chryſt our kynge
               was aſked, what is trouth or ſothfaſtneſſe
               He not a worde anſwered to that aſkynge
               As who ſayeth, no man is all true I geſſe
               And therfore though I hyght to expreſſe
               The ſorowe and wo that is in maryage
               I dare not wryten of it no wyckedneſſe
               Leſt I my ſelfe fall efte in ſuche dotage.
            
            
               I woll not ſay how that it is the chayne
               Of Sathanas, on whiche he gnaweth euer
               But I dare ſayne, were he out of his payne
               As by his wyll, he wolde be bounden neuer
               But thylke doted foole that eft hath leuer
               Ychayned be, than out of priſon crepe
               God let hym neuer fro his wo diſceuer
               Ne no man hym bewayle, though he wepe.
            
            
               But yet leſt thou do worſe, take a wyſe
               Bet is to wed, then bren in worſe wyſe
               But yu ſhalt haue ſorow on thy fleſh thy lyfe
               And bē thy wyues thral, as ſayn theſe wiſe
               And if that holy wrytte may not ſuffyſe
               Experience ſhall the teache, ſo may happe
               Take the waye leuer to be take in Fryſe
               Than efte to fall of weddyng in the trappe.
            
            
               This lytle wryt, prouerbes or fygures
               I ſende you, take kepe of it I rede
               Vnwyſe is he, that can no wele endure
               Yf thou be ſyker, put the not in drede
               The wyfe of Bathe I praye you yt ye rede
               Of this mater that we haue on honde
               God graunt you your lyfe frely to lede
               In fredome, for foule is to be bonde.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            The aſſemble of foules.
            
               
                  THe lyfe ſo ſhorte, ye craft ſo longe to lerne
               Thaſſaye ſo harde, ſo ſharpe the cōquering
               The dredful ioy alway that flyt ſo yerne
               All this mene I by loue that my felynge
               Aſtonyeth with his wondrefull werkynge
               So ſore iwys, that whan I on him thynke
               Nought wet I wel, whether I flete or ſink
            
            
               For al be that I, knowe not loue in dede
               Ne wot how that he quyteth folke her hyre
               Yet happeth me full oft in bokes rede
               Of his myracles, and of his cruell yre
               There rede I well, he wol be lorde and ſyre
               I dare not ſayne, his ſtrokes be ſore
               But god ſaue ſuche a lorde, I can nomore
            
            
               Of vſage, what for luſt, & what for lore
               On bokes rede I oft, as I you tolde
               But wherfore I ſpeke all this, nought yore
               Agone, it happed me to beholde
               Vpon a boke was ywrytten wt letters olde
               And thervpon a certayne thynge to lerne
               The longe day ful faſt I rad and yerne.
            
            
               For out of olde feldes, as men ſayth
               Cōmeth al this newe corne fro yere to yere
               And out of olde bokes, in good fayth
               Cōmeth all this newe ſcience that men lere
               But now to purpoſe, as of this matere
               To rede forth, it gan me ſo delyte
               That al that day me thought it but lyre.
            
            
               This boke of which I make mencyon
               Entytled was ryght thus, as I ſhall tell
               Tullius, of the dreame of Scipion
               Chapiters ſeuen it had, of heauen and hell
               And erth, and ſoules that therin dwel
               Of which as ſhortly as I can it treate
               Of his ſentence, I woll you ſayne the great
            
            
               Fyrſt telleth it, whan Scipion was come
               In Affryke, how he meteth Maſſynyſſe
               
                  That hym for ioye, in armes hath ynome
               Than telleth he her ſpeche, and all the blyſſe
               that was betwixe hem, tyll ye day gan myſſe
               And howe hys aunceſtre Affrykan ſo dere
               Gan in his ſlepe that nyght tyll him apere
            
            
               Than telleth it, that from a ſterry place
               Howe affrikan hath hym Cartage ſhewed
               And warned him beforne, of al hys grace
               And ſayd him what man, lered eyther leude
               That loueth comune profyte, wel ytheude
               He ſhulde into a blyſfull place wende
               There as the ioye is wythouten any ende
            
            
               Than aſked he, yf folke that here bene dede
               Haue lyfe, and dwellyng in another place
               And Affrikan ſayd yee, without any drede
               And howe our preſent lyues ſpace
               ment but a maner deth, what way we trace
               And rightful folke, ſhul gone after they dye
               To heauen, and ſhewed hym the Galaxie
            
            
               Than ſhewed he him, the lytle erth ye here is
               To regarde of the heuens quantyte
               And after ſhewed he him the nyne ſperis
               And after that the melodye herde he
               That cometh of thylke ſperes thriſe thre
               That welles of muſyke bene, and melodye
               In thys worlde here, and cauſe of armonye
            
            
               Than ſayd he him, ſens erth was ſo lyte
               And ful of turment, and of harde grace
               That he ne ſhulde him in this worlde delyte
               That tolde he hym, in certayne yeres ſpace
               That euery ſterre, ſhuld come into his place
               Ther it was firſt, and al ſhuld out of minde
               That in thys worlde is done, of al mākinde
            
            
               Than prayed hym Scipion, to tel hym al
               The waye to come into that heuen blyſſe
               And he ſayd: Fyrſt know thy ſelfe immortal
               And loke aye beſely, that thou werch & wiſſe
               To comune profite, and thou ſhalt not miſſe
               To come ſwyftly, vnto that place dere
               That full of blyſſe is, and of ſoules clere
            
            
               And brekers of the lawe, ſothe to ſayne
               And lykerous folke, after that they ben dede
               Shul whirle about ye world alway in paine
               Tyl many a worlde be paſſed, out of drede
               And than foryeuen al her wycked dede
               than ſhullen they come, to that blyſful place
               To whych to comen, God ſende the grace
            
            
               The day gan faylen, and the derke nyght
               That reueth beeſtes from her beſyneſſe
               Berafte me my boke for lacke of lyght
               And to my bedde I gan me for to dreſſe
               Fulfylled of thought, and beſy heuyneſſe
               For both I had thing, which that I nolde
               And eke I ne had that thyng that I wolde
            
            
               But fynally my ſpyrite at laſte
               For wery of my labour al that daye
               Toke reſte, that made me to ſlepe faſte
               And in my ſlepe I mette, as that I laye
               Howe Affrikan, ryght in the ſelfe araye
               That Scipion hym ſawe, before that tyde
               was come, & ſtode ryght at my beddes ſyde
            
            
               The wery hunter: ſlepyng in hys bedde
               To wodde ayen hys mynde goth anone
               The iuge dremeth, how hys plees be ſpedde
               The carter dremeth, howe his cartes gone
               the rych of golde, ye knight fyght wt his fone
               The ſycke mette he drynketh of the tonne
               The louer met, he hath hys lady wonne
            
            
               Can I not ſayne, yf that the cauſe were
               For I had radde of affrikan beforne
               That made me to mete that he ſtode there
               but thus ſayd he: thou haſt the ſo wel borne
               In lokynge of myne olde boke al to torne
               Of whych Macrobie rought not a lyte
               That ſomdele of thy labour wolde I quyte
            
            
               Citherea, thou blyſful lady ſwete
               That wt thy fyre brōde, daunteſt whā ye leſt
               That madeſt me thys ſweuen for to mete
               be thou my helpe in this, for thou maiſt beſt
               As wyſely as I ſeygh the north north weſt
               whan I began my ſweuen for to write
               So yeue me myght, to ryme it and endyte
            
            
               This foreſayde Affrikan me hente anone
               And forth with him to a gate brought
               Ryght of a parke, walled wyth grene ſtone
               and ouer ye gate, with letters large ywroȝt
               There were verſe ywritten, as me thought
               On eyther halfe, of full great difference
               of which I ſhal you ſay, the playne ſentence
            
            
               Through me men gone into ye blyſful place
               Of hertes heale, and deedly woundes cure
               
                  Through me men gon into the wel of grace
               There grene & luſty May, ſhall euer endure
               Thys is the waye to all good auenture
               Be glad thou reder, and thy ſorowe of caſt
               Al open am I, paſſe in and ſpede the faſt
            
            
               Through me mē gon, thā ſpake ye other ſyde
               Vnto the mortal ſtrokes of the ſpeere
               Of which diſdayne & daunger is the gyde
               There neuer tree ſhall frute, ne leaues beere
               this ſtreme you ledeth to the ſorouful weere
               There as the fyſhe in priſon is all drye
               The eſchewyng is onely the remedye
            
            
               Theſe verſes of gold & aſure ywritten were
               Of whych I gan, aſtouyed to beholde
               For with that one, encreaſed al my feare
               And with that other gan my herte to bolde
               That one me hette, that other dyd me colde
               No wytte had I, for errour for to cheſe
               To entre or ſlye, or me to ſaue or leſe
            
            
               Ryght as betwene Adamantes two
               Of euyn weyght, a pece of yron ſet
               Ne hath no myght to moue to ne fro
               For what that one may hale, that other let
               So fared I, that I nyſt where me was bet
               To entre or leaue, tyl Affrikan my gyde
               Me hente and ſhoue in, at the gates wyde
            
            
               And ſayd, it ſtandeth writen in thy face
               Thyne errour, though thou tell it not me
               But drede the not, to come into thys place
               For thys writtyng is nothinge ment by the
               Ne by none, but he loues ſeruaunte be
               For thou of loue, haſt loſt thy taſt I geſſe
               As ſycke man hath, of ſwete and bytterneſſe
            
            
               But nathleſſe, although thou be dul
               That thou cauſt not do, yet mayſt thou ſe
               For many a man, that may not ſtande a pul
               Yet lyketh it hym, at the wreſtlyng for to be
               And demeth yet, whether he do bet, or he
               And yf thou haddeſt connyng for tendyte
               I ſhal the ſhewe matter of to wryte
            
            
               And wyth yt my hande in hys he toke anone
               Of whych I comfort caught, & went in faſt
               But lorde ſo I was glad, and wel begon
               For ouer al, where I myne eyen caſt
               were trees clad wyth leues yt aye ſhall laſt
               Eche in hys kynde, wt colour freſh & grene
               As Emeraude, that ioye it was to ſene
            
            
               The bylder Oke, and eke the hardy aſhe
               The pyller elme, the coffer vnto carayne
               The boxe pype tre, holme to whyppes laſhe
               The ſaylynge fyrre, ye cypres deth to playne
               The ſhoter ewe, the aſpe for ſhaftes playne
               The Oliue of peace, and eke yt dronken vine
               The victor Palme, the laurer to dyuyne
            
            
               A gardeyne ſaw I, full of bloſomed bowis
               Vpon a ryuer, in a grene mede
               There as ſwetneſſe, euermore ynough is
               wyth floures whyte, blew, yelow, and rede
               And colde wel ſtremes, nothynge dede
               That ſwōmen ful of ſmal fyſhes lyght
               with ſynnes rede, and ſcales ſyluer bryght
            
            
               On euery bough the byrdes herde I ſynge
               with voyce of aungel, in her armony
               that buſyed hem, her byrdes forth to brynge
               The lytle prety conyes, to her playe gan hy
               And further al aboute, I gan eſpy
               The dredeful Roe, ye bucke, the hart, & hynde
               Squyrels, & beeſtes ſmall of gentyl kynde
            
            
               Of inſtrumentes, of ſtrynges in accorde
               Herde I ſo playe, a rauyſhynge ſwetneſſe
               That God, that maker is of al and lorde
               Ne herde neuer better, as I geſſe
               Therwyth a winde, vnneth it might be leſſe
               Made in the leaues grene, a noyſe ſofte
               Accordaunt to the foules ſonge on loſt
            
            
               The ayre of the place, ſo attēpre was
               That neuer was there greuaunce of hote ne colde
               There was eke euery holſome ſpyce & grace
               Ne no man may there waxe ſycke ne olde
               yet was there more ioy a thouſande folde
               Than I can tell, or euer coude or myght
               There is euer clere day, and neuer nyght
            
            
               Vnder a tree, beſyde a well I ſey
               Cupyde our lorde, his arowes forge & fyle
               And at hys fete, hys bowe al redy ley
               And wel his doughter tēpred al the whyle
               The heedes in the wel, with her wyle
               She couched hem after, as they ſhuld ſerue
               Some to ſlee, & ſome to wounde and carue
            
            
               Tho was I ware of pleaſaūce anone right
               And of aray, luſt, beaute, and curteſy
               
                  And of the crafte, that can & hath the myght
               To done beforce, a wyght to done foly
               Diſfygured was ſhe, I wyl not lye
               And by hym ſelfe, vnder an oke I geſſe
               Saw I delyte, that ſtode wyth gentylneſſe
            
            
               Than ſawe I beaute, wyth a nyce atyre
               And youth ful of game and iolyte
               Folehardeneſſe, flatery, and deſyre
               Meſſagery, mede, and other thre
               Her names ſhal not here be tolde for me
               And vpon pyllers great of Iaſper longe
               I ſaw a temple of braſſe yfounded ſtronge
            
            
               And aboute the temple, daunced alway
               women ynowe, of whych ſome there were
               Fayre of hem ſelfe, & ſome of hem were gay
               In kyrtyls al diſheueled went they there
               That was theyr offyce euer, fro yere to yere
               And on the temple, ſawe I whyte and fayre
               Of downes ſitting, many a thouſand payre
            
            
               And before the temple dore ful ſoberly
               Dame peace ſatte, a curteyne in her honde
               And her beſyde, wonder dyſcretly
               Dame Pacience ſyttynge there I founde
               wyth face pale, vpon an hyl of ſonde
               And alther nexte, wythin and wythout
               Beheſt and arte, and of her folke a rout
            
            
               wythin the temple, of ſyghes hote as fyre
               I herde a ſwough, that gan aboute ren
               whych ſyghes were engendred wyth deſyre
               That made euery herte for to bren
               Of newe flambe, and wel eſpyed I then
               That al the cauſe of ſorowes, yt they drye
               Come of the bytter goddes ialouſye
            
            
               The god Pyriapus, ſawe I as I went
               wythin the temple, in ſoueraine place ſtonde
               In ſuch arraye, as whan the aſſe hym ſhent
               with crye by nigt, and with ſceptre in honde
               Ful buſely men gan aſſay and ſonde
               Vpon hys heed to ſette of ſondry hewe
               Garlandes, ful of freſhe floures newe
            
            
               And in a preuy corner, in diſporte
               Founde I Venus, and her porter Rycheſſe
               That was ful noble, and hauten of her port
               Derke was that place, but after lyghtneſſe
               A ſawe a lyte, vnnethes it myght be leſſe
               And on a bed of golde, ſhe lay to reſt
               Tyll that the hote ſunne gan to weſt
            
            
               Her gylte heeres, wyth a golde threde
               Ybounde were, vntreſſed as ſhe lay
               And naked from the breſt vnto the hede
               Men myght her ſe, and ſothly for to ſay
               The remenaunt, couered wel to my pay
               Ryght wyth a lytle kerchefe of valence
               There was no thycker cloth of defence
            
            
               The place gaue a thouſande ſauours ſote
               And Bacchus god of wyne, ſate her beſyde
               And Ceres nexte, that doth of hunger bote
               And as I ſayd, a myddes lay Cupyde
               To whom on knees, the yonge folkes cryed
               To be theyr helpe, but thus I let her lye
               And farther in the temple, I gan eſpys
            
            
               That in diſpyte of Dyane the chaſte
               Ful many a bowe ybroke, hynge on the wal
               Of maydens, ſuch as gon her tymes waſte
               In her ſeruyce, and paynted ouer al
               Of many a ſtorye, of whyche I touche ſhall
               A fewe, as of Calixte and Athalante
               and many a maide, of which ye name I wāt
            
            
               Semyramus, Caudace, and Hercules
               Byblys, Dydo, Tyſbe, and Piramus
               Triſtram, Iſoude, Parys, and Achilles
               Heſeyne, Cleopatre, and Troylus
               Sylla, and eke the mother of Romulus
               All theſe were paynted on that other ſyde
               And al her loue, and in what plyte they dide
            
            
               Whan I was comen ayen into the place
               That I of ſpake, that was ſo ſote & grene
               Forth walked I tho, my ſeluen to ſolace
               Tho was I ware, where there ſate a quene
               That as of lyght, the ſōmer ſunne ſhene
               Paſſeth the ſterre, ryght ſo ouer meaſure
               She fayrer was than any creature
            
            
               And in a launde, vpon an hyl of floures
               was ſette this noble goddeſſe Nature
               Of braūches were her halles & her boures
               I wrought, after her crafte and her meſure
               Ne there nas foule, yt cometh of engendrure
               That there ne were preeſt, in her preſence
               To take her dome, and yeue her audience
            
            
               For thys was on ſaynt Valentynes daye
               whan euery foule cometh to cheſe her make
               
                  Of euery kynde, that men thynke may
               And that ſo huge a noyſe gan they make
               That erth, ſee, and tree, and euery lake
               So ful was, that vnneth there was ſpace
               For me to ſtande, ſo ful was al the place
            
            
               And right as Alayne, in the playnt of kynde
               Deuyſeth Nature, of ſuch aray and face
               In ſuch aray, men myght her there fynde
               Thys noble Empreſſe ful of al grace
               Bad euery foule to take her owne place
               As they were wonte alway, fro yere to yere
               On ſaynt Valentynes day, to ſtanden there
            
            
               That is to ſay, the foules of rauyne
               were hygheſt ſet, and than the foules ſmale
               That eaten, as that nature wolde enclyne
               As worme or thynge, of which I tel no tale
               But water foule, ſat loweſt in the dale
               & foules yt liueth be ſede ſate on they grene
               And that ſo many, that wōder was to ſene
            
            
               There myght men the royal Egle fynde
               That wyth his ſharpe loke perſeth the ſon
               And other Egles, of a lower kynde
               Of which that clerkes wel deuyſen con
               There was the tyrant with his fethers don
               And grene, I mene yt goſhauke yt doth pyne
               To byrdes, for hys outragyous rauyne
            
            
               The gētyl faucō, yt with his fete diſtreyneth
               The kynges hande, the hardy ſperhauke eke
               The quales foe, the merlyon that peyneth
               Hym ſelfe ful ofte, the larke for to ſeke
               There was the doue, with her eyen meke
               The ielous ſwan, ayenſt his deth yt ſyngeth
               The oule eke, that of deth the bode bryngeth
            
            
               The crane, the geant, wt his trompes ſowne
               The thefe the choughe, & the chateryng pye
               The ſcorning Iaye ye Eles foe the herowne
               The falſe lapwyng, ful of trechery
               The ſtare, that the counſayle can bewry
               The tame Ruddocke, and the cowarde kyte
               The Cocke, that horiloge is of thorpes lyte
            
            
               The ſparow Venus ſon, & the nyghtyngale
               That clepeth forth the freſh leaues newe
               The ſwalowe murdrer of the flyes ſmale
               That maken hony, of floures freſhe of hewe
               The wedded turtel, with his herte trewe
               The pecocke, wyth his aūgel fethers bright
               The Feſaunt, ſcorner of the cocke by nyght
            
            
               The waker goſe, the cuckowe euer vnkinde
               The popyngey, ful of delycaſy
               The drake ſtroyer of hys owne kynde
               The ſtorke, wreker of auoutry
               The hote cormeraunt, ful of glotony
               The rauyn & the crow with her voice of care
               The throſtle olde, and the froſty feldefare
            
            
               what ſhulde I ſay, of foules of euery kynde
               That in thys worlde haue fethers & ſtature
               Men myght in that place aſſembled fynde
               Before that noble goddes of Nature
               And eche of them dyd hys buſy cure
               Benignely to cheſe, or for to take
               By her accorde, his formell or his make
            
            
               But to the point, Nature helde on her honde
               A formal Egle, of ſhap the gentylleſt
               That euer ſhe amonge her workes fonde
               The mooſt benigne, and eke the goodlyeſt
               In her was euery vertue, at his reſt
               So farforth, that Nature her ſelf had bliſſe
               To loke on her, and ofte her becke to kyſſe
            
            
               Nature, the vycar of the almyghty lorde
               That hote, colde, heuy, lyght, moyſt & drey
               Hath knytte, by euen nombre of accorde
               In eaſy voyce, began to ſpeke and ſay
               Foules take hede of my ſentence I pray
               & for your owne eaſe, in fordrīg of your nede
               As faſt as I may ſpeke, I wyl me ſpede
            
            
               Ye know wel, how on ſaint Valentines day
               By my ſtatute, & throughe my gouernaunce
               Ye do cheſe your makes, & after flye away
               with hem, as I pricke you wyth pleaſaunce
               But nathleſſe, as by ryghtful ordinaunce
               May I not let, for al this worlde to wyn
               But he that moſt worthyeſt is, ſhal begyn
            
            
               The tercel Egle, as ye knowe ful wele
               The foule royal, aboue you al in degre
               The wyſe & worthy the ſecrete true as ſtele
               The whych I haue formed, as ye may ſe
               In euery parte as it beſt lyketh me
               It nedeth not hys ſhappe you to deuyſe
               He ſhal fyrſt cheſe and ſpeken in hys gyſe
            
            
               And after hym by ordre ſhal ye cheſe
               After your kynde eueryche as you lyketh
               
                  And as your hap is, ſhal ye wynne or leſe
               But which of you, that loue mooſt entrikith
               God ſende hym her, yt ſoreſt for hym ſiketh
               And there withal, the Tercel gan ſhe cal
               And ſayd, my ſonne the choyſe is to the fal
            
            
               But nathleſſe, in thys condicion
               Muſt be the choyſe, of euerych that is here
               That ſhe agree to hys election
               who ſo he be, that ſhulde bene her fere
               Thys is our vſage alway, fro yere to yere
               & who ſo may at this tyme haue his grace
               In blyſful tyme he came into thys place
            
            
               wyth heed enclined, & with ful humble chere
               Thys royal Tercell ſpake, & taryed nought
               Vnto my ſouerayne lady, and not my fere
               I choſe & cheſe, with wyl, herte, & thought
               The formel on your hande, ſo well ywrouȝt
               whoſe I am al, and euer wyl her ſerue
               Do what her luſt, to do me lyue or ſterue
            
            
               Beſechyng her of mercy, and of grace
               As ſhe that is my lady ſouerayne
               Or let me dye, here preſent in thys place
               For certes, longe may I not lyue in payne
               For in my herte is coruen euery vayne
               Hauyng regarde onely to my trouth
               My dere herte, haue on my wo ſome routh
            
            
               And yf I be founde to her vntrewe
               Dyſobeyſaunt, or wylful negligent
               A vauntour, or in proceſſe loue a newe
               I pray to you thys be my iugement
               That wyth theſe foules I be al to rent
               That ylke daye, that ſhe me euer fynde
               Vnto her vntrue, or in my gylte vnkynde
            
            
               And ſyth that none loueth her ſo wel as I
               Although ſhe neuer of loue me behet
               Thā ought ſhe be myne, through her mercy
               For other bonde, can I none on her knet
               For wele nor wo, neuer ſhall I let
               To ſerue her, howe farre ſo that ſhe wende
               Say what you lyſt, my tale is at an ende
            
            
               Ryght as the freſhe reed roſe newe
               Agaynſt the ſommer ſunne coloured is
               Ryght ſo for ſhame, al waxen gan the hewe
               Of thys formel, whan ſhe herde al this
               Neyther ſhe anſwerde well, ne ſayd amys
               So ſore abaſhed was ſhe, tyl that nature
               Said, doughter drede you not, I you aſſure
            
            
               Another Tercel Egle ſpake anone
               Of lower kynde, & ſayd that ſhulde nat be
               I loue her better than ye do, by ſaynt Ihon
               Or at leeſt, I loue her as wel as ye
               And lenger haue ſerued her in my degre
               & yf ſhe ſhulde haue loued for longe louing
               To me alone had be the guerdonyng
            
            
               I dare eke ſay, yf ſhe me fynde falſe
               Vnkynde, iangler, or rebel in any wyſe
               Or iolous, do me hange by the halſe
               And but I beare me in her ſeruyſe
               As wel as my wyt can me ſuffyce
               Fro poynt to poynt, her honour for to ſaue
               Take ſhe my lyfe, and al the good I haue
            
            
               The thyrde tercel Egle, anſwerde tho
               Nowe ſyrs, ye ſe the lytle leyſer here
               For euery ſoule cryeth out to be ago
               Forth wyth hys make, or with his lady dere
               And eke Nature her ſelfe, ne wyl not here
               For taryeng her, not halfe that I wolde ſey
               And but I ſpeke, I muſte for ſorowe dey
            
            
               Of longe ſeruyce, auaunt I me nothyng
               But as poſſible is me to dye to daye
               For wo, as he that hath be languyſhyng
               Thys twenty wynter, & wel it happen may
               A man may ſerue better, and more to pay
               In halfe a yere, although it were no more
               Thā ſome man doth, yt hath ſerued ful yore
            
            
               I ne ſay nat thys by me, for I ne can
               Do no ſeruyce, that may my lady pleaſe
               But I dare ſay, I am her treweſt man
               As to my dome, & fayneſt wolde her pleaſe
               At ſhorte wordes, tyl that deth me ceaſe
               I wyl be hers, whether I wake or wynke
               And trewe in al that herte may bethynke
            
            
               Of al my lyfe, ſyth that day I was borne
               So gentyl plee, in loue or other thyng
               Ne herde neuer no man me beforne
               who ſo that had leyſer and connyng
               For to reherce theyr chere, & theyr ſpekyng
               And from the morowe gan thys ſpech laſt
               Tyl downwarde went the ſūne wōder faſt
            
            
               The noyſe of foules for to be delyuerde
               So loude range, haue done & let vs wende
               
                  That wel wende I yt wod had al to ſhiuerd
               Come of they cryed, alas ye wyl vs ſhende
               whā ſhal your curſed pledinge haue an ende
               Howe ſhulde a iudge, eyther partye leue
               For yee or nay, without any preue
            
            
               The goſe, the ducke, and the cuckowe alſo
               So cryed keke keke, cuckow queke queke hy
               That through mine eares ye noyſe went tho
               The goſe ſaid than, al this nys worth a 
                     ••
                  ye
               But I can ſhape herof a remedy
               And wyl ſay my verdyte fayre & ſwythe
               For water foule who ſo be wroth or blythe
            
            
               And I for wormfoule, ſayd ye fole cuckow
               For I wyll of myne owne authorite
               for cōmon ſpede, take on me the charge now
               For to delyuer vs, it is great charyte
               Ye may abyde a whyle yet parde
               (Quod the Turtel) yf it be your wyl
               A wyght may ſpeke, it were as good be ſtyl
            
            
               I am a ſede foule, one the vnworthyeſt
               That wote I wel, and leeſt of connyng
               But better it is, that a wyghtes tonge reſt
               Than entremete hym of ſuch doynge
               Of which he neyther rede can nor ſynge
               And who ſo it doth, ful foule him ſelf acloyeth
               For o
                     ••
                  ice vncōmitted, ofte anoyeth
            
            
               Nature whych that alway had an eare
               To murmur of the leudneſſe behinde
               with faconde voice ſayd, holde your tonges there
               And I ſhall ſone, I hope a counſayle fynde
               You for to delyuer, & fro thys noyſe vnbinde
               I charge, of euery flocke ye ſhal one cal
               To ſay the verdyte of you foules al
            
            
               Aſſented were, to thys concluſyon
               The byrdes al, and foules of rauyne
               Haue choſen fyrſt, by playne eleccyon
               The Tercelet of the faucon to dyffyne
               All her ſentence, and as him luſt to termyne
               And to Nature, him they dyd preſent
               And ſhe accepteth him with glad entent
            
            
               The tercelet ſayd than, in this manere
               Ful herde it were, to preue it by reaſon
               who loueth beſt, this gentyl formel here
               For euerych hath ſuch replication
               that by ſkylles may none be brought adoun
               I can not ſe, that argumentes auayle
               Than ſemeth it, there muſt be batayle
            
            
               Al redy quod theſe Egles tarcelles tho
               Naye ſyrs (quod he) yf that I durſt it ſay
               Ye do me wronge, my tale is not ydo
               For ſyrs, taketh nat agrefe I pray
               It may not be as ye wolde, in this way
               Ours is ye voice, yt hath the charge in hande
               And to the Iuges dome, ye muſt ſtande
            
            
               And therfore peace I ſaye, as to my wyt
               Me wolde thynke, howe that the worthyeſt
               Of knyghthode, and lengeſt had vſed it
               Mooſt of eſtate, of blode the gentylleſt
               were ſyttyng for her, yf that her leſt
               And of theſe thre, ſhe wote her ſelfe I trow
               which that he be, for it is lyght to know
            
            
               The water foules, haue theyr heedes layd
               Togyther, and of ſhorte auyſement
               whan eueryche had hys verdyte ſayd
               They ſayd ſothly, al by one aſſent
               Howe that the goos, with the faconde gent
               That ſo deſyreth, to pronounce our nede
               Shal tel our tale, & prayed to god her ſpede
            
            
               And for theſe water foules, tho began
               The gooſe to ſpeke, and in her cakelynge
               She ſayd, peace nowe, take kepe euery man
               & herken which a reaſon I ſhall forth bryng
               My wytte is ſharpe, I loue no rarying
               I ſay I rede him, tho he were my brother
               But ſhe wyll loue him, let hym loue another
            
            
               Lo here a parfyte reaſon of a goſe
               (Quod the ſperhauke) neuer mote ſhe the
               Lo, ſuch a thyng it is to haue a tonge loſe
               Nowe parde foole, yet were it better for the
               Haue holde thy peace, than ſhewe thy nicete
               It lyeth not in his wyt, nor in his wyl
               But ſoth is ſayd, a foole can not be ſtyl
            
            
               The laughter aroſe, of gentyl foules al
               And right anone, the ſede foules choſen had
               The Turtel trewe, and gan her to hem cal
               And prayed her to ſay, the ſoth ſad
               Of this mater, and aſked what ſhe rad
               And ſhe anſwered, that playnly her entent
               She wolde ſhewe, & ſothly what ſhe ment
            
            
               Nay, god forbede a louer ſhulde chaunge
               The Turtel ſayd, & wexte for ſhame all reed
               
                  Though that hys lady, euermore be ſtraūge
               Yet let hym ſerue her alwaye, tyll he be deed
               Forſoth, I prayſe not the goſes reed
               For tho ſhe dyed, I wolde none other make
               I wyll be hers, tyll that the death me take
            
            
               well ybourded (ꝙ the ducke) by my hat
               That men ſhulde loue alway cauſeleſſe
               who can a reaſon fynde, or wyt in that
               Daunceth he mery, that is myrthleſſe
               who ſhulde recke, of that is recheleſſe
               Ye qucke yet (ꝙ the ducke) ful wel and fayre
               There be mo ſterres in the ſkye then a payre
            
            
               Now fye churle (ꝙ the gentyl Tercelet)
               Out of the donghyl, came that worde aryght
               Thou canſt not ſe, whych thyng is wel beſet
               Thou fareſt by loue, as oules do by lyght
               The day hē blindeth, ful wel they ſe by night
               Thy kynde is of ſo lowe wretchedneſſe
               That what loue is, thou cāſt not ſe nor geſſe
            
            
               Tho gan ye cuckowe put him forth in preace
               For foule that eateth worme, and ſayd blyue
               So I (ꝙ he) may haue my make in peace
               I retche nought, howe longe that ye ſtryue
               Let eche of hem be ſoleyn all her lyue
               Thys is my rede, ſens they may not accorde
               Thys ſhort leſſon, nedeth not recorde
            
            
               Yea, haue the glutton fylde hys paunche
               Then are we well, ſayd the Emerlon
               Thou murdrer of ye heiſugge, on the braūche
               That brought the forth, thou rufull glotton
               Lyue thou ſoleyn, wormes corruption
               For no force is, of lacke of thy nature
               Go leude be thou, whyle ye world may dure
            
            
               Now peace (ꝙ Nature) I cōmaunde here
               For I haue herde all your opinion
               And in effecte, yet be we neuer the nere
               But fynally, thys is my concluſion
               That ſhe her ſelfe ſhall haue her election
               Of whom her lyſt, who ſo be wroth or blyth
               H
                     •
                  m yt ſhe cheſeth, he ſhal her haue as ſwyth
            
            
               For ſyth it may not here dyſcuſſed be
               who loueth her beſte, as ſayd the Tercelet
               Thē wol I done this fauour to her, that ſhe
               Shal haue right him, on whō her hert is ſet
               And he her, that hys herte hath on her knet
               Thys iuge I Nature, for I may not lye
               To none eſtate, I haue none other eye
            
            
               But as for counſayle, for to choſe a make
               Yf I were reaſon, then wolde I
               Counſayle you, the royall tercell take
               As ſayd the tercelet, full ſkylfully
               As for the gentylleſt, and moſte worthy
               whych I haue wrought ſo wel to my pleſāce
               That to you it ought ben a ſuffyſaunce
            
            
               wyth dredful voyce, ye formel her anſwerde
               My ryghfull lady, goddeſſe of Nature
               Soth is, that I am euer vnder your yerde
               As is eueryche other creature
               And muſt be yours, whyle my lyfe may dure
               And therfore graunt me my fyrſt boone
               And myne entēt, you woll I ſay ryght ſoone
            
            
               I graunt it you (ꝙ ſhe) and ryght anone
               Thys formel Egle ſpake in thys degre
               Almyghty quene, vnto thys yere be done
               I aſke reſpyte for to auyſen me
               And after that to haue my choyce all fre
               Thys all & ſome, that I wolde ſpeke & ſey
               Ye get nomore, al though ye do me dey
            
            
               I woll not ſeruen Venus, ne Cupide
               Forſoth as yet, by no maner way
               Nowe ſens it may none other wayes betyde
               (Quod Nature) here is no more to ſay
               Then wolde I that thys foules were away
               Eche wyth hys make, for taryeng lēger here
               And ſayd hem thus, as ye ſhall after here
            
            
               To you ſpeke I, ye tercelets (ꝙ Nature)
               Beth of good herte, and ſerueth all thre
               A yere is not ſo longe to endure
               And eche of you payne hym in hys degree
               For to do well, for god wote quyte is ſhe
               For you thys yere, what after ſo befall
               Thys entremes, is dreſſed fro you all
            
            
               And whē this werke brought was to an end
               To euery foule, Nature yaue hys make
               By euen acorde, and on her way they wende
               And lorde the blyſſe and ioye that they make
               For ech of hem gan other in his wynges take
               And wyth her neckes, eche gan other wynde
               Thākyng alway, ye noble goddeſſe of kynde
            
            
               But fyrſt were choſen foules for to ſynge
               As yere by yere, was alway her vſaunce
               
                  To ſynge a roundell at her departynge
               To do Nature honoure and pleaſaunce
               The note I trowe, maked was in Fraunce
               The wordes were ſuch, as ye may here fynd
               The next vers, as I nowe haue in mynde
            
            
               Qui bien ayme tarde oublie.
               Now welcom ſōmer, wt thy ſunnes ſofte
               That haſte thys wynter wethers ouerſhake
               Saynt Valentyne, thou arte ful hye on lofte
               whych dryueſt away, the lōge nyghtes blake
               Thus ſyngen ſmale foules for thy ſake
               well haue they cauſe for to gladen ofte
               Sens eche of hem recouered hath hys make
               Ful blyſful may they ſyng whē they awake.
               And wt the ſhoutynge whē her ſonge was do
               That foules made, at her flyght away
               I woke, and other bokes toke me to
               To rede vpon, and yet I rede alway
               I hope ywys to rede ſo ſome day
               That I ſhall mete ſomthynge for to fare
               The bet, and thus to rede I nyll not ſpare.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            The Floure of Curteſy.
            
               
                  IN Feuerier, when yt froſlye moone
               was horned, full of Phebus fyry lyght
               And that ſhe gan to reyſe her ſtreames ſone
               Saynt Valentyne, vpon thy blyſfull nyght
               Of dutye, when gladis euery wyght
               And foules cheſe, to voyde her olde ſorowe
               Eueryche hys make, vpon the next morowe
            
            
               The ſame tyme, I herde a lerke ſynge
               Full luſtely, agayne the morowe gray
               Awake ye louers, out of your ſlombrynge
               Thys glad morowe, in all the haſte ye may
               Some obſeruaunce doth vnto thys day
               Your choyſe ayen of herte to renewe
               In confyrmynge, for euer to be trewe
            
            
               And ye that be of choſynge at your large
               Thys luſty day, by cuſtome of nature
               Take vpon you the blyſfull holy charge
               To ſerue loue, whyle your lyfe may dure
               wyth herte, body, and all your beſy cure
               For euermore, as Venus and Cipride
               For you dyſpoſeth, and the god Cupyde
            
            
               For ioye owe we playnly to obey
               Vnto thys lordes myghty ordinaunce
               And mercyleſſe rather for to dye
               Then euer in you be founden variaunce
               And though your lyfe be medled wt greuaūce
               And at your herte cloſet be your wounde
               Beth alwaye one, there as ye are bounde
            
            
               That when I had herde and lyſted longe
               wyth deuoute herte, the luſty melody
               Of thys heuenly comfortable ſonge
               So agreable, as by ermonye
               I roſe anone, and faſte gan me hye
               Towarde a groue, and the waye take
               Foules to ſene, eueryche choſe hys make
            
            
               And yet I was full thurſty in languyſhyng
               Myne ague was ſo feruent in hys hete
               when Aurora, for drery complaynyng
               Can dyſtyll her chryſtall teeres wete
               Vpon the ſoyle, wyth ſyluer dewe ſo ſwete
               For ſhe durſte for ſhame not apere
               Vnder the lyght of Phebus beames clere
            
            
               And ſo for anguyſhe of my paynes kene
               And for conſtraynte of my ſyghes ſore
               I ſet me downe, vnder a laurer grene
               Full pytouſly, and alway more and more
               As I behelde in to the holtes hore
               I gan cōplayne myne inward deedly ſmerte
               That aye ſo ſore crampeth at myne herte
            
            
               And whyle that I in my drery payne
               Sate, and behelde aboute on euery tre
               The foules ſytte, alway twayne & twayne
               Thē thought I thus, alas what may this be
               That euery foule hath hys lyberte
               Frely to choſe, after hys deſyre
               Eueryche his make, thus fro yere to yere
            
            
               The ſely wrenne, the tytemoſe alſo
               
                  The lytell redbreſt, haue free election
               To flyen yfere, and together go
               where as hem lyſt, aboute enuyron
               As they of kynde haue inclinacion
               And as Nature, empreſſe and gyde
               Of euery thynge lyſt to prouyde
            
            
               But man alone, alas the harde ſtounde
               Full cruelly, by kyndes ordynaunce
               Conſtrayned is, and by ſtatute bounde
               And debarred from all ſuche pleſaunce
               what meneth this, what is this purueyaūce
               Of god aboue, agayne all ryght of kynde
               wythout cauſe, ſo narow man to bynde
            
            
               Thus maye I ſene and playne, alas
               My wofull houre, and my dyſauenture
               That doulfully ſtonde in the ſame caas
               So ferre behynde, from all health and cure
               My wounde abydeth lyke a ſurſanure
               For me fortune ſo felly lyſt dyſpoſe
               My harme is hyd, that I dare not dyſcloſe
            
            
               For I my herte haue ſet, in ſuche a place
               where I am neuer lykely for to ſpede
               So ferre I am hyndred from her grace
               That ſaue daunger, I haue none other mede
               And thus alas, I not who ſhall me rede
               Ne for myne helpe ſhape remedye
               For Male bouche, and for falſe enuye
            
            
               The whiche twayne, aye ſtōdeth in my wey
               Malyciouſly, and falſe ſuſpection
               Is very cauſe alſo that I dey
               Gynnyng and rote of my diſtruction
               So that I fele, in concluſyon
               with her traynes, that they wol me ſhende
               Of my labour, that deth mote make an ende
            
            
               Yet or I dye, with herte, wyl, and thought
               To god of loue, this auowe I make
               As I beſt can, howe dere that it be bought
               where ſo it be, that I ſlepe or wake
               whyle Boreas dothe the leaues ſlake
               As I haue heyght, plainly tyl I ſterue
               For wel or wo, that I ſhal her ſerue
            
            
               And for her ſake, nowe this holy tyme
               Saynt Valentyne, ſomwhat ſhal I write
               Al though ſo be, that I can not ryme
               Nor curyouſly by no crafte endyte
               Yet leuer I haue, that ſhe put the wyte
               In vnconnynge, then in negligence
               what euer I ſaye, of her excellence
            
            
               what euer I ſaye, it is of dute
               In ſothfaſtneſſe, and no preſumpcion
               Thys I enſure to you that ſhall it ſe
               That it is all vnder correction
               what I reherce in cōmendacion
               Of her, that I ſhall to you as blyue
               So as I can, her vertues here dyſcryue.
            
            
               ¶Ryght by example, as the ſomer ſonne
               Paſſeth the ſterre, wyth hys beames ſhene
               And Lucyfer, amonge the ſkyes donne
               A morowe ſheweth, to voyde nyghtes tene
               So verely, wythouten any wene
               My lady paſſeth, who ſo taketh hede
               All tho alyue, to ſpeake of womanhede
            
            
               And as the Ruby hath the ſoueraynte
               Of ryche ſtones, and the regalye
               And the roſe of ſweteneſſe and beaute
               Of freſhe floures, wythout any lye
               Ryght ſo in ſothe, wyth her goodly eye
               She paſſeth all, in bounty and fayreneſſe
               Of maner eke, and of gentylneſſe
            
            
               For ſhe is both the fayreſt and the beſte
               To reken all, in very ſothfaſtneſſe
               For euery vertue is in her at reſte
               And furthermore, to ſpeake of ſtedfaſtneſſe
               She is the rote, and of ſemelyneſſe
               The very myrrour, and of gouernaunce
               To all example, wythouten variaunce
            
            
               Of porte benygne, and wonder glad of chere
               Hauynge euermore her trewe aduertence
               Alwaye to reaſon, ſo that her deſyre
               Is brydeled aye, by wytte and prouydence
               There to of wytte, and of hye prudence
               She is the welle, aye deuoyde of pryde
               That vnto vertue, her ſeluen is the gyde
            
            
               And ouer thys, in her daliaunce
               Lowly ſhe is, dyſcrete and wyſe
               And goodly gladde, by attemperaunce
               That euery wyght, of hygh and lowe degre
               Are glad in herte, wyth her for to be
               So that ſhortly, yf I ſhall not lye
               She named is, the Floure of Curteſye
            
            
               And there to ſpeake of femynyte
               
                  The leſte mannyſhe in compariſon
               Goodly abaſhed, hauynge aye pyte
               Of hem that ben in tribulacion
               For ſhe alone is conſolacion
               To all that arne in myſchefe and in nede
               To comforte hem, of her womanhede
            
            
               And aye in vertue is her beſy charge
               Sadde and demure, and but of wordes fewe
               Dredefull alſo of tonges that ben large
               Eſchewynge aye hem, that lyſten to hewe
               Aboue her heed, her wordes for to ſhewe
               Dyſhoneſtly to ſpeke of any wyght
               She deedly hateth, of hem to haue a ſyght
            
            
               The herte of whom, ſo honeſt is and clene
               And her entent, ſo faythfull and entere
               That ſhe ne may, for all the worlde ſuſtene
               To ſuffre her eeres any worde to here
               Of frende nor foe, neyther ferre ne nere
               Amyſſe reſonynge, yt hinder ſhulde his name
               And yf ſhe do, ſhe wexeth reed for ſhame
            
            
               So trewly in menynge ſhe is in ſette
               wythout chaungynge, or any doubleneſſe
               For bountie and beautie, are together knette
               In her perſone, vnder faythfulneſſe
               For voyde ſhe is of newfangleneſſe
               In herte aye one, for euer to perſeuer
               There ſhe is ſette, and neuer to dyſſeuer
            
            
               I am to rude, her vertues euerychone
               Connyngly to dyſcryue and wryte
               For well ye wote, colour haue I none
               Lyke her dyſcrecion, craftely to endyte
               For what I ſaye, all it is to lyte
               wherfore to you, thus I me excuſe
               That I aqueynted am not wyth no muſe
            
            
               By rethoryke, my ſtyle to gouerne
               In her prayſe and cōmendacyon
               I am to blynde, ſo hylye to dyſcerne
               Of her goodneſſe, to make dyſcripcion
               Saue thus I ſaye in concluſion
               Yf that I ſhall ſhortly commende
               In her is naught, that nature can amende
            
            
               For good ſhe is, lyke to Polycene
               And in fayreneſſe, to the quene Helayne
               Stedfaſt of herte, as was Dorigene
               And wyfely trouth, yf I ſhall not fayne
               In conſtaunce eke & fayth, ſhe may attayne
               To Cleopatre, and therto as ſetrone
               As was of Troye, the whyte Antygone
            
            
               As Heſter meke, lyke Iudith of prudence
               Kynde as Alceſt, or Marcia Catoun
               And to Griſylde lyke in pacience
               And Arladne of dyſcrecioun
               And to Lucrece, that was of Rome toun
               She may be lykened as for honeſte
               And for her fayth, vnto Penelope
            
            
               To fayre Phyllis, and to Hipſiphiles
               For innocence, and for womanhede
               For ſemelyneſſe vnto Canace
               And ouer thys, to ſpeke of goodlyhede
               She paſſeth all that I can of rede
               For worde and dede, that ſhe nought ne fall
               Acorde in vertue, and her werkes all
            
            
               For though that Dido wyth wytte ſage
               was in her tyme ſtedfaſt to Enee
               Of haſtyneſſe yet ſhe dyd outrage
               And ſo for Iaſon dyd alſo Medee
               But my lady is ſo auyſee
               That boūty & beautye, both in her demeyne
               She maketh bountye alwaye ſouerayne
            
            
               This is to meane, bountye goeth afore
               Lad by prudence, and hath the ſouerainte
               And beautye foloweth, ruled by her lore
               That ſhe ne ſende her in no degre
               So that in one, thys goodly freſhe fre
               Surmountynge al, wythouten any were
               Is good and fayre, in one perſone yfere
            
            
               And though that I for very ignoraunce
               Ne maye dyſcryue her vertues by and by
               Yet on thys daye for a remembraunce
               Onely ſupported vnder her mercy
               wyth quakynge honde, I ſhall full humbly
               To her hyneſſe, my rudeneſſe for to quyte
               A lytell balade, here byneth endyte
            
            
               Euer as I can ſuppryſe in myne herte
               Alwaye wyth feare, betwyxte drede & ſhame
               Leſte out of loſe, any worde aſterte
               In thys metre, to make it ſeme lame
               Chaucer is deed, that had ſuche a name
               Of fayre makynge, that wythout wene
               Fayreſt in our tonge, as the Laurer grene
            
            
               we maye aſſaye for to countrefete
               
                  Hys gaye ſtyle, but it wyll not be
               The welle is drye, wyth the lycoure ſwete▪
               
               Both of Clye, and of Caliope
               And fyrſt of all, I woll excuſe me
               To her that is grounde of goodlyhede
               And thus I ſaye, vntyll her womanhede
            
            
               ¶Balade ſymple.
               
                  
                     WYth all my myght, and my beſte entente
                  Wyth all the fayth that myghtye god of kynde
                  Me yaue, ſyth he me ſoule & knowynge ſent
                  I cheſe, and to thys bonde euer I me bynde
                  To loue you beſt, whyle I haue lyfe & mynd
                  Thus herde I foules in the daunynge
                  Vpon the daye of ſaynt Valentyne ſynge
               
               
                  Yet cheſe I at the begynnyng, in thys entent
                  To loue you, though I no mercy fynde
                  And yf you lyſte I dyed, I wolde aſſent
                  As euer twynne I quycke out of thys lyne
                  Suffyſeth me to ſene your fethers ynde
                  Thus herde I ſoules in the mornynge
                  Vpon the daye of ſaynt Valentyne ſynge
               
               
                  And ouer thys, myne hertes luſte to bente
                  In honour onely of the wodde bynde
                  Holy I yeue, neuer to repente
                  In ioye or wo, where ſo that I wynde
                  To ſore Cupide, wyth hys eyen blynde
                  The foules all, when Tytan dyd ſprynge
                  wyth deuout hert, me thought I herd ſynge.
               
            
            
               ¶Lenuoye.
               ¶Prynceſſe of beauty, to you I repreſent
               Thys ſymple dyte, rude as in makynge
               Of herte and wyll, faythfull in myne entent
               Lyke as thys daye, foules herde I ſynge.
            
            ¶Here endeth the Floure of Curteſy and here after foloweth, howe pyte is deed and buryed in a gentle herte.
         
         
            
               
                  PYte yt I haue ſought ſo yore ago
               wyth herte ſore and full of beſy payne
               yt in this world was neuer wyght ſo wo
               wythout deth, and yf I ſhall not fayne▪
               
               My purpoſe was, pyte to complayne
               Vpon teh crueltye and tyraunye
               Of loue, that for my trouth doth me dye
            
            
               And that I by length of certayne yeres
               Had euer in one, ſought a tyme to ſpeke
               To Pyte ran I, all by ſpreynt wyth teeres
               To prayen her on Cruelte me awreke
               But or I myght wyth any worde out breke
               Or tell her any of my paynes ſmerte
               I founde her deed, and buryed in an herte
            
            
               Adowne I fell, when I ſawe the herſe
               Deed as a ſtone, whyle yt the ſowne me laſte
               But vp I roſe, wyth colour full dyuerſe
               And pytouſly on her myne eyen I caſte
               And nerer the corſe I gan preaſen faſte
               And for the ſoule, I ſhope me for to pray
               I was but lorne, there was no more to ſay
            
            
               Thus am I ſlayne, ſyth that Pyte is deed
               Alas that daye that euer it ſhulde fall
               what maner man dare now hold vp his heed
               To whome ſhal nowe any ſorowful hert cal
               Nowe Cruelte hath caſte to ſtee vs all
               In ydle hope, folke redeleſſe of payne
               Syth ſhe is deed, to whom ſhal we cōplayne
            
            
               But yet encreaſeth me thys wonder newe
               That no wyght wote that ſhe is deed but I
               So many men as in her tyme her knewe
               And yet ſhe deyde ſo ſodeynly
               For I haue ſought her euer full beſely
               Syth I had fyrſt wytte or mynde
               But ſhe was deed er I coude her fynde
            
            
               Aboute her herſe there ſtoden luſtely
               wythouten any mo, as thought me
               Bountie, perfytly well armed and rychely
               And freſhe Beaute, Luſt, and Iolyte
               Aſſured maner, youthe, and Honeſte
               wyſedome, Eſtate, Drede, & Gouernaunce
               Confedred both by bonde and alyaunce
            
            
               
               A complaynt had I wrytten in my honde
               To haue put to Pyte, as a byll
               But I there all thys company fonde
               That rather wolde all my cauſe ſpyll
               Then do me helpe, I helde my playnt ſtyll
               For to thoſe folke wythouten fayle
               wythout pyte, there maye no byll auayle
            
            
               Then leaue all vertues, ſaue onely pyte
               Kepynge the corſe, as ye haue herde me ſayne
               Confedred by bonde vnto Cruelte
               And be aſſented when I ſhalbe ſlayne
               And I haue put my complaynte vp agayne
               For to my foes, my byll I dare not ſhewe
               The effecte, whych ſayeth thus in wordes fewe
            
            
               ¶Humbleſt of herte, hyeſt of reuerence
               Benigne ſloure, crowne of vertues all
               Sheweth vnto your royall excellence
               Your ſeruaunt, yf I durſt me ſo call
               Hys mortall harme, in whych he is yfall
               And nought all onely for hys wofull fare
               But for your renome, as he ſhall declare
            
            
               It ſtōdeth thus, that your cōtrary cruelte
               Alyed is ayenſt your regalye
               Vnder colour of womanly beaute
               For men ſhulde not knowe her tyrannye
               wyth bountie, Gentylleſſe, and Curteſye
               And hath depryued you of your place
               That is hygh beaute, apertenaunt to youre grace
            
            
               For kyndly, by your heritage ryght
               Ye be annexed euer vnto bounte
               And verely ye ought do your myght
               To helpe trouth in hys aduerſite
               Ye be alſo the corowne of beaute
               And certes yf ye wante in theſe twayne
               The world is lore, there is no more to ſayne
            
            
               Eke what auayleth maner & gentylleſſe
               wythout you, benigne creature
               Shall cruelte be your gouernereſſe
               Alas, what herte may it longe endure
               wherfore but ye rather take cure
               To breke that peryllous alyaunce
               Ye fleen hem that ben in your obeyſaunce
            
            
               And further, yf ye ſuffre thus
               Your renome is fordo in a throwe
               There ſhall no man wete what pyte is
               Alas, that euer your renome is fall ſo lowe
               Ye be alſo fro your herytage ythrowe
               By cruelte, that occupyeth your place
               And we dyſpayred, that ſeken your grace
            
            
               Haue mercy on me, thou Herenus quene
               That you haue ſought, ſo tenderly and ſore
               Let ſome ſtreme of lyght on me be ſene
               That loue and drede you euer lenger ye more
               For ſothly to ſayne, I beare ſo ſore
               And though I be not connyng for to playne
               For goddes loue haue mercy on my payne
            
            
               My payne is thys, that what ſo I deſyre
               That haue I not, ne nothynge lyke therto
               And euer ſetteth deſyre myne herte on fyre
               Eke on that other ſyde where that I go
               what maner thyng that may encreaſe my wo
               That haue I redy vnſought euery where
               Me lacketh but my dethe, and then my bete
            
            
               what nedeth to ſhewe percell of my payne
               Syth euery wo, that herte may bethynke
               I ſuffre, and yet I dare not to you playne
               For well I wote, though I wake or wynke
               Ye recke not whether I flete or ſynke
               And natheleſſe yet my trouth I ſhall ſuſtene
               Vnto my death, and that ſhall well be ſene
            
            
               Thys is to ſayne, I wyll be yours euer
               Though ye me ſlee by cruelte your fo
               Algate my ſpirite ſhall neuer dyſceuer
               Fro your ſeruyce, for any payne or wo
               Syth ye be yet deed, alas that it is ſo
               Thus for your death, I may wepe & playne
               wyth herte ſore, and full of beſy payne.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            
            ¶ La belle dame ſans mercy.
            
               
                  HAlfe in a dreame, not fully well awaked
               The goldē ſlepe me wrapped vnder hys wyng
               Yet nat for thy I roſe, and well nygh naked
               All ſodaynlye my ſelfe remembryng
               Of a mater, leuynge all other thynge
               Whyche I muſte do wythouten more delay
               For hem, whiche I durſt nat dyſobey
            
            
               My charge was this, to tranſlate by and by
               All thynge forgyue, as parte of my penaunce
               A boke, called La belle dame ſauns mercy
               whiche mayſter Aleyne made of remēbraūce
               Chefe ſecretarie wyth the kyng of Fraunce
               And here vpon a whyle I ſtode muſynge
               And in my ſelfe greatly ymagenynge
            
            
               What wyſe I ſhuld perform ye ſayd proceſſe
               Conſyderynge by good aduyſement
               My vnconnynge, and my great ſympleneſſe
               And ayen warde the ſtrayte cōmaundement
               whiche that I had, and thus in myne entent
               I was vexed and tourned vp and downe
               And yet at laſt, as in concluſyon
            
            
               I caſt my clothes on, and went my way
               This foreſaid charge hauyng in remēbraūce
               Tyll I came to a luſty grene valey
               Full of floures, to ſe a great pleaſaunce
               And ſo boldly with theyr benigne ſuffraunce
               whych rede this boke, touchyng thys matere
               Thus I began, yf it pleaſe you to here.
            
            
               
                  NAt longe ago, rydynge an eaſy paas
               I fell in thought of ioye full deſperate
               with gret dyſeaſe & payne ſo that I was
               Of all louers the moſt vnfortunate
               Syth by his darte, moſt cruell full of hate
               The dethe hath take my lady and mayſtreſſe
               And lefte me ſole, thus dyſcomfyte and mate
               Sore languyſſhynge, and in way of diſtreſſe
            
            
               Than ſayd I thus, it falleth me to ceſſe
               Eyther to ryme, or dytees for to make
               And I ſurely to make a full promeſſe
               To laugh no more, but wepe in clothesblake
               My ioyfull tyme (alas) nowe doth it ſlake
               For in my ſelfe I fele no maner of eaſe
               Let it be wrytten, ſuche fortune (as I take)
               which neyther me, nor non other doth pleaſe
            
            
               If it were ſo, my wyll or myne entent
               Conſtrayned were, a ioyfull thyng to wryte
               My penne coude neuer knowe, what it ment
               To ſpeke therof, my tonge hath no delyte
               Tho with my mouthe I laugh, moch or lyte
               Myne eyen ſholde make a coutenaūce vntrue
               My herte alſo, wolde haue therof dyſpyte
               The wepynge teares, haue ſo large yſſue
            
            
               Theſe ſicke louers I leue, that to hem lōges
               whiche lede theyr lyfe in hope of alegeaunce
               That is to ſaye, to make balades and ſonges
               Euery of hem, as they fele theyr greuaunce
               For ſhe that was my ioye, and my pleſaunce
               whoſe ſoule I pray god, of hys mercy ſaue
               She hath my wyll, myne hertes ordynaunce
               whiche lyeth here, within this tombe ygraue
            
            
               Fro this tyme forth, tyme is to hold my pees
               It weryeth me, this mater for to trete
               Let other louers put hem ſelfe in prees
               Theyr ſeaſon is, my tyme is nowe forgete
               Fortune by ſtrength, the forcer hath vnſhete
               wheryn was ſperde all my worldly rycheſſe
               And all the goodes, whyche that I haue gete
               In my beſt tyme of youthe, and luſtyneſſe
            
            
               Loue hath me kepte vnder hys gouernaunce
               If I myſdyd, god graunt me forgyueneſſe
               Yf I dyd well, yet felte I no pleaſaunce
               It cauſed neyther ioye nor heuyneſſe
               For whan ſhe dyed, that was my mayſtres
               My welfare, than made the ſame purchaſe
               The dethe hath ſhette my bondes of wytnes
               which for nothyng myn herte ſhal neuer paſe
            
            
               In this gret thought, ſore troubled in minde
               Alone thus rode I, all the morowe tyde
               Tyll at the laſt it happed me to fynde
               
                  The place, wherin I caſt me to abyde
               whan that I had no further for to ryde
               And as I went, my lodgynge to puruey
               Ryght ſoone I herde, a lytell me beſyde
               In a garden, where mynſtrels gan to play
            
            
               Wyth that anone, I went me backer more
               My ſelfe and I, me thought we were ynowe
               But twayne yt were my frendes here before
               Had me eſpyed, and yet I wote nat howe
               They came for me, awaywarde I me drowe
               Somwhat by force, ſomwhat by her requeſt
               That in no wyſe, I coude my ſelfe reſcowe
               But nedes I muſt come in and ſe the feeſt
            
            
               At my cōmynge, the ladyes euerchone
               Bad me welcome, god wote right gentylly
               And made me chere, euery one by one
               A great dele better than I was worthy
               And of theyr grace, ſhewed me grete curteſy
               wt good diſport, bycauſe I ſhuld nat mourne
               That day I bode ſtyll in theyr company
               whyche was to me, a gracyous ſoiourne.
            
            
               The bordes were ſpred, in ryght lytell ſpace
               The ladyes ſat, eche as hem ſemed beſt
               There were no deedly ſeruaūtes in the place
               But choſen men, ryght of the goodlyeſt
               & ſome there were, parauenture moſt freſheſt
               That ſawe theyr iuges full demure
               wythout ſemblaunt, eyther to moſt or leſt
               Natwithſtandyng, they had hem vnder cure
            
            
               Amonge all other, one I gan eſpy
               which in grete thought, ful oftē came & went
               As one that had ben rauyſhed vtterly
               In hys language, nat greatly dylygent
               His countenaunce he kept wt great tourment
               But his deſyre farre paſſed hys reaſon
               For euer hys eye, went after hys entent
               Full many a tyme, whan it was no ſeaſon
            
            
               To make chere, ſore himſelfe he payned
               And outwardly he fayned great gladneſſe
               To ſynge alſo, byforce he was conſtrayned
               For no pleaſaunce, but very ſhamfaſtneſſe
               For the complaynte of hys moſte heuyneſſe
               Came to hys voyce, alway without requeſt
               Lyke as the ſowne of byrdes dothe expreſſe
               whan they ſynge loude, in frythe or in foreſt
            
            
               Other there were, that ſerued in the hall
               But none lyke hym, as after myne aduyſe
               For he was pale, and ſomwhat leane withal
               Hys ſpeche alſo trymbled in fereful wyſe
               And euer alone, but whan he dyd ſeruyſe
               All blacke he ware, & no deuyſe but playne
               Me thouȝt by hym, as my wyt coude ſuffyſe
               His herte was nothing in his own demeyne
            
            
               To feeſt hem all, he dyd his dylygence
               And well he coude, ryght as it ſemed me
               But euermore, whan he was in preſence
               Hys chere was done, it wolde none other be
               Hys ſchole mayſter had ſuche authorite
               That all the whyle he bode ſtyll in the place
               Speke coude he nat, but vpon her beaute
               He loked ſtyll, with ryght a pytous face
            
            
               Wyth that hys heed he tourned at the laſt
               For to beholde the ladyes euerychone
               But euer in one, he ſet his eye ſtedfaſt
               On her, whiche his thought was moſt vpon
               For of hys eyen, the ſhot I knewe anone
               which ferefull was, wt right hūble requeſtes
               Than to my ſelfe I ſayd, by god alone
               Such one was I, or that I ſawe theſe ieſtes
            
            
               Out of the preſe he wente full eaſely
               To make ſtable his heuy countenaunce
               And wote ye well, he ſyghed wonderly
               For hys ſorowes and wofull remembraunce
               That in hym ſelfe, he made his ordynaunce
               And forthwithall came to bryng in the meſſe
               But for to iuge, hys moſt wofull penaunce
               God wote it was a pytous entremeſſe
            
            
               After dyner anone, they hem auaunced
               To daunce aboue the folkes euerychone
               And forthwithal, thys heuy man he daunced
               Somtyme with twayne, & ſomtyme wt one
               Vnto hem all, hys chere was after one
               Nowe here nowe there, as fell by auenture
               But euer amonge, he drewe to her alone
               whyche he moſt dred, of lyuynge creature
            
            
               To myne aduyſe, good was his purueyaūce
               whan he her chaſe, to hys mayſtres alone
               If that her herte were ſet to hys pleaſaunce
               As moche as was her beauteous perſone
               For who ſo euer ſetteth hys truſt vpon
               The reporte of the eyen, wythouten more
               He might be deed, and grauen vnder ſtone
               
                  Or euer he ſhulde, his hertes eaſe reſtore
            
            
               In her fayled nothynge, that I coude geſſe
               One wyſe nor other, preuy nor perte
               A garyſon ſhe was, of al goodlyneſſe
               To make a frounter, for a louers herte
               Right yonge & freſſhe, a woman ful couerte
               Aſſured wele of porte, and eke of chere
               wele at her eaſe, withouten wo or ſmerte
               Al vnderneth the ſtanderde of daungere
            
            
               To ſe the feeſt, it weryed me ful ſore
               For heuy ioye doth ſore the herte trauayle
               Out of the preſe, I me withdrawe therfore
               And ſet me downe alone behynde a trayle
               Ful of leues, to ſe a great meruayle
               with grene wrethes ybounden wonderly
               The leues were ſo thycke withouten fayle
               That throughout, no man might me eſpy
            
            
               To this lady he came ful curteſly
               whā he thought tyme to daūce wt her a trace
               Set in an herber, made fule pleſauntly
               They reſted hem fro thens but a lytel ſpace
               Nygh hem were none, of a certayne compace
               But onely they, as farre as I coude ſe
               Saue the trayle, there I had choſe my place
               There was no more bytwene hem two & me
            
            
               I harde the louer ſyghyng wonder ſore
               For aye the more, the ſorer it him ſought
               His inwarde paine he coude not kepe in ſtore
               Nor for to ſpeke, ſo hardy was he nought
               His leche was nere, ye gretter was his thouȝt
               He muſed ſore, to conquere his deſyre
               For no mā may to more penaūce be brought
               That in his heate, to bring him to the fyre
            
            
               The herte began to ſwel within his cheſte
               So ſore ſtrayned, for anguiſſhe & for payne
               That al to peces almoſte it to breſt
               whan both at ones, ſo ſore it dyd conſtrayne
               Deſyre was bold, but ſhame it gan refrayne
               That one was large, the other was ful cloſe
               No lytel charge was layde on him certayne
               To kepe ſuche werre, and haue ſo many foſe
            
            
               Ful oftē tymes to ſpeke, him ſelfe he payned
               But ſhamfaſtneſſe & drede, ſayd euer nay
               Yet at the laſt, ſo ſore he was conſtrayned
               whan he full longe had put it in delay
               To his lady, ryght thus than gan he ſay
               with dredeful voyce, wepyng, halfe in a rage
               For me was purueyed, an vnhappy day
               whan I fyrſt had a ſyght of your vyſage
            
            
               I ſuffre payne god wote, ful hote brennynge
               To cauſe my dethe, all for my true ſeruyſe
               And I ſe well, ye recke therof nothyng
               Nor take no hede of it, in no kynde wyſe
               But whan I ſpeke after my beſt aduyſe
               Ye ſet it at nought, but make therof a game
               And thoughe I ſewe, ſo great an entrepryſe
               Yet peyreth not your worſhip nor your fame
            
            
               Alas, what ſhulde it be to you preiudyce
               If that a man do loue you faythfully
               To your worſhyp, eſchewynge euery vyce
               So am I yours, and wyll be veryly
               I chalenge nought of ryght, and reaſon why
               For I am hole ſubmyt vnto your ſeruyce
               Ryght as ye lyſt it be, ryght ſo wyll I
               To bynde my ſelf, where I was in fraūchiſe
            
            
               Lamant
               Though it be ſo, that I can nat deſerue
               To haue your grace, but alway lyue in drede
               Yet ſuffre me, you for to loue and ſerue
               withouten maugre, of your moſt goodlyhede
               Both faith & trouth I gyue your womāhede
               And my ſeruyce wythout any callynge
               Loue hath me boūd, withoute wage or mede
               To be your man, and leue all other thynge
            
            
               La dame
               Whan thys lady had herde al this language
               She gaue anſwere, full ſofte and demurely
               wythout chaungynge of colour or courage
               Nothynge in haſte, but meſurably
               Me thinketh ſyr, your thought is great foly
               Purpoſe ye nought, your labour for to ceſe
               For thynketh not, whyles ye lyue and I
               In thys mater, to ſet your herte in peaſe
            
            
               Lamant
               There may none make the peace, but only ye
               which are the grounde & cauſe of al this war
               For wyth your eyen, the letters written be
               By whyche I am defyed and put a far
               Your pleſaunt loke, my very lode ſtar
               was made herande, of thilke ſame defyaunce
               whiche vtterly behyght me for to barre
               My fayhtfull truſt, and all myne affyaunce
            
            
               La dame
               To lyue in wo, he hath great fantaſy
               And of hys herte alſo ſlypper holde
               That onely for beholdynge of an eye
               
                  Can nat abyde in peace, as reaſon wolde
               Other or me, yf ye lyſt ye may beholde
               our eyē are made to loke, whi ſhuld we ſpare
               I take no kepe, neyther of yonge ne olde
               who feleth ſmerte, I counſayle hym beware
            
            
               Lamant.
               If it be ſo, one hurte another ſore
               In hys defaute, that feleth the greuaunce
               Of very ryght, a man may do no more
               Yet reaſon wolde it were in remembraunce
               And ſyth fortune onely by her chaunce
               Hath cauſed me to ſuffre all thys payne
               By your beaute, wyth all the cyrcumſtaunce
               why lyſte ye haue me, in ſo great dyſdayne
            
            
               La dame.
               To your perſone, ne haue I no dyſdayne
               Nor neuer had trewly, ne nought wyll haue
               Nor ryght great loue, nor hatred in certayne
               Nor your counſayle to know, ſo god me ſaue
               Yf ſuche loue be in your mynde ygraue
               That lytell thynge, may do you dyſpleaſaūce
               You to begyle, or make you for to raue
               I wyll nat cauſe, no ſuche encomberaunce
            
            
               Lamant.
               What euer it be, yt me hath thus purchaſed
               wenynge hath nat dyſceyued me certayne
               But feruent loue, ſo ſore hath me ychaſed
               That I vnware, am caſten in your chayne
               And ſyth ſo is, as fortune lyſt ordayne
               All my welfare, is in your haundes fall
               In eſchewynge of more myſcheuous payne
               who ſoneſt dyeth, hys care is leeſt of all
            
            
               La dame.
               This ſyckeneſſe is ryght eaſy to endure
               But fewe people, it cauſeth for to dye
               But what they meane, I knowe it very ſure
               Of more comforte, to drawe the remedy
               Suche be there nowe, playnyng ful pytouſly
               That fele god wote, nat alther gretteſt paine
               And yf ſo be, loue hurte ſo greuouſly
               Leſſe harm it were, one ſorowful thā twayn
            
            
               Lamant.
               Alas madame, yf that it myght you pleaſe
               Moche better it were, by way of gentylneſſe
               Of one ſory, to make twayne wel at eaſe
               Than hym to deſtroye that lyueth in diſtreſſe
               For my deſyre is, neyther more nor leſſe
               But my ſeruyce, to do for your pleaſaunce
               In eſchewynge all maner doubleneſſe
               To make two ioyes, in ſtede of one greuaūce
            
            
               La dame.
               Of loue I ſeke, neyther pleaſaunce nor eaſe
               Nor haue therin no great affyaunce
               Though ye be ſick, it doth me nothing pleaſe
               Alſo I take no hede of your pleaſaunce
               Cheſe who ſo wyll, her hertes to auaunce
               Fre am I nowe, and free wyll I endure
               To be ruled by mannes gouernaunce
               For erthely good, Nay, that I you enſure
            
            
               Lamant.
               Loue, which that ioy & ſorowe doth departe
               Hath ſet the ladyes out of all ſeruage
               And largely dothe graunt hem for her parte
               Lordſhyp and rule of euery maner of age
               The poore ſeruaūt, nought hath of auantage
               But what he may gete onely by purcheſſe
               And he that ones, to loue doth hys homage
               Full often tymes, dere bought is the rycheſſe
            
            
               La dame.
               Ladyes be nat ſo ſymple, thus I mene
               So dull of wyt, ſo ſotted in foly
               That for wordes, whiche ſayd be of ye ſplene
               In fayre langage, paynted full pleſauntly
               whiche ye and mo, holde ſcholes of dayly
               To make hem all, great wonders to ſuppoſe
               But ſone they can away, theyr heedes wrye
               And to fayre ſpeche, lyghtly theyr eres cloſe
            
            
               Lamant.
               There is no man, that tangleth buſyly
               And ſetteth hys herte, & all mynde therfore
               That by reaſon, may playne ſo pytouſly
               As he that hath moche heuyneſſe in ſtore
               whoſe heed is hole, and ſayth that it is ſore
               Hys fayned chere, is harde to kepe in mewe
               But thought, whyche is vnfayned euermore
               The wordes preueth, as the workes ſhewe
            
            
               La dame.
               Loue is ſubtell, and hath a great awayte
               ſharpe in working, in gabbing gret pleſaūce
               And can hem venge, of ſuche as by dyſceyte
               wolde fele and knowe, his ſecret gouernaūce
               And maketh hem to obey hys ordynaunce
               By cherefull wayes, as in hem is ſuppoſed
               But whan they fall in to repentaunce
               Than in a rage, her counſayle is diſcloſed
            
            
               Lamant.
               Syth for as moche, as god and eke nature
               Hath auaunced loue, to ſo hye degre
               Moche ſharpe is the poynt, thus am I ſure
               Yet greueth more the faute, where euer it be
               who hath no colde, of heate hath no deynte
               The one for that other, aſked is expreſſe
               And of pleſaunce, knoweth none certeyne
               But it be one, in thought and heuyneſſe
            
            
               
               La dame
               As for pleaſaunce, it is nat alway one
               That you think ſwete, I thinke it bitter pain
               Ye may nat me cōſtrayne, nor yet right none
               After your luſt to loue, that is but vayn
               To chalenge loue by ryght, was neuer ſeyne
               But herte aſſent, before bonde and promyſe
               For ſtrength and force, may nat attayne
               A wyll that ſtandeth enfeffed in fraunchyſe
            
            
               Lamant
               Ryght fayre lady, god mote I neuer pleaſe
               Yf I ſeke other ryght in thys caſe
               But for to ſhewe you playnly my dyſeaſe
               And your mercy to abyde, & eke your grace
               If I purpoſe your honour to deface
               Or euer dyd, god and fortune me ſhende
               And that I neuer vnrightfully purchace
               One onely ioy, vnto my lyues ende
            
            
               La dame
               Ye and other, that ſwere ſuche othes faſte
               And ſo condempne, and curſen to and fro
               Full ſykerly ye wene your othes laſte
               No lenger than the wordes ben ago
               And god, and eke his ſayntes laughe alſo
               In ſuche ſweryng, there is no ſtedfaſtneſſe
               And theſe wretches that haue ful truſt therto
               After they wepe and waylen in diſtreſſe
            
            
               Lamant
               He hath no corage of a man trewly
               That ſecheth pleſaunce, worſhyp to diſpyſe
               Nor to be called forthe, is not worthy
               The erthe to touche, ye ayre in no kyns wyſe
               A truſty herte, a mouth without feyntyſe
               Thus be the ſtrength of euery maner name
               And who that layeth his fayth for lytel pryſe
               He leſeth bothe hys worſhyp and hys fame
            
            
               La dame.
               A curſed herte, a mouth that is curteyſe
               Ful well ye wote they be not accordynge
               Yet fayned chere, right ſoone may hē apeyſe
               where of malyce is ſet all her workynge
               Full falſe ſemblaunt they bere, & true ſemyng
               Her name, her fame, her tonges but fayned
               worſhyp in hem is put in forgettynge
               Nought repented, nor in no wyſe cōplayned
            
            
               Lamant.
               Who thynketh yll, no good may hym befall
               God of hys grace graunt eche man his deſert
               But for hys loue, amonge your thoughtes all
               As thynke vpon my wofull ſorowes ſmert
               For of my payne, wheder your tender herte
               Of ſwete pyte, be not therwyth agreued
               And of your grace, to me were diſcouerte
               That by your mean, ſone ſhulde I be releued
            
            
               La dame.
               A lightſome herte, a folly of pleaſaunce
               Are moche better, the leſſe whyle they abyde
               They make you think, & bring you in atraūce
               But that ſyckneſſe, wyll ſone be remedyde
               Reſpyte your thought, and put al thys aſyde
               Full good diſporte werieth me all day
               To helpe nor hurte, my wyll is not aplyde
               who troweth me not, I let hem paſſe away
            
            
               Lamant.
               Who hath a byrde, a faucon, or a hounde
               That foloweth hym for loue in euery place
               He cheriſheth hym, & kepeth hym full ſounde
               Out of hys ſyght, he wyl not hym enchace
               And I that ſet me wyttes in this cace
               On you alone, wythouten any chaunge
               Am put vnder, moche farther out of grace
               And leſſe ſet by, than other that be ſtraunge
            
            
               La dame.
               Though I make chere to euery man aboute
               For my worſhip, & for myne owne fraūchyſe
               To you I nyl do ſo, wythouten doute
               In eſchewynge all maner preiudyſe
               For wote ye well, loue is ſo lytell wyſe
               And in byleue, ſo lyghtly wyll be brought
               That he taketh all at hys owne deuyſe
               Of thyng god wote, yt ſerueth him of nought
            
            
               Lamant.
               Yf I by loue, and by my true ſeruyce
               Leſe ye good chere yt ſtraungers haue alway
               wherof ſhall ſerue my trouth in any wyſe
               Leſſe than to him, that cometh & goth all day
               whiche holdeth of you nothynge, yt is no nay
               Alſo in you is loſt, as to my ſemynge
               All curteſy, whyche of reaſon wyll ſay
               That loue for loue, were lawfull deſyrynge
            
            
               La dame.
               Curteſy is alyed wonder nere
               To worſhyp, whyche hym loueth tenderly
               And he wyll nat be bounde for no prayere
               Nor for no gyftes, I ſay you verely
               But hys good chere, departe full largely
               where hym lyketh, as his conceyte wyll fall
               Guerdon cōſtrayned a gifte done thankfully
               Theſe twayn cā neuer accorde nor neuer ſhal
            
            
               Lamant.
               As for guerdon I ſeke none in this cace
               For that deſert, to me it is to hye
               wherfore I aſke your pardon & your grace
               Sythe me behoueth dethe, or your mercy
               
                  To gyue the good where it wanteth truely
               That were reaſon, and a curtyſe manere
               And to your owne moch better were worthy
               Thā to ſtraungers, to ſhew hem louely chere
            
            
               La dame
               What call ye good, fayne wolde I yt I wyſt
               That pleaſeth one, another ſmerteth ſore
               But of hys owne, to large is he that lyſt
               Gyue moch, and leſe hys good name therfore
               One ſhulde nat make a graunt, lytel ne more
               But the requeſt were ryght well accordynge
               Yf worſhyp be not kepte and ſet before
               All that is lefte, is but a lytell thynge
            
            
               Lamant
               In to this worlde was founded neuer none
               Nor vnder heuen creature ybore
               Nor neuer ſhall, ſaue onely your perſone
               To whō your worſhyp toucheth halfe ſo ſore
               But me whiche haue no ſeaſon leſſe ne more
               Of youthe ne age, but ſtyll in your ſeruyce
               I haue no eyen, no wit, nor mouth in ſtore
               But all be gyuen to the ſame offyce
            
            
               La dame.
               A full great charge hath he wythouten fayle
               That hys worſhyp kepeth in ſykerneſſe
               But in daunger he ſetteth hys trauayle
               That feſſeth it wyth others buſyneſſe
               To hym that longeth, honour and nobleſſe
               Vpon none other ſhulde nat be awayte
               For of hys owne, ſo moche hath he the leſſe
               That of other, moche folowet hthe conceyte
            
            
               Lamant
               Your eyen hath ſet ye prynt, which that I fele
               wythin my herte, that where ſo euer I go
               Yf I do thynge, that ſowneth vnto wele
               Nedes muſt it come from you, & fro no mo
               Fortune wyll thys, that I for wele or wo
               My lyfe endure, your mercy abydynge
               And very ryght wyll, that I thynke alſo
               Of your worſhyp, aboue all other thynge
            
            
               La dame.
               To your worſhyp ſe well, for that is nede
               That ye ſpende nat your ſeaſon all in vayne
               As touchynge myne, I rede you take no hede
               By your folly, to put your ſelfe in payne
               To ouercome is good, and to reſtrayne
               An herte, whyche is diſceyued follyly
               For worſe it is to breke than bowe certayne
               Better bowe, than to fall ſodaynly
            
            
               Lamant.
               Nowe fayre lady thynke, ſyth it fyrſt began
               That loue hath ſet myn herte vnder his cure
               It neuer myght, ne truely I ne can
               None other ſerue, whyle I ſhall here endure
               In moſt fre wyſe, therof I make you ſure
               which may not be withdrawe, this is no nay
               I muſt abyde all maner aduenture
               For I may neyther put to nor take away
            
            
               La dame.
               I holde it for no gyfte in ſothfaſtneſſe
               That one offreth, where it is forſake
               For ſuche a gyfte is abandonynge expreſſe
               That wyth worſhip ayen may not be take
               He hath an herte full fell that lyſt to make
               A gyfte lyghtly, that put is to refuſe
               But he is wyſe, that ſuche conceyte wyl ſlake
               So that hym nede, neyther to ſtudy ne muſe
            
            
               Lamant.
               He ſhulde nat muſe, yt hath hys ſeruyce ſpent
               On her, whyche is a lady honourable
               And yf I ſpende my tyme to that entent
               Yet at the leſt, I am not reprouable
               Of fayned herte, to thynke I am vnable
               Or I myſtoke, whan I made thys requeſt
               By whiche loue hath of entrepriſe notable
               So many hertes gotten by conqueſt
            
            
               La dame.
               If that ye lyſte do after my counſayle
               Seche a fayrer, and of more hygher fame
               whych in ſeruyce of loue, wyll you preuayle
               After your thought, accordynge to the ſame
               He hurteth both hys worſhyp and hys name
               That follyly, for twayne hī ſelfe wyl trouble
               And he alſo leſeth his after game
               That ſurely can not ſet hys poyntes double
            
            
               Lamant.
               This your counſayle, by ought that I can ſe
               Is better ſayd than done, to myne aduyſe
               Though I byleue it not, forgyue it me
               Myne herte is ſuch, ſo hole without feyntyſe
               That I ne may gyue credence in no wyſe
               To thyng, which is not ſowning vnto truth
               Other counſayle I ſe, be but fantaſyſe
               Saue of your grace, to ſhewe pyte and ruth
            
            
               La dame.
               I holde hym wyſe that worketh no foly
               And whan hym lyſt, can leue & parte therfro
               But in connynge, he is to lerne truely
               That wolde hym ſelfe conduyte, & can not ſo
               And he that wyll not after counſayle do
               His ſute he putteth in to dyſperaunce
               And all the good that ſhulde fall hym to
               Is loſt and deed, clene out of remembraunce
            
            
               Lamant.
               
                  Yet wyl I ſewe thys matter faythfully
               whyles I lyue, what euer be my chaunce
               And yf it hap, that in my truth I dye
               Than deth ſhal do me no diſpleaſaunce
               But whan that I, by your harde ſuffraunce
               Shall dye ſo true, & with ſo great a payne
               Yet ſhal it do me much the leſſe greuaūce
               Than for to lyue a falſe louer certayne
            
            
               La dame.
               Of me get ye ryght nought, thys is no fable
               I wyl to you be neyther harde nor ſtrayte
               And ryght wyl not no man cuſtomable
               To thynke ye ſhulde be ſure of my conceyte
               who ſecheth ſorowe, his be the receyte
               Other counſayle can I not fele nor ſe
               Nor for to lerne, I caſt me not to awayte
               who wyll therof, let hym aſſaye for me
            
            
               Lamant.
               Ones muſt it be aſſayde, that is no nay
               wyth ſuche as be of reputacyon
               And of true loue, the ryght honour to pay
               Of free hertes gotten by dewe raunſome
               For frewyl holdeth thys opinion
               That it is great dureſſe and diſcomforte
               To kepe a herte in ſo ſtrayte a priſon
               That hath but one body for his diſporte
            
            
               La dame.
               I knowe ſo many cauſes meruaylous
               That I muſt nede of reaſon thynke certaine
               That ſuch auenture is wonder peryllous
               And yet wel more, the coming backe againe
               Good or worſhyp, therof is ſeldome ſene
               where I ne wyll make ſuche araye
               As for to fynde a pleaſaunce, but a barayne
               whan it ſhal coſt ſo dere the fyrſt aſſaye
            
            
               Lamant.
               Ye haue no cauſe to dout of this mater
               Nor you to mene with no ſuch fantaſyſe
               To put me farre al out as a ſtraunger
               For your goodneſſe can thinke & wel aduyſe
               That I haue made a pryſe in euery wyſe
               By whiche my truth ſheweth open euidence
               My longe abydyng, and my trewe ſeruyce
               Maye well be knowen by playne experience
            
            
               La dame.
               Of very ryght he may be called trewe
               And ſo muſt he be take in euery place
               That can diſcerne, and ſet as he ne knewe
               And kepe the good, yf he it may purchace
               For who yt prayeth, or ſwereth in any caſe
               Right wel ye wote, in yt no trouth is preued
               Such hath there bene, & are, that getē grace
               And leſe it ſone, whan they haue it acheued
            
            
               Lamant.
               If truth me cauſe by vertue ſouerayne
               To ſhewe good loue, & alway fynde cōtrary
               And cheriſh yt, which ſleeth me with ye paine
               This is to me a louely aduerſary
               whan ye pyte, which longe on ſlepe doth tary
               Hath ſet the fyne of al my heuyneſſe
               Yet her comforte to me mooſt neceſſary
               Shal ſet my wyll more ſure in ſtableneſſe
            
            
               La dame.
               The wofull wight, what maye he thynke or ſay
               The contrary of al ioy and gladneſſe
               A ſicke bodye, his thought is alway
               From hem that felen no ſore nor ſickeneſſe
               Thus hurtes bene of diuers buſyneſſe
               which loue hath put to great hyndraunce
               And truth alſo, put in forgetfulneſſe
               whan they ful ſore begyn to ſigh aſkaunce
            
            
               Lamant.
               Now god defende, but he be harmeleſſe
               Of al worſhip or good that may befall
               That to werſt tourneth by his lewdneſſe
               A gyfte of grace, or any thinge at all
               That his ladie vouchſafe vpon him call
               Or cheriſheth him in honorable wiſe
               In that defaute, what euer he be that fall
               Deſerueth more than deth to ſuffre twyſe
            
            
               La dame.
               There is no iuge yſet on ſuche treſpace
               By whych of right, loue may recouered be
               One curſeth faſt, another doth manace
               Yet dyeth none, as farre as I can ſe
               But kepe her courſe alway in one degre
               And euermore, theyr labour doth encreaſe
               To brynge ladies by theyr great ſubtelte
               For others gylte, in ſorowe and diſeaſe
            
            
               Lamant.
               Albeit ſo, one doth ſo great offence
               And is not deed, nor put to no iuſtyce
               Right well I wote him gayneth no defence
               But he muſt ende in ful miſcheuous wyſe
               And all euer ſayd, god wyl him diſpyſe
               For falſhed is euer ful of curſedeneſſe
               that his worſhyp may neuer haue interpriſe
               where it reygneth, & hath the wylfulneſſe
            
            
               La dame.
               Of that haue they no great fere now a daiſe
               Such as wyl ſay and maynteyne it therto
               That ſtedfaſt truth is nothing for to prayſe
               In hem that kepe it longe in wele or wo
               Theyr buſye hertes paſſen two and fro
               
                  They be ſo wel reclaymed to the lure
               So wel lerned hem to wythholde alſo
               And al to chaūg whā loue ſhuld beſt endure
            
            
               Lamant.
               Whan one hath ſet his hert in ſtable wyſe
               In ſuch a place, as is both good and trewe
               He ſhulde not flyt, but do forth his ſeruice
               Alway withouten chaunge of any newe
               As ſone as loue begynneth to remewe
               Al pleſaunce goth anone in lytle ſpace
               As for my partye, that ſhal I eſchewe
               whyle the ſoule abydeth in hys place
            
            
               La dame.
               To loue truely, there as it ought of right
               Ye may not be myſtaken doutleſſe
               But ye be foule dyſceyued in your ſyght
               By lyght vnderſtandyng, as I geſſe
               yet may ye wel repele your buſyneſſe
               And to reaſon haue ſome attendaunce
               Moch better thā to abyde by foly ſimplenes
               The feble ſocour of diſperaunce
            
            
               Lamant.
               Reaſon, coūſayle, wyſedome, & good aduiſe
               Bene vnder loue areſted euerychone
               To which I can accorde in euery wyſe
               For they be not rebel, but ſtyl as a ſtone
               Theyr wyl and myne, be medled al in one
               And therwyth bouden wt ſo ſtrong a cheyne
               That as in hem, departyng ſhal be none
               But pyte breke the myghty bonde atwayne
            
            
               La dame.
               Ye loue not your ſelfe, what euer ye be
               That in loue ſtande forgete in euery place
               And of your wo, yf ye haue no pyte
               Others pite beleue ye not to purchace
               But be fully aſſured, as in thys caſe
               I am alway vnder one ordynaunce
               To haue better truſt not after grace
               And al that leueth, take to your pleſaunce
            
            
               Lamant.
               Haue my hope ſo ſure and ſo ſtedfaſt
               That ſuch a lady ſhulde not lacke pyte
               But nowe alas, it is ſhyt vp ſo faſt
               That daunger ſheweth on me hys cruelte
               And yf ſhe ſe the vertue fayle in me
               Of true ſeruice, though ſhe do fayle alſo
               No wonder were, but thys is my ſurete
               I muſt ſuffre, whych way that euer it go
            
            
               La dame.
               Leue chys purpoſe I rede you for the beſt
               For the lenger ye kepe, it is in vayne
               The leſſe ye gete, as of your hertes reſt
               And to reioyce it ſhal you neuer attayne
               whā ye abyde good hope to make you fayne
               Ye ſhal be founde aſotted in dotage
               And in the ende, ye ſhal knowe for cartayne
               Hope ſhal pay the wretches for her wage
            
            
               Lamant.
               Ye ſay as falleth mooſt for your pleſaunce
               And your power is great, al thys I ſe
               But hope ſhal neuer out of my remēbraunce
               By whych I fele ſo great aduerſite
               For whan nature hath ſet in you plente
               Of al goodneſſe by vertue and by grace
               He neuer aſſembled hem, as ſemed me
               To put pyte out of hys dwellynge place
            
            
               La dame.
               Pyte of ryght ought to be reſonable
               And to no wight do no great diſauauntage
               There as is nede, it ſhulde be profytable
               And to the pytous ſhewynge no damage
               If a lady wyl do ſo great outrage
               To ſhewe pyte and cauſe her owne debate
               Of ſuch pyte cometh diſpitous rage
               And of ſuch loue, alſo ryght deedly hate
            
            
               Lamant.
               To comforte hem that lyue al comfortleſſe
               That is no harme, but cōforte to your name
               But ye that haue a herte of ſuch dureſſe
               And a fayre lady I muſt affirme the ſame
               If I duſt ſay, ye wynne all thys defame
               By cruelte, whych ſytteth you full yl
               But yf pyte, whych may al thys attaine
               In your hygh herte may reſt and tary ſtyll
            
            
               La dame.
               what euer he be that ſayth he loueth me
               And perauenture I leue wel it be ſo
               Ought he be wroth, or ſhulde I blamed be
               Though I did not as he wolde haue me do
               If I medled wyth ſuch or other mo
               It myght be called pyte mercyleſſe
               And afterwarde yf I ſhulde lyue in wo
               Than to repent, it were to late I geſſe
            
            
               Lamant.
               O marble hert, and yet more harde parde
               whych mercy may not perce for no labour
               More ſtrong to bowe than is a myghty tre
               what auayleth you to ſhew ſo great rygour
               Pleaſeth you more to ſe me dye thys hour
               Before your eyen, for your diſport and play
               Than for to ſhewe ſome cōforte and ſocour
               To reſpyte death, whych chaſeth me alway
            
            
               La dame.
               Of your diſeaſe, ye may haue allegeaunce
               
                  And as for myne, I let it ouer ſlake
               Alſo ye ſhal not dye for my pleaſaunce
               Nor for your heale, I can not ſurety make
               I wyl not hurt my ſelfe for others ſake
               wepe they, laugh they, or ſynge they, I warant
               For this mater, ſo wyl I vndertake
               That none of hem ſhal make therof auaunt
            
            
               Lamant.
               I can not ſkyl of loue by god alone
               I haue more cauſe to wepe in your preſence
               And wel ye wote, auauntour am I none
               For certaynly, I loue better ſcilence
               One ſhulde not loue by hertes credence
               But he were ſure to kepe it ſecretly
               For a vauntour is of no reuerence
               whan that his tonge is his mooſt enemy
            
            
               La dame.
               Male bouch in court, hath great cōmaundement
               Eche man ſtudyeth to ſay the worſt he may
               Theſe falſe louers in this time now preſent
               They ſerue beſt to iangle as a Iay
               The mooſt ſecrete ywys, yet ſome men ſay
               Howe he miſtruſted is in ſome partyſe
               wherfore to ladyes whā ſo men ſpeke or ſay
               It ſhulde be byleued in no wyſe
            
            
               Lamant
               Of good and yl ſhal be, and is alway
               The worlde is ſuch, the erth is not al plaine
               They yt be good, ye profe ſheweth euerye day
               And otherwyſe great villony certayne
               It is reaſon, though one his tonge diſtayne
               with curſed ſpech, to do hym ſelfe a ſhame
               That ſuch refuſe, ſhuld wrōgfully remayne
               Vpon the good renomed in theyr fame
            
            
               La dame
               Suche as be nought, whan they here tidynges newe
               That eche treſpas ſhal lightly haue pardon
               They that purſuen to be good and trewe
               wyl not ſet by none yl diſpoſition
               To contynewe in euery good condicion
               They are the firſt that fallen in damage
               And ful frely the hertes habandon
               To lytle fayth, wyth ſoft and fayre langage
            
            
               Lamant.
               Nowe knowe I wel of very certaynte
               If one do truely, yet ſhal he be ſhente
               Syth al maner of iuſtice and pyte
               Is baniſhed out of a ladyes entente
               I can not ſe, but al is at one ſtente
               The good, the yl, the vice, and eke the vertue
               Such as be good, ſuch haue ye punyſhment
               For the treſpas of hem that lyue vntrue
            
            
               La dame.
               I haue no power you to do greuaunce
               Nor to punyſhe none other creature
               But to eſchewe the more encomberaunce
               To kepe vs from you al, I holde it ſure
               Falſe ſemblaunce, hath a face ful demure
               Lyghtly to catche theſe ladyes in a wayte
               wherfore we muſt, yf we wyl here endure
               Make ryght good watche, lo this is my cō
                  ceyte
            
            
               Lamant.
               Syth that of grace, a goodly worde not one
               May now be had, but alwaye kepte in ſtore
               I appele to god, for he may here my mone
               Of the dureſſe, whych greueth me ſore
               And of pyte, I complayne furthermore
               which he forgate, in al hys ordinaunce
               Or els my lyfe to haue ended before
               which ſo ſone am put out of remembraunce
            
            
               La dame.
               My herte nor I haue done you no forfeyte
               By which ye ſhulde complayne in any kynd
               Nothing hurteth you but your owne cōceite
               Beyng your ſelfe, for ſo ye ſhal it fynde
               Thus alwaye let thys ſynke in your mynde
               That your deſyre ſhall neuer recouered be
               Ye noy me ſore, in waſtyng al thys wynde
               For I haue ſayd ynough, as ſemeth me
            
            
               Lamant.
               Thys woful man roſe vp in al hys payne
               And ſo departed wyth weping countenaūce
               His woful herte, almooſt to braſt in twayne
               Ful lyke to dye, walking forth in a traunce
               And ſayd deth come forth, thy ſelfe auaunce
               Or that myne herte forgete his properte
               And make ſhorter al thys woful penaunce
               Of my pore lyfe, ful of aduerſyte
            
            
               Fro thēs he went, but whither wiſt I nouȝt
               Nor in what parte he drewe in ſothfaſtneſſe
               But he no more was in hys ladyes thought
               For to the daunce anone ſhe gan her dreſſe
               And afterwarde, one tolde me thus expreſſe
               He rent his heer, for anguyſhe and for paine
               And in him ſelfe toke ſo great heuyneſſe
               That he was deed wythin a day or twayne
            
            
               ¶Lenuoy.
               
                  
                  
                     THe true louers thus I beſech you all
                  Such auentures flye hem in euery wyſe
                  And as people defamed ye hem call
                  For they truely do you great preiudyſe
                  His caſtelles ſtronge ſtuffed with ordinaūce
                  For they haue had long tyme by theyr offyce
                  The hole countrey of loue in obeyſaunce
               
               
                  And ye ladyes, or what eſtate ye be
                  Of whom worſhip hath choſe his dwelling place
                  For goddes loue do no ſuch cruelte
                  Nor in no wyſe ne foule not the trace
                  Of her that here is named ryghtwyſly
                  which by reaſon me ſemeth in thys cace
                  Maye be called, La belle dame ſans mercy
               
               
                  Go lytle boke, god ſende the good paſſage
                  Cheſe wel thy way, be ſimple of manere
                  Loke thy clothyng be lyke thy pylgrimage
                  And ſpecially let thys be thy prayere
                  Vnto hem all, that they wyll rede or here
                  where thou art wronge after her help to cal
                  The to correcte in any parte or al
               
               
                  Pray hem alſo with thine humble ſeruice
                  Thy boldneſſe to pardon in thys cace
                  For els thou arte not able in no wyſe
                  To make thy ſelfe appere in any place
                  And furthermore beſeche hem of her grace
                  By her fauour and ſupportacion
                  To take in gre this rude tranſlation
               
               
                  The whych god wote ſtandeth ful deſtitute
                  Of eloquence, of meter, and colours
                  Lyke as a beeſt naked without refute
                  Vpon a playne to abyde all maner ſhowres
                  I can no more, but aſke of hem ſocours
                  At whoſe requeſt yu were made in this wyſe
                  Commaundyng me wyth body and ſeruyſe
               
               
                  Right thus I make an ende of thys proſſes
                  Beſechyng hym, that all hath in balaunce
                  That no trewe man be vexed cauſeleſſe
                  As this mā was, which is of remembraūce
                  And all that done her faythful obſeruaunce
                  And in her trouth purpoſe hem to endure
                  I pray god ſende hem better auenture.
               
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            Of quene Annelida and falſe Arcite.
            
               
                  O Thou feyrs God of armes Mars the rede
               That in thy froſty countre called Trace
               wythin thy gryſlye temples ful of drede
               Honoured art as patron of that place
               wyth the Bellona Pallas full of grace
               Be preſent, and my ſong continew and gye
               At my begynnyng thus to the I crye
            
            
               For it ful depe is ſonken in my mynde
               wyth pytous herte in Englyſhe to endyte
               Thys olde ſtory, in latyn whych I fynde
               Of quene Annelyda and falſe Arcyte
               That elde, whych all can frete and byte
               And it hath freten many a noble ſtory
               Hath nygh deuoured out of our memorye
            
            
               Be fauourable eke thou Polymnia
               On Pernaſo that hath thy ſuſters glade
               By Elycon, not farre from Cirſa
               Syngeſt wyth voice memorial in the ſhade
               Vnder the Laurer which that may not fade
               And do that I my ſhyp to hauen wynne
               Fyrſt folowe I Stace, & after him Corinne
            
            Iam
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                domos patrias Cithic poſt aſpera gentis, Prelia laurigero ſuburente Theſea curru, Le tifici plauſus miſſuſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ad ſidera vulgi.
            
               whan Theſeus wyth warres longe & great
               The aſpre folke of Cithe hath ouercome
               The laurer crowned in his chayre gold bete
               Home to hys countre houſes is ycome
               For whych the people blyſful all and ſome
               So cryden, that to the ſterres it wente
               And hym to honouren dyd al her entente
            
            
               Before thys duke, in ſigne of victory
               
                  The trompes come, and in his baner large
               The ymage of Mars, and in token of glorie
               Men myght ſe of treſour many a charge
               many a bright helme & many a ſpere & targe
               Many a freſh knight & many a blyſfull rout
               On horſe and on foote, in all the felde about
            
            
               Ipolyta his wyfe, the hardy quene
               Of Cithya, that he conquered had
               wyth Emelye her yong ſuſter ſhene
               Fayre in a chare of golde he with him lad
               that all the groūde about her chare ſhe ſprad
               with brightneſſe of beautie in her face
               Fulfylled of largeſſe and of grace
            
            
               with hys triumphe & laurer corowned thus
               In al the floure of fortunes yeuyng
               Lete I this noble prince Theſeus
               Towarde Athenes in hys way rydyng
               And fonde I wol in ſhortly to bryng
               The ſlye waye of that I gan to write
               Of quene Annelyda and falſe Arcyte
            
            
               Mars yt through his furious courſe of yre
               The olde wrath of Iuno to fulfyll
               Hath ſette the peoples hertes both on fyre
               Of Thebes & Grece, & eueryche other to kyl
               with blody ſpeares neuer reſted ſtyl
               But throng now here now there amōg hem both
               That euerich other ſlew ſo were they wroth
            
            
               For whan Amphiorax and Tydeus
               Ipomedon, and Partynope alſo
               were deed, and ſlayne proude Campaneus
               And whā ye wretched thebans brethrē two
               were ſlayne, and kynge Adraſtus home ago
               So deſolate ſtode Thebes and ſo bare
               That no wyght coude remedye of his care
            
            
               And whan the olde Creon gan eſpye
               How yt the blode royal was brought adoun
               He helde the citie by his tyrannye
               And dyd the gentyls of that regyoun
               To bene his frendes, and dwel in the toun
               So what for loue of him, & what for awe
               The noble folke were to the towne ydrawe
            
            
               Amonge al theſe Annelyda the quene
               Of Ermonye, was in that towne dwellyng
               That fayrer was than the ſunne ſhene
               throuȝout ye world ſo gan her name ſpring
               That her to ſe had euery wyght lykyng
               For as of trouth is there none her lyche
               Of al the women in thys worlde ryche
            
            
               Yonge was this quene, of twentye yere olde
               Of myddle ſtature, and of ſuch fayreneſſe
               That nature had a ioye her to beholde
               And for to ſpeken of her ſtedfaſtneſſe
               She paſſed hath Penelope, and Lucreſſe
               And ſhortly yf ſhe ſhal bene comprehended
               In her myght nothyng bene amended
            
            
               This Theban knyght eke ſoth to ſayne
               was yonge, & therto wythal a luſty knyght
               But he was double in loue & nothing plaine
               And ſubtyl in that crafte ouer any wyght
               And with his cōnyng wan this lady bright
               For ſo ferforth he gan her trouth aſſure
               That ſhe him truſteth ouer any creature
            
            
               what ſhulde I ſayne, ſhe loueth Arcyte ſo
               That whan that he was abſent any throwe
               Anone her thought her herte braſt a two
               For in her ſyght to her he bare him lowe
               So that ſhe wende haue al his hert yknow
               But he was falſe, it nas but fayned chere
               As nedeth not ſuche craft men to lere
            
            
               But neuertheleſſe ful mykel buſyneſſe
               Had he, er that he myght hys lady wynne
               And ſwore he wolde dyen for diſtreſſe
               Or from his witte he ſayd he wold twynne
               Alas the whyle, for it was routh and ſynne
               That ſhe vpon his ſorowes wolde rewe
               But nothinge thinketh the falſe as doth the trewe
            
            
               Her fredom founde Arcyte in ſuch manere
               That al was his, that ſhe hath much or lite
               Ne to no creature made ſhe chere
               Further than it lyked to Arcyte
               There was no lacke, wyth which he myght her wyte
               She was ſo ferforth yeuen hym to pleaſe
               That al that lyked him, dyd her eaſe
            
            
               There nas to her no maner letter ſent
               That touched loue, from any maner wyght
               That ſhe ne ſhewed hym or it was brent
               So playn ſhe was, and dyd her ful myght
               That ſhe nyl hyde nothyng from her knight
               Leſt he of any vntrouth her vpbreyde
               wythout bode his herte ſhe obeyed
            
            
               And eke he made hym ialous ouer her
               
                  That what any man had to her ſayde
               Anone he wolde prayen her to ſwere
               what was ye word, or make him yuel apayd
               Thā wende ſhe out of her wytte haue brayd
               But al was but ſleyght and flaterye
               wythout loue he fayned ielouſy
            
            
               And al this toke ſhe ſo debonairly
               That al his wyl, her though it ſkylful thing
               And euer the lenger ſhe loued him tenderly
               And dyd him honour as he were a kyng
               Her herte was to him wedded wyth a ryng
               For ſo ferforth vpon trouth is her entent
               That where he goth, her hert with him wēt
            
            
               whā ſhe ſhall eate, on hym is ſo her thought
               That wel vnneth of meate toke ſhe kepe
               And whan ſhe was to her reſt brought
               On him ſhe thought alway tyl that ſhe ſlepe
               whan he was abſent, priuely doth ſhe wepe
               Thus lyueth fayre Annelyda the quene
               For falſe Arcyte, that dyd her al this tene
            
            
               This falſe Arcyte, of his newfangleneſſe
               For ſhe to him ſo lowly was and trewe
               Toke leſſe deynte for her ſtedfaſtneſſe
               And ſawe another lady proude and newe
               And ryght anone he clad him in her hewe
               wote I not whether in white, reed, or grene
               And falſed fayre Annelyda the quene
            
            
               But neuertheleſſe, great wōder was it none
               Though he were falſe, for it is ye kynd of mā
               
               Syth lameth was, that is ſo longe agone
               To be in loue as falſe as euer he can
               He was the fyrſt father that began
               To louen two, and was in bigamye
               And he founde tentes fyrſt, but yf men lye
            
            
               This falſe Arcyte, ſomwhat muſt he fayne
               whan he was falſe, to coueren his traytorye
               Ryght as an horſe, ye can both byte & playne
               For he bare her in honde of trecherye
               And ſwore he coude her doubleneſſe eſpye
               And al was falſeneſſe, that ſhe to hym ment
               Thus ſwort this thefe & forthe his waye he went
            
            
               Alas what hert myght endure it
               For routh or wo, her ſorowe for to tell
               Or what man hath the connyng or the wyt
               Or what mā might within the chābre dwel
               If I to him reherſen ſhal the hell
               That ſuffreth fayre Annelyda the quene
               For falſe Arcyte, that dyd al thys tene
            
            
               She wepeth, wayleth, & ſwouneth pitouſly
               To grounde deed ſhe falleth as a ſtone
               Crampyſheth her lymmes crokedly
               She ſpeaketh as her wytte were al agone
               Other colour than aſhen hath ſhe none
               Ne none other word ſpeketh ſhe moch or lite
               But mercy cruel hert myne Arcyte
            
            
               And this endureth, tyl that ſhe was ſo mate
               yt ſhe ne hath foote on which ſhe may ſuſtene
               But forth languyſhyng euer in this eſtate
               Of which Arcyte hath neyther roth ne tene
               His herte was els where newe and grene
               that on her wo, ne deyneth him nat to thinke
               Him recketh neuer whether ſhe flete or ſinke
            
            
               Thys newe lady holdeth hym ſo narowe
               Vp by the brydel, at the ſtaues ende
               That euery worde he dred it as an arowe
               Her daunger made him both bowe & bende
               And as her luſt, made him turne or wende
               For ſhe ne graunted him in her lyuyng
               No grace, why that he hath to ſyng
            
            
               But droue hym forth, vnneth lyſt her knowe
               That he was ſeruaunt vnto her ladyſhyp
               But leſte he were proude, ſhe helde him low
               Thus ſerueth he, wythout meate or ſyp
               She ſent him nowe to lande, & now to ſhyp
               And for ſhe yaue him daunger al his fyl
               Therfore ſhe had him at her owne wyl
            
            
               Enſample of this, ye thrifty women all
               Take hede of Annelyda and falſe Arcyte
               That for her lyſt him, her dere herte call
               And was ſo meke, therfore he loued her lyte
               The kynde of mannes herte is to delyte
               On thyng that ſtraung is, alſo god me ſaue
               for what the may not get, yt wold they haue
            
            
               Nowe turne we to Annelyda ayen
               That pyneth day by day in languyſhyng
               But whan ſhe ſaw that her ne gate no geyn
               Vpon a day full ſoroufully wepyng
               She caſt her for to make a complaynyng
               And wyth her owne hand ſhe gan it write
               And ſent it to her theban knyght Arcyte
            
            
               
               ¶The complaynt of Annelyda to falſe Arcyte.
               
                  
                     SO thyrled wyth ye poynt of remembraunce
                  The ſwerde of ſorowe whet wt falſe pleſaūce
                  Myne hert bare of blyſſe and blacke of hewe
                  That turned is to quakyng all my daunce
                  My ſuretie in a waped countenaunce
                  Syns it auayleth nought to ben trewe
                  For who ſo true is, it ſhal her rewe
                  That ſerueth loue, & doth her obſeruaunce
                  Alwaye to one, and chaungeth for no newe
               
               
                  I wote my ſelfe as wel as any wyght
                  For I loued one wt al myne hert & myght
                  More than my ſelfe an hundred M. ſyth
                  And called him my hertes lyfe, my knyght
                  And was all his, as ferre as it was ryght
                  And whā yt he was glad, than was I blyth
                  And his diſeaſe was my deth as ſwythe
                  And he ayen his trouth hath me plyght
                  For euermore his lady to me kythe.
               
               
                  Nowe is he falſe alas, and cauſeleſſe
                  And of my wo he is ſo routhleſſe
                  That wt a worde hym lyſt not ones dayne
                  To brynge ayen my ſorowful hert in pees
                  For he is caught vp in an other lees
                  Ryght as him lyſt, he laugheth at my payn
                  And I ne can myne hert not reſtrayne
                  For to loue hym yet alway neuertheleſſe
                  And of al this I not to whom to playne.
               
               
                  And ſhulde I playne, alas the harde ſtound
                  Vnto my fo, that yaue myne hert a wound
                  And yet deſyreth that myne harme be more
                  Now certes ferther wol I neuer be founde
                  None other helpe, my ſores for to ſounde
                  My deſteny hath ſhaped ſo full yore
                  I woll none other medicine ne lore
                  I woll ben aye there I was ones bounde
                  That I haue ſayde, be ſayde for euermore
               
               
                  Alas, where is become your gentleneſſe
                  Your wordes full of pleaſaunce & humbleſſe
                  Your obſeruaunce in ſo lowe manere
                  Your awaytyng, and your beſyneſſe
                  On me that ye called your mayſtreſſe
                  Your ſouerayne lady in this worlde here
                  Alas, is there neyther worde ne chere
                  Ye vouchſafe vpon myne heuyneſſe
                  Alas your loue, I bye it all to dere
               
               
                  Now certes ſwete, though that ye
                  Thus cauſeleſſe the cauſe be
                  Of my deedly aduerſitie
                  Your manly reaſon ought it to reſpyte
                  To ſlee your frende, and namely me
                  That neuer yet in no degree
                  Offended you, as wiſly he
                  That all wot of wo my ſoule quyte.
               
               
                  But for I was ſo playne Arcyte
                  In all my workes moche and lyte
                  And was ſo beſy you to delyte
                  Myne honour ſaue, meke, kynde and free
                  Therfore ye put in me this wyte
                  Alas, ye retche not a myte
                  Though that the ſwerde of ſorowe byte
                  My wofull hert through your crueltie
               
               
                  My ſwete fo, why do ye ſo for ſhame
                  And thynke ye ye furthred be your name
                  To loue anewe, and ben vntrue aye
                  And put you in ſlaundre now and blame
                  And do to me aduerſitie and grame
                  That loue you mooſt, god thou woſt alway
                  Yet turne ayen, and yet be playne ſomedaye
                  And than ſhal this yt now is mys ben game
                  And all foryeue whyle I lyue maye.
               
               
                  Lo hert myne, al this is for to ſayne
                  As whether ſhall I praye or els playne
                  which is the way to done you to be trewe
                  For eyther mote I haue you in my chayne
                  Or with the deth ye mote depart vs twayn
                  There beth none other meane wayes newe
                  For god ſo wyſely on my ſoule rewe
                  As verely ye ſleen me with the payne
                  That mow ye ſene vnfayned on myne hew
               
               
                  For thus ferforth haue I my deth ſought
                  My ſelfe I murdre with my priuy thought
                  For ſorowe & routh of your vnkyndneſſe
                  I wepe, I wayle, I faſt, al helpeth nought
                  I voyde ioye that is to ſpeke of ought
                  I voyde company, I flye gladneſſe
                  who may auaunt her better of heuyneſſe
                  Thā I, and to this plyte haue ye me brouȝt
                  without gylte, me nedeth no wytneſſe.
               
               
                  
                  And ſhulde I pray, & weyuen womanhed
                  Nay rather deth, than do ſo foule a dede
                  And aſke mercy and gyltleſſe, what nede
                  And yf I playne what lyfe I lede
                  You recketh not, yt knowe I out of drede
                  And yf I vnto you myne othes bede
                  For myne excuſe, a ſcorne ſhalbe my mede
                  Your chere floureth, but it wyll not ſede
                  Ful longe agone I myght haue takē hede.
               
               
                  For though I had you to morowe agayne
                  I myght as well holde Apryll from rayne
                  As holde you to maken ſtedfaſt
                  Almyghty god, of trouth the ſouerayne
                  wher is ye trouth of man, who hath it ſlayne
                  She yt hem loueth, ſhal hem fynde as faſt
                  As in a tempeſt is a rotten maſt
                  Is that a tame beeſt, that is aye fayne
                  To renne away, whan he is leſt agaſt
               
               
                  Now mercy ſwete, yf I miſſay
                  Haue I ought ſayde out of the way
                  I not, my wyt is all away
                  I fare as doth ye ſonge of chaunteplure
                  For now I playne, and now I pley
                  I am ſo maſed, that I dey
                  Arcyte hath borne away the key
                  Of al my worlde, & my good auenture
               
               
                  For in this worlde there nis no creature
                  walkyng in more diſcomfyture
                  Than I, ne more ſorowe endure
                  For yf I ſlepe a furlonge way or twey
                  Than thynketh me that your fygure
                  Before me ſtant, clad in aſure
                  Efte to profre a newe aſſure
                  For to ben true, and mercy me to prey
               
               
                  The longe nyght, this wondre ſyght ydrye
                  That on the day for ſuche a fraye I dye
                  And of al this right nought twys ye retche
                  Ne neuermore myne eyen two ben drye
                  And to your routh, & to your trouth I crye
                  But welaway, to ferre ben they to fetche
                  Thus holdeth me my deſtenie a wretche
                  But me to rede out of this drede or gye
                  Ne may my wyt (ſo weke is it) not ſtretche
               
               
                  Than ende I thus, ſyth I maye do nomore
                  I yeue it vp, for now and euermore
                  For I ſhall neuer efte putten in balaunce
                  My ſykerneſſe, ne lerne of loue the lore
                  But as ye ſwan, I haue herde ſaye full yore
                  Ayenſt his deth woll ſynge in his penaūce
                  So ſynge I here the deſteny and chaunce
                  How that Arcyte Annelyda ſo ſore
                  Hath thrilled wt the poynt of remembraūce.
               
               
                  whan that Anneleda this wofull quene
                  Hath of her hande wrytten in this wyſe
                  with face deed, betwixt pale and grene
                  She fell a ſwoune, and ſythe ſhe gan to ryſe
                  And vnto Mars avoweth ſacrifyce
                  within the temple with a ſorowful chere
                  That ſhapen was, as ye may playnly here.
               
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            ¶The aſſemble of Ladyes.
            
               
                  IN Septembre at the fallyng of the lefe
               The freſh ſeaſon was all togyther done
               And of the corne was gathered the ſhefe
               In a garden about .ii. after none
               Ther wer ladyes walking as was her won
               Foure in nōbre, as to my mynde doth fall
               And I the fyfth, the ſympleſt of hem all.
            
            
               Of gentlewomen fayre there were alſo
               Diſportyng hem eueryche after her gyſe
               In croſſe alleyes walkyng by two and two
               And ſome alone after her fantaſyeſe
               Thus occupyed we were in dyuers wyſe
               And yet in trouth we were not all alone
               Ther were knightes & ſquyres many one
            
            
               wherof I ſerued, one of hem aſked me
               I ſayd ayen, as it fell in my thought
               To walke about the maſe in certayntie
               As a woman that nothyng rought
               He aſked me ayen whom that I ſought
               And of my colour, why I was ſo pale
               Forſoth (ꝙ I) and therby lyth a tale.
            
            
               That muſt we wete (ꝙ he) and that anon
               Tel on let ſe, and make no taryinge
               Abyde (ꝙ I) ye ben a haſty one
               I let you wete it is no lytle thynge
               But for bycauſe ye haue a great longyng
               In your deſyre, this proceſſe for to here
               I ſhal you tell the playne of this matere.
            
            
               
               It happed thus, that in an after noone
               My felouſhyp and I by one aſſent
               whan all other beſyneſſes were done
               To paſſe our tyme, into this maſe we went
               And toke our wayes eche after our entent
               Som wēt inward, & wēt they had gon out
               Some ſtode in ye mid, and loked all about
            
            
               And ſoth to ſay, ſom wer full ferre behynde
               And ryght anon, as ferforth as the beſt
               Other there were ſo maſed in her mynde
               Alwaies wer good for hem both eeſt & weſt
               Thus went they forth & had but lytle reſt
               And ſome her corage dyd hem ſore aſſayle
               For very wrath they dyd ſtep ouer ye rayle.
            
            
               And as they ſought hem ſelfe to and fro
               I gate my ſelfe a lytle auauntage
               All forweryed, I myght no ferther go
               Thouȝ I had won right great for my viage
               So came I forth into a ſtrayte paſſage
               which brouȝt me to an herber fayre & grene
               Made with benches full crafty and clene.
            
            
               That as me thought, ther myght no creature
               Deuyſe a better by a due proporcioun
               Safe i
                     •
                   was cloſed well I you enſure
               with maſonry, of compaſſe enuyroun
               Ful ſecretly with ſtayres going doun
               In myddes ye place wt turnyng whele certayne
               And vpon that a pot of margelayne
            
            
               with margaretes growing in ordinaunce
               To ſhew hem ſelf as folke went to and fro
               That to beholde it was a great pleaſaunce
               And how they were accōpanyed with mo
               Ne momblyſneſſe and ſoueneſſe alſo
               The poure penſes were not diſloged there
               Ne god wot her place was euery where
            
            
               The flore & bench was paued fayre & ſmoth
               with ſtones ſquare of many dyuers hewe
               So well ioyned, that for to ſay the ſoth
               Al ſemed one, that none other knewe
               And vnderneth the ſtreames newe & newe
               As ſyluer bryght ſpringyn in ſuch a wyſe
               That whēce it came, ye coude it not deuyſe
            
            
               A lytle whyle was I all alone
               Beholdyng well this delectable place
               My felowſhip were coming euerychone
               So muſt we now abyde for a ſpace
               Remembryng of many dyuers caſe
               Of tyme paſſed, with ſyghes depe
               I ſet me downe, and there I fell aſlepe
            
            
               And as I ſlept, me thought thercame to me
               A gentlewoman, metely of ſtature
               Of great worſhyp ſhe ſemed for to be
               Attyred well, not hygh but by meaſure
               Her countenaunce ful ſad and demure
               Her colours blewe, all that ſhe had vpon
               There came no mo but her ſelfe alone
            
            
               Her gowne wel was enbraudred certaynly
               with ſtones after her owne deuyſe
               In her purfyl, her worde by and by
               (Bien et loyalment) as I coude deuyſe
               Than prayde I her in any maner wyſe
               That of her name I miȝt haue remēbraūce
               She ſayd, ſhe was called Perſeueraunce
            
            
               So furthermore to ſpeake was I bolde
               wher ſhe dwelled, I prayed her for to ſaye
               And ſhe agayne full curteſly me rolde
               My dwellyng is, and hath be many a day
               with a lady: what lady I you pray?
               Of great eſtate, thus warne I you (ꝙ ſhe)
               what call ye her? Her name is Loyaltie
            
            
               In what offyce ſtande ye, or in what degre?
               (ꝙ I to her) that wold I wete right fayne
               I am (ꝙ ſhe) vnworthye though I be
               Of her chambre her huſher in certayne
               This rod I beare, as for a token playne
               Lyke as ye knowe the rule in ſuche ſeruyce
               Appertaynyng is to the ſame offyce
            
            
               She charged me by her cōmaundement
               To warne you & your felowes euerychone
               That ye ſhuld come there as ſhe is preſent
               For a counſayle, which ſhalbe now anon
               Or ſeuen dayes be comen and gone
               And furthermore, ſhe bad that I ſhulde ſay
               Excuſe there myght be none, nor delay
            
            
               An other thyng was not forget behynde
               which in no wyſe I wolde but ye knewe
               Remēbre well, and beare it in your mynde
               All your felowes & ye muſt come in blewe
               Euery lyche able, your matters for to ſue
               with more, which I pray you thynke vpon
               Your wordes on your ſleues euerychone
            
            
               
               And be not abaſſhed in no maner wyſe
               As many ben, in ſuche an hygh preſence
               Make your requeſt, as ye can beſt deuyſe
               And ſhe gladly wyll gyue you audience
               There is no grefe, nor no maner offence
               wherin ye fele that your hert is diſpleaſed
               But wt her helpe right ſone ye ſhalbe eaſed
            
            
               I am right glad (ꝙ I) ye tell me this
               But there is non of vs that knoweth ye way
               As of your way (ꝙ ſhe) ye ſhal not mys
               Ye ſhal haue to gyde you day by day
               Of my felowes, I can no better ſay
               Such one as ſhal tel you ye way ful ryght
               And Dyligence this gentlewoman hyght
            
            
               A woman of ryght famous gouernaunce
               And well cheryſhed I tel you in certayne
               Her felowſhyp ſhal do you great pleaſaunce
               Her port is ſuche, her maner true & playne
               She with glad chere wyl do her beſy payne
               To bring you there, now farewel I haue done
               Abyde ſayd I, ye may not go ſo ſone
            
            
               why ſo (ꝙ ſhe) and I haue ferre to go
               To yeue warnyng in many dyuers place
               To your felowes, and ſo to other mo
               And wel ye wot I haue but lytle ſpace
               Now yet (ꝙ I) ye muſt tel me this caſe
               Yf we ſhall any men vnto vs call
               Not one (ꝙ ſhe) may come amonges you all
            
            
               Not one than ſayd I, eygh benedicite
               what haue I done, I pray you tel me that
               Now by my lyfe I trowe but wel (ꝙ ſhe)
               But euer I can beleue there is ſomwhat
               And for to ſay you trouth more can I not
               In queſtyons I may nothyng be to large
               I medle no further than my charge
            
            
               Than thus (quod I) do me to vnderſtande
               what place is there this lady is dwellynge
               Forſoth (ꝙ ſhe) & one ſought al this lande
               Fayrer is none, though it were for a kynge
               Deuyſed well, and that in euery thing
               The toures hye, full pleaſaunt ſhal ye fynde
               with phanes freſh, turning wt euery wynde
            
            
               The chambres and parlers of a ſorte
               wt bay windowes, goodly as may bethouȝt
               As for daunſyng, and other wyſe diſport
               The galeryes ryght wel ywrought
               That wel I wot, yf ye wer thyder brought
               And take goodhede therof in euery wyſe
               Ye wol it thynke a very paradyſe
            
            
               what hight ye place (ꝙ I) now ſay me that
               Pleſaunt regarde (ꝙ ſhe) to tel you playne
               Of very trouth (quod I) and wot ye what?
               It may right well be called ſo certayne
               But forthermore this wold I wyt riȝt fayn
               what I ſhulde do as ſone as I come there
               And after whom I may beſt enquere.
            
            
               A gentlewoman, a porter of the yate
               Ther ſhal ye fynde her name is coutenaūce
               Yf ye ſo hap, ye come early or late
               Of her wer good to haue ſom acquaintaūce
               She can you tel, how ye ſhal you auaunce
               And how to come to her ladyes preſence
               To her wordes I rede you gyue credence.
            
            
               Now it is tyme I parte you fro
               For in good fayth I haue great buſyneſſe
               I wot ryght wel (ꝙ I) that it is ſo
               And I thanke you of your great gentleneſſe
               Your cōfort hath yeuen me hardyneſſe
               That now I ſhal be bolde withouten fayle
               To do after your aduyſe & good counſayle
            
            
               Thus parted ſhe, and I left all alone
               with that I ſawe (as I behelde aſyde)
               A woman come, a very goodly one
               And forth withall as I had her eſpyde
               Me thought anon it ſhulde be the gyde
               And of her name anon I dyd enquere
               Ful womanly ſhe yaue me this anſwere
            
            
               I am (ꝙ ſhe) a ſymple creature
               Sent frō the court, my name is Diligence
               As ſone as I myght come I you enſure
               I taryed not after I had lycence
               And nowe that I am come to your preſence
               Loke what ſeruyce I can do or may
               Cōmaunde me, I can no further ſay.
            
            
               I thanked her, & prayed her to come nere
               Bycauſe I wolde ſe how ſhe was arayed
               Her gown was blew dreſſed in good maner
               with her deuyſe, her worde alſo that ſayde
               (Tant que i
                     •
                   puis) and I was wel apayed
               And than wyſt I withouten any more
               It was full true that I had herde before
            
            
               
               Though we toke now before a lytle ſpace
               It were full good (ꝙ ſhe) as I coude geſſe
               How farre (ꝙ I) haue we vnto the place?
               A dayes iourney (quod ſhe) but lytle leſſe
               wherfore I rede that we outwarde dreſſe
               For I ſuppoſe our felowſhyp is paſt
               And for nothing I wold not we were ye laſt
            
            
               Thā departed we at ye ſpringyng of ye daye
               And forth we went ſoft and eaſy pace
               Tyl at the laſt we were on our iourney
               So far outwarde, yt we myght ſe the place
               Now let vs reſt (ꝙ I) a lytle ſpace
               And ſaye we as deuoutly as we can
               A Pater noſter for ſaynct Iulyan
            
            
               with all my herte I aſſent with good wyll
               Moche better ſhal we ſpede whā we haue done
               Thā taryed we, and ſayd it euery dyl
               And whan the day was paſt far after none
               we ſawe a place, and thyder came we ſoone
               which rounde about was cloſed wt a wall
               Semyng to me ful lyke an hoſpitall.
            
            
               Ther foūd I one had brought al myn aray
               (A gentlewoman of myne acquayntaunce)
               I haue meruayle (ꝙ I) what maner way
               Ye had knowlege of al this ordenaunce
               Yes yes (ꝙ ſhe) I herde perſeueraunce
               How ſhe warned her felowes euerychone
               And what aray ye ſhulde haue vpon
            
            
               Now for my loue (ꝙ I) this I you praye
               Syth ye haue take vpon you all the payne
               That ye wold helpe me on with myne aray
               For wit ye well I wolde be gone right fayn
               Al this prayer nedeth not certayne
               (ꝙ ſhe agayne) come of & hye you ſone
               And ye ſhall ſe anon it ſhalbe done
            
            
               But this I dout me greatly, wot ye what
               That my felowes be paſſed by and gone
               I warne you (ꝙ ſhe) that are they nat
               For here they ſhal aſſemble euerychone
               Notwithſtanding I counſayl you anone
               Make you redy, and tary you nomore
               Ytis no harme though ye be there before
            
            
               So than I dreſſed me in myne araye
               And aſked her, whether it wer well or no
               It is ryght well (ꝙ ſhe) vnto my paye
               Ye nede not care to what place euer ye go
               And whyles that ſhe and I debated ſo
               Came Diligence and ſawe me al in bl
                     •
                  we
               Siſter (ꝙ ſhe) ryght wel broke ye your now
            
            
               Diſcretion purueyour.
               Than went we forth and met at auenture
               A yonge woman, an offycer ſemyng
               what is your name (ꝙ I) good creature
               Diſcretion (quod ſhe) without leſynge
               And where (ꝙ I) is your moſt abydynge
               I haue (quod ſhe) this office of purchace
               Chefe purueyour that longeth to this place
            
            
               Acquayntaunce herbyger.
               Fayre loue (ꝙ I) in all your ordenaunce
               what is her name that is the herbyger
               Forſoth (ꝙ ſhe) her name is acquayntaūce
               A woman of ryght gracious manere
               Thā thus ꝙ I, what ſtraūgers haue ye here
               But fewe quod ſhe, of hygh degree ne lowe
               Ye be the fyrſt, as ferforth as I knowe
            
            
               Countenaunce porter.
               Thus wt tales we came ſtreyght to ye yate
               This yonge woman departed was & gone
               Came Diligence and knocked faſt therate
               who is without (ꝙ countenaunce) anone
               Truly (quod I) fayre ſyſter here is one
               which one ꝙ ſhe, & therwithal ſhe lough
               I Diligence, ye knowe me wel ynough
            
            
               Than opened ſhe the gate, and in we go
               with wordes fayre ſhe ſayd full gently
               Ye are welcome ywis, are ye no mo?
               Not one quod ſhe, ſaue this woman & I
               Now than quod ſhe, I pray you hertly
               Take my chambre for a whyle to reſt
               Tyl your felowes come, I holde it beſt
            
            
               I thanked her, and forth we go euerychon
               Tyl her chambre without wordes mo
               Came diligence and toke her leue anon
               where euer ye lyſt quod I, now may ye go
               And I thanke you ryght hertely alſo
               Of your labour, for which god do you mede
               I can nomore, but Ieſu be your ſpede
            
            
               Than countenaunce aſked me anon
               Your felowſhip, where ben they, quod ſhe
               Forſoth ꝙ I, they be coming euerychone
               But where they are I knowe no certayntie
               without I may hem at this wyndowe ſe
               Here wyl I ſtande awayting euer amonge
               For well I wote they wyll not be longe.
            
            
               
               Thus as I ſtode muſyng full buſily
               I thought to take good hede of her aray
               Her gowne was blewe, this wot I verely
               Of good faſion and furred wel with gray
               Vpon her ſleue her worde this is no nay
               which ſayd thus, as my penne can endyte
               (A moy que ie voy) written wt letters white
            
            
               Than forthwithal ſhe came ſtreight to me
               Your wordes ꝙ ſhe, fayn wold I yt I knew
               Forſoth quod I, ye ſhal wel knowe & ſe
               And for my word I haue none, this is trew
               It is ynough that my clothing be blewe
               As here before I had cōmaundement
               And ſo to do I am ryght wel content
            
            
               Largeſſe ſtewarde.
               But tel me this I pray you hertely
               The ſtuarde here ſay me what is her name
               She hyght largeſſe, I ſaye you ſurely
               A fayre lady and of ryght noble fame
               whan ye her ſe, ye wyl report the ſame
               And vnder her to byd you welcome all
               There is Belchier marſhal of the hall.
            
            
               Now all this whyle that ye here tary ſtyl
               your own maters ye may wel haue in mind
               But tel me this, haue ye brought any byll
               Yea yea (quod I) and els I wer behynde
               where is there one, tel me that I may fynde
               To whō yt I may ſhew my maters playne
               Surely ꝙ ſhe, vnto the Chambrelayne
            
            
               Remembraunce Chambrelayne.
               The chābrelayne quod I, ſaye ye trewe
               Yea verely quod ſhe, by myne aduyſe
               Be not aferde, vnto her lowly ſewe
               Yt ſhalbe done quod I, as ye deuyſe
               But ye muſt know her name in any wyſe
               Truly (ꝙ ſhe) to ſhewe you in ſubſtaunce
               wtouten fayning her name is Remēbraūce.
            
            
               The ſecretarye ſhe may not yet be forget
               For ſhe doth ryght moche in euery thynge
               wherfore I rede, whan ye haue wt her ymet
               Your mater hole tell her without fayninge
               Ye ſhall her fynde ful good and ful louyng
               Tel me her name (ꝙ I) of gentleneſſe
               By my good ſoth quod ſhe, Auyſeneſſe.
            
            
               That (quod I) for her is paſſyng good
               For euery byll and ſedule ſhe muſt ſe
               Now good (ꝙ I) come ſtād ther as I ſtode
               My felowes be cōmyng, yonder they be
               Is it iape, or ſaye ye ſothe (quod ſhe)
               In iape, nay nay, I ſay you for certayne
               Se how they come togyder twayne and twayne
            
            
               Ye ſaye ful ſoth (quod ſhe) that is no naye
               I ſe commyng a goodly company
               They ben ſuch folke quod I, dare I ſaye
               That lyſt to loue thynke it verely
               And for my loue I pray you faythfully
               At any tyme, whan they vpon me call
               That ye woll be good frende to hem all
            
            
               Of my frendſhyp ꝙ ſhe, they ſhall not myſſe
               And for theyr eaſe to put therto my payne
               God yelde it you (ꝙ I) but take you this
               How ſhal we know who is the chābrelayne
               yt ſhal ye well knowe by her worde certayne
               what is her word ſiſter, I pray you ſaye
               (Plus ne purroy) thus wryteth ſhe alwaye
            
            
               Thus as we ſtode togyther ſhe and I
               Euen at the yate my felowes we
                     •
                   eche one
               So met I hem, as me thouȝt was goodly
               And bade hem welcome all by one and one
               Than came forth Countenaunce anon
               Full hertely fayre ſyſters all (ꝙ ſhe)
               Ye be ryght welcome into this countrie,
            
            
               I counſayle you to take a lytle reſt
               In my chambre, yf it be your pleaſaunce
               whan ye be there, me thynke it for the beſt
               That I go in, and call Perſeueraunce
               Bycauſe ſhe is of your acquayntaunce
               And ſhe alſo wyll tell you euery thynge
               How ye ſhal be ruled of your comyng
            
            
               My felowes al and I, by one aduyſe
               were wel agreed to do lyke as ſhe ſayde
               Than we began to dreſſe vs in our gyſe
               that folk ſhuld ſay we wer not vnpurueyd
               And good wagers amōg vs there we layde
               which of vs was attyred mooſt goodlyeſt
               And of vs al which ſhulde be prayſed beſt.
            
            
               The porter came & brought Perſeueraunce
               She welcomed vs in curtyſe manere
               Thynke ye not longe (ꝙ ſhe) of youre attendaunce
               I wol go ſpeke vnto the harbigere
               That ſhe puruey for your lodging here
               Than wyll I go vnto the Chambrelayne
               
                  To ſpeke for yon, and come anone agayne
            
            
               And whan ſhe departed was and gone
               we ſawe folkes comynge wythout the wall
               So gret people, that nombre coude we none
               Ladyes they were, and gentylwomen all
               Clothed in blewe echone her worde wythall
               But for to knowe her worde or her deuyſe
               They came ſo thycke, yt I ne might ī no wyſe
            
            
               Wyth that anone came in Perſeueraunce
               And where I ſtode, ſhe came ſtreyght to me
               Ye ben (ꝙ ſhe) of myne olde acquayntaunce
               You to enquere the bolder wolde I be
               what worde they bere eche after her degre
               I you pray tell it me in ſecrete wyſe
               And I ſhall kepe it cloſe on warantyſe
            
            
               We ben fyue ladyes (ꝙ I) all in fere
               And gentylwomen foure in company
               whan they begyne to open her matere
               Than ſhall ye knowe her wordes by and by
               
                  
                     •
                  ut as for me I haue none verely
               And ſo I tolde Countenaunce here before
               All myne aray is blewe, what nedeth more
            
            
               Nowe than (ꝙ ſhe) I woll go agayne
               That ye may haue knowleg, what ye ſhulde do
               In ſoth (ꝙ I) yf ye wolde take the payne
               Ye dyd ryght moche for vs, yf ye dyd ſo
               The rather ſped, the ſoner may we go
               Great coſt alway there is in taryenge
               And longe to ſewe it is a wery thynge
            
            
               Than parted ſhe, and came agayne anone
               Ye muſte (ꝙ ſhe) come to the chamberlayne
               We be nowe redy (ꝙ I) euerychone
               To folowe you, whan euer ye lyſt certayne
               we haue none eloquence to tell you playne
               Beſechynge you we may be ſo excuſed
               Our trewe meanynge, that it be not refuſed
            
            
               Than wente we forth after Perſeueraunce
               To ſe the prees it was a wonder cace
               There for to paſſe it was great combraunce
               The people ſtode ſo thycke in euery place
               Nowe ſtande ye ſtyll (ꝙ ſhe) a lytell ſpace
               And for your eaſe ſomwhat I ſhall aſſay
               If I can make you any better way
            
            
               And forth ſhe goth, amonge hem euerychone
               Makyng a way, yt we myght through paſſe
               More at our eaſe, and whan ſhe had ſo done
               She beckende vs to come, where as ſhe was
               So after her we folowed more and las
               She brouȝt vs ſtreyght vnto ye chābrelayne
               There lefte ſhe vs, and thā ſhe went agayne
            
            
               We ſalued her as reaſon wolde it ſo
               Full humbly beſechyng her great goodneſſe
               In our maters that we had for to do
               That ſhe wolde be good lady and mayſtreſſe
               Ye be welcome (ꝙ ſhe) in ſothfaſtneſſe
               And ſe what I can do, you for to pleaſe
               I am redy, that may be to your eaſe
            
            
               we folowed her vnto the chambre dore
               Syſters (ꝙ ſhe) come ye in after me
               But wete ye well, there was a paued ſtore
               The goodlyeſt, that any wight myght ſe
               And furthermore aboute than loked we
               On eche corner, and vpon euery wall
               whyche was made of Burell and Cryſtal
            
            
               wherin was grauen of ſtoryes many one
               Fyrſt howe Phyllis, or womanly pyte
               Dyed pyteouſly for loue of Demophone
               Nexte after was the ſtory of Tyſbe
               Howe ſhe ſlewe her ſelfe vnder a tree
               Yet ſawe I more, how in a riȝt pytous caas
               For Antony was ſlayne Cleopatras
            
            
               That other ſyde was Hawes the ſhe
                     •
                  e
               Full vntrewly diſceyued in her vayne
               There was alſo Annelida the quene
               Vpon Arcyte howe ſore ſhe dyd complayne
               All theſe ſtoryes were graued there certayne
               And many mo, than I reherce you here
               It were to longe to tell you all in fere
            
            
               And bycauſe the walles ſhone ſo bright
               wyth fyne vmple they were all ouer ſprad
               To that entēt folke ſhuld nat hurt her ſyght
               And through it the ſtoryes myght be rad
               Than furthermore I went, as I was lad
               And there I ſawe wythout any fayle
               A chayre ſet, wyth full ryche aparayle
            
            
               And fyue ſtages, it was ſet fro the grounde
               Of Caſſydony full curyouſly wrought
               with foure pomelles of golde, & very rounde
               Set wt ſaphirs, as good as coude be thouȝt
               That wote ye what, if it were through ſouȝt
               As I ſuppoſe, fro this countrey to Inde
               
                  Another ſuche it were right farre to fynde
            
            
               For wete ye well, I was ryght nere that
               So as I durſt, beholdyng by and by
               Aboue there was a ryche cloth of eſtate
               wrought wyth the nedle full ſtraungely
               Her worde theron, and thus it ſayd trewly
               A endure to tell you in wordes fewe
               wyth great letters, the better I hem knewe
            
            
               Thus as we ſtode, a dore opened anone
               A gentylwoman, ſemely of ſtature
               Berynge a mace, came out her ſelfe alone
               Sothely me thought a goodly creature
               She ſpake nothyng to lowde, I you enſure
               Nor haſtely, but wyth goodly warnynge
               Make rome (ꝙ ſhe) my lady is comynge
            
            
               Wyth that anone I ſawe Perſeueraunce
               Howe ſhe helde vp the tapet in her hande
               I ſawe alſo in ryght goodly ordenaunce
               This great lady within the tapet ſtande
               Comynge outwarde, I woll ye vnderſtande
               And after her a noble company
               I coude nat tell the nombre ſykerly
            
            
               Of theyr names I wolde nothyng enquere
               Further than ſuche as we wolde ſewe vnto
               Saue a lady, whyche was the chauncellere
               Attemperaunce ſothely her name was ſo
               For vs nedeth wyth her haue moche to do
               In our maters, and alwaye more and more
               And ſo forthe to tell you furthermore
            
            
               Of thys lady, her beaute to diſcryue
               My connynge is to ſymple verely
               For neuer yet the dayes of my lyue
               So inly fayre I haue ſene none trewly
               In her eſtate aſſured vtterly
               There wanted naught, I dare well aſſure
               That longed to a goodly creature
            
            
               And furthermore to ſpeke of her aray
               I ſhall you tell the maner of her gowne
               Of clothe of golde, full ryche it is no nay
               The coloure blewe of a ryght goodly facyoū
               
               In taberde wyſe, the ſleues hangyng adown
               And what purfyl there was, & in what wyſe
               So as I can I ſhall it you deuyſe
            
            
               After a ſorte, the coller and the vente
               Lyke as Armyne is made in purfelynge
               wyth great perles full fyne and orient
               They were couched all after one worchynge
               wyth diamondes in ſtede of powderynge
               The ſleues and purfell of aſſyſe
               They were made lyke in euery wyſe
            
            
               Aboute her necke a ſorte of fayre rubyes
               In whyte floures of ryght fyne enamayle
               Vpon her heed ſet in the fayreſt wyſe
               A cercle of great balays of entayle
               That in erneſt to ſpeke wythout fayle
               For yonge and olde, and euery maner age
               It was a worlde to loken on her vyſage
            
            
               Thus comynge forthe to ſyt in her eſtate
               In her preſence we kneled down euerychone
               Preſentynge our bylles, and wote ye what
               Full humbly ſhe toke hem by one and one
               whan we had done, than came they al anone
               And dyd the ſame eche after her manere
               Knelyng at ones, and ryſynge all in fere
            
            
               And whā this was don, & ſhe ſet in her place
               The chamberlayne ſhe dyd vnto her call
               And ſhe goodly comyng vnto her a pace
               Of her entent knowyng nothyng at all
               Voyde backe the preace (ꝙ ſhe) vp to the wal
               Make large roume, but loke ye do not tary
               And take theſe bylles to the ſecretarye
            
            
               The chamberlayne dyde her cōmaundement
               And came agayne, as ſhe was byd to do
               The ſecretarye there beyng preſent
               The bylles were delyuered her alſo
               Not onely ours, but many other mo
               Than the lady wyth good aduyce agayne
               Anone wythall, called her chamberlayne
            
            
               We woll (ꝙ ſhe) the fyrſt thyng that ye do
               The ſecretarye ye do make come anone
               wyth her bylles, and thus we wyll alſo
               In our preſence ſhe rede hem euerychon
               That we maye take good aduyce theron
               Of the ladyes that ben of oure counſayle
               Loke thys be done, wythouten any fayle
            
            
               Whan the chamberlayne wyſte of her entēt
               Anon ſhe dyd the ſecretarye call
               Let your bylles (ꝙ ſhe) be here preſent
               My lady it wyll: Madame (ꝙ ſhe) I ſhall
               And in preſence ſhe wyll ye hem call
               Wyth good wyll I am redy (ꝙ ſhe)
               At her pleaſure, whan ſhe cōmaundeth me
            
            
               
               And vpon that was made an ordynaunce
               They yt came fyrſt her bylles ſhulde be redde
               Full gentelly than ſayd Perſeueraunce
               Rayſon it wyll they were ſoneſt ſpedde
               Anone wythall, vpon a tapet ſpredde
               The ſecretarye layde hem downe echone
               Our bylles fyrſt ſhe redde one by one
            
            
               The fyrſt lady bearyng in her deuyſe
               Sans que iamays, thus wrote ſhe on her byl
               Complaynyng ſore, and in full pytous wyſe
               Of promeſſe made, with faythful hert & wyl
               And ſo broken ayenſt all maner ſkyll
               wythout deſerte, alwayes on her partye
               In thys mater, deſyryng a remedy
            
            
               Her next folowing, her word was ī this wiſe
               (Vng ſanz chaūger) & thus ſhe dyd cōplayne
               though ſhe had be guerdoned for her ſeruice
               Yet nothynge lyke as ſhe that toke the payne
               wherfore ſhe coude in no wyſe her reſtrayne
               But in thys caſe ſewe vntyll her preſence
               As reaſon wolde to haue recompence
            
            
               So furthermore, to ſpeke of other twayne
               One of hem wrote after her fantaſy
               (Vncques puis leuer) & for to tel you playne
               Her complaynt was full pytous verely
               For as ſhe ſayd, there was great reaſon why
               As I can remembre thys matere
               I ſhall you tell the proceſſe all in fere
            
            
               Her byl was made complaynyng in her gyſe
               That of her ioy, her comforte and gladneſſe
               was no ſurete, for in no maner wyſe
               She ſayd therin no poynt of ſtableneſſe
               Nowe yll nowe wele, out of all ſykerneſſe
               Full humbly deſyrynge of her hygh grace
               Soone to ſhewe her remedy in thys cace
            
            
               Her felawe made her byll, and thus ſhe ſayd
               In playnynge wyſe there as ſhe loued beſt
               whether ſhe were wrothe or wele apayde
               She might nat ſe whan ſhe wolde fayneſt
               And wrothe ſhe was in verye erneſt
               To tell her worde, as ferforth as I wote
               (Entierment voſtre) ryght thus ſhe wrote
            
            
               And vpon that ſhe made a great requeſt
               wyth herte and wyl, & all that might be done
               As vntyll her that might redreſſe it beſt
               For in her mynd there might ſhe fynd it ſone
               The remedy of that whych was her boone
               Reherſynge that ſhe had ſayd before
               Beſechynge her it myght be ſo nomore
            
            
               And in lyke wyſe as they had done before
               The gentylwomen of our company
               Put her bylles, and for to tell you more
               One of hem wrote (ceſt ſanz dire) verely
               And her matere hole to ſpecify
               wyth in her byll ſhe put it in writynge
               And what it ſayd, ye ſhall haue knowynge
            
            
               It ſayd god wote, and that ful pytouſly
               Lyke as ſhe was diſpoſed in her herte
               No myſfortvne that ſhe toke greuouſly
               Al one to her was the ioy and ſmerte
               Somtyme no thanke for al her good deſerte
               Other comforte ſhe wanted non comynge
               And ſo vſed, it greued her nothynge
            
            
               Deſyrynge her, and lowly beſechynge
               That ſhe wolde for her ſeke a better way
               As ſhe that had ben her dayes lyuynge
               Stedfaſt and trewe, and wylbe alway
               Of her felawe, ſomwhat I ſhal you ſaye
               whoſe byl was red nexte forthe withal
               And what it ment, reherſen you I ſhal
            
            
               (En diu eſt) ſhe wrote in her deuyſe
               And thus ſhe ſayd withouten fayle
               Her trouthe myght be take in no wyſe
               like as ſhe thouȝt, wherfore ſhe had meruaile
               For trouth ſōtyme was wont to take auayle
               In euery matere, but al that is ago
               The more pyte that it is ſuffred ſo
            
            
               Moche more there was, wherof ſhe ſhuld cō
                  playn
               But ſhe thouȝt it to gret encōbraūce
               So moche to wryte, and therfore in certayn
               In god and her ſhe put al her affiaunce
               As in her worde is made a remembraunce
               Beſeching her, that ſhe wolde in this cace
               Shewe vnto her the fauour of her grace
            
            
               The thirde ſhe wrote reherſing her greuaūce
               Yea, wote ye what? a pitous thing to here
               For as me thouȝt ſhe felte great dyſpleſaūce
               One miȝt right wel perceyue it by her chere
               And no wonder, it ſate her paſſynge nere
               Yet lothe ſhe was to put it in wrytynge
               But nede wol haue courſe in euery thinge
            
            
               
               (Soyes enſure) this was her word certayne
               And thus ſhe wrote in a lytell ſpace
               There ſhe loued, her labour was in vayne
               For he was ſet all in another place
               Full humbly deſyrynge in that cace
               Some good comforte her ſorowe to appeſe
               That ſhe myght lyue more at hertes eaſe
            
            
               The fourth ſurely me thought ſhe liked wele
               As in her porte, and in her behauynge
               And (bien moneſte) as farre as I coude fele
               That was her word tyll her welbelongynge
               wherfore to her ſhe prayed aboue all thynge
               Full hertely to ſay you in ſubſtaunce
               That ſhe wolde ſende her good continuaunce
            
            
               Ye haue reherſed me theſe bylles all
               But nowe let ſe ſomwhat of your entent
               It may ſo hap, parauenture ye ſhall
               Nowe I pray you whyle I am here preſent
               Ye ſhall haue knowlege parde what I ment
               But thus I ſay, in trouthe & make no fable
               The caſe it ſelfe is inly lamentable
            
            
               And well I wote ye woll thynke the ſame
               Lyke as I ſay, whan ye haue herde my byll
               Now good tell on, I hate you by ſaint Iame
               Abyde a whyle, it is nat yet my wyll
               Yet muſte ye wete by reaſon and by ſkyll
               Sith ye haue knowlege of yt was don before
               And thus it is ſayd without wordes more
            
            
               Nothynge ſo lefe as dethe to come to me
               For fynall ende of my ſorowes and payne
               what ſhulde I more deſyre as ſeme ye
               And ye knewe al aforne it for certayne
               I wote ye wolde, and for to tell you playne
               without her helpe that hath all thyng in cure
               I can nat thynke that it may longe endure
            
            
               As for my trouthe it hath beproued wele
               To ſay the ſothe, I can ſay no more
               Of full longe tyme and ſuffred euery dele
               In pacience, and kepe it all in ſtore
               Of her goodneſſe, beſechynge her therfore
               That I myght haue my thanke in ſuch wyſe
               As my deſerte ſerueth of iuſtyſe
            
            
               Whan theſe bylles were rad euerychone
               The ladyes toke a good aduyſement
               And hem to anſwere by one and one
               She thought it was to moche in her entent
               wherfore ſhe yaue hem commaundement
               In her preſence to come bothe one and all
               To yeue hem her anſwere in generall
            
            
               What dyd ſhe than ſuppoſe ye verely?
               She ſpake her ſelfe, and ſayd in this manere
               we haue well ſene your bylles by and by
               And ſome of hem pytous for to here
               we wol therfore ye knowe all thys infere
               wythin ſhorte tyme, our courte of parlyment
               Here ſhall be holde in our palays preſent
            
            
               And in all thys, wherin ye fynde you greued
               There ſhall ye fynde an open remedy
               In ſuche wyſe as ye ſhall be releued
               Of all that ye reherce here throughly
               As for the date ye ſhall knowe verely
               That ye may haue a ſpace in your comyng
               For dyligence ſhall it tell you by wrytyng
            
            
               We thanked her in our moſte humble wyſe
               Our felauſhyp, eche one by one aſſente
               Submyttyng vs lowly tyll her ſeruyſe
               For as we thouȝt, we had your trauayle ſpēt
               In ſuche wyſe as we helde vs contente
               Than eche of vs toke other by the ſleue
               And forth withal, as we ſhulde take our leue
            
            
               All ſodaynly the water ſprange anone
               In my viſage, and therwythall I woke
               where am I nowe thought I, al this is gone
               All maſed, and vp I gan to loke
               with that anone I went and made this boke
               Thus ſymply reherſyng the ſubſtaunce
               Bycauſe it ſhulde not be out of remembraūce
            
            
               Nowe verily your dreame is paſſyng good
               And worthy to be had in remembraunce
               For though I ſtande here as long as I ſtode
               It ſhulde to me be none encombraunce
               I toke therin ſo inly great pleaſaunce
               But tell me nowe what ye the boke do call
               For I muſt wete: wt right good wyll ye ſhall
            
            
               As for thys boke, to ſay you very ryght
               Of the name to tell you in certaynte
               Laſſemble de dames, thus it hyght
               Howe thynke ye? that name is good parde
               Nowe go farewell, for they call after me
               My felawes all, and I muſte after ſone
               Rede wel my dreme, for now my tale is done
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               
               The concluſions of the Aſtrolabie.
               
                  LItell Lowys my ſunne, I perceyue well by certayne euydēces thyne abilite to lerne ſciences, touchyng nombres, and proporcions: and alſo wel cō
                  ſydre I thy beſye prayer in eſpecyall to lerne the tretyſe of the Aſtrolabe. Than for as moche as a philoſopher ſayth, he wrappeth hym in hys frēde, that cō
                  deſcendeth to the ryghtfull prayers of hys frende: Therfore I haue gyuen the a ſuffycient Aſtrolaby for our orizonte, compowned after the latytude of Oxenford: vpon ye whiche by medyacyon of thys lytell treatyſe, I purpoſe to teache the a certayne nombre of concluſyons, pertayning to this ſame inſtrument. I ſaye a certayne of concluſyons for thre cauſes, the fyrſt cauſe is this. Truſte wel that all the concluſyons that haue be foundē, or els poſſyblye myght be founde in ſo noble an inſtrument as is the Aſtrolabye, ben vnknowen perfytely to any mortall man in this regyon, as I ſuppoſe. Another cauſe is thys, that ſothlye in any cartes of the Aſtrolabye that I haue yſene, there ben ſome concluſyōs, that woll not in all thynges perfourme her byheſtes: and ſome of hem ben to harde to thy tender age of ten yere to conceyue. This treatyſe deuyded in fyue partes wyll I ſhewe the wonder lyght rules and naked wordes in engliſhe, for latyn ne canſte thou yet but ſmale, my lytell ſonne. But neuer the leſſe ſuffyſeth to the theſe trewe concluſyons in englyſſhe, as well as ſuffyſeth to thys noble clerkes Grekes theſe ſame concluſyons in greke, and to arabyens in arabyke, and to iewes in Hebrewe, & to the Latyn folke in Latyn: which Latyne folke had hem fyrſte out of other dyuers langages, and wryte hem in her owne tonge, that hys to ſayne in Latyne.
               And god wote that in all theſe languages and in manye mo, haue theſe concluſyons ben ſuffycyently lerned and taught, and yet by dyuers rules, ryght as dyuers pathes leadē dyuers folke the ryght waye to Rome.
               Nowe woll I praye mekely euery perſon diſcrete, that redeth or hereth thys lytell treatyſe, to haue my rude entendyng excuſed and my ſuperfluyte of wordes, for two cauſes. The fyrſt cauſe is, for that curyous endytyng and harde ſentences is full heuy at ones, for ſuche a chylde to lerne. And the ſeconde cauſe is thys, that ſothly me ſemeth better to wryten vnto a chylde twyſe a good ſentence, than he forgette it ones. And Lowis if it ſo be that I ſhewe the in my lyth Englyſſhe, as trewe concluſyons, touchynge thys mater, and not onely as trewe, but as many and ſubtyll concluſyons as ben yſhewed in Latyne in anye commune tretyſe of the Aſtrolabye, conne me the more thanke, and pray God ſaue the kyng that is lorde of thys language, and all that hym faythe beareth, and obeyeth eueryche in hys degre, the more and the laſſe. But conſydreth well, that I ne vſurpe not to haue founden thys werke of my labour or of myne engyne, I nam but a leude compylatour of the labour of olde Aſtrologiens, and haue it tranſlated in myne Englyſſhe onelye for thy doctryne: and wyth thys ſwerde ſhal I ſleue enuye.
               
                  ¶The fyrſte partye.
                  
                     THe fyrſte partye of this treatyſe ſhall reherce the fygures and the membres of thyne Aſtrolabye, bycauſe that thou ſhalte haue the greater knowynge of thyne owne inſtrument.
               
               
                  ¶The ſeconde partye.
                  ¶The ſeconde partye ſhall teche the to werken the very practyke of the foreſayde concluſyons as ferforthe and all ſo narowe as may be ſhewed in ſo ſmale an inſtrument portatyfe aboute. For wel wote euery aſtrologien, that ſmalleſt fractions ne wol not be ſhewed in ſo ſmal an inſtrument, as in ſubtyll tables calcuſed for a cauſe.
               
               
                  ¶The thyrde partye.
                  ¶The thirde party ſhal contayne dyuers tables of longytudes and latytudes of ſterres, fyxe in the Aſtrolabye. And tables of the declinacyons of the ſunne, and tables of the longytude

of cytes and townes. And tables as well for the gouernacyon of the clocke, as for to fynde the altitude meridyan, and many an other notable cōcluſyon after the kalenders of the reuerent clerkes frere Iohn Som. and frere N. Lenne.
               
               
                  ¶The fourth partye.
                  ¶The fourth partye ſhall be a theorike to declare the meanynge of the celeſtyall bodyes, wyth the cauſes, the whyche the fourth partye in ſpecyal ſhall ſhewe in a table of the verye menynge of the moone frome one to one euerye day and euery ſygne, after thyne Almanake. Vpon the whyche table there foloweth a canone, ſuffycyent to teache as well in maner of workynge in the ſame concluſyons, as to knowe in oure oryzonte, wyth whyche degre of zodiac the Moone aryſeth in anye latytude, and the aryſynge in anye Planete after hys latytude fro the eclyptyke lyne.
               
               
                  ¶The fyfte partye.
                  ¶The fyfthe partye ſhall ben an introductorye after the ſtatutes of oure Doctours, on whyche thou mayſte lerne a great parte of the generall rules of theoryke in Aſtrologye. In whyche fyfthe partye thou ſhalt fynde tables of equacyons of houſes, after the latitude of Oxenforde, and tables of dignytees of Planettes, and other notefull thynges, yf god vouchſafe & hys mother the mayden, mo than I behete.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶The rynge.
                  ¶Thy Aſtrolabye hath a rynge to putten on thy thombe on thy ryght honde, in takyng of the heyght of thynges. And take kepe, frome hence forwarde I woll cleape the heyght of heuy thynge, that is take by the rule, the altytude wythouten mo wordes.
               
               
                  ¶The turet.
                  ¶Thys rynge renneth in a maner of a turet faſtned to the moder of thyne Aſtrolabye, in a roume a ſpace that it dyſtroubeleth not the inſtrument to hangen after hys ryght centure.
                  The moder of thyne Aſtrolabye is thickeſt by the brinkes, that is the vtmoſte ryng with degrees: and al the myddle wythin the rynge ſhall be thynner, to receyue the plates for dyuers clymates, and alſo for the rethe, that is ſhape in maner of a nette, or els after the webbe of a loppe.
               
               
                  ¶The moder.
                  ¶The moder of thyne Aſtrolaby is the thickeſt plate perced wyth a large hole, that receyueth in her wombe the thynne plates compowned of dyuers clymates, and thy reete ſhapen in maner of a nette or of a webbe of a loppe.
               
               
                  ¶Of the foure lynes.
                  ¶Thys moder is deuyded on the backhalfe wyth a lyne, that cometh diſcendynge fro the rynge downe to the nethereſt bordure, the whyche lyne, fro the foreſayd rynge vnto the centre of the large hole amydde, is cleped ſouth lyne, or els the lyne merydionall: And the remenaunt of this lyne downe to the bordure is cleped the northe lyne, or all the lyne of the mydnight.
               
               
                  ¶Of foure lynes Eeſt, Weſt, Northe, and Southe.
                  
                     OVerthwarte thys forſayd longe lyne there croſſeth him another lyne of the ſame length, fro Eeſt to Weſt, of the whyche lyne, frome a lytell croſſe in the bordure vnto the centure of the large hole, is cleped the Eeſt lyne, or els the lyne oriental: and the remenaunt of the lyne, fro the forſayd Orientall vnto the bordure, is ycleped the weſt lyne, or the lyne occidentall. ¶Nowe haſt thou here the foure quarters of thyn Aſtrolabye, deuyded after the foure principal plages or quarters of the fyrmament.
               
               
                  ¶Whyche is the ryght ſyde, and whyche is the lyfte.
                  
                     THe Eeſt ſyde of the Aſtrolaby is cleaped the ryght ſyde, and the weſte ſyde is cleaped the lyft ſyde. Foryet not this lytel Lowys. Put ye rynge of thyne Aſtrolabye vpon the thombe of thy ryght hande, and than wyl hys ryght ſyde by towarde thy lyfte ſyde, and hys lyfte ſyde woll be towarde thy ryght ſyde. Take thys rule generall as well on the backe as on the wombe ſyde. Vpon the ende of thys Eeſt lyne (as I fyrſte ſayde) is ymarked a lytell croſſe, where as euermore generallye is conſydred the entrynge of the Eeſt degre, in the whyche the ſunne aryſeth.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The degrees fro the Eeſt lyne to the South.
                  
                     FRo the lytell croſſe vp to the ende of the meridionall lyne vnder the rynge ſhalte thou fynde the bordure, deuyded with .xc. degrees, and by that ſame proporciō is euery quarter of thyn Aſtrolaby deuyded, ouer ye which degrees there ben nombres of augrym, that deuyden thylke ſame degrees fro .v. to .v. as ſheweth by lōge ſtrykes bytwen: of ye which longe ſtrykes the ſpace bytwene conteyneth a myle waye, and euery degree of thylke bordure cōteyneth foure minutes, that is to ſay, foure mynutes of an houre.
               
               
                  ¶Of the twelue ſygnes, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, and the other.
                  
                     VNder the cōpas of thilke degrees ben wrytten the names of the twelue ſignes, as Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cācer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius, Capricornus, Aquaries, and piſſes. And ye nombres of the degrees of the ſygnes ben wryttē in augrymatioue, and wyth longe diuyſious from fyue to fyue, deuydeth from the tyme that ye ſigne entreth vnto the laſte ende. But vnderſtande wel, that theſe degrees of ſignes ben euerych of hem conſydred of .lx. mynutes, and euerye mynute of .lx. ſecondes, & ſo forth into ſmale fractions infynite, as ſayth Alcabucius. And therfore knowe well that a degre of the bordure conteyneth .iiii. mynutes, and a degre of a ſygne contayneth .lx. mynutes, & haue thys in mynde.
               
               
                  ¶The cercle of the dayes.
                  
                     NExte thys foloweth the cercle of the dayes, that ben fygured in maner of the degrees, that conteynen in nombre. CCClxv. deuyded alſo wyth longe ſtrykes from .v. to .v. and the nō
                     bres of augrim wrytten vnder the cercle.
               
               
                  ¶The cercle of the .xii. monethes.
                  
                     NExte the cercle of dayes foloweth the cercle of the .xii. names of the monethes, that is to ſay, Ianuarius, Februarius, Marcius, Apryll, Maius, Iunius, Iulius, Auguſt, September, October, Nouember, December. The names of theſe mō
                     thes taken her names, ſome for properties & ſome by ſtatutes of emperours, and ſome by other lordes of Rome. Eke of theſe mōthes, as lyked to Iulius Ceſar and Ceſar Auguſtus, ſome were ycompowned of dyuers nō
                     bres of dayes, as Iuly & Auguſt. Then hath Ianuarius .xxxi. dayes. Februarius .xxviij. Marcius .xxxi. April .xxx. May .xxxi. Iunius xxx. Auguſt .xxxi. September .xxx. October, xxxi. Nouember .xxx. December .xxxi. Natheleſſe all though that Iulius Ceſar toke two dayes out of Feueryre and put hem in hys month of Iuly, and Auguſtus Ceſar cleped the moneth of Auguſte after hys name, and ordeyned it of .xxxi. dayes, yet truſte well that the ſunne dwelleth therfore neuer the more ne the laſſe in one ſygne then in another.
               
               
                  ¶The names of the holy dayes.
                  Then foloweth the names of the holy dayes in the kalender, and next hem ye letters A.B.C. on whych they fallen.
               
               
                  ¶The ſcale of the Aſtrolabye.
                  
                     NExt the forſayd cercle of the A.B.C vnder the croſſe lyne is marked the ſcale, in maner of two ſquyers, or els in maner of ledders that ſerueth by hys xxij. poyntes, and hys dyuyſions of full many ſubtyll concluſyon of thys forſayde ſcale: For the croſſe lyne vnto the very angle, is cleped Vmbra recta, or els vmbra extenſa, and the nether party vmbra verſa.
               
               
                  ¶The rule.
                  Then haſt thou a brode rule that hath on euery ende a ſquare plate, parted wyth certayne holes, ſome more and ſome leſſe, to receyuen the ſtreames of the ſunne by day, and eke by mediacion of thyne eye, to knowe the altytude of the ſterres by nyght.
               
               
                  ¶The pyn, whych is ymagined to be pole artyke and the horſe.
                  Then is there a large pyn in maner of an

exyltre, that goth thorowe the hole that halt the tables of the clymathes in ye reeth, in the wombe of the mother, thorow whych pynne there goeth a lytel wedge, the whyche is cleped the horſe, that ſtrayneth all the partes together. Thys forſayd great pynne in maner of an exyltre, is ymagende to be pole artyke in thyne Aſtrolabye.
               
               
                  ¶For lynes on the wombe ſyde.
                  The wombe ſyde of thyne Aſtrolabye is alſo deuyded wt a longe croſſe in foure quarters from Eeſt to weſt, frō South to North from ryght ſyde to left ſyde, as is ye backſyde.
               
               
                  ¶The degrees of the wombe ſyde.
                  The border of the whych wombe ſyde is deuyded fro the poynte of the Eeſt lyne vnto the poynte of the South lyne vnder ye rynge in .xc. degrees, and by the ſame proporcion is euery quarter deuyded, as is the backſyde, that amoūteth .CCC.lx. degrees. And vnder ſtande well that the degrees of thys border bene anſwerynge and conſentynge to the degrees of equinoctiall that is deuyded in the ſame nombre, as euerye other cercle is in the hye heauen. Thys border is deuided alſo wyth xxiij. letters, and a ſmale croſſe aboue the ſouth lyne, that ſheweth the .xxiiij. houres equales of the clocke. And I haue ſayde .v. of theſe degrees maken a myle waye, and thre myle waye maken an houre, and euery degre of thys border conteyneth .iiij. mynutes, and euery mynute .lx. ſecōdes. Nowe haue I told the twyſe and for the more declaracion.
               
               
                  ¶Of the thre princypall cercles.
                  
                     THe plate vnder the reete is dyſcryued wt thre cercles, of which the leeſt is cleped the cercle of Cancer, bycauſe that the heed of Cancer turneth euermore cō
                     centryke vpon the ſame cercle. In thys halfe of Cancer is the greateſt declinacion northewarde of the ſonne, and therfore is he yclypped Solſticium of ſommer, whych declinacion after Ptholome, is .xxiij. degrees and .l. minutes, as well in Cancer as in Capricorne. Thys ſygne of Cancer is cleped the tropyke of ſommer of tropos, that is to ſayne ayenwarde. The mydle cercle in wydneſſe of this iij. is cleped ye cercle equinoctial, vpon which turneth euer more ye heedes of Aries and Libra. And vnderſtande well, that euermore thys cercle equinoctiall turneth iuſtly fro verye Eeſt to verye weſt, as I haue ſhewed in the ſphere ſolide. Thys ſame cercle is cleped alſo the wayer of the daye, for when ye ſunne is in the hedde of Aries and Libra, then bene dayes and nyghtes lyke of lengthe in all the worlde, and therfore bene theſe two ſygnes called equinoctis. And all that moueth wyth in theſe heedes of Aries and Libra, is ycalled northwarde, and all that meueth wythoute theſe heedes, hys meuynge is cleped Southwarde, as for ye equinoctiall, take kepe of the latytudes North and South, & forget it not By thys cercle equinoctial ben conſydred the xxiiij. houres of the clocke, for euermore the aryſynge of .xv. degrees of the equinoctial maketh an houre equal of the clocke. Thys equinoctiall is cleped the mydwaye of the fyrſte meuynge, or els of the ſunne. And note that the fyrſt meuynge is cleped meuynge of the fyrſt mouable of the eyght ſphere, whych meuynge is fro Eeſt to weſte, and agayne into Eeſt. Alſo it is cleped gyrdell of the fyrſt meuyng, for it departeth the fyrſt mouable, that is to ſayne, the ſphere in two like parties euē dyſtante fro the poles of thys worlde. The wydeſt of theſe thre cercles princypall is cleped ye cercle of Capricorne, and turneth euermore concentryke vpon the ſame cercle. In the heed of thys forſayd Capricorne is ye greateſt declinacyon Southwarde of the ſunne, and therfore it is deped Solſticium of wynter. Thys ſygne of Capricorne is alſo cleped the tropyke of wynter, for then begynneth ye ſunne to come agayne to vs warde.
               
               
                  ¶Of the almicanteras, the ſygnet, and what is thyne orizonte.
                  
                     VPon thys forſayde plate ben compaſed certayne cercles, that hyghten almicanteras: of whyche ſome of hem ſemen parfyte cercles, and ſome ſemen imparfyte. The centure that ſtandeth amyddeſt the naroweſt cercle is cleped the ſygnet. And the nethereſt cercle, that deuydeth the two emyſperies that is the partye of the heauen aboue the erth, and the partie byneth.

Theſe almicāteras ben compowned by two & two, all be it ſo that on dyuers aſtrolabies ſome almycanteras ben deuyded by one, and ſome by two, and ſome by thre, after ye quantyte of the Aſtrolabye. Thys foreſayd ſignet is ymagined to be the verye poynte ouer the crowne of thy heed, and alſo thys ſygnet is the very pole of the orizonte in euery region.
               
               
                  ¶What ben thyne azimutes.
                  From thys ſygnet (as it ſemeth) there comen croked ſtryke
                        •
                     , lyke to the clawes of a loppe, or els lyke to ye werk of a womās calle in keruynge ouerthwarte the almycanteras, and theſe ſame ſtrykes or dyuyſions ben cleped Azimutes, and they deuyden the orizontes on thyne Aſtrolabye in .xxiiij. dyuyſions. And theſe azimutes ſerue to know the coſtes of the fyrmament, and to other concluſyons, as for to knowe the ſygnet of the ſunne and of euery ſterre.
               
               
                  ¶Of the .xij. houres of the planetes,
                  
                     NExte theſe azimutes, vnder the cercle of Cācer, ben the .xij. dyuyſions embolyfe, moche lyke to the ſhap of the azimutes that ſhewen the ſpaces of houres of planetes.
               
               
                  ¶Thy reete or els thy zodiake.
                  
                     THy reete of thyn Aſtrolaby which is thy zodiake ſhapen in maner of a nette or of a loppe webbe, after ye olde dyſcripcyon, whych yu mayſte turne vp and downe as thy ſelfe lyketh, conteyneth certayne nōbre of ſterres fyxe, wyth her longitudes and latitudes determinate, yf ſo be that the maker haue not erred. The names of the ſterres ben written in the margin of thy reete there they ſyt, of the whych ſterres the ſmale poynte is cleped the centure. And vnderſtande, that all the ſterres ſyttyng wythin the zodiake of thyne aſtrolabye, bene cleped ſterres of the north, for they aryſen by the north eeſt lyne, and all ye remnaunt fyxes out of the zodiake, ben ycleped ſterres of the ſouthe, but I ſaye not that they aryſen all by the ſouth eeſt lyne, wytneſſe of Aldeberā and alſo Algomyſa. Generally vnderſtande thys rule, that thylke ſterres that bene cleped ſterres of ye north, aryſen rather thē the degre of her longitude, and all the ſterres of the ſouth aryſen after the degree of her longitude, that is to ſayne, ſterres in thyne aſtrolabye. The meaſure of longitude of ſterres ytaken in the lyne ecliptyke of heauen, vnder ye whych lyne when that the ſunne and the moone ben line ryght, els in the ſuperfycie of thys lyne, then is the eclyps of the ſunne or of the moone, as I ſhall declare & eke the cauſe why: but ſothlye the eclyptike lyne of thy zodyake is the vttereſt bordure of ye zodiake there thy degrees bene marked. The zodiake of thy aſtrolaby is ſhapen as a compace, whych that conteyneth a large brede, as after the quantyte of thy aſtrolabye, in enſemple that the zodyake of heuen is ymagyned to be a ſuperfycyes, conteynynge the latitude of 12 ſygnes, where as al the remnaunt of cercles in heauen ben ymagyned very lynes wythouten any latytude a myddes the celeſtyall zodiake is ymagyned a lyne, whych that is cleped ye eclyptyke lyne vnder the whych lyne is euermore the waye of the ſunne. Thus ben there 6 degrees of the zodiake of that one ſyde of the lyne, and 6 degrees on that other. The zodiake is deuyded in 12 princypall deuyſyons, that departen the 12 ſygnes, and for ye ſtraytneſſe of thyne aſtrolabye, then is euery ſmale dyuiſyon in a ſygne yparted by two degrees and two, I meane degrees conteynynge 60 mynutes & thys forſayd heuenyſh zodiake is cleped the cercle of the ſygnes, or the cercle of beeſtes. For zodiake in language of greke ſowneth beeſtes in laten tonge, and in the zodiake ben the 22 ſygnes that haue names of beeſtes, bycauſe when the ſunne entreth in any of the ſygnes, he taketh the propertie of ſuche beeſtes, or els for that the ſterres that ben there ben fired ben diſpoſed in ſygne of beeſtes or ſhape lyke beeſtes, or els whan the planettes ben vnder the ſignes they trāſmue vs by her influences, operacions, and effectes, lyke to operacions of beeſtes: And vnderſtande alſo, that whan an hote planet cometh in to an hote ſigne, thā entreth his hete, and if a planet be colde, than amenuſeth his coldeneſſe, bycauſe of the hotte ſygne: And by this concluſyon mayſt thou taken enſample in al ſygnes, be they moiſte or drie, mouable or fyxe, reckenynge the qualyte of the planettes as

I fyrſt ſayd. And euerych of theſe 12 ſygnes hath reſpecte to a certayne parcel of the body of a man, and hath it in gouernaunce: as Aries hath thyne heed, and Taurus thy necke and thy throte, Gemini thyne arme holes & thyne armes, and ſo forth, as ſhalbe ſhewed more playnly in the fyfth partye of thys treatyſe. The zodiake the whyche is partie of the eyght ſphere, ouerkerueth the equinoctiall, & he ouerkerueth hym agayne in euen partes, and that one halfe declyneth ſouthwarde, & that other northwarde, as playnly declareth the treatyſe of the ſphere.
               
               
                  ¶The labell.
                  Then haſte thou a labell that is ſhapen lyke a rule, ſaue that it is ſtreyght and hathe no plates on eyther ende, but wyth the ſmale poynte of the forſayde labell ſhalte thou calcule the equacions in ye bordure of thyne Aſtrolabye as by thyne almury.
               
               
                  ¶The almury, the deutycle of Capricorne, or els the calculere.
                  Thyne almury is cleped the dētycle of Capricorne, or els the calculere, thys ſame almury ſet fyxe in the heed of Capricorne, and it ſerueth of many a neceſſary cōcluſion in equacion of thynges, as ſhalbe ſhewed.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Here begynne the concluſyons of thyne Aſtrolabye to fynde the degre in the whych the ſunne is day by day, after hys courſe aboute.
                  
                     REcken and knowe which is the day of the moneth, and lay thy rule vpō the ſame daye, and then woll the very poynte of thy rule verely ſytten on the bordure vpon the degre of the ſonne. Enſample as thus. The yere of our lord 1391 ye 12 day of Marche at myddaye, I wolde knowe the degre of the ſunne, I ſoughte in the backhalf of myne Aſtrolabye, and founde the cercle of the dayes the whych I knewe by the names of the monthes writtē vnder the ſame cerkle: tho layde I my rule ouer the foreſayd daye, and founde the poynte of my rule in the border vpō the fyrſt degre of Aries, a lytel within the degree: and thus knewe I this concluſyon. Another daye I wolde knowe ye degre of my ſunne, and thys was at mydday in the 13 daye of Decembre, I foūde the day of the moneth in maner as I ſayd: tho layde I my rule vpon the forſayd 13 daye, and foūde the poynte of my rule vpō the fyrſt degree of Capricorne, a lytell wythin the degre, and then had I of this concluſion the very experience.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the altytude of the ſunne eyther of celeſtiall bodyes.
                  
                     PVt the rynge of thyne Aſtrolabye vp on thy ryght thombe, and tourne thy lyfte ſyde againe the light of ye ſunne and remeue thy rule vp and downe tyll the ſtreame of the ſunne ſhyne thorowe both holes of the rule: Loke then howe many degrees thys rule is areyſed fro the lytel croſſe vpō the reſt lyne, and take there the altytude of thy ſunne: and in thys ſame wyſe mayſte thou knowe by nyght ye altytude of ye moone or of the bryght ſterres. Thys chapiter is ſo generall euer in one yt there nedeth no more declaracion, but forget it not.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the degree of the ſunne and of thy zodiake, by the daye in the backſyde of thyne Aſtrolabye.
                  Then yf thou wylte wete the rekenynge to knowe whyche is the daye in thy calender of the moneth that thou arte in, laye thyne Aſtrolabye, that is to ſaye the allydatha, vppon the daye in the calender of thyne Aſtrolabye, and he ſhall ſhewe the thy degree of the ſunne.
               
               
                  ¶To know euery tyme of the daye by lyght of the ſunne, & euery tyme of the nyght by the ſterres fyxe, & eke to knowe by nyght or by daye the gree of the ſygne that aſcendeth on the eeſt orizont, whych is cleped comenly aſcendent.
                  
                     TAke the altytude of the ſun when the lyſte, as I haue ſayde and ſet the degre of the ſunne (in caſe that it be before the myddle of the daye) amonge thyne Almicanteras

on the eeſt ſyde of thyne aſtrolabye: and yf it be after the mydle of the day, ſet the degre of the ſunne vpon the weſt ſyde. Take thys maner of ſettynge for a generall rule ones for euer. And when thou haſt yſette ye degre of the ſunne vpon as many almycāteras of heyght as was the ſunne, taken by thy rule, lay ouer thy label vpon the degre of the ſunne, & then woll the poynte of the labell ſytten in the bordure vpon the very tyde of the daye. Enſample of thys. The yere of our lorde 1391 the 12 day of Marche, I wolde knowe the tyde of the daye, I toke the altitude of my ſunne, & founde that it was 25 degrees, and 30 mynutes of heyght of ye bordure in the backſyde, tho turned I myne aſtrolabye, and bycauſe it was before myddaye I turned my reete, & ſet the degre of the ſunne, that is to ſaye, the fyrſt degre of Aries in the right ſyde in myne aſtrolabye, vpon the 25 degree and 30 mynutes of heyght, amonge my almycanteras: Tho layde I my labell vpō the degree of my ſunne, and founde the poynte of my labell in the bordure on the capitale letter, that is cleped an X. Tho reckened I all the capitall letters fro ye lyne of mydnyght vnto the forſayd letter X. and founde it was 9 of the clocke of the daye. Tho loked I ouer my eeſt orizont & founde there the 12 degre of Geminius aſcē
                     dynge, whych that I toke for myne aſcendēt and in thys wyſe had I the experience for euermore in whych maner I ſhulde knowe ye tyde of the daye, and eke myne aſcendēt. Tho wolde I wete that ſame nyght folowynge the houre of the nyght, and wrought in thys wyſe: amōge an heape of ſterres it lyked me to take the altytude of the fayre whyte ſterre that is cleaped the Alhabor, and foūde her ſyttynge on the weſte ſyde of the lyne of mydde day 18 degrees of heyght, taken by my rule on the backſyde. Tho ſet I the cēture of thys alhabor vpon 18 degrees amonge my almycanteras vpon the weſtſyde, bycauſe that he was founde vpon the weſte ſyde: Tho layde I my label ouer the degree of the ſunne, that was dyſcended vnder the weſte orizont, and reckened al the letters capitalles fro the lyne of myddaye vnto ye poynte of my labell in the bordure, and founde that it was after noone, paſſed 7 of the clocke the ſpace of 11 degrees. Tho loked I downe vpon my eeſt orizonte, & foūde there 20 degrees of Libra aſcendyng whome I toke for myne aſcendent, and thus lerned ones for euer, to knowe in whych maner I ſhulde come to the houre of the nyghte and to myne aſcendent, as verely as maye be taken by ſo ſmale an inſtrument. But natheleſſe thys rule in generall wyll I warne the for euer: Ne make thou neuer none aſcendēt at noone of the daye. Take a iuſte aſcendent of thyne Aſtrolabye, and haue ſette iuſtlye a clocke, when any celeſtial body, by the which thou weneſt gouerne thilke thinges, ben nye the ſouthe lyne: for truſt well, when ye ſunne is nere the meridional lyne, the degree of the ſunne remeueth ſo longe concentryke vppon thyne almycanteras, that ſothely thou ſhalte erre fro the iuſte aſcendent. The ſame concluſyon ſay I by my centure of my ſterre fyxe by the nyght, & moreouer by experience I wote well that fro our orizonte fro eleuen of the clocke vnto one in takynge of the iuſte aſcendent in a portatyfe aſtrolabye, it is to harde to knowe, I meane from eleuen of ye clocke before noone, tyll one of the clocke nexte folowynge: and for the more declaracion lo here thy fygure next after thys rule that foloweth
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the degree of the ſunne in thy zodiake by the dayes in the backſyde of thyne Aſtrolabye.
                  Then thou wolte weten to recken and knowe whych is the daye of the moneth that thou arte in, and laye the rule of thy Aſtrolabye, that is to ſaye the allidatha vpō the daye in the calender of thyne aſtrolaby, and he ſhal ſhewe the thy degre of the ſunne.
               
               
                  ¶Speciall declaracion of the aſcendent.
                  
                     THe aſcendent ſothly, is as well in all natiuites as in queſtions, and as in elections ofte tymes is a thynge, whych that theſe aſtrologiens greatly obſeruen, wherfore me ſemeth conuenient, ſens I ſpeke of the aſcendent, to make of it a ſpeciall declaracion. The aſcendent ſothly to take it at the largeſt, is thylke degree that aſcendeth at any of theſe forſayd tymes on ye eeſt orizont: and therfore, yf that any planet aſcende at thilke ſame tyme in the

forſaid ſame gre of his lōgitude, mē ſay yt the ylkeplanet is in horoſcopo, but ſothly ye houſe of ye aſcendent, that is to ſay, ye fyrſt houſe or theeſt angle, is a thynge more brode & large, for after the ſtatutes of aſtrologiens, what celeſtiall body that is 5 degrees aboue thylke degree that aſcendeth on the orizont, or with in that nombre, that is to ſayne nere the degree that aſcendeth, yet reckē they thylke planette in the aſcendent, & what planet that is vnder thylke degree that aſcendeth the ſpace of 15 degrees, yet ſayne they that planette is lyke to hym that is the houre of the aſcendēt. But ſothly yf he paſſe the boundes of the for ſayd ſpaces aboue or byneth, they ſayne that thylke planette is fallynge fro the aſcendent: yet ſaine theſe aſtrologiens that the aſcendēt and eke the lorde of the aſcendent, may be ſhapē for to be fortunate or infortunate: as thus A fortunate aſcendent clepen they when that no wycked planette of Saturne or Mars, or els the tayle of the dragon is in the houſe of the aſcendent, ne that no wycked planette haue no aſpecte of enemyte vpon the aſcendēt but they woll caſt yt they haue fortunate planette in her aſcendent, and yet in hys felicite, and then ſaye they that it is well. Furthermore they ſayne that fortune of an aſcendent is the contrary of theſe forſayd thinges. The Lorde of the aſcendent ſayne they, that he is fortunate when he is in good place for the aſcendent, and eke the lorde of the aſcendent is in an angle or in a ſuccedēt where he is in his dygnite, and conforted wyth frendely aſpectes receyued, and eke he that maye ſe the aſcē
                     dent not retrograde ne combuſte, ne ioyned wyth no ſhrewe in the ſame ſygne, ne that he be nor in his dyſcencion, ne reigned wt no planette in hys dyſcencions, ne haue vpon hym none aſpecte infortunate, & then they ſayne that he is well. Natheleſſe theſe bene obſeruaunces of Iudiciall mater and rytes of paynyms, in whych my ſpirite hath no faythe ne knowynge of her horuſcopum, for they ſayne that euerye ſygne is departed in 3 euen partes, by 10 degrees and thylke porcyon they clepen a face. And althoughe a planette haue a latytude fro ye eclyptyke, yet ſayne ſomfolke ſo that the planette aryſe in that ſame ſygne, wyth any degre of the forſayd face, in whych hys longitude is rekened. And yet is ye planet in horoſcopo be in natiuitees or in election.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the very equacion of the degrees of the ſunne, yf it ſo be that it fall betwyxe to almicanteras.
                  
                     FOr as moche as the almicanteras of thyne Aſtrolaby ben compouned by two and two, where as ſome almycanteras in ſondrye aſtrolabyes ben cō
                     powned by one or els by two, it is neceſſary to thy lernyng, to teche ye fyrſt to knowe & wyrch wt thyne inſtrumēt: wherfore whē yt the degre of ye ſun falleth betwene two almycāteras or els yf thyn almycāteras ben grauē wt ouer great a poynt of a cōpace, for both theſe thinges maye cauſe errour as wel in knowynge of ye tyde of ye day as of the very aſcendent. Thou muſte werken in thys wyſe: ſet the degree of the ſunne vppon the hygher almycanteras as of both, and wayte well where thy almurye toucheth the bordure, and ſette there a prycke of ynke, ſette adowne agayne the degree of the ſonne vpon the nether almycanteras of bothe, & ſet there another prycke: remeue then thy almurye in the bordure euen amyddes both pryckes, and thys woll leaden iuſtlye the degre of ye ſunne to ſytte bytwene both ye almycanteras in hys ryght place. Laye then the label on the degre of the ſunne, and fynde in the bordure the very tyde of the daye or of the nyght. And alſo verely ſhalte thou fynde vpō thy ceſt orizont thy aſcendent.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the ſprynge of the dawnynge and the ende of the euenyng, the whych ben cleped the two crepuſculis.
                  
                     SEtte the nadyre of thy ſūne vpon 1
                        •
                      degrees of heyght amonge thyne almycanteras on the weſte ſyde, and laye thy labell on the degre of the ſunne, and then ſhall the poynte of the labell ſhewe the ſprynge of the daye: alſo ſette the nadyre of the ſunne vpon the 18 degrees of the heyght amonge thyne almycanteras on the eeſt ſyde, and lay ouer thy labell vpon ye degree of the ſunne, and wyth the poynt of thy labell fynde in the

bordure the ende of thyne euenynge, that is very night. The nadyre of the ſunne is thilk degree that is oppoſyte to the degree of the ſunne in the .320. ſygne, as thus. Euerye degree of Aries by ordre, is nadyre to euery degre of Libra by ordre, and Taurus to Scorpion, Gemini to Sagittarius, Cācer to Capricorne, Leo to Aquary, Virgo to Piſces. And yf any degree in thy zodyake be darke, his nadyre ſhall declare hym.
               
               
                  ¶To know the arche of the day, that ſome folke callen the daye artifyciall, fro the ſunne aryſynge tyll it go downe.
                  
                     SEt the degree of the ſunne vpon thyne Eeſt orizonte, and lay thy labell on the degree of the ſunne and at the poynt of thy labell in the bordure ſet a prycke: tourne than thy reet about, tyll the degre of the ſun ſyt vpon the weſt orizont, and lay the labell vpon the ſame degree of the ſunne, and at ye poynt of the labell ſet an other prycke. Recken than the quantitie of tyme in the bordur betwixt both pryckes, and take there thyne arche of thy daye: the remnaunte of the bordure vnder the orizonte, is the arche of the nyght. Thus mayſt thou reken both arches of euery porcion where that thou lykeſt, and by this maner of weckynge mayeſt thou ſe how longe that any ſtarre fyxe dwelleth about the erth, fro the tyme that he ryſeth till he go to reſt. But the daye naturell, that is to ſayne .24. houres is the reuolution of the equinoctiall, with as moche partie of the zodyake, as the Sunne of his propre mouing paſſeth in the meane whyle.
               
               
                  ¶To turne the houres inequalles, and the houres equalles.
                  KNow the nombre of the degrees in the houres inequalles, and departe hem by .15. and take there thyne houres equalles.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the quantitie of the day vulgare, that is to ſaye, fro ſprynge of the daye vnto the very nyght.
                  
                     KNow thy quātitie of thy coepuſclys, as I haue it taughte in the chapiter before, and adde hem to the arche of the daye artificial, and take there thy ſpace of all the hole daye vulgare vnto the very nyght. In the ſame maner mayeſt thou werke to knowe the vulgare nyght.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the houres inequalles by daye
                  
                     VNderſtande well, that theſe houres inequalles ben cleped houres of the planetes: and vnderſtande wel that ſomtyme ben they longer by daye than they be by nyght, and ſomtyme contrary. But vnderſtonde thou well, that euermore generally the houres inequall of the daye, with the houres inequall of the nyght, conteyneth .30. degrees of the bordure, the whiche bordure is euermore anſweryng to the degrees of ye equinoctiall, wherfore departe the arche of the daye artificyall in .12. and take there the quantitie of the houre inequall by daye, and yf thou abate the quantitie of the houre inequall by daye out of .360. degrees, than ſhall the remnaunt that leaueth, perfourme the houre inequall by nyght.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the quantitie of houres equalles.
                  
                     THe quantities of houres equalles, that is to ſayne, the houres of the clocke, ben departed by .15. degrees all readye in the bordure of thy Aſtrolabye, as well by nyght as by day generally for euermore. what nedeth anymore declaracyon? wherfore whan the lyſt to knowe how manye houres of the clocke bene paſſed, or anye parte of any of theſe houres ben to comē fro ſuche a tyme to ſuche a tyme, by daye or by night, knowe the degree of thy ſunne, & laye thy labell on it: than tourne thy reete aboute ioyntly with thy labell, and with the poynt of it reken in the bordre fro the Sunne aryſyng into the ſame place there thou deſyreſt by daye as by nyght.
                  
                     This concluſion wol I declare in the fourth partye of the laſt chapter of this treatyſe, ſo openly that there ſhall lacke no worde that nedeth declaracyon.
               
               
                  ¶Specyal declaracion of the houres of the planetes.
                  VNderſtande well that euermore from the aryſynge of the Sunne tyll it goo to reſt, the nadyre of the Sunne ſhall ſhewe the houre of the planete, and fro that tyme forwarde all the nyght, tyll the ſunne aryſe, than ſhall the very degree of the ſunne ſhewe the houre of the planet. Enſample as thus. The .1
                        •
                     . daye of Marche fell vpon a ſaturday peraduenture, and at the ryſynge of the Sunne I founde the ſeconde degree of Aries ſyttyng vpon myne eeſt orizont, albeit was but lytle. Than founde I the ſecond degree of Libra nadyre of my ſunne, diſcendyng on my weſt orizont, vpon which weſt orizont euery day generally at the ſonne aryſyng entreth the houre of any planet, vnder the forſayde weſt orizonte, after the whiche planet the daye beareth hys name, and endeth in the next ſtryke of the planete, vnder the forſayde weſte orizonte: and euer as the ſunne clymbeth vpper and vpper, ſo goeth hys nadyre downer and downer, & echynge fro ſuche ſtrykes the houres of planetes, by ordre as they ſytten in heauen. The fyrſte hourre inequall of euerye ſaturdaye is Saturne, and the ſeconde to Iupyter, the thyrd to Mars, the fourth to the Sunne, the fyfth to Venus, the ſyxt to Mercurius, the ſeuēth to the moone, and than ayen the eyght to ſaturne, the nynth to Iupiter, the 10. to Mars the enleuenth to the ſunne, the twelfth to venus. And now is my Sunne gone to reſt as for that ſaturday, than ſheweth the very degre of the ſun the hour of Mercury, entryng vnder my weſt orizonte at euen. And nexte hym ſuccedeth the moone, and ſo forth by ordre planet after planet, in houre after houre all the nyght longe tyll the ſun aryſe. Now ryſeth the Sunne the ſundaye, by the morowe, and the nadyre of the ſun vpō the weſt orizont, ſheweth me the entryng of ye houre of the foreſayde ſunne. And in this maner ſuccedeth planet vnder planet, fro Saturne vnto the moone, and from the moone vp agayne to Saturne, houre after houre generally: and thus knowe I this concluſyon.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe with whych degre of the zodiake any ſtarre fyxe in thyne Aſtrolaby aryſeth vpon the Eeſt orizont, although the orizont be in an other ſygne.
                  
                     SEt the centure of the ſtarre vpon the Eeſt orizonte, and loke what degree of anye ſygne that ſytteth vpon the ſame orizont at the ſame tyme: and vnderſtande well, that wyth the ſame degree aryſeth the ſame ſtarre. And thys maruelous aryſyng with a ſtronge degree in an other ſygne, is bycauſe that the latitude of the ſtarre fyxe is eyther Northe or South fro the equinoctiall. But ſothly, the latitudes of planetes ben comenly reckened fro the eclyptyke, bycauſe that none of hem declineth but fewe degrees out fro the brede of the zodyake. And take good kepe of thys chapiter of aryſyng of celeſtiall bodyes, for there truſteth wel, that neyther moone neyther ſtarre in our ambolyfe orizont, that aryſeth with the ſame degree of hys longitude, ſaue in one caſe, and that is whan they haue no longitude fro the eclyptyke lyne. But neuertheleſſe ſomtyme is eueryche of theſe planettes vnder the ſame lyne.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the declinacyon of euery degre in the zodiake fro the equinoctial cer
                        ••
                     e.
                  
                     SEt the degre of any ſygne vpon the lyne meridional, and recken his altitude in the almycanteras fro the Eeſt orizont vp to ye ſame degree ſet in the foreſayde lyne, & ſet there a prycke▪ Turne vp than thy reet, and ſette the heed of Aries or Libra in the ſame meridionall lyne, and ſet there an other prycke. And whan that is done, conſydre the altytudes of hem both: for ſothly the difference of thylke altitude is the declynacyon of thylke degree fro the equinoctiall. And yf it ſo be that thylke degree be Northwarde fro the equinoctiall, than is his declinacyon North, and yf it be ſouthward than is it South.
               
               
                  
                  ¶To knowe for what latitude in any regyon the almycanteras in my tables ben compowned.
                  
                     REken how many degrees of almicanteras in the meridionall lyne, be from the cercle equinoctiall vnto the ſygnet, or els from the pole artike vnto the north orizonte, and for ſo greate a latitude or ſo ſmal a latitude, is the table compowned.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the latitude of the ſunne in the myddes of the daye, that is cleped the altitude meridian.
                  
                     SEt the degree of thy ſunne vpon the lyne meridionall, and reken how many degrees of almicantras ben betwyxt thyne eeſt orizont, and the degre of thy ſunne and take there thyne altitude meridian, that is to ſayne, ye hygheſt degre of the ſunne as for that day. So mayeſt thou knowe in the ſame lyne the hygheſt lyne that anye ſtarre fyxe clymbeth by night, this is to ſayn, that whan any ſtarre fyxe is paſſed the lyne meridional, than begynneth it to diſcende, and ſo doth the ſunne.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the degre of the Sunne by the reet for a maner coriouſte.
                  
                     SEke buſily with thy rule, ye higheſt of the ſunne in the myddes of the day, turne than thyne aſtrolaby, and wt a pryck of ynke marke the nombre of the ſame altitude in the lyne meridionall. Turne than thy reet about tyll thou fynde a degre of thy zodiake according with the prycke, this is to ſayne, ſyttyng on the prycke, and in ſoth thou ſhalt fynde but 2. degrees in all the zodiake of that condiciō And yet thylke .2. degrees ben in dyuers ſygnes. Than mayeſt thou lyghtly by the ſeaſen of the yere knowe the ſygne in whiche is the ſunne.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe which day is lyke to other in length throughout the yere.
                  
                     LOke whiche degrees ben ylyke from the heedes of Cancer and Capricorne, and loke whan the ſunne is in any of thilk degrees than ben the dayes like of lēgth that is to ſayne, that as longe is that day in the moneth, as was ſuche a daye in ſuche a moneth there varyeth but lytle. Alſo if thou take two dayes naturelles in the yere ylyke farre from either poyntes of the equinoctial in the oppoſyte partyes, than as long is the daye artificiall, on that one daye as on that other: and eke the contrary.
               
               
                  ¶This chapiter is a maner declaracion to concluſyons that foloweth.
                  
                     VNderſtande well, that thy zodiake is departed into halfe cercles, from the heed of Capricorne vnto ye heed of Cancer, and ayenwarde from the heed of Cancer vnto the heed of Caprycorne. The heed of Caprycorne is the loweſte poynte, where as the ſunne goth in wynter, and the heed of Cancer is ye hygheſt poynt, in which the Sunne goeth in Sommer. And therefore vnderſtande wel that any two degrees that bene ylyke farre from any of theſe two heedes, truſt well, that thylke two degrees ben lyke declynacyon, be it Southwarde or Northwarde, and the dayes of hem be lyke of length, and the nyghtes alſo, and ſhadowes ylyke, and the altitudes ylyke at myddaye for euer.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the very degree of anye maner ſtarre ſtraunge after his latitude, though he be indetermynate in thyne aſtrolaby, ſothly to the trouth thus he ſhalbe knowen.
                  
                     TAke the altytude of thy ſtarre whan he is on the eeſt ſyde of the lyne meridional as nygh as thou mayeſt geſſe, and take an aſcendent anon ryght by ſome maner ſtarre fyxe which thou knoweſt, and forget not the altitude of the fyrſt ſtarre ne thyne aſcendent.
                  And whan that thys is doone, aſpye dylygentlye whan thys ſame fyrſte ſtarre paſſeth any thinge to the ſouthweſtwarde, and

catche hym anon ryght in the ſame nombre of the altitude on the weſt ſyde of this lyne meridionall, as he was caught on the Eeſte ſyde, and take a newe aſcendent anon ryght by ſome maner fyxe, the whiche that thou knoweſt, and forget not this ſeconde aſcendent. And whan this is done, reken thā how many degrees ben betwixt the firſt aſcendēt and the ſeconde aſcendent, and reken well ye mydle degre betwixt both aſcendentes, and ſet thylke mydle degree vpon thyne eeſt oryzont, and than loke what degre ſyt vpon the lyne meridional & take there ye very degre of the ecliptyke, in whiche the ſtarre ſtandeth for the tyme. For in the eclyptyke is the longitude of a celeſtial body, rekened euen fro ye halfe of the heed of Aries vnto the ends of Piſces, and his latitude reckened after the quantitie of his declination North or ſouth towarde the poles of this werke. As thus: yf it be of the ſunne or any fyxe ſtarre, recken this latitude or his declinacyon fro the equinoctial cercle, and yf it be of a planete, reken than the quantitie of his latitude from the ecliptike lyne, albeit ſo that from the equinoctiall maye the declinacion or the latitude of any body celeſtial be rekened after the ſyght North or South, and after the quantitie of his declinacion. And yet ſo manye the latytude or the declinacion of any body celeſtial ſaue only of the ſunne, after his ſyght north or South. And after the quantitie of his declinacion be rekened from the ecliptike lyne, fro which lyne al planetes ſomtyme declyne North or South, ſaue onelye the forſayde ſunne.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe degrees of longitudes of fyre ſterres, after that they ben determinat in thyne aſtrolabye, if it ſo be that they ben truly ſet.
                  
                     SEt ye centre of the ſter vpon the lyne meridionall, and take kepe of thy zodyake, and loke what degree of any ſygne ſyt vpon the ſame lyne meridional at the ſame tyme, and there the degre in which the ſtarre ſtandeth, and with the ſame degre commeth the ſame ſtarre vnto the ſame line from the orizonte.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe in ſpecyall the latitude of oure centre, I mene after the altitude of Oxenforde & the heyght of our pole.
                  
                     VNderſtande well, that as far is the heed of Aries or Librain the equinoctial from our orizonte, as is the ſynet from the poole artyke, and as hye as the pole artyke from the orizont, as the equinoctial is farre from the ſynet, I preue it thus by the latitude of Oxenforde, vnderſtande well that the heyght of our pole artyk from our north orizont is .51. degres, and .5
                        •
                     . minutes, than is the ſynet from the pole artyke 
                        •
                     1 degrees and .10. minutes, than is the equinoctial from our ſynet .51. degrees and .5
                        •
                     . mynutes, than is our ſouth orizonte from oure equinoctiall .58. degrees and .10. mynutes. Vnderſtande well this rekening alſo, forget not that the ſynet is .90. degrees of heyghte from the orizont, and our equinoctial is .
                        ••
                     . degrees from our pole artyk. And this ſhort rule is ſoth, that the latitude of any planete in a regyon, is the diſtaunce from the ſynete vnto the equinoctiall.
               
               
                  ¶To proue the latitude of any place in a regyon by the preſſe of the heyght of the pole artyke in that ſame place.
                  
                     IN ſome wynters nyght whan the firmament is clere & thycke ſtarred, wayte a tyme tyll that euery ſterre fyxe ſyt lyne ryght perpendiculer ouer the pole artyke, & clepe that ſter A. and wayte an other ſterre that ſyt lyne ryght vnder A. and vnder the pole, and clepe that ſterre F. and vnderſtande well that F is not conſydred but onely to declare that A that ſyt euer on the pole. Take than anone ryght the altitude of A from the orizont, & forget it not: let A & F goo farewell, tyll agaynſt the dawnynge a great whyle, and come than agayne, and abyde tyll that A is euen vnder the poole vnder F. for ſothly than wyl F ſyt ouer ye pole, take than eftſones, the altitude of A, from the orizont, and note as wel the ſeconde altitude as ye fyrſt altitude. And whā that this is done, reken how many degrees yt the firſt altitude A exceded his altitude, & take halfe

the ilke porciō that is exceded and adde it to his ſeconde altitude, and take there the eleuacion of the poole, and eke the altitude of thy regyon. For theſe two ben of one nōbre, that is to ſayne, as manye degrees as thy pole is eleuate, ſo moche is the latitude of thy regyon. Enſample as thus: Parauenture the altitude of A, in the euenyng is .62. degrees of heyght, than wyl the ſeconde altitude or the dawnyng be .21. that is to ſayn leſſe than .92. that was his fyrſte altitude at euen. Take than the halfe of .62, and adde it to .21. that was his ſeconde altitude, & than haſt thou the heyght of thy pole, and the latitude of thy regyon. But vnderſtande well to preue this concluſyon and many an other fayre cōcluſyon, thou mayeſt haue a plomet bangyng on a lyne hygher than thyne heed on a perche, and that lyne mote hange euen perpendiculer betwyxt the poole and thyne eye, and than ſhalt thou ſe yf A ſit euen ouer the pole and ouer F at euen. And alſo yf F ſyt euen ouer the pole and ouer A or daye.
               
               
                  ¶An other concluſyon to preue the heyght of the pole artyke from the orizont.
                  
                     TAke any ſter fyre that euer deſcēdeth vnder the orizont in thylke region, and cōſydre his hygheſt altitude, and his lowen altitude from the orizont, and make a nombre of theſe altitudes, take than and abate halfe ye nombre, and take there the eleuacyon of the pole artyke in that ſame regyon, and for the more declaracyon. &c.
               
               
                  ¶An other concluſion to preue the latitude of a region that ye ben in.
                  
                     VNderſtande wel that the latitude of any place in a regyon is verelye the ſpace betwixt the ſygne of hem that dwellen there, and the equinoctiall cercie, north or ſouth, takynge the meaſure in the meridionall lyne, as ſheweth in the almicā
                     tras of thyne aſtrolabye, and thylke ſpace is as moche as the pole artyke is hye in ye ſame place from the orizont. And than is ye depreſſyon of the pole artentyke beneth the orizōt the ſame quantitie of ſpace, neyther more ne leſſe, that yf thou deſyre to knowe this latitude of the regyon, take the altitude of the ſunne in the mydle of the day, whan the ſun is in the heed of Aries or of Libra, for than moueth the ſunne in the lyne equinoctiall, & abate the nombre of the ſame Sunnes altitude out of .90. degrees, and than is the remnaunt of the nombre that leueth the altitude of the region, as thus. I ſuppoſe that ye ſun is thilke day at noone .38. degrees of heyght, abate than .38. degrees out of .90. ſo leaueth there .52. than is .52. degrees the latitude, I ſaye not this but for enſample. for well I wote the latitude of Oxenforde is certayne mynutes leſſe. Now yf it be ſo that the thinketh to longe a tarying to abyde tyl that the ſunne be in ye heed of Aries or of Libra, than wayte whan that ye Sunne is in anye other degre of the zodiake and conſydre the degre of this declinacion be northwarde from the equinoctiall, abate than from the ſunnes altitude at noone the nombre of hys declinacion, and than haſte thou the hygheſt of the heedes of Aries and Libra, as thus. My ſunne parauenture is in the .10. degre of Leo almooſt .56. of heyght at noone, and his declinacion is almooſt .18. degrees Northwarde from the equinoctiall, abate than thylke .18. degrees of declinacion out of the altitude at noone, than leaueth .38. degrees, 
                        •
                     o there the heed of Aries or Libra, and thine equinoctiall in that regyon. Alſo yf ſo be that the ſunnes declynacyon be Southwarde from the equinoctiall, adde than thylke declynacyon to the altitude of the ſunne at none, and take there the heedes of Aries and Libra & thyne equinoctiall, abate than the heyght of the equinoctiall out of .90. degrees, and than leaueth there .38. degrees, that is the diſtaunce of the regyon from the equinoctiall of anye ſterre fyxe that thou knoweſt, and take the nether elongacion lengthen from the ſame equinoctial lyne, and werke after the maner aforeſayde.
               
               
                  ¶Declaracyon of the aſcencion of ſygnes, as well in cercle direct, as in oblyque.
                  
                     THe excellēce of ye ſphere ſolyde amōges other noble cōcluſiōs ſheweth manifeſt ye diuers aſcē
                     ciōs of ſignes in diuers places,

as wel in right cercles as in embolyfe cercle Theſe auctours wryten that thilke ſigne is cleped of ryght aſcencyon, with whiche the more parte of the cercle equinoctial and the leſſe parte of the zodyake aſcendeth, & thilke ſigne aſcendeth embolyfe, with whiche the leſſe of the zodiake equinoctial, and the more parte of the zodiake aſcendeth, and euer mo the arche of the day and the arch of ye nyght is there ylyke longe, and the ſunne twyſe euery yere paſſynge through the ſignet of her heed, and 2. ſomers and .2. wynters in a yere haue theſe foreſayde people, and the almycantras in her Aſtrolabye ben ſtreyght as a lyne, ſo hath ſhewed in this fygure. The vtilities to knowe the aſcencyons of ſygnes in the ryght cercle is this. Truſt well that be mediations of thylke aſcencyons theſe Aſtrologiens by her tables and her inſtrumē
                     tes knowen verely the aſcencion of euery degre and mynute in all the zodiake in the embolyfe cercle, as ſhall be ſhewed. And note that this forſayd ryght oryzont that is ycleped orizōte rectum, deuideth the equinoctial into ryght angles, and embolyfe orizont where as the poole is enhaunced vpon the orizont, ouercommeth the equinoctial in embolyfe angles.
               
               
                  ¶This is the concluſyon to knowe the aſcē
                     cyons of ſygnes in the ryght cercle, that is circulus directus.
                  
                     SEt the heed of what ſygne the lyſt to knowe the aſcending on the ryght cercle vpon the lyne meridionall, and wayte where thyne almury toucheth the bordure, and ſet there a prycke, tourne than thy rete weſtwarde, tyll the ende of the forſayde ſygne, ſet vpon the meridionall lyne, and eft ſones wayt where thine almury toucheth ye bordure, & ſet there an other prycke. Recken than the nombres of degrees in the bordure betwyxt both pryckes, and take than the aſcencyon of the ſygne in the ryght cercle, and thus mayeſt thou werke with euery porcyō of the zodyake.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the aſtencions of ſignes in the embolyfe cercle in euery regyon, I meane in circulo obliquo.
                  
                     SEt the heed of the ſygnes whiche as the lyſt to knowe his aſcenciō vpon the eeſt orizonte, and wayte where thyne almurye toucheth ye bordure, and ſet there a prycke, tourne than thy reete vpwarde tyll the ende of the ſame ſygne, ſet vpon the eeſt orizonte, and wayte eftſones where as thyne almury toucheth ye bordure, and ſet there an other prycke, reken than the nombre of the degrees in the bordure betwyxt bothe pryckes, and take there the aſcencyon of the ſygne in the embolyfe cercle. And vnderſtande well, that all the ſygnes in the zodyake, from the heed of Aries vnto the ende of Virgo, ben cleaped ſygnes of the north from the equinoctial, and theſe ſygnes aryſen betwyxt the very eeſt and the very north in our orizonte generally for euer and all the ſygnes from the heed of Libra, vnto the ende of Piſces, ben cleped ſignes of the ſouth fro the equinoctiall, and theſe ſygnes aryſen euermore betwyxte the verye Eeſt and the very South in our orizont, alſo euery ſygne betwyxte the heed of Caprycorne vnto the ende of Gemini ariſeth in our orizont in leſſe than two houres equalles, & theſe ſame ſignes from the heed of Caprycorne vnto the ende of Gemini ben called tortuous ſignes or croked ſygnes, for they ryſen embolife in our orizont, and theſe croked ſygnes bene obedient to the ſignes that ben of the ryght aſcencion. Theſe ſygnes of the right aſcencion ben from the heed of Cancer vnto the heed of ſagitarye, and theſe ſignes aryſen more vpryght than doeth the other, and therfore they ben called ſoueraygne ſygnes, and euery of hem ariſeth in more ſpace than in two houres, of which ſignes Gemini obeyeth to Cancer, and Taurus to Leo, and Aries to Virgo, Piſces to Libra, Aquarius to Scorpio, and Capricorne to Sagittarye, and thus euermore two ſygnes that ben farre from the heed of Capricorne obeyeth eueryche of hem to other.
               
               
                  ¶To know iuſtly the foure quarters of the worlde, as eeſt, weſt, ſouth and north.
                  
                     TAke the altitude of thy ſunne, whan thou lyſt, and note well the quarter of the worlde, in which the ſunne is

from the tyme by the aſimutes, tourne than thyne aſtrolaby and ſet the degree of the ſun in ye almycantras of hys altytude, on thylke ſyde that the ſunne ſtandethe, as is in maner of takynge of houres, and ley thy labell on the degree of the ſunne, and reken howe many degrees of the ſunne ben betwene the lyne meridional and the poynte of thy labell and note well the nombres. Tourne than agayne thyne aſtrolabye, and ſet the poynt of thy greate rule there thou takeſt thyne altytudes vpō as many degrees in hys bordure from his meridionall, as was the poynte of thy labell from the lyne merydyonall on the wombe ſyde. Take than thyne aſtrolabye wyth bothe handes ſadly and ſlylye, and let the ſunne ſhyne throughe bothe holes of thy rule, and ſlylye in thylke ſhynynge ley thyne aſtrolabye couche adoun euen vpon a plaine grounde, and than wyll the meridional lyne of thyne aſtrolabye be euen ſouthe, and the Eeſt lyne wyl lye euen Eeſt, & the weſte lyne weſt, & the North lyne Northe, ſo that thou werke ſoftely and auyſely in the couchynge, and thou haſt thus foure quarters of the firmament. &c.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the altitude of planetes from the waye of the ſunne, whether they bene North or ſouth fro the waye aforeſayd.
                  
                     LOke whā a planete is on ye lyne meridionall, yf that her altitude be of the ſame height that is the degree of the ſunne for that day and than is the planet in the verey waye of the ſunne, and hath no latitude. And yf the altitude of the planet be hyer thā the degree of the ſunne, than is the planette North from the waye of the ſygne Southe, a quantyte of latitude as ſheweth by thyne Almicantras, and yf the altitude be leſſe thā the degree of the ſunne, than is the planette Southe from the waye of the ſunne, ſuche a quantyte of latitude as ſheweth by thine almicantras. This is to fayne from the waye of the ſunne in euery place of the zodiake, for on the morowe the ſunne wyll be in another degree.
               
               
                  ¶For to knowe the ſygnet for the aryſyng of the ſunne, thys is to ſayne the partye of the orizonte in which the ſūne ariſeth.
                  
                     THou muſt fyrſt conſyder that the ſūne aryſeth not in the verey Eeſt ſygnet, ſometyme by North Eeſt and ſomtyme by South Eeſt, ſothly the ſunne aryſeth euermore in the verey Eeſt in our orizonte, but yf he be in the heed of Aryes or Libra. Nowe is thyne orizonte departed in to .24. partes of thy mynutes in ſygnyfycacyon of .24. partes of the worlde, thoughe it be ſo that ſhypmen reken all that parties .32. Thā is there no more but wayte in the whych mynute that the ſunne entreth at hys aryſynge, and take there the ſignet of the ryſinge of the ſunne.
               
               
                  ¶The maner of deuiſion of thine aſtrolaby is thus enioyned, as in this caſe.
                  
                     FYrſt it is deuyded in four places principally with the lyne that cometh fro the Eeſt to the weſte, and than with another lyne that goth fro the South to the Northe, than is it deuided in ſmale parties of mynutes, as Eeſt and Eeſt by Southe, where that is the fyrſte mynute aboue ye eeſt line, and ſo forth fro partye to partie tyl that thou come agayne to the Eeſt lyne. Thus thou myght vnderſtande the ſignet of euery ſterre in whych partye he aryſeth.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe in which partie of the firmament is the coniunction.
                  
                     COnſyder the tyme of the coniunction by the kalender, as thus: how many houres that the cōiunction is fro mydday of the day before, as ſheweth the canon of the kalender. Reken than that nombre in the bordure of thyn aſtrolaby, as thou were wonte to do in knowinge of the houres of the day or of ye nyght and lay thy label ouer the degre of the ſunne than wyll the poynte of the labell ſytte vpon the houre of the coniunction. Loke than in whyche mynute the degree of the ſunne ſytteth,

and in that partye of the fyrmament is the coniunction.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe the ſygnet of the altitude of the ſunne.
                  
                     THis is no more to ſaye, but any time of the daye take ye altitude of ye ſūne, and by the mynutes in whych he aſcendeth thou myghte ſe in whyche partie of the firmamente he is, and in the ſame wyſe might thou ſe by night of any ſterre wheder he ſyt Eeſt, weſt, or South, or any part bytwixe, after ye name of the minutes in which the ſterre ſtandeth.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe ſothly the longitude of the mone or any planette that hath no latitude fro the tyme of the ecliptyke lyne.
                  
                     TAke the altitude of the mone, and reken thyne altitude vp amonge thyne Almycantras on whyche ſyde that the mone ſtandeth, and ſette there a pricke. Take than anone ryght vpon the mones ſyde the altitude of euerye ſterre fixe that thou knoweſt, and ſet his circle vpon his altitude amonge thyne almycā
                     tras, there the ſterre is founden, wayte than of whiche degree the zodiake is, to whyche the prycke of the altitude of the moone, and there take the degree in whyche the moone ſtandeth. Thys concluſion is verey ſothe of the ſterres in thyne aſtrolabye, and ſtanden after the trouthe. Some treatyſe of the aſtrolabye maketh none exception whether ye mone haue latitude or none, nor whether ſyde of the mone ye altitude of the ſterre be founde. And note yf the moone ſhewe her ſelfe by day, than maiſt thou wortch ye ſame cōcluſion by the ſūne as wel as by the ſterre fixe.
               
               
                  ¶Thys is the werchynge of the concluſyon to knowe whether anye planet be directe or retrograde.
                  
                     TAke the altitude of any ſterre that is cleped a planette and note it well, and anone ryght take ye altitude of ſome ſterre fixe that thou knoweſt & note it well alſo, and come agayne the thyrde or the fourth nyght nexte folowyng, for thā thou ſhalt perceyue well the meuynge of the planette whether he meue forwarde or bacwarde, and wayte well than whan the ſterre fyxe is in the ſame altitude that ſhe was whan thou toke her firſte altitude of the forſayd planette and note it wel, for truſte well yf ſo be that the planette be in the right ſide of the meridionall lyne, ſo that his ſeconde altitude be leſſe than the fyrſt altitude was, than is the planette directe, and if he be in the weſt ſide in that condition, thā is he retrograde, and yf ſo be that thys planette be in the Eeſt ſyde whan hys altitude is take, ſo that the ſeconde altytude be more than his fyrſt altitude, thā is he retrograde and yf he be in the weſt ſide of the lyne medidionall, than is he derecte but contrary mouynge of theſe partyes is the courſe of the mone, for ſothly the moone moueth the contrarye fro eyther planettes in her eclyptyke lyne, but in none other maner.
               
               
                  ¶The concluſyon of equacyons of houſes after the aſtrolabye.
                  
                     SEtte the begynnynge of the degree yt aſcendeth vpon the ende of the 3 houre inequall, thā wyl the lyne of the ſeconde houſe ſit vpon the line of mydnyght, remeue than the degre that aſcendeth, and ſet hym vpon the ende of the 10 houre inequall, thā wyl the begynning of the 3 houſe ſyt vpō the midnight line, bringe vp agayn the ſame degre that aſcendeth fyrſt, and ſet hym vpon the Eeſt orizont, and thā wyl the begynning of the 4 houſe ſyt vpon the mydnyght lyne. Take than the nadere of the degree yt aſcendeth fyrſt and ſet hym vpon the ende of the 2 houre inequall, and than wyl the begynning of the 5 houſe ſyt vpon the mydnyght lyne. Take than the nadere of the aſcendente and ſet hym vpon the ende of the 4 houre inequal and than wyll the begynnyng of the 6 houſe ſyt vpon the mydnyghte lyne. The begynnynge

of the 7 houſe is nadere of the aſcendent and the begynnyng of the 8 houſe is nadere of the ſeconde, and the begynning of the 9 houſe is nadere of the 3 and the begynnyng of the 10 houſe is nadere of the 4 and the begynnynge of the 11 houſe is nadere of the 5 & the begynnynge of the 12 houſe is nadere of the 6 houſe.
               
               
                  ¶Another maner of equacyons of houſes by the aſtrolabye.
                  
                     TAke thyne aſcendent, and than thou haſt the 4 angles, for wel thou woteſt that the appoſyte is of thyne aſcendente, that is to ſaye, the begynning of the 7 houſe ſyt vpon the weſt orizonte, and the begynnyng of the 10 houſe vpon the lyne meridionall, & hys oppoſite vpon the lyne of mydnight, than lay thy label vpon the degre that aſcendeth & reken than fro the poynte of thy labell all the degrees in the bordure tyl that thou come to the meridionall lyne, and departe al thylke degrees into 3 euen partes, & take there the euen porcyons of 3 other houſes for to laye thy labell ouer euerye of theſe 3 parties, and thā thou might ſe by the label in the zodiake the begynninge of theſe 3 houſes fro the aſcendente, that is to ſaye the 12 nexte aboue thyne aſcendent, and than the 11 houſe and the 10 houſe vpon the meridional lyne, as I fyrſte ſayd the ſame wyſe wyrtch fro the aſcendent downe to the lyne of mydnyght, and thus thou haſt thre houſes, that is to ſaye, the begynnyng of the ſeconde, the thyrde, and the fourth houſe: than is the nadyre of theſe thre houſes, the begynnynge of theſe 3 houſes that foloweth.
               
               
                  ¶To fynde the lyne meridionall, to dwell fyxe in any certayne place.
                  
                     TAke a rounde plate of metall for warpinge the border the better, & make thervpon a iuſte compace a lytle wythin the bordure, and lay this rounde plate vpon an euen grounde, or ſome euen ſtone, or on euen ſtocke fixe in the grounde, and lay it euen by a rule in the centre of the compace, ſtycke an euen pynne or a wyre vpryghte, the ſmaller the better, and ſette thy pinne or thy wyre by a plōme rules ende vpryght euen, and let thys pynne be no lenger than a quarter, of thy diameter of the compace fro the pynne, and wayte beſyly aboute 10 or 11 of the clocke whan the ſunne ſheweth, whan the ſhadowe of the pynne entreth any thynge wyth the cercle of the compace one heer brede, and make there a pricke wyth ynke, abyde than ſtyll wayting on the ſunne after one of the clocke, tyl that the ſhadowe of the pynne or of the wyre paſſe anye thynge out of the cercle or compace, be it neuer ſo litle, and ſette there a pricke. Take thā a compace and meaſure euen the middle bytwyxe both the pryckes, & ſet there a prycke: take than a rule and drawe a ſtryke euen fro the pynne vnto the myddle pricke, and take there the line meridional for euermore, as in the ſame place. And yf thou drawe a croſſe ouerthwart the compace iuſtly ouer the line meridionall, than haſte thou Eeſt and weſt, & per cōſequens the oppoſitife, that is ſouth and North.
               
               
                  ¶Diſcription of the meridionall lyne, and of the longitudes & latitudes of cityes and townes as wel as of clymates.
                  
                     THys lyne meridional is but a maner diſcription of a lyne ymagined, that paſſeth vpon ye poles of the worlde, & by the ſygnet of oure heed: & it is cleped the ſygnette, for in what place that any mā is at any tyme of the yere whan the ſūne by meuyng of the firmament cometh to hys meridionall place, than is it the verey myddaye that we clepe noone, and therfore it is cleaped the lyne of myddaye. Than take hede that euermore of two cities or of townes, of whyche the one approcheth nerer the Eeſt than dothe the other towne, truſte well that thylke two twones haue diuers meridians. Take kepe alſo yt the arche of the equinoctial, that is conteyned & bounded bytwene the two meridians, is cleped ye lōgitude of the towne. And if ſo be that two townes haue meridian lyke, or one meridian, than is the diſtaunce of hem bothe lyke farre: & in thys maner they chaunge not her

meridian, but ſothly they chaunge her almicanteras for the haunſynge of the poole and the diſtaunce of the ſunne. The longitude of a clymate may be cleaped the ſpace of the erth, fro the begynnynge of the fyrſt clymate vnto the laſt ende of the ſame clymate, euen directe ayenſt the pole artike, thus ſay ſome auctours. And ſome clerkes ſay, that yf men cleape the latitude of a centre the arch meridian, that is conteined or intercepte betwixt the ſygnette and the equinoctiall, than they ſay that the diſtaunce fro the equinoctial vnto the ende of the clymate, euen ayenſte the poole artyke, is the longitude of the clymate for South.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe wyth what degre of the zodiake that any planette aſcendeth on the orizont, where hys latitude be North or South.
                  
                     KNowe by thine almynake the degree of the eclyptike of any ſigne, in whiche that the planette is rekened for to be and that is cleped the degree of his longitude. And knowe alſo the degree of hys latitude fro the eclyptyke, North or ſouthe, and by theſe enſamples folowyng in eſpeciall, thou mayſt wirch wyth euerye ſigne of the zodiake. The longitude perauenture of Venus or of an other planet was of Capricorne, and the latitude of hym was northwarde.
                  Degrees fro the ecliptyke lyne, than toke I a ſubtyl compace, & cleped the one poynte of my compace A, and that other F, thā toke I the poynte of A, and ſet it in the celyptyke lyne, and my zodiake in the degre of the longitude of heedes, that is to ſaye, in the heede of Capricorne, and than ſet I the poynte of F, vpwarde in the ſame ſygne, bycauſe that the altitude was Northe, vpon the latitude of Venus, yt is to ſaye, in the degree fro the heed of Capricorne, and thus haue I the degrees betwyxe my two prickes, than layde I downe ſoftly my compace, and ſet the degree of ye longitude vpō the orizont, thā toke I and waxed my labell in maner of a payre of tables, to receiue diſtinctly ye pricke of my compace, than toke I thys foreſayd labell, and layd it fixe ouer the degree of my longitude, thā toke I vp my compace & the pointe of A, in ye waxe of my label, as I coude geſſe ouer the eclyptike lyne in the ende of the longitude, I ſette the pointe ouer endelonge on the labell, vpon the ſpace of the latytude inwarde and on the zodiake, yt is to ſay northward fro the ecliptyke: Thā layde I downe any compace, and loked well in the way vpō the eclyptyke of A, and F, than turned I my reete tyl that the pricke of F, ſate vpon the orizont: Than ſawe I well that the bodye of Venus in her latytude of degrees ſeptētrionals, aſcendeth in the ende of degree fro the heed of Capricorne. And note that in thys maner thou myghteſt werche wyth any latitude ſeptemerionall in al ſignes: But ſothly the latitude meridional of a planet in Capricorne maye not be take, bycauſe of the lytle ſpace betwyxt the eclyptyke and the bordure of the aſtrolabye, & ſykerlye in all other ſygnes it maye be take. Alſo the degree perauenture of Iupiter or of anye other planet was in the fyrſte degree of Piſces in longitude, and his latitude was degrees meridionall. Than toke I the poynte of A, and ſet it in the fyrſt degre of Piſces on the ecliptyke, than ſette I the poynt downwarde of F, in the ſame ſigne, becauſe that the latiude was South degrees, that is to ſaye, fro the heed of Piſces, & thus haue I degrees betwyxe bothe prickes. Than ſette I the degree of the longitude vpon the orizont, than toke I my labell and layde hym fixe vpō the degree of longitude, than ſette I the poynte of A, on my labell euē ouer the ecliptyke lyne in the ende of the degree of the longitude, & I ſette the poynte of F, endelonge on my label the ſpace of degrees of the latitude out warde fro the zodiake, that is to ſay, ſouthwarde fro the ecliptyke toward the bordure and than tourned I my reete tyll the poynte of F, ſate vpon the orizont, than ſaw I well that the bodye of Iupiter in hys latytude of degrees meridionall, aſcendeth with the degre of Piſces in horeſcopo. And in this maner thou mayſt wyrch wyth any latitude as I ſayd fyrſte, ſaue in capricorne. And thou wylte plye thys crafte wyth the aryſinge of the mone, loke thou recken well the courſe of houre by houre, for ſhe dwelleth in a degree of her longitude but a lytle whyle, as thou woſte well: but neuertheleſſe, yf thou legen wel her very menyng by the tables, or after

her courſe houre by houre, thou ſhalt do well ynough.
               
               
                  ¶Vmbra recta.
                  
                     IF thou wylt wyrche with Vmbra recta, yf thou myghte come to the baſe of the towre, in thys maner ſhalt thou wyrch: Take the altitude of the towre wyth both hooles, ſo that the rule lye euē on a point. Enſample, as thus. I ſe him through the point of 4, than mete I ye ſpace betwyxe me and the toure, and I fynde it 20 foote, than beholde I howe 4 is to 12, and I fynde it is the thyrde parte of 12. Ryghte ſo the ſpace betwixe the and the toure is the thyrde parte of the altitude of the toure: thā thryſe 20 foote is the higheſt of the toure, wt the addicion of thyne owne bodye fro thyne eye. If the rule fall on 5, than is 5 tymes 12 the hygheſt of the toure.
               
               
                  ¶Vmbra verſa.
                  
                     IF thou maiſt not come to the baſe of the toure, & thou fixe hym thorowe the nombre of 1, ſette there a pricke at thy fote, thā go nere the toure, and ſe hym through at the poynte of 2, and ſet there another prycke, and than beholde howe 1 hath hym to 12, and thou ſhalt fynde that he hathe hym 12 ſythes, than beholde how 2 haue hym to 12, and thou ſhalt fynd it 6 ſythes, & therfore the ſpace betwixe 2 pryckes is 6 tymes thyne altitude. And note that at the fyrſte altitude of 1 thou ſetteſt a prycke, and afterwarde whan thou ſeeſt hym through at 2, there yu ſetteſt a prycke thā thou fyndeſt bytwene 30 fote, than thou ſhalte fynde that 10 is the 8 parte of 80, than is a foote the altytude of the toure, but yf it fall vpon another pointe, as thus. It falleth on 6 at the ſeconde taking it, whan it falleth on 4, than ſhalte thou fynde that 6 is the ſeconde parte of 12, and 4 is the thyrde part of 12 by the thyrde parte, yt is to ſaye, the ſpace betwyxe 2 pryckes, twyſe the heyght of the toure, and if the difference were 3, thā wolde it be thre times the height. Et ſic de ſingulis Another maner wyrchyng by vmbra recta. If thou mayſte not come by the baſe of the toure, wyrche in thys wyſe: Set thy rule vpon 1 tyll thou ſe the altitude, and ſet at thy fote a pricke, and than ſet thy rule vpō 2, & ſo do in the ſame maner: than loke what is the difference betwyxe 1 and 2, and thou ſhalte fynde that it is one. Than meſure that ſpace betwyxe the two pryckes, and that is the 12 parte of the altitude of the toure, and ſo of al other. 7
               
               
                  ¶Vmbra recta.
                  
                     IF thy rule fall vpon the 8 pointe on the ryght ſhadow, thā make the fygure of 8 than loke howe muche ſpace of fete is betwyxe the and the toure, and multiply that by 12, and whan thou haſt multyplyed it by the ſame nombre, than deuyde it by the nombre of 8, and kepe the reſidewe, and adde therto thy heyght vnto thyne eye, to the reſidue, and that ſhall be the very heyght of the toure. And thus mayſte thou worche on the ſame ſyde from one to 12. &c. Vmbra recta.
                  Another maner of working vpō the ſame ſide. Loke vpon what poynt thy rule falleth whā thou ſeeſt the toppe of the tour thorow the two holes, and thā mete the ſpace from thy foote to the baſe of the toure, and ryghte as the nombre of the poynte hathe hym ſelfe to 12, ryghte ſo the meſure betwyxe the and the toure, hath him ſelfe to the heyght of the ſame tour. Enſample as thus. I ſette caſe thy rule fal vpon 8, than is 8 two thyrde partes of 12, ſo is the ſpace two thyrde partes of the toure.
               
               
                  ¶Vmbra verſa.
                  
                     TO knowe the heyghte of the pointes of Vmbra verſa. If thy rule fall vpon 3 whā thou ſeeſt the toppe of the tour, ſet a pricke there thy fote ſtōdeth and go nere tyll thou mayſte ſe the ſame toppe at the poynt of 4, and ſette there another prycke, than mete howe many foote is betwyxe the two pryckes, and the heyght vp to thyne eye, and that ſhall be the heyght of the tour. And note that thre is the 4 parte of 12, and 4 is the 3 part of 12. Now paſſrth 4 the nōbre of 3 by diſtaunce of 1, therfore

the ſame ſpace with thy heyght to thine eye, is the height of the toure. And yf it were ſo that there were two or thre diſtaunces in the nombres, ſo ſhulde the meſure betwixte the pryckes betwyſe or thryſethe heyght of the toure.
               
               
                  ¶Vmbra recta.
                  
                     TO knowe the heyght yf thou mayſt not come to the baſe of the thinge, ſette thy rule vpon what poynte thou wylte, ſo that thou mayſte ſe the toppe of the thing through the two holes, and make a marke there as thy foote ſtōdeth, & go nere or farther, tyl thou mayſt ſe it through another point, & make ther another marke, & loke what differēce is betwixt the two poyntes in the ſcale, and ryghte as that difference hath hym to 12, ryghte ſo the ſpaces betwyxt the two markes, hath hym to the heyght of the thynge. Enſample. I ſet the eaſe yt thou ſeeſt it thorowe at the poynte of 4, and after at the poynt of 3. Now paſſeth the nombre of 4 the nombre of 3 the diſtaunce of 1, and ryght as thys difference of one hath him ſelfe to 12, ryght ſo the meſure betwixt bothe the markes, hathe hym to the heyght of the ſame thynge, puttynge therto the height of thy ſelfe to thyne eye. And thus mayſt thou werke from 1 to 12.
               
               
                  ¶Vmbra verſa.
                  
                     FVrthermore, yf thou wylte knowe in vmbra verſa, by the crafte of vmbra recta, I ſuppoſe to take thine altitude at the poynte of 4 and makeſte a marke, and than thou goeſt nere tyll thou haſte it at the poynte of 3 and makeſt there another marke than muſte thou deuide 144 by 4, the nombre that cometh therof ſhall be 36, and after deuyde 144 by 3, & the nōbre yt cometh therof is 48, thā loke what difference is betwixt 36 and 48, and that ſhalt thou fynde 12, and ryght as 12 hath hym to 12, ſo the ſpace betwixt the two pryckes, hath him to the altitude of the thynge.
               
               ¶Here endeth the concluſions of the Aſtrolabie.
            
         
         
            The complaynt of the blacke knyght.
            
               
                  IN May whan Flora the freſhe luſty Quene
               The ſoyle hath cladde, in grene, reed, & whyghte
               And Phebus gan to ſhed his ſtremes ſhene
               Amydde the bulle, wyth all the beames bryghte
               And Lucifer, to chace awaye the nyght
               Ayen the morowe oure orizont hath take
               To byd al louers out of her ſlepe awake
            
            
               And hertes heuy for to comforte
               From dreryheed, of heuy nyghtes ſorowe
               Nature bade hem ryſe, and hem diſporte
               Ayen the goodly glad grey morowe
               And hope alſo, with ſaynt Iohan to borow
               Bade in diſpire of daunger and diſpayre
               For to take the holſome luſty ayre
            
            
               And wyth a ſyghe I gan for to abreyde
               Out of my ſlomber, and ſodaynly vp ſterte
               As he (alas) that nyghe for ſorowe deyde
               My ſyckeneſſe ſate aye ſo nye my herte
               But for to fynde ſocour of my ſmerte
               Or at the leſte ſome releaſe of my peyne
               That me ſo ſore halte in euery veyne
            
            
               I roſe anone, and thought I wolde gone
               Into the wodde, to here the byrdes ſynge
               whan that the myſty vapoure was agone
               And clere and fayre was the moronyng
               The dewe alſo lyke ſyluer in ſhynyng
               Vpon the leaues, as any baume ſwete
               Tyl fyry Tytan wyth his perſaunt hete
            
            
               Had dryed vp the luſty lycour newe
               Vpon the herbes in the grene mede
               And that the floures of manye diuers hewe
               Vpon her ſtalkes gonne for to ſprede
               And for to ſplaye out her leaues in brede
               Agayne the ſunne, golde burned in his ſpere
               That down to hem caſt he his beames clere
            
            
               
               And by a ryuer forth I gan coſtey
               Of water clere, as byrell or cryſtall
               Tyll at the laſte I founde a lytell wey
               Towarde a parke, encloſed wyth a wall
               In compace rounde, and by a gate ſmall
               who ſo that wolde, frely myght gone
               In to thys parke, walled wyth grene ſtone
            
            
               And in I went to here the byrdes ſonge
               whych on the braūches, both in plaine & vale
               So loude ſange, that all the woode ronge
               lyke as it ſhulde ſhyuer in peces ſmale
               And as me thought, that the nyghtyngale
               with ſo great might, her voyce gan out wreſt
               Ryght as her herte for loue wolde breſt
            
            
               The ſoyle was plaine, ſmothe, & wōder ſofte
               All ouerſprad wyth tappettes that Nature
               Had made her ſelfe: couered eke alofte
               wyth bowes grene, the floures for to cure
               That in her beautye they may longe endure
               From all aſſaute of Phebus feruent fere
               whych in hys ſphere ſo hote ſhone and clere
            
            
               The eyre attempre, and the ſmoth wynde
               Of zepherus, amonge the bloſomes whyte
               So holſome was, and ſo noriſhing by kynde
               That ſmale buddes, & rounde bloſomes lyte
               In maner gan of her brethe delyte
               To yeue vs hope there frute ſhall take
               Ayenſt Autumpne redy for to ſhake
            
            
               I ſawe the Daphene cloſed vnder rynde
               Grene Laurer, and the holſome Pyne
               The Myrre alſo, that wepeth euer of kynde
               The Cedres hye, vpryght as a lyne
               The Fylberte eke, that lowe doth enclyne
               Her bowes grene, to the erthe adoun
               Vnto her knyght called Demophoun
            
            
               There ſawe I eke the freſhe hauthorne
               In whyte motley, that ſo ſwote doth ſmel
               Aſhe, fyrre, & oke, wyth many a yonge acorne
               And many a tree mo then I can tell
               And me beforne I ſawe a lytell well
               That had hys courſe, as I gan beholde
               Vnder an hyll, wyth quycke ſtreames colde
            
            
               The grauell golde, the water pure as glaſſe
               The bankes rounde, the well enuyronynge
               And ſofte as veluet the yonge graſſe
               That therupon luſtely came ſpryngynge
               The ſute of trees about compaſynge
               Her ſhado we caſte, cloſyng the wel r
                     •
                  
               
               And al the herbes growyng on the g
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               The water was ſo holſome, and ſo vert
                     •
                  
               
               Thorowe might of herbes growyng beſ
                     •
                  
               
               Not lyke the welle where as Narciſu
                     •
                  
               
               Yſlayne was, thorowe vengeance of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               where ſo couertly he dyd hyde
               The grayne of dethe vpon eche brinke
               That deth mote folowe, who ye euer d
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               Ne lyke the pytte of the Pegace
               Vnder Pernaſo where poetes ſlepte
               Nor lyke the welle of pure chaſtyte
               whiche that Diane with her nymphes kept
               whan ſhe naked in to the water lepte
               That ſlowe Acteon with her hondes fel
               Onely for he came ſo nyghe the wel
            
            
               But this welle that I here reherce
               So holſome was, that it wolde aſwag
                     •
                  
               
               Bollen hertes, and the venym peerce
               Of penſyfeheed, with al the cruel rage
               And ouermore refeſſhe the vyſage
               Of hem that were in any weryneſſe
               Of great labour, or fallen in diſtreſſe
            
            
               And I that had thorowe daunger & diſ
                     •
                  
               
               So drie a thruſt, thought I wolde aſſa
                     •
                  
               
               To taſte a draught of this welle or t
                     •
                  
               
               My bytter langour if it might alaye
               And on the banke anon downe I laye
               And with myn heed, vnto the welle I ra
                     •
                  
               
               And of the water dranke I a good drau
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               wherof me thought I was refreſſhed
               Of the brennyng that ſate ſo nye my he
                     •
                  
               
               That verily anon I gan to fele
               An huge parte releaſed of my ſmerte
               And therwithal anon vp I ſterte
               And thought I wolde walke and ſem
                     •
                  
               
               Forthe in the parke, and in the holtes h
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               And through a launde as I yed a pace
               And gan aboute faſte to beholde
               I founde anon a delectable place
               That was beſet with trees yonge and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               whoſe names here for me ſhal not be tol
                     •
                  
               
               Amydde of whiche ſtoode an herber gre
                     •
                  
               
               
                  That beched was, with colours new & clene
            
            
               Thys herber was full of floures gende
               Into the whych, as I beholde gan
               Betwyxe an hulfere and a wodbende
               As I was ware, I ſawe where lay a man
               in blacke, and whyte coloure pale and wan
               And wonder deedly alſo of hys hewe
               Of hurtes grene, and freſhe woundes newe
            
            
               And ouermore dyſtrayned wyth ſyckneſſe
               Beſyde all thys he was full greuouſlye
               For vpon hym he had an hote acceſſe
               That daye by daye hym ſhoke full pytouſly
               So that for conſtraynynge of hys malady
               And hetly wo, thus lyenge all alone
               It was a dethe for to here hym grone
            
            
               wherof aſtonyed, my fote I gan wythdrawe
               Greatly wondrynge what it myght be
               That he ſo laye, and had no felawe
               Ne that I coude no wyght wyth hym ſe
               wherof I had routh, and eke pyte
               And gan anone, ſo ſoftely as I coude
               Amonge the buſhes priuely me to ſhroude
            
            
               Yf that I myght in any wyſe aſpye
               what was the cauſe of hys deedly wo
               Or why that he ſo pytouſly gan crye
               On hys fortune, and on vre alſo
               wyth all my myght I layde an eere to
               Euery worde to marke what he ſayd
               Out of hys ſwough amonge as he abrayde
            
            
               But fyrſt, yf I ſhulde make mencion
               Of hys perſon, and playnly hym dyſcryue
               He was in ſothe, wythout excepcion
               To ſpeake of manhode, one the beſt on lyue
               There maye no man ayen trouth ſtryue
               For of hys tyme, and of hys age alſo
               He proued was, there men ſhulde haue ado
            
            
               For one the beſt therto of brede and length
               So well ymade by good proporcion
               Yf he had be in hys delyuer ſtrength
               But thought and ſyckneſſe were occaſyon
               That he thus laye in lamentacion
               Gruffe on the grounde, in place deſolate
               Sole by hym ſelfe, awhaped and amate
            
            
               And for me ſemeth that it is ſyttyng
               Hys wordes al to put in remembraunce
               To me that herde all hys complaynyng
               And all the grounde of hys wofull chaunce
               Yf there wythall I may you do pleaſaunce
               I woll to you ſo as I can anone
               Lyke as he ſayd, reherce euerychone
            
            
               But who ſhall helpe me nowe to complayne
               Or who ſhall nowe my ſtyle gye or lede
               O Niobe, let nowe thy teeres rayne
               Into my penne, and helpe eke in nede
               Thou wofull Mirre, yt feleſt myn hert blede
               Of pytous wo, and myne hande eke quake
               when that I wryte, for thys mannes ſake
            
            
               For vnto wo accordeth complaynynge
               And dolefull chere vnto heuyneſſe
               To ſorowe alſo, ſyghynge and wepyng
               And pytous mournynge vnto dreryneſſe
               And who that ſhall wryte of dyſtreſſe
               In party nedeth to knowe felyngly
               Cauſe and roote of all ſuch malady
            
            
               But I alas, that am of wytte but dull
               And haue no knowynge of ſuche matere
               For to dyſcryue, and wryte at the full
               The wofull cōplaynte, whych yt ye ſhal here
               But euen lyke as doth a ſkryuenere
               That can nomore, what that he ſhall wryte
               But as hys mayſter beſyde dothe endyte
            
            
               Ryght ſo fare I, that of no ſentement
               Saye ryght nought in concluſyon
               But as I herde when I was preſent
               Thys man complayne, wyth a pytous ſoun
               For euen lyke wythout addicioun
               Or dyſencreaſe, eyther more or leſſe
               For to reherce anone I woll me dreſſe
            
            
               And yf that any nowe be in thys place
               That fele in loue brennynge or feruence
               Or hyndred were to hys ladyes grace
               wyth falſe tonges, that wyth peſtilence
               Slee trewe men, that neuer dyd offence
               In worde nor dede, ne in her entent
               Yf any ſuche be here nowe preſent
            
            
               Let hym of routh laye to audience
               wyth dolefull chere, and ſobre countenaunce
               To here thys man, by full hye ſentence
               Hys mortall wo, and hys perturbaunce
               Complaynynge, nowe lyenge in a traunce
               wyth lokes vpcaſte, and rufull chere
               
                  Theffecte of whych was as ye ſhall here.
            
            
               The thouȝt oppreſſed wt inward ſyghes ſore
               The paynful lyfe, the body languyſhynge
               The wofull goſte, the herte rent and tore
               The pytous chere pale in complaynynge
               The deedly face, lyke aſhes in ſhynynge
               The ſalte teares that from myne eyen fall
               Parcell declare, grounde of my paynes all
            
            
               whoſe herte is grounde to blede in heuyneſſe
               The thought reſceyte of wo, & of complaynt
               The breſt is cheſt of dole and dreryneſſe
               The body eke ſo feble and ſo faynte
               wyth hote and colde myne axes is ſo maynte
               That nowe I chyuer, for defaute of heate
               And hote as glede, nowe ſodaynly I ſweate
            
            
               Now hote as fyre, nowe colde as aſhes deed
               Now hote for cold, nowe colde for hete agayne
               Nowe colde as yſe, nowe as coles reed
               For hete I brenne, & thus betwyxe twayne
               I poſſed am, and al forcaſt in payne
               So that my hete playnly as I fele
               Of greuous colde is cauſe euery dele
            
            
               Thys is the cold of inward hye dyſdayne
               Colde of dyſpyte, and colde of cruell hate
               Thys is the cold yt euer doth hys beſy payne
               Ayenſt trouth to fyght and debate
               Thys is the colde that the fyre abate
               Of trewe meanynge, alas the harde whyle
               Thys is the colde that woll me begyle
            
            
               For euer the better that in trouth I mente
               wyth all my myght faythfully to ſerue
               wyth herte and all to be diligente
               The leſſe thanke, alas I can deſerue
               Thus for my trouth daunger doth me ſterue
               For one that ſhulde my deth of mercy let
               Hath made deſpyte new hys ſwerde to whet
            
            
               Agaynſt me, and hys arowes to fyle
               To take vengeaunce of wylfull cruelte
               And tonges falſe through her ſleightly wyle
               Han gonne awarre, that wyll not ſtynted be
               And falſe enuy, wrath and enuyte
               Haue conſpyred agaynſt all ryght and lawe
               Of her malyce that trouth ſhalbe ſlawe
            
            
               And male bouche, gan fyrſt the tale tell
               To ſclaundre trouth of indignacion
               And Falſe reporte ſo loude range the bell
               That myſbyleue and falſe ſuſpection
               Haue trouth brought to his dampnacion
               So that alas, wrongfully he dyeth
               And falſneſſe nowe hys place occupyeth
            
            
               And entred is in to trouthes londe
               And hath therof the full poſſeſſyon
               O ryghtful god that fyrſt the trouth fonde
               Howe may thou ſuffre ſuch oppreſſyon
               That falſhode ſhulde haue iuriſdiction
               In trouthes ryght to ſlee hym gyltleſſe
               In hys fraunchyſe he maye not lyue in pees
            
            
               Falſly accuſed, and of hys fone foringed
               wythout anſwere, whyle he was abſent
               He dampned was, and may not be excuſed
               For cruelte ſate in iugement
               Of haſtyneſſe wythout auyſement
               And badde Dyſdayne do execute anone
               Hys ingement in preſence of hys fone
            
            
               Attourney maye none admytted bene
               To excuſe trouth, ne a worde to ſpeke
               To fayth or othe the iuge lyſt not ſene
               There is no gayne, but he wyll be wreke
               O lorde of trouth to the I call and clepe
               Howe may thou ſe thus in thy preſence
               wythout mercy murdred innocence
            
            
               Nowe god that arte of trouth ſouerayne
               And ſeeſt howe I lye for trouth bounde
               So ſore knytte in loues fyrye chayne
               Euē at ye deth thrugh gyrte wt many a woūd
               That lykely are neuer for to ſounde
               And for my trouth am dampned to the dethe
               And not abyde, but drawe alonge the brethe
            
            
               Conſyder and ſe in thyne eternall ryght
               Howe yt myne herte profeſſed whylom was
               For to be trewe wyth all my ful myght
               Onely to one, the whych nowe alas
               Of volunte wythout any treſpas
               Myne accuſours hath taken vnto grace
               And cheryſheth hem, my deth for to purchace
            
            
               what meaneth thys? what is this wōder bre
               Of purueyaunce yf I ſhall it call
               Of god of loue, that falſe hem ſo aſſure
               And trew alas, downe of the whele ben fall
               And yet in ſoth, thys is the worſt of all
               that falſhed wrōgfully of troth hath ye name
               
                  And troth a
                     •
                  ēward of falſhed bereth ye blame
            
            
               Thys blynde chaūce, thys ſtormy auēture
               In loue hath moſte hys experience
               For who yt doth wyth trouth moſte his cure
               Shall for hys mede fynde moſte offence
               That ſerueth loue wyth all hys diligence
               For who can fayne vnder lowlyhede
               Ne fayleth not to fynde grace and ſpede
            
            
               Fol I loued one, full longe ſyth agone
               wyth all myne herte, body and full myght
               And to be deed my herte can not gone
               From hys heſte but holde that he hath hyght
               Though I be banyſhed out of her ſyght
               And by her mouth dampned that I ſhal dey
               Vnto my beheſt, yet I wyll euer obey
            
            
               For euer ſyth that the worlde began
               who ſo lyſt loke, and in ſtory rede
               He ſhall aye fynde that the trewe man
               was put abacke where as the falſhede
               Yfurthered was, for loue taketh none hede
               To ſlee the trew, and hath of hem no charge
               where as the falſe goeth frely at her large
            
            
               I take recorde of Palamydes
               The trewe man, the noble worthy knyght
               That euer loued, and of hys payne no relees
               Notwithſtādyng his māhode & hys myght
               Loue vnto hym dyd full great vnryght
               For aye the bet he dyd in chylualrye
               The more he was hyndred by enuye
            
            
               And aye the better he dyd in euery place
               Through hys knyghthode and buſy payne
               The ferther was he from hys ladyes grace
               For to her mercy myght he neuer attayne
               And to hys deth he coude it not refrayne
               For no daungere, but aye obey and ſerue
               As he beſte coude, playnly tyll he ſterue
            
            
               what was the fyne alſo of Hercules
               For all hys conqueſt and hys worthyneſſe
               That was of ſtrength alone peerles
               For lyke as bokes of hym lyſt expreſſe
               He ſette pyllers through hys hye proweſſe
               Awaye at Gaddes for to ſygnifye
               That no mā myght hym paſſe in chyualrye
            
            
               The whych pyllers ferre beyonde Inde
               Be ſet of golde, for a remembraunce
               And for all that was he ſet behynde
               wyth hem that loue lyſt febly auaunce
               For hym ſet laſt vpon a daunce
               Agaynſt whome helpe may no ſtryfe
               For all hys trouth he loſte hys lyfe
            
            
               Phebus alſo for all hys perſaunt lyght
               when that he wente here in erthe lowe
               Vnto the herte wyth Venus ſyght
               Ywounded was through Cupides bowe
               And yet hys lady lyſt hym not to knowe
               Though for her loue hys herte dyd blede
               She let hym go, and toke of hym no hede
            
            
               what ſhall I ſaye of yonge Piramus?
               Of trewe Triſtram, for al hys hye renowne
               Of Achylles, or of Antonius
               Of Arcite, or of hym Palamowne
               what was the ende of her paſſyoune
               But after ſorowe deth, and then her graue
               Lo here the guerdon that theſe louers haue
            
            
               But falſe Iaſon wyth hys doubleneſſe
               That was vntrewe at Calkos to Medee
               And Theſeus, rote of vnkyndneſſe
               And wyth theſe two eke the falſe En
                     •
                  e
               Lo thus the falſe aye in one degre
               Had in loue her luſt and all her wyll
               And ſaue faſhode, there was none other ſkyll
            
            
               Of Thebes eke the falſe Arcyte
               And Demephoon eke for his ſlouthe
               They had her luſt & al that myght delyte
               For al her falſhode and great vntrouthe
               Thus euer loue alas, and that is routhe
               His falſe lieges forthereth what he may
               And ſleeth the trewe vngoodly day by day
            
            
               For trewe Adon was ſlayne with the bore
               Amydde the foreſt in the grene ſhade
               For Venus loue he felte al the ſore
               But Vulcanus wiht her no mercy made
               The foule chorle had many nyghtes glade
               where Mars her knyght and her man
               To fynde mercy comforte none he can
            
            
               Alſo the yonge freſſhe vpomedes
               So luſty fre as of his courage
               That for to ſerue with al his herte he ches
               Athalans ſo fayre of her vyſage
               But loue alas quitte hym ſo his wage
               with cruell daungere playnly at the laſt
               
                  That wyth the deth guerdonleſſe he paſt
            
            
               Lo here the fyne of loues ſeruyſe
               Lo how that loue can hys ſeruauntes quyte
               Lo howe he can hys faythfull men dyſpyſe
               To ſlee the trewe men, and falſe to reſpyte
               Lo howe he doth the ſwerde of ſorowe byte
               In hertes, ſuch as mooſt hys luſt obey
               To ſaue the falſe and do the trewe dey
            
            
               For fayth nor othe, worde, ne aſſuraunce
               Trewe meanynge, awayte, or buſyneſſe
               Styll porte, ne faythfull attendaunce
               Manhode ne myght in armes worthyneſſe
               Purſute of worſhyp nor hye proweſſe
               In ſtraunge lande rydynge ne trauayle
               Ful lytell or nought in loue doth auayle
            
            
               Peryll of deth, nor in ſee ne lande
               Hunger ne thurſte, ſorowe ne ſyckeneſſe
               Ne great empryſes for to take on hande
               Shedynge of bloode, ne manfull hardyneſſe
               Ne ofte woundynge at ſautes by dyſtreſſe
               Nor in partynge of lyfe, nor deth alſo
               Al is for nought, loue taketh no hede therto
            
            
               But leſynges wyth her flaterye
               Through her falſhed, & with her doubleneſſe
               wyth tales newe, and many fayned lye
               By falſe ſemblaunt and coūtrefete hūbleſſe
               Vnder colour depaynte wyth ſtedfaſtneſſe
               wyth fraude couered vnder a pytous face
               Accepte be nowe ratheſt vnto grace
            
            
               And can hym ſelfe nowe beſt magnifye
               wyth fayned porte and preſumpcion
               They haunte her cauſe wyth falſe ſurquidre
               Vnder meanynge of double entencion
               To thynke one in her opinion
               And ſaye another, to ſet hym ſelfe alofte
               And hynder trouth, as it is ſene full ofte
            
            
               The which thynge, I bye nowe al to dere
               Thanked be Venus, and the God Cupide
               As it is ſene by myne oppreſſed chere
               And by hys arowes that ſtycken in my ſyde
               That ſaue deth, I nothynge abyde
               Fro daye to daye, alas the harde whyle
               when euer his darte that hym lyſt to fyle
            
            
               My wofull herte for to ryue a two
               For taute of mercy, and lacke of pyte
               Of her that cauſeth all my payne and wo
               And lyſt not ones of grace for to ſe
               Vnto my trouth through her cruelte
               And moſte of al I me complayne
               That ſhe hath ioye to laugh at my payne
            
            
               And wylfully hath my deth ſworne
               All gyltleſſe, and wote no cauſe why
               Saue for the trouth that I had aforne
               To her alone to ſerue faythfully
               O god of loue, vnto the I cry
               And to thy blende double deyte
               Of thys great wronge I complayne me
            
            
               And vnto thy ſtormy wylfull variaunce
               Yment wyth chaūge and great vnſtableneſſe
               Now vp now down, ſo rēnyng is thy chaūce
               That the to truſt may be no ſekerneſſe
               I wyte it nothynge but thy doubleneſſe
               And who that is an archer and is blynde
               Marketh nothynge but ſhoteth by wynde
            
            
               And for that he hath no dyſcrecion
               wythout aduyſe he let hys arowe go
               For lacke of ſyght, and alſo of reaſon
               In hys ſhotynge it happeth ofte ſo
               To hurte hys frende rather then hys fo
               So doth thys god wyth hys ſharpe flone
               The trewe ſleeth, and letteth the falſe gone
            
            
               And of hys woundyng, thys yu worſt of al
               when he hurteth doth to ſo cruell wreche
               And maketh the ſycke for to crye and call
               Vnto hys foe for to be hys leche
               And harde it is for a man to ſeche
               Vpon the poynte of dethe in ieopardye
               Vnto hys foe to fynde remedye
            
            
               Thus fareth it nowe euen by me
               That to my foe yt gaue myne herte a woūde
               Mote aſke grace, mercy, and pyte
               And namely there where none may be foūde
               For nowe my ſore my leche wyll confounde
               And god of kynde ſo hath ſet myne vre
               My lyues foe to haue my wounde in cure
            
            
               Alas the whyle now that I was borne
               Or that I euer ſawe the bryght ſonne
               For nowe I ſe that full longe aforne
               Or I was borne, my deſteny was ſponne
               By Parcas ſyſterne to ſlee me yf they conne
               For they my dethe ſhopen or my ſherte
               
                  Onely for trouth I may it not aſterte
            
            
               The myghty goddeſſe alſo of nature
               That vnder god hath the gouernaunce
               Of worldly thynges cōmytted to her cure
               Dyſpoſed haue throgh her wyſe purueiaūce
               To gyue my lady ſo moche ſuffyſaunce
               Of all vertues, and therwythall puruyde
               To murdre trouth, hath take daūger to gyde
            
            
               For bounte, beaute, ſhappe, and ſemelyhed
               Prudence, wyt, paſſyngly fayrneſſe
               Benygne porte, glad chere wyth lowlyhed
               Of womanhede ryght plenteous largeneſſe
               Nature dyd in her fully impreſſe
               when ſhe her wrought, & alther laſt diſdayne
               To hinder trouth ſhe made her chāberlayne
            
            
               when myſtruſt alſo, and falſe ſuſpection
               wyth myſbyleue ſhe made for to be
               Chefe of counſayle to thys concluſyon
               For to exyle trouth, and eke pyte
               Out of her court to make mercy flee
               So yt dyſpyte nowe holdeth forth her reyne
               Through haſty byleue of tales yt men feyne
            
            
               And thus I am for my trouth, alas
               Murdred & ſlayne, wt wordes ſharpe & kene
               Gyltleſſe god wote of all treſpas
               And lye and blede vpon this colde grene
               Nowe mercy ſwete, mercy my lyues quene
               And to your grace of mercy yet I preye
               In your ſeruyce that your man maye deye
            
            
               But yf ſo be that I ſhall dye algate
               And that I ſhall none other mercy haue
               Yet of my deth let thys ben the date
               that by your wyl I was brouȝt to my graue
               Or haſtely, yf that you lyſt me ſaue
               My ſharpe woundes that ake ſo and blede
               Of mercy charme, and alſo of womanhede
            
            
               For other charme playnly is there none
               But onely mercy, to helpe in thys caſe
               For though my woundes blede euer in one
               My lyfe, my deth, ſtandeth in your grace
               And though my gylte be nothynge, alas
               I aſke mercy in all my beſt entente
               Redy to dye, yf that ye aſſente.
            
            
               For there agaynſt ſhall I neuer ſtryue
               In worde ne werke, playnly I ne may
               For leuer I haue then to be alyue
               To dye ſothly, and it be to her paye
               Yea though it be thys ſame daye
               Or when that euer her lyſt to deuyſe
               Suffyſeth me to dye in your ſeruyſe
            
            
               And god yt knoweſt ye thoght of euery wyght
               Ryght as it is, in euery thynge thou mayſt ſe
               Yet er I dye, wyth all my full myght
               Lowly I praye to graunt vnto me
               That ye goodly, fayre, freſhe and fre
               whych onely ſlee me for defaute of rothe
               Or that I dye, ye maye knowe my trouth
            
            
               For that in ſoth ſuffiſeth me
               And ſhe it knowe in euery circumſtaunce
               And after I am wel payde that ſhe
               If that her lyſt of deth to do vengeaunce
               Vnto me that am vnder her ligraunce
               It ſytte me not her dome to dyſobeye
               But at her luſte wylfully to deye
            
            
               wythout grutchynge or rebellyon
               In wyll or worde, holy I aſſent
               Or any maner contradiction
               Fully to be at her commaundement
               And yf I dye, in my teſtament
               My herte I ſende, and my ſpirite alſo
               what ſo euer ſhe lyſte wyth hem to do
            
            
               And alder laſte to her womanhede
               And to her mercy, me I recomaunde
               That lye nowe here betwyxte hope & drede
               Abydynge playnly what ſhe lyſt cōmaunde
               For vtterly thys nys no demaunde
               welcome to me whyle me laſteth brethe
               Ryght at her choyſe where it be lyfe or dethe
            
            
               In this ma
                     •
                  er more what might I fayne
               Syth in her hande, and in her wyll is all
               Bothe lyfe & deth, my ioye and al my payne
               And fynally my heſte holde I ſhall
               Tyl my ſpirite by deſteny fatall
               when that her lyſt fro my body wende
               Haue here my trouth, & thus I make an ende
            
            
               And with that worde he gan ſygh as ſore
               Lyke as hys herte ryue wolde at wayne
               And helde hys peace, & ſpake no worde more
               But for to ſe hys wo and mortall payne
               The teres gonne fro myne eyen rayne
               Full pytouſly for very inwarde r
                     •
                  the
               
                  That I him ſaw, ſo long wiſhing for trouth
            
            
               And all thys whyle my ſelfe I kepte cloſe
               Amonge the bowes, and my ſelf gonne hyde
               Tyll at the laſt the wofull man aroſe
               And to a lodge wente there beſyde
               where all the May, hys cuſtome was tabyde
               Sole to complayne of hys paynes kene
               From yere to yere vnder the bowes grene
            
            
               And for bycauſe that it drewe to the nyght
               And that the ſonne his arke diurnall
               Ypaſſed was, ſo that his perſaunt light
               Hys bright bemes and hys ſtremes all
               were in the waues of the water fall
               Vnder the bordure of our occyan
               Hys chare of golde, hys courſe ſo ſwyftly ran
            
            
               And whyle the twylyght & the rowes rede
               Of Phebus lyght were deaurat alyte
               A penne I toke, and gan me faſt ſpede
               The wofull playnte of thys man to wryte
               worde by worde as he dyd endyte
               Lyke as I herde and coude hem to reporte
               I haue here ſet, your hertes to diſporte
            
            
               If ought be myſſe, laye the wyte on me
               For I am worthy for to beare the blame
               If any thynge myſſe reported be
               To make this dytte for to ſeme lame
               Through myne vncōning, but for to ſayn the ſame
               Lyke as this mā his complaynt dyd expreſſe
               I aſke mercy and forgyueneſſe
            
            
               And as I wrote, me thought I ſawe a ferre
               Ferre in the weſt luſtely appere
               Eſperus the goodly bryght ſterre
               So glad, ſo fayre, ſo perſaunt eke of chere
               I meane Venus wyth her bemes clere
               That heuy hertes onely to releue
               Is wonte of cuſtome for to ſhewe at eue
            
            
               And I as faſt fell adowne on my kne
               And euen thus to her gan I to prey
               O lady Venus ſo fayre vpon to ſe
               Let not this man for hys trouthe deye
               For that ioy thou haddeſt whan thou leye
               wt Mars thy knight, whan Vulcanus fonde
               And with a chayne vnuyſyble you bonde
            
            
               Togyder bothe twaye in the ſame whyle
               That all the courte aboue celeſtyall
               At your ſhame gan laughe and ſmyle
               Ah, fayre lady wylly fonde at all
               Comforte to carefull, o goddes immortall
               Be helpynge nowe, and do thy dilygence
               To let the ſtremes of thyne influence
            
            
               Deſcende down, in fortheryng of the trouth
               Namely of hem that lye in ſorowe bounde
               ſhewe now thy miȝt & on her wo haue routh
               Er falſe daunger ſle hem and confounde
               And ſpecially let thy myght be founde
               For to ſocoure what ſo that thou maye
               The trewe man that in the herber lay
            
            
               And all trewe forther for hys ſake
               O glad ſterre, O lady Venus myne
               And cauſe hys lady hym to grace take
               Her herte of ſtele to mercy ſo enclyne
               Er that thy bemes go vp to declyne
               And er that thou nowe go fro vs adowne
               For that loue thou haddeſt to Adowne
            
            
               And whan ſhe was gone to her reſt
               I roſe anone, and home to bed wente
               For wery me thought it for the beſt
               Prayenge thus in all my beſt entente
               That all trewe, that be wyth daunger ſhente
               wyth mercy may in releaſe of her payne
               Recured be, er Maye come efte agayne
            
            
               And for that I ne may no lenger wake
               Farewell ye louers all that be trewe
               Prayenge to god, and thus my leue I take
               That er the ſonne to morowe be riſſen newe
               And er he haue ayen roſen hewe
               That eche of you may haue ſuche a grace
               Hys owne lady in armes to embrace
            
            
               I meane thus, in all honeſte
               wythout more ye may togyder ſpeke
               what ſo ye lyſt at good lyberte
               That eche may to other her herte breke
               On ialouſyes onely to be wreke
               That hath ſo longe of his malyce and enuye
               werred trouthe with hys tyranny.
            
            
               ¶Lenuoye.
               Prynceſſe pleaſeth it to your benygnyte
               Thys lytell dyte to haue in mynde
               Of womanhode alſo for to ſe
               Your man may your mercy fynde
               And pyte eke, that long hath be behynde
               Let hym agayne be prouoked to grace
               
                  For by my trouthe it is agaynſt kynde
               Falſe daunger to occupye hys place
            
            
               Go lytell quayre vnto my lyues quene
               And my very hertes ſouerayne
               And be ryght glad, for ſhe ſhall the ſene
               Suche is thy grace, but I alas in payne
               Am lefte behynde, & not to whom to playne
               For mercy, ruthe, grace, and eke pyte
               Exiled be, that I may not attayne
               Recure to fynde of myne aduerſyte.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            ¶A preyſe of women.
            
               
                  ALl tho that lyſte of women euyll to ſpeke
               And fayn of hem worſe than they deſerue
               I pray to god that her neckes to breke
               Or on ſome euyll dethe mote tho ianglers ſterne
               For euery man were holden hem to ſerue
               And do hem worſhyp, honour, and ſeruyce
               In euery maner that they beſt coude deuyſe
            
            
               For we ouȝt fyrſt to thynke on what manere
               they brīg vs forth, & what payn they endure
               Fyrſt in our byrth, and ſyth fro yere to yere
               Howe buſely they done theyr buſy cure
               To kepe vs fro euery myſauenture
               In our youth whan we haue no myght
               Our ſelfe to kepe, neyther by daye nor nyght
            
            
               Alas, howe may we ſay on hem but wele
               Of whom we were foſtred and ybore
               And ben al our ſuccoure, & euer trew as ſtele
               And for our ſake full ofte they ſuffre ſore
               wythout women were all our ioye lore
               wherfore we ought all women to obey
               In all goodneſſe, I can no more ſay
            
            
               This is well knowen, and hath ben or thys
               That women ben cauſe of al lyghtneſſe
               Of knighthode, norture, eſchewyng al malis
               Encreaſe of worſhyp, and of al worthyneſſe
               Therto curteys and meke, and grounde of all goodneſſe
               Glad and mery, and trewe in euery wyſe
               That any gentyl herte can thynke or deuyſe
            
            
               And though any wold truſt to your vntruth
               And to your fayre wordes wold aught aſſent
               In good fayth me thinketh it were gret ruth
               That other women ſhold for her gylt be ſhēt
               That neuer knew ne wiſt nouȝt of her entēt
               Ne lyſte not to here ye fayre wordes ye write
               whyche ye you payne fro day to day tendyte
            
            
               But who may be ware of your tales vntrew
               That ye ſo buſyly paynt and endyte
               For ye wyll ſwere that ye neuer knewe
               Ne ſawe the woman, neyther moche ne lyte
               Saue onely her to whom ye had delyte
               As for to ſerue of all that euer ye ſey
               And for her loue muſte ye nedes dey
            
            
               Thā wyl ye ſwere that ye knew neuer before
               what loue was ne his dredfull obſeruaunce
               But nowe ye fele that he can wounde ſore
               wherfore ye put you in to her gouernaunce
               whō loue hath ordeyned you to ſerue & do pleſaūce
               wt all your miȝt your lytel lyues ſpace
               whyche endeth ſone, but yf ſhe do you grace
            
            
               And than to bedde wyll ye ſoone drawe
               And ſone ſicke ye wyll you than fayne
               And ſwere faſt your lady hath you ſlawe
               And brouȝt you ſodeynly in ſo hygh a payn
               That fro your deth may no mā you reſtrayn
               wyth a daungerous loke of her eyen two
               That to your dethe muſt ye nedes go
            
            
               Thus wyl ye morne, thus wyll ye ſyghe ſore
               As though your herte anon ī two wold breſt
               And ſwere faſt that ye may lyue no more
               Myne owne lady, that myght yf ye leſt
               Brynge myne herte ſomdele in to reſt
               As yf you lyſt mercy on me to haue
               Thus your vntrouth wyll euer mercy craue
            
            
               Thus wol ye playne, tho ye nothyng ſmerte
               Theſe innocent creatures for to begyle
               And ſwere to hem, ſo wounded is your herte
               For her loue, that ye may lyue no whyle
               Scarſly ſo longe as one might go a myle
               So hyeth dethe, to brynge you to an ende
               
                  But yf your ſouerayn lady lyſt you to amēde
            
            
               And yf for routh ſhe cōforte you in any wyſe
               For pyte of your falſe othes ſere
               So ye innocent weneth yt it be as you deuyſe
               And weneth your herte be as ſhe may here
               Thus for to cōfort, & ſomwhat do you chere
               Than woll theſe ianglers deme of her ful yl
               And ſayne that ye haue her fully at your wyl
            
            
               Lo howe redy her tonges ben, and preſt
               To ſpeke harme of women cauſeleſſe
               Alas, why might ye not as wel ſay the beſt
               As for to deme hem thus gyltleſſe
               In your herte ywis there is no gentylneſſe
               that of your own gylte, lyſt thus womē fame
               Now by my trouth, me thynk ye be to blame
            
            
               For of women cometh this worldly wele
               wherfore we ought to worſhip hē euermore
               And though it miſhap one, we ouȝt for to hele
               For it is all through our falſe lore
               That day and night, we payne vs euermore
               wyth many an othe, theſe women to begyle
               wyth falſe tales, and many a wycked wyle
            
            
               And yf falſhede ſhulde be reckened and tolde
               In women, iwys full trouthe were
               Not as in men, by a thouſande folde
               Fro all vyces twys they ſtande clere
               In any thyng that euer I coude of here
               But yf entyſyng of theſe men it make
               That hem to flatteren connen neuer ſlake
            
            
               I wold fayne were wher euer ye coude here
               without mens tiſing, what womē dyd amys
               For ther ye may get hē, ye lye fro yere to yere
               And many a gabbynge ye make to hem iwys
               For I coude neuer here, ne knowen er thys
               where euer ye coude fynde in any place
               That euer women beſought you of grace
            
            
               There ye you payne, with al your ful might
               wyth all your herte, and all your beſyneſſe
               To pleaſen hem, bothe by day and nyght
               Prayeng hem of her grace and gentylneſſe
               To haue pyte vpon your great diſtreſſe
               And ye they wolde on your payne haue routh
               And ſlee you not, ſens ye meane but trouh
            
            
               Thus may ye ſe that they ben fauteleſſe
               And innocent to all your werkes ſlye
               And all your craftes that touche falſneſſe
               They know hem not, ne may hem not eſpye
               So ſweare ye, that ye muſt nedes dye
               But yf they wolde of her womanheed
               Vpon you rewe, er that ye be deed
            
            
               And than your lady, and your hertes quene
               Ye call hem, and therwyth ye ſygh ſore
               And ſay, my lady I trowe that it be ſene
               In what plyte that I haue lyued full yore
               But nowe I hope that ye woll no more
               In theſe paynes ſuffre me for to dwell
               For of all goodneſſe, iwys ye be the well
            
            
               Lo whiche a paynted proceſſe can ye make
               Theſe harmleſſe creatures for to begyle
               And whan they ſlepe, ye payne you to wake
               And to bethink you on many a wycked wyle
               But ye ſhal ſe the day yt ye ſhal curſe ye whyle
               That ye ſo beſily dyd your entent
               Hem to begyle, that falſhede neuer ment
            
            
               For this ye knowe wel, though I wolde lye
               In women is all trouthe and ſtedfaſtneſſe
               For in good faythe, I neuer of hem ſye
               But moche worſhyp, bounte, and gentilneſſe
               Right commyng, fayre, and ful of mekeneſſe
               Good and glad, and lowly you enſure
               Is thys goodly angelyke creature
            
            
               And yf it happe a man be in diſeaſe
               She dothe her buſyneſſe, and her full payne
               wyth all her might, him to comforte & pleaſe
               If fro hys diſeaſe ſhe might hym reſtrayne
               In worde ne dede iwys ſhe wol not fayne
               But with al her might, ſhe doth her beſineſſe
               To brynge hym out of hys heuyneſſe
            
            
               Lo what gentylleſſe theſe women haue
               If we coude knowe it for our rudeneſſe
               Howe beſy they be vs to kepe and ſaue
               Bothe in heale, and alſo in ſyckneſſe
               And alway ryght ſory for our diſtreſſe
               In euery maner, thus ſhewe they routhe
               That in hem is all goodneſſe and trouthe
            
            
               And ſyth we fynd in hem gētilneſſe & trouth
               worſhyp, bounte, and kyndeneſſe euermore
               Let neuer this gētileſſe, through your ſlouth
               In her kynde trouthe be aught forlore
               That in woman is, and hath ben ful yore
               For in reuerence of the heuens quene
               
                  we ought to worſhyp all women that bene
            
            
               For of all creatures yt euer were get & borne
               This wote ye well, a woman was the beſt
               By her was recouered ye blyſſe yt we had lorn
               And through yt woman ſhal we come to reſt
               And ben yſaued, yf that our ſelfe leſt
               wherfore me thynketh, yf that we had grace
               we oughten honour women in euery place
            
            
               Therfore I rede, that to our lyues ende
               Fro thys tyme forth, whyle yt we haue ſpace
               That we haue treſpaced, purſue to amende
               Prayenge our lady, well of all grace
               To brynge vs vnto that blyſfull place
               There as ſhe & all good womē ſhal be in fere
               In heuen aboue, amonge the angels clere.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            
               The houſe of Fame.
               
                  GOd tourne vs euerye dreme to good
               For it is wōder thyng by the rood
               To my wytte, what cauſeth ſweuenes
               On the morowe or on euenes
               And why the effecte foloweth of ſome
               And of ſome it ſhall neuer come
               why that it is an auyſion
               And why thys a reuelacyon
               why thys a dreme, why that a ſweuen
               And nat to euery man lyche euen
               why this a fantome, why that oracles
               I not: but who ſo of theſe myracles
               The cauſes knowe bette than I
               Defyne he, for I certaynly
               Ne can hem nat, ne neuer thynke
               To buſy my wytte for to ſwynke
               To knowe of her ſignifycations
               The gendres, ne diſtynctions
               Of the tymes of hem, ne the cauſes
               Or why this is more than that is
               Or yeue folkes complexions
               Make hem dreme of reflexions
               Or els thus, as other ſayne
               For the great febleneſſe of her brayne
               By abſtynence, or by ſyckneſſe
               Pryſon, ſtryfe, or great diſtreſſe
               Or els by dyſordynaunce
               Or naturall accuſtomaunce
               That ſome men be to curyous
               In ſtudye, or melancolyous
               Or thus: ſo inly full of drede
               That no man may hym bote rede
               Or els that deuocion
               Of ſome, and contemplacyon
               Cauſen ſuche dremes ofte
               Or that the cruell lyfe vnſofte
               Of hem that loues leden
               Ofte hopen moche or dreden
               That purely her impreſſyons
               Cauſen hem to haue viſyons
               Or yf ſpyrites han the myght
               To make folke to dreame on nyght
               Or yf the ſoule of proper kynde
               Be ſo perfyte as men fynde
               That it wote what is to come
               And that he warneth all and ſome
               Of eueryche of her auentures
               By auyſyons, or by fygures
               But that our fleſſhe hath no myght
               To vnderſtande it a ryght
               For it is warned to derkely
               But why the cauſe is, not wote I
               well worthe of thys thynge clerkes
               That treaten of that, and of other werkes
               For I of none opynyon
               Nyll as nowe make mencyon
               But only that the holye Rood
               Tourne vs euery dreame to good
               For neuer ſythe I was borne
               Ne no man els me beforne
               Mette I trowe ſtedfaſtly
               So wonderfull a dreame as I.
               The tenthe day nowe of Decembre
               The whyche, as I can remembre
               I woll you tellen euery dele
               But at my begynnyng truſteth wele
               I woll make inuocation
               wyth a deuoute ſpecyall deuocyon
               Vnto the god of ſlepe anone
               That dwelleth in a caue of ſtone
               Vpon a ſtreme that cometh fro Lete
               
                  That is a fludde of hell vnſwete
               Beſyde a fulke, that men clepe Cymery
               There ſlepeth aye this god vnmery
               wyth hys ſlepy thouſande ſonnis
               That alway to ſlepe her won is
               And to thys god that I of rede 
                     〈☐〉
                  
               
               Praye I, that he woll me ſpede
               My ſweuen for to tell a ryght
               If euery dreme ſtande in hys myght
               And he that mouer is of all
               That is and was, and euer ſhall
               So gyue hem ioye that it here ❧
               
               Or all that they dreme to yere
               And for to ſtande al in grace
               Of her loues, or in what place
               That hem were leueſt for to ſtonde
               And ſhelde hem frome pouerte and ſhonde
               And frome euery vnhappe and diſeaſe
               And ſende hem that may hem pleaſe
               That taketh well and ſcorneth nought
               Ne it miſdeme in her thought
               Through malycious entencion
               And who ſo through preſumpcion
               Or hate or ſcorne, or through enuy
               Diſpyte or 
                     •
                  ape, or felony
               Myſdeme it, pray I Ieſus good
               Dreme he barefote or dreme he ſhood
               That euery harme that any man
               Hath had ſythe the worlde began
               Befall hym therof or he ſterne
               And graunt that he may it deſerue
               Lo, wyth ryght ſuche a concluſyon
               As had of hys auiſyon
               Creſus, that was kyng of Lyde
               That hygh vpon a gybet dyde
               This prayer ſhall he haue of me
               I am no bette in charyte.
               
                  
                     NOwe herken, as I haue you ſayde
                  What that I mette or I abrayde
                  Of Decembre the tenthe day
                  Whan it was nyght, to ſlepe I lay
                  Right as I was wonte to doone
                  And fyll a ſlepe wonder ſoone
                  As he that was wery forgo
                  On pylgrimage myles two
                  To the corps of ſaynt Leonarde
                  To maken lythe, that erſt was harde
                  But as I ſlepte me mette I was
                  wythin a temple ymade of glas
                  In whyche there were mo ymages
                  Of golde, ſtandyng in ſondrie ſtages
                  In mo ryche tabernacles
                  And wyth perre mo pynnacles
                  And mo curyous portratures
                  And queynt maner of fygures
                  Of golde worke, than I ſawe euer
                  But certaynly I nyſt neuer
                  where that it was, but well wyſt I
                  It was of Venus redely
                  This temple, for in purtreture
                  I ſawe anone ryght her fygure
                  Naked fletyng in a ſee
                  And alſo on her heed parde
                  Her roſe garlande whyte and rede
                  And her combe to kembe her hede
                  Her dounes, and dan Cupido
                  Her blynde ſonne, and Vulcano
                  That in hys face was full browne
                  But as I romed vp and downe
                  I founde that on the wall there was
                  Thus written on a table of bras
                  I woll nowe ſynge yf that I can
                  The armes, and alſo the man
                  That fyrſt came through hys deſtyne
                  Fugityfe fro Troye the countre
                  In to Itayle, wyth full moche pyne
                  Vnto the ſtrondes of Lauyne
                  And tho began the ſtorie anone
                  As I ſhall tellen you echone
                  Fyrſt ſawe I the diſtruction
                  Of Troye, through the greke Synon
                  wyth hys falſe vntrewe forſwerynges
                  And wyth hys chere and hys leſynges
                  Made a horſe, brought in to Troy
                  By whyche Troyans loſte all her ioy
                  And after thys was graued alas
                  Howe Ilyons caſtell aſſayled was
                  And wone, and kyng Priamus ſlayne
                  And Polytes hys ſonne certayne
                  Diſpytouſly of dan Pyrrus
                  And next that ſawe I howe Venus
                  whan that ſhe ſawe the caſtell brende
                  Downe frome heuen ſhe gan diſcende
                  And bade her ſonne Eneas to flye
                  And howe he fledde, and howe that he
                  Eſcaped was frome all the prees
                  And toke hys father, olde Anchyſes
                  And bare hym on hys backe away
                  
                     Cryeng alas and welaway
                  The whyche Anchyſes in hys hande
                  Bare tho the goddes of the lande
                  Thylke that vnbrenned were
                  Than ſawe I next all in fere
                  Howe Cruſa, dan Eneas wyfe
                  whom that he loued all hys lyfe
                  And her yonge ſonne Iulo
                  And eke Aſkanyus alſo
                  Fledden eke, wyth drery chere
                  That it was pyte for to here
                  And in a foreſt as they went
                  At a tournyng of a went
                  Howe Cruſa was yloſte, alas
                  That rede nat I, howe that it was
                  Howe he her ſought, and howe her goſte
                  Bade hym ſlye the grekes hoſte
                  And ſayd he muſte in to Itayle
                  As was hys deſtyne, ſauns fayle
                  That it was pyte for to here
                  whan her ſpyrite gan appere
                  The wordes that ſhe to hym ſayde
                  And for to kepe her ſonne hym prayde
                  There ſawe I grauen eke howe he
                  Hys father eke, and hys meyne
                  wyth hys ſhyppes gan to ſayle
                  Towarde the countre of Itayle
                  As ſtreyght as they myghten go
                  There ſawe I eke the cruell Iuno
                  That arte dan Iupyters wyfe
                  That haſte yhated all thy lyfe
                  All the Troyan bloode
                  Ren and crye as thou were woode
                  On Eolus, the god of wyndes
                  To blowen out of all kyndes
                  So loude, that he ſhulde drenche
                  Lorde, lady, grome, and wenche
                  Of all the Troyans nacyon
                  wythout any of her ſauacion
                  There ſawe I ſuche tempeſt aryſt
                  That euery herte myght agryſe
                  To ſe it paynted on the wall
                  There ſawe I eke grauen wyth all
                  Venus, howe ye my lady dere
                  wepynge wyth full wofull chere
                  Prayenge Iupyter on hye
                  To ſaue and kepe that nauye
                  Of that Trogian Eneas
                  Sythe that he her ſonne was
                  There ſawe I Ioues Venus kyſſe
                  And graunted was of the tempeſt lyſſe
                  There ſawe I howe the tempeſt ſtente
                  And howe wyth all pyne he wente
                  And pryuely toke a ryuage
                  In to the countre of Cartage
                  And on the morowe howe that he
                  And a knyght that hyght Achate
                  Metten wyth Venus that day
                  Goyng in a queynte aray
                  As ſhe had be an huntereſſe
                  wyth wynde blowyng vpon her treſſe
                  And howe Eneas began to playne
                  whan he knewe her of hys payne
                  And howe hys ſhyppes dreynt were
                  Or els yloſt, he nyſt where
                  Howe ſhe gan hym comforte tho
                  And bade hym to Cartage go
                  And there he ſhulde hys folke fynde
                  That in the ſee were lefte behynde
                  And ſhortly of thys thyng to pace
                  She made Eneas ſo in grace
                  Of Dydo, quene of that countre
                  That ſhortly for to tellen ſhe
                  Became hys loue, and let hym do
                  All that weddyng longeth to
                  what ſhulde I ſpeke it more quaynte
                  Or payne me my wordes to paynte
                  To ſpeke of loue, it well nat be
                  I can nat of that faculte
                  And eke to tellen of the manere
                  Howe they fyrſt acquaynted were
                  It were a longe proceſſe to tell
                  And ouer longe for you to dwell
                  There ſawe I graue howe Eneas
                  Tolde to Dydo euery caas
                  That hym was tyde vpon the ſee
                  And efte grauen was howe that ſhe
                  Made of hym ſhortly at a worde
                  Her lyfe, her loue, her luſt, her lorde
                  And dyd to hym all reuerence
                  And layde on hym all the diſpence
                  That any woman myght do
                  wenyng it had all be ſo
                  As he her ſwore, and hereby demed
                  That he was good, for he ſuche ſemed
                  Alas what harme dothe apparence
                  whan it is falſe in exiſtence
                  For he to her a traytour was
                  wherfore ſhe ſlowe her ſelfe alas
                  Lo, howe a woman dothe amys
                  To loue hym that vnknowen is
                  For by Chriſt, lo thus it fareth
                  It is nat all golde that glareth
                  For alſo brouke I well myne heed
                  
                     There may be vnder goodlyheed
                  Couered many a ſhreude vyce
                  Therfore be no wyght ſo nyce
                  To take a loue onely for chere
                  Or ſpeche or for frendly manere
                  For this ſhall euery woman fynde
                  That ſome man of his pure kynde
                  wol ſhewen outwarde the fayreſt
                  Tyl he haue caught that what him leſt
                  And than woll he cauſes fynde
                  And ſwere howe ſhe is vnkynde
                  Or falſe or priuy, or double was
                  Al thys ſaye I by Eneas
                  And Dydo, and her nyce leſt
                  That loued al to ſoone a geſt
                  wherfore I wol ſaye o prouerbe
                  That he that fully knoweth the herbe
                  Maye ſafely laye it to hys eye
                  wythoutyn drede thys is no lye
                  But let vs ſpeke of Eneas
                  Nowe he betrayed her, alas
                  And lefte her full vnkyndely
                  So whan ſhe ſawe al vtterly
                  That he wolde her of Trouth fayle
                  And wenden from her into Itayle
                  She gan to wrynge her handes two
                  Alas (quod ſhe) that me is wo
                  Alas, is euery man thus trewe
                  That euery yere wol haue a newe
                  If it ſo longe tyme endure
                  Or els that parauenture
                  And thus of one he woll haue fame
                  In magnifyeng of hys owne name
                  Another for frenſhyp ſayth he
                  And yet there ſhal the thyrde be
                  That is taken for delyte
                  Lo, or els for ſynguler profyte
                  In ſuch wordes gan complayne
                  Dydo of her great payne
                  As me mette dremyng redyly
                  None other authour allege wol I
                  Alas (quod ſhe) my ſwete herte
                  Haue pyte on my ſorowes ſmerte
                  And ſlee me not, go not away
                  O woful Dydo, welaway
                  (Quod ſhe) vnto her ſelfe tho
                  O Eneas what wol ye do
                  O that your loue ne your bonde
                  That ye ſwore with your ryght honde
                  Ne my cruel deth (quod ſhe)
                  Maye holde you ſtyl here wyth me
                  O haue ye of my deth no pite
                  Iwys myne owne dere herte ye
                  Knowe full wel that neuer yet
                  As farre as euer I had wyt
                  Agylte you, in thought ne in dede
                  O, haue ye men ſuch goodlyhede
                  In ſpeche, and neuer a dele of trouth
                  Alas that euer had routh
                  Any woman on a falſe man
                  Nowe I ſe wel, and tel can
                  we wretched women can no arte
                  For certayne, for the more parte
                  Thus we bene ſerued euerychone
                  Howe ſore that ye men can grone
                  Anone as we haue you receyued
                  Certaynly we bene diſceyued
                  For though your loue leſt a ſeaſon
                  wayte vpon the concluſyon
                  And eke howe ye determyne
                  And for the more parte defyne
                  O welawaye that I was borne
                  For through you my name is lorne
                  And myne actes redde and ſonge
                  Ouer al thys lande in euery tonge
                  O wycked fame, for there nys
                  Nothynge ſo ſwyfte lo as ſhe is
                  O ſoth is, euery thynge is wyſt
                  Though it be couerde with the myſt
                  Eke though I myght duren euer
                  That I haue done recouer I neuer
                  That it ne ſhall be ſayd, alas
                  I ſhamed was through Eneas
                  And that I ſhal thus iuged be
                  Lo ryght as ſhe hath done, nowe ſhe
                  wol done efteſones hardely
                  Thus ſaye the people priuely
                  But that is done nys not to done
                  But all her complaynt ne her mone
                  Certayne auayled her not a ſtre
                  And whan ſhe wyſt ſothly, he
                  was forth into his ſhyp agone
                  She into chambre went anone
                  And called on her ſuſter Anue
                  And gan her to complayne thanne
                  And ſayde, that ſhe cauſe was
                  That ſhe fyrſt loued him, alas
                  And fyrſt counſayled her therto
                  But what, whan thys was ſayd and do
                  She rofte her ſeluen to the herte
                  And dyed through the woundes ſmerte
                  But al the maner howe ſhe deyde
                  And al the wordes howe ſhe ſeyde
                  who ſo to knowe it hath purpoſe
                  
                     Rede Virgyle in Eneydos
                  Or the pyſtles of Ouyde
                  what that ſhe wrote, or that ſhe dyde
                  And nere it to longe to endyte
                  By god I wolde it here wryte
                  But welawaye, the harme and routh
                  That hath betydde for ſuch vntrouth
                  As men maye ofte in bokes rede
                  And aldaye ſene it yet in dede
                  That for to thynken it tene is
                  Lo Demophon, duke of Athenys
                  Howe he forſwore him falſely
                  And trayed Phyllis wyckedly
                  That kynges doughter was of Thrace
                  And falſely gan his terme pace
                  And whan ſhe wyſt that he was falſe
                  She honge her ſelfe ryght by the halfe
                  For he had done her ſuche vntrouth
                  Lo, was not thys a wo and routh
                  Eke loke howe falſe and recheles
                  was to Briſeyda Achilles
                  And Parys to Oenone
                  And Iaſon to Hipſyphile
                  And efte Iaſon to Medea
                  And Hercules to Dyanira
                  For he lefte her for Iolee
                  That made him take his deth parde
                  Howe falſe was eke Theſeus
                  That as the ſtorye telleth vs
                  Howe he betrayed Adriane
                  The dyuel be his ſoules bane
                  For had he laughed or yloured
                  He muſt haue bene al denoured
                  If Adriane ne had be
                  And for ſhe had of him pyte
                  She made hym fro the deth eſcape
                  And he made her a full falſe iape
                  For after thys wythin a whyle
                  He lefte her ſlepynge in an yle
                  Deſerte alone ryght in the ſee
                  And ſtale awaye and let her be
                  And toke her ſuſter Phedra tho
                  wyth him, and gan to ſhyp go
                  And yet he had ſworne to her
                  On al that euer he coulde ſwere
                  That ſo ſhe ſaued him his lyfe
                  He wolde taken her to his wyfe
                  For ſhe deſyred nothynge elles
                  In certayne, as the boke vs telles
                  But for to excuſe thys Eneas
                  Fullyche of al his greate treſpas
                  The boke ſayth ſauns fayle
                  The goddes bade him go to Itayle
                  And leauen Affriques regioun
                  And fayre Dydo and her towne
                  Tho ſawe I graue howe to Itayle
                  Dan Eneas gan for to fayle
                  And howe the tempeſt al began
                  And howe he loſt his ſtereſman
                  whiche that the ſterne, or he to kepe
                  Smote ouer the borde as he ſlepe
                  And alſo ſaugh I howe Sybyle
                  And Eneas beſyde an yle
                  To hel wente for to ſe
                  His father Anchiſes the fre
                  And howe he there founde Palymurus
                  And alſo Dido, and Deiphebus
                  And eueryche tourment eke in hel
                  Sawe he, whych longe is for to tel
                  whych paynes who ſo lyſte knowe
                  He muſt rede many a rowe
                  In Virgyle or in Claudian
                  Or Daunt, that it tellen can
                  Tho ſawe I eke al the aryuayle
                  That Eneas had made in Itayle
                  And wyth kinge Latyn his trete
                  And all the batayls that he
                  was at hym ſelfe, and his knyghtes
                  Or he had al ywon hys ryghtes
                  And howe he Turnus reſte hys lyfe
                  And wan Lauyna to hys wyfe
                  And al the merueylous ſygnals
                  Of the goddes celeſtials
                  Howe maugre Iuno, Eneas
                  For al her ſleyght and her compas
                  Atcheued all hys auenture
                  For Iupiter toke on him cure
                  At the prayer of Venus
                  whiche I praye alwaye ſaue vs
                  And vs aye, of our ſorowes lyght
                  whan I had ſene al thys ſyght
                  In thys noble temple thus
                  Hey lorde thought I, that madeſt vs
                  Yet ſawe I neuer ſuche nobleſſe
                  Of ymages, nor ſuche rycheſſe
                  As I ſe grauen in this church
                  But naught wote I who did hem worche
                  Ne where I am, ne in what countre
                  But nowe wyll I out gone and ſe
                  Ryght at the wyket yf I can
                  Sene ought where ſteryng any man
                  That maye me tellen where I am
                  whan I out of the dore cam
                  I faſt about me behelde
                  
                     Than ſawe I but a large felde
                  As farre as euer I myght ſe
                  wythout towne, houſe, or tre
                  Or buſhe, or graſſe, or eared lande
                  For all the felde was but a ſande
                  As ſmall as men may ſe at eye
                  In the deſerte of Lyby
                  Ne no maner creature
                  That is yformed by nature
                  Ne ſawe I, me to rede or wyſſe
                  O Chriſt thought I, that art in blyſſe
                  From fanton and illuſyoun
                  Me ſaue, and with deuocioun
                  Myne eyen to the heauen I caſt
                  Tho was I ware, lo at the laſt
                  That falt by the ſunne on hye
                  As kenne myght I wyth myne eye
                  Me thought I ſawe an Egle ſore
                  But that it ſemed muche more
                  Than I had any Egle yſeyne
                  Thys is as ſoth as deth certeyne
                  It was of golde and ſhone ſo bryght
                  That neuer ſawe men ſuche a ſyght
                  But yf the heuen had ywonne
                  Aſ newe of god another ſunne
                  So ſhone the Egles fethers bryght
                  And ſomwhat downwarde gan it lyght
               
               ¶Explicit liber primus.
            
            
               
                  NOwe herken euerye maner man
               That Englyſhe vnderſtand can
               And lyſteth of my dreame to here
               For now at erſt ſhal ye lere
               So ſely and ſo dredefull a viſyon
               That I ſaye neyther Scipion
               Ne kynge Nabugodonoſore
               Pharao, Turnus, ne Alcanore
               Ne metten ſuch a dreame as thys
               Nowe fayre blyſfull, O Cipris
               So be my fauour at this tyme
               That ye me tendyte, and ryme
               Helpeth, that in Pernaſo dwell
               Beſyde Elycon the clere well
               O thought, that wrote all that I met
               And in the treaſorye it ſet
               Of my brayne, nowe ſhall men ſe
               If any vertue in the be
               To tell all my dreme a ryght
               Nowe kyth thy engyn and thy myght
               Thys Egle of which I haue you tolde
               That with fethers ſhone al of golde
               whiche that ſo hye gan to ſore
               I gan beholde more and more
               To ſene her beaute and the wonder
               But neuer was that dynte of thonder
               Ne that thynge that men call foudre
               That ſmyte ſomtyme a towre to poudre
               And in hys ſwyfte commyng brende
               That ſo ſwyfte gan downwarde diſcende
               As thys foule whan it behelde
               That I a rowme was in the felde
               And wyth his grym pawes ſtronge
               wythin his ſharpe nayles longe
               Me flyeng at a ſwappe he hente
               And wyth his ſours agayne vp wente
               Me caryeng in his clawes ſtarke
               As lyghtly as I had bene a larke
               Howe hye I can not tellen yowe
               For I came vp, I nyſt neuer howe
               For ſo aſtonyed and aſweued
               was euery vertue in me heued
               what wyth his ſours and my dreed
               That all my felynge gan to deed
               For why, it was a great affray
               Thus I longe in his clawes lay
               Tyl at laſt he to me ſpake
               In mannes voyce, and ſayd awake
               And be not agaſt ſo for ſhame
               And callen me tho by my name
               And for I ſhulde better abrayde
               Me to awake, thus he ſayde
               Right in the ſame voice and ſteuyn
               That vſeth one that I can neuyn
               And with that voice ſoth to ſayne
               My mynde came to me agayne
               For it was goodly ſayd to me
               So nas it neuer wonte to be
               And here withall I gan to ſtere
               As he me in his fete bere
               Tyl that he felt that I had heate
               And felte eke tho myne herte beate
               And tho gan he me to diſporte
               And wyth gentyll wordes me comforte
               And ſayd twyſe, ſaynt Mary
               Thou arte a noyous thynge to cary
               And nothynge nedeth it perde
               For alſo wyſe god helpe me
               As thou no harme ſhalte haue of this
               And thys caſe that betydde the is
               As for thy lore and for thy prowe
               
                  Lette se, 
                     •
                  arſt thou loke yet nowe
               Be ful enſured boldely
               I am thy frende, and therwith I
               Gan for to wonder in my mynde
               O god (quod I) that madeſt al kynde
               Shal I none otherwyſe dye
               Whether Ioue wyll me ſtellyfye
               Or what thynge may this ſignifye
               I am neyther Enocke ne Helye
               Ne Romulus, ne Ganemede
               That were bore vp as men rede
               To heuen with dan Iupiter
               And made the goddes boteler
               Lo, this was tho my fantaſye
               But he that bare gan eſpy
               That I ſo thought, and ſayde this
               Thou demeſt of thy ſelfe amys
               For Ioue is not there aboute
               I dare the put ful out of doute
               To make of the yet a ſterre
               But er I bere the moche ferre
               I wyl the tel what I am
               And whyther thou ſhalte, and why I cam
               To do this, ſo that thou take
               Good herte, and not for fere quake
               Gladly (quod I) nowe wel (quod he)
               Firſt, I that in my fete haue the
               Of whom thou haſt feare and wonder
               I am dwellyng wyth the god of thonder
               whych men callen Iupiter
               That doth me ſtyen ful ofte fer
               To do al thys commaundement
               And for thys cauſe he hathe me ſent
               To the: Herke nowe by thy trouth
               Certayne he hath of the routh
               That thou haſt ſo truely
               Longe ſerued ententyfely
               Hys blynde neuewe Cupido
               And fayre Venus alſo
               wythout guerdon euer yet
               And netheles haſt ſet thy wyt
               Although in thy heed full lytle is
               To make bokes, ſonges, and ditees
               In ryme, or els in cadence
               As thou beſt canſt in reuerence
               Of loue, and of hys ſeruauntes eke
               That haue his ſeruyce ſought, and ſeke
               And payneſt the to prayſe his arte
               Although thou haddeſt neuer parte
               wherfore alſo god me bleſſe
               Iouis halte it great humbleſſe
               And vertue eke, that thou wylt make
               A nyght full ofte thyne heed to ake
               In thy ſtudye ſo thou wryteſt
               And euermore of loue endyteſt
               In honour of him and prayſynges
               And in hys folkes furtherynges
               And in her matter al deuyſeſt
               And not hym ne his folke diſpiſeſt
               Although thou mayſt go in the daunce
               Of hem, that hym lyſt not auaunce
               wherfore as I ſayd ywys
               Iupiter conſydereth wel thys
               And alſo beauſyre, of other thynges
               That is, thou haſt no tydynges
               Of loues folke yf they be glade
               Ne of nothynge els that god made
               And not onely fro farre countre
               That no tydynges comen to the
               Not of thy very neyghbours
               That dwellen almooſt at thy dores
               Thou hereſt neyther that ne thys
               For whan thy labour al done is
               And haſt made all thy rekenynges
               In ſtede of reſt and of newe thynges
               Thou goeſt home to thyne houſe anone
               And alſo dombe as a ſtone
               Thou ſytteſt at another boke
               Tyl fully daſed is thy loke
               And lyuyſt thus as an Hermyte
               Although thyne abſtinence is lyte
               And therfore Iouis, through hys grace
               wyl that I bere the to a place
               whiche that hyght the houſe of Fame
               And to do the ſporte and game
               In ſome recompenſatioun
               Of thy labour and deuotioun
               That thou haſt had, lo cauſeles
               To god Cupido the recheles
               And thus thys god through hys meryte
               wyl wyth ſome maner thynge the quyte
               So that thou wylte be of good chere
               For truſt well that thou ſhalt here
               whan we be comen there as I ſaye
               Mo wonder thynges dare I laye
               And of loues folke mo tydynges
               Both ſothſawes and leaſynges
               And mo loues newe begon
               And longe ſerued tyl loue is won
               And mo louers caſuelly
               That bene betydde, no man wote why
               But as a blynde man ſtarteth an Hare
               And more iolyte and welfare
               whyle they fynde loue of ſtele
               
                  As thynke men, and ouer all wele
               Mo diſcordes and mo ialouſyes
               Mo murmures, and mo nouelryes
               And alſo mo diſſimulacions
               And eke feyned reperations
               And mo berdes in two houres
               wythout raſour or ſyſoures
               Ymade, than graynes be of ſandes
               And eke mo holdyng in mo handes
               And alſo mo renouelaunces
               Of olde forleten acqueyntaunces
               Mo louedayes, and mo accordes
               Than on inſtumentes bene cordes
               And eke of loue mo exchaunges
               Than euer corne were in graunges
               Vnneth mayſt thou trowen thys
               (Quod he) no ſo me helpe god as wys
               (Quod I) No why (quod he) for it
               were impoſſible to my wyt
               Though fame had all the pyes
               In al a realme and al eſpyes
               Howe that yet he ſhulde here al thys
               Or they eſpyen, O yes yes
               (Quod he) to me, that can I preue
               By reaſon, worthy for to leue
               So that thou gyue thyne aduertence
               To vnderſtande my ſentence
               Fyrſt ſhal thou here where ſhe dwelleth
               Ryght ſo as thyne owne boke telleth
               Her palays ſtandeth as I ſhall ſay
               Ryght euen amyddes of the way
               Bytwene heuen, erth, and ſee
               That what ſo euer in all theſe thre
               Is ſpoken in pryue or apperte
               The way therto is ſo ouerte
               And ſtante eke in ſo iuſte a place
               That euery ſowne mote to it pace
               Or what ſo cometh from any tonge
               Be it rowned, redde, or ſonge
               Or ſpoken in ſurete or drede
               Certayne it mote thyther nede
               Nowe herken wel, for why I wyl
               Tellen the a proper ſkyl
               And a worthy demonſtration
               In myne ymaginacyon
               Geffray, thou wotteſt wel thys
               That euery kyndly thynge that is
               Hath a kyndly ſtede there he
               Maye beſt in it conſerued be
               Vnto whiche place euery thynge
               Through his kyndly enclynynge
               Meueth for to come to
               whan that it is awaye therfro
               As thus. Lo howe thou mayſt al day ſe
               Take any thynge that heuy be
               As ſtone or leed, or thyng of weyght
               And bere it neuer ſo hye on heyght
               Let go thyne hande, it falleth downe
               Ryght ſo ſay I by fyre or ſowne
               Or ſmoke, or other thynges lyght
               Alwaye they ſeke vpwarde on heyght
               Lyght thyngs vp, & downwarde charge
               whyle eueryche of hem be at large
               And for thys cauſe, thou mayſt well ſe
               That euery ryuer vnto the ſee
               Enclyned is to go by kynde
               And by theſe ſkylles as I fynde
               Haue fyſhes dwellyng in flode and ſee
               And trees eke on the erth be
               Thus euery thynge by hys reaſon
               Hath his owne proper manſion
               To whiche he ſeketh to repeyre
               There as it ſhulde not appeyre
               Lo, thys ſentence is knowen couth
               Of euery philoſophers mouth
               As Ariſtotle, and dan Platone
               And other clerkes many one
               And to confirme my reaſoun
               Thou woſt wel that ſpeche is ſowne
               Or els no man might it here
               Nowe herke what I wyl the lere
               Sowne is not but eyre ybroken
               And euery ſpeche that is ſpoken
               Loude or pryue, foule or fayre
               In hys ſubſtaunce is but eyre
               For as flame is but lyghted ſmoke
               Ryght ſo is ſowne eyre ybroke
               But thys maye be in many wyſe
               Of whych I wyl the deuyſe
               As ſowne cometh of pype or harpe
               For whan a pype is blowen ſharpe
               The eyre is twyſt wyth violence
               And rent: Lo, thys is my ſentence
               Eke, whan men harpe ſtrynges ſmyte
               whether it be muche or lyte
               Lo, wyth the ſtroke the eyre to breketh
               And ryght ſo breketh it whan men ſpeketh
               Thus woſt thou well what thing is ſpeche
               Nowe henſforth, I wyl the teche
               Howe euery ſpeche, voyce or ſowne
               Throughe his multiplycacyowne
               Thoughe it were pyped of a mouſe
               Mote nedes come to Fames houſe
               I proue it thus, take hede nowe
               
                  By experience, for yf that thou
               Threwe in a water nowe a ſtone
               well woſt thou it wyl make anone
               A lytle roundle as a cercle
               Parauenture, as brode as a couercle
               And ryght anone thou ſhalte ſe well
               That whele cercle wyl cauſe another whele
               And that the thyrde, and ſo forthe brother
               Euery cercle cauſynge other
               Broder than hym ſelfe was
               And thus fro roundel to compas
               Eche aboute other goynge
               Cauſeth of others ſterynge
               And multeplyeng euermo
               Tyl it be ſo farre go
               That it at bothe brynkes be
               Al thoughe thou may it not ſe
               Aboue, yet gothe it alway vnder
               Though thou thynke it a greate wonder
               And who ſo ſaythe of trouthe I vary
               Bydde hym proue the contrary
               And right thus euery worde ywys
               That loud or pryue yſpoken is
               Moueth firſt an eyre aboute
               And of his mouynge out of doute
               Another eyre anone is moued
               As I haue of the water proued
               That euery cercle cauſeth other
               Right ſo of eyre my leue brother
               Eueryche eyre in other ſtereth
               More and more, and ſpeche vp bereth
               Or voyce or noyſe, worde or ſowne
               Aye through multiplicatiowne
               Tyl it be at the houſe of fame
               Take it on erneſt or in game
               nowe haue I tolde, yf thou haue mynde
               Howe ſpeche or ſowne, of pure kynde
               Enclyned was vpwarde to meue
               Thys mayſt thou fele well by preue
               And that ſome ſtede ywys
               That euery thynge enclyned to is
               Hath hys kyndlyche ſtede
               That ſeweth it wythout drede
               That kyndly the mancyoun
               Of euery ſpeche of euery ſoun
               Be it eyther foule or fayre
               Hath hys kynde place in eyre
               And ſyth that euery thynge ywys
               Out of hys kynde place ywys
               Moueth thyder for to go
               If it awaye be therfro
               As I haue before proued the
               It ſeweth euery ſoune perde
               Moueth kyndly to pace
               As vp into his kynde place
               And thys place of which I tell
               There as fame lyſt to dwell
               Is ſette a myddes of theſe thre
               Heuen, erth, and eke the ſee
               As mooſt conſeruatyfe the ſoun
               Than is thys the concluſyoun (:)(:)
               That euery ſpeche of euery man
               As I the tell fyrſt began
               Meueth vp on heyght to pace
               Kyndly to Fames place
               Tel me this nowe faythfully
               Haue I not proued thus ſymply
               wythout any ſubtylte (:)(:)
               Of ſpeche, or great prolixite
               Of termes of Philoſophie
               Of fygures of Poetrie
               Or colours of rethoryke
               Perde it ought the to lyke
               For harde langage, and harde matere
               Is encombrous for to here
               At ones, woſt thou not well thys
               And I anſwered and ſayd yes
               Ha ha (quod he) lo ſo I can
               Leudly vnto a leude man
               Speke and ſhewe hym ſuche ſkyylles
               That he maye ſhake hem by the bylles
               So palpable they ſhulden be
               But tell me thys nowe praye I the
               Howe thynketh the my concluſyon?
               A good perſuaſyon
               (Quod I) it is and lyke to be
               Ryght ſo as thou haſt proued me
               By god (quod he) and as I leue
               Thou ſhalte haue yet or it be eue
               Of euery worde of thys ſentence
               A profe, by experience
               And wyth thyne eares heren well
               Toppe and tayle, and euery dell
               That euery worde that ſpoken is
               Cometh into Fames houſe ywys
               As I haue ſayde what wylte thou more
               And wyth thys worde vpper to ſore
               He began, and ſayde by ſaynt Iame
               Nowe wyll we ſpeke all of game
               Howe fareſt thou nowe (quod he) to me?
               well (quod I) nowe ſe (quod he)
               By thy trouth yonde adowne
               where that thou knoweſt any towne
               Or houſe, or any other thynge
               
                  And whan thou haſt of aught knowynge
               Loke that thou warne me
               And I anone ſhall tel the
               Howe farre that thou arte nowe therfro
               And I adowne gan to loken tho
               And behelde feldes and playns
               Nowe hylles, and nowe mountayns
               Nowe valeys, and nowe foreſtes
               And nowe vnneth great beeſtes
               Nowe ryuers, nowe Citees
               Nowe townes, nowe great trees
               Nowe ſhippes ſaylyng in the ſee
               But thus ſoone in a whyle he
               was flowen fro the grounde ſo hye
               That al the worlde as to myne eye
               No more ſemed than a pricke
               Or els was the eyre ſo thycke
               That I might it not deſerne
               with that he ſpake to me ſo yerne
               And ſayde: Seeſt thou any token
               Or aught, that in this worlde is of ſpoken
               I ſayde nay, no wonder is
               (Quod he) For neuer halfe ſo hye as this
               Nas Alexander of Macedon
               kyng▪ Ne of Rome dan Scipion
               That ſawe in dreme at poynt deuyſe
               Heuen and erth, hel and paradyſe
               Ne eke the wretche Dedalus
               Ne his chylde nyce Icharus
               That flewe ſo hye, that the hete
               His wynges molte, and he fel wete
               In mydde the ſee, and there he dreynte
               For whom was made a great complaynte
               Nowe tourne vpwarde (quod he) thy face
               And beholde this large ſpace
               This eyre, but loke that thou ne be
               Adrad of hem that thou ſhalt ſe
               For in this region certeyne
               Dwelleth many a cytezeyne
               Of whiche ſpeketh dan Plato
               Theſe ben the eyryſſhe beeſtes lo
               And tho ſawe I al the menye
               Bothe gone and alſo flye
               Lo (quod he) caſte vp thyne eye
               Seyonder lo, the Galaxye
               The whiche men clepe the mylky way
               For it is whyte: And ſome perfay
               Callen it watlynge ſtrete
               That ones was brente with the hete
               whan the ſonnes ſonne the reade
               That hyte Pheton wolde leade
               A gate his fathers carte, and gye
               The carte horſe gan well eſpye
               That he coude no gouernaunce
               And gan for to lepe and praunce
               And beare hym vp and now downe
               Tyll he ſawe the Scorpiowne
               which that in heuen a ſygne is yet
               And he for feare loſt his wyt
               Of that, and let the reynes gone
               Of his horſe, and they anone
               Sone vp to mount, and downe diſcende
               Tyll both eyre and erth brende
               Tyll Iupiter lo, at the laſt
               Hym ſlewe, and fro the carte caſt
               Lo, is it not a great myſchaunce
               To let a foole haue gouernaunce
               Of thynges that he can not demayne
               And with this worde ſoth for to ſayne
               He gan alway vpper to ſore
               And gladed me than more and more
               So faythfully to me ſpake he
               Tho gan I to loke vnder me
               And behelde the eyryſh beeſtes
               Cloudes, myſtes, and tempeſtes
               Snowes, hayles, raynes and wyndes
               And than gendryng in her kyndes
               All the waye through which I came
               O God (quod I) that made Adam
               Moche is thy myght and nobles
               And tho thought I vpon Boece
               That wryteth, a thought may flye ſo hye
               with fethers of philoſophye
               To paſſen eueryche element
               And whan he hath ſo farre ywent
               Than may be ſene behynde his bake
               Cloude and erth, and all that of I ſpake
               Tho gan I wexe in a were
               And ſayde, I wot wel I am here
               But whether in body or in ghoſt
               I not ywys, but god thou wooſt
               For more clere entendement
               Nas me neuer yet yſent
               And than thought I on Marcyan
               And eke of Anteclaudian
               That ſoth was her deſcription
               Of all the heauens regyon
               As farre as that I ſawe the preue
               And therfore I can hem leue
               with that the Egle gan to crye
               Let be (quod he) thy fantaſye
               wylt thou lere of ſterres ought
               Nay certaynly (quod I) ryght nought
               And why (quod he) for I am olde
               
                  Or els wolde I the haue tolde
               (Quod he) the ſtarres names lo
               And all the heuens ſygnes to
               And which they be: No force (ꝙ I)
               Yes parde (quod he) woſt thou why
               For whan thou redeſt poetrye
               How the goddes can ſtellyfy
               Byrde, fyſh, or hym, or her
               As the Rauyn and other
               Or Ariones harpe fyne
               Caſtor, Polexe, or Delphyne
               Or Athalantes doughters ſeuen
               How all theſe are ſet in heuen
               For though thou haue hem oft in hande
               Yet noſt thou nat where they ſtande
               No force (quod I) it is no nede
               As well I leue ſo god me ſpede
               Hem that wryten of this matere
               As though I knewe her places here
               And eke thy ſeluen here ſo bryght
               It ſhoulde ſhenden all my ſyght
               To loke on hem that maye wel be
               (Quod he) and ſo forthe bare he me
               A whyle, and tho began to crye
               That neuer herde I thynge ſo hye
               Holde vp thyne heed, for all is well
               Saynct Iulyan lo, bonne hoſtel
               Se here the houſe of Fame, lo
               Mayeſt thou not here that I do
               what (quod I) the great ſowne
               (Quod he) that rombleth vp and downe
               In Fames houſe full of tydynges
               Both of fayre ſpeche and chydynges
               And of falſe and ſoth compowned
               Herken well it is not rowned
               Heareſt thou not the great ſwough
               Yes perde (quod I) well ynough
               And what ſowne is it lyke (quod he)
               Peter, lyke the beatyng of the ſee
               (Quod I) agaynſt the roches holowe
               whan tempeſtes done her ſhyppes ſwalow
               And that a man ſtande out of dout
               A myle thence, and here it route
               Or els lyke the humblyng
               After the clappe of a thundrynge
               whan Iouis hath the eyre ybete
               But it doth me for feare ſwete
               Nay, drede the not therof (quod he)
               It is nothyng that wyll byten the
               Thou ſhalt haue no harme truly
               And with that worde both he and I
               As nygh the place aryued were
               As men myght caſt with a ſpere
               I nyſt how, but in a ſtrete
               He ſet me fayre on my fete
               And ſayde: walke forth a pace
               And tell thyne aduenture and caſe
               That thou ſhalt fynde in fames place
               Now (quod I) whyle we haue ſpace
               To ſpeke, or that I go fro the
               For the loue of god tell me
               In ſoth, that I wyll of the lere
               Yf this noyſe that I here
               Be as I haue herde the tell
               Of folke that downe in erth dwell
               And cōmeth here in the ſame wyſe
               As I the herde or this deuyſe
               And that here lyues body nys
               In all that houſe that yonder is
               That maketh all this loude fare
               No (quod he) by ſaynct Clare
               And alſo wyſſe god rede me
               But o thynge I wyl warne the
               Of the which thou wylt haue wonder
               Lo, to the houſe of Fame yonder
               Thou woſt how cōmeth euery ſpeche
               It nedeth not the efte to teche
               But vnderſtande now ryght well this
               whan any ſpeche ycomen is
               Vp to the palays anon ryght
               It wexeth lyke the ſame wyght
               which that the worde in erth ſpake
               Be he clothed in red or blake
               And hath ſo very his lykeneſſe
               And ſpake the worde that thou wylt geſſe
               That it the ſame body be
               Man or womon, he or ſhe
               And is not this a wonder thynge
               Yes (quod I tho) by heuen kynge
               And with this worde, farewel (ꝙ he)
               And here wyll I abyde the
               And god of heuen ſende the grace
               Some good to lerne in this place
               And I of hym toke leaue anone
               And gan forth to the palayes gone.
               ¶Explicit liber ſecundus.
            
            
               
               
                  GOd of ſcyence and of lyght
               Apollo, throughe thy great myght
               Thys lytle laſt booke now thou gye
               Not that I wyll for mayſtrye
               Here art potentiall be ſhewde
               But for the ryme is lyght and lewde
               Yet make it ſomwhat agreable
               Though ſome verſe fayle in a ſyllable
               And that I do no diligence
               To ſhewe craft, but ſentence
               And yf deuyne vertue thou
               wylt helpe me to ſhewe nowe
               That in my heed ymarked is
               Lo, that is for to meanen this
               The houſe of Fame for to diſcryue
               Thou ſhalt ſe me go as blyue
               Vnto the next laurer I ſe
               And kyſſe it, for it is thy tree (?)
               Now entre in my breſt anone
               whan I was from the Egle gone
               I gan beholde vpon this place
               And certayne or I forther pace
               I woll you all the ſhappe deuyſe
               Of houſe and cytie, and all the wyſe
               How I gan to this place approche
               That ſtode vpon ſo hye a roche
               Hyer ſtandeth none in Spayne
               But vp I clambe with moche payne
               And though to clymbe greued me
               Yet I ententyfe was to ſe
               And for to pooren wondre lowe
               Yf I coude anywyſe yknowe
               what maner ſtone this roche was
               For it was lyke a lymed glas
               But that it ſhone full more clere
               But of what congeled matere
               It was, I nyſt redely (?)
               But at the laſt eſpyed I
               And fonde that it was euery dele
               A roche of yſe, and not of ſtele
               Thought I by ſaynt Thomas of kent
               This were a feble foundement
               To buylden on a place hye
               He ought hym lytle to glorifye
               That heron buylte, god ſo me ſaue
               Tho ſawe I all the hall ygraue
               with famous folkes names fele
               That had bene in moche wele
               And her fames wyde yblowe
               But well vnneth myght I knowe
               Any letters for to rede
               Her names by, for out of drede
               They weren almooſt of thawed ſo
               That of the letters one or two
               were molte away of euery name
               So vnfamous was wexe her fame.
               But men ſay, what maye euer laſt
               Tho gan I in myne hert caſt
               That they were molte away for hete
               And not away with ſtormes bete
               For on that other ſyde I ſey
               Of this hyll, that northwarde ley
               How it was wrytten ful of names
               Of folke that had afore great fames
               Of olde tyme, and yet they were
               As freſh as men had wrytten hem there
               The ſelfe day, or that houre
               That I on hem gan to poure
               But well I wyſt what it made
               It was conſerued with the ſhade
               All the wrytyng that I ſye
               Of a Caſtell that ſo ſtode on hye
               And ſtode eke in ſo colde a place
               That heate myght it not deface
               Tho gan I on this hyll to gone
               And founde on the coppe a wone
               That all the men that ben on lyue
               Ne han the connyng to diſcryue
               The beautie of that ylke place
               Ne coude caſt no compace
               Suche an other for to make
               That myght of beautie be his make
               Ne ſo wondrely ywrought
               That it aſtonyeth yet my thought
               And maketh all my wyt to ſwynke
               On this caſtell for to thynke
               So that the great beautie
               The caſt, craft, and curioſitie
               Ne can I not to you deuyſe
               My wyt, ne may me not ſuffyſe
               But natheleſſe all the ſubſtaunce
               I haue yet in my remembraunce
               For why, me thought by ſaynct Gyle
               Al was of ſtone of Beryle
               Both the caſtell and the toure
               And eke the hall, and euery boure
               without peces or ioynynges
               But many ſubtell compaſſynges
               As babeuries and pynnacles
               
                  Ymageries and tabernacles
               I ſawe, and full eke of wyndowes
               As flakes fallen in great ſnowes
               And eke in eche of the pynacles
               weren ſondrye habytacles
               In which ſtoden all withouten
               Full the caſtell all abouten
               Of all maner of mynſtrales
               And ieſtours that tellen tales
               Both of wepyng and of game
               And of all that longeth vnto fame
               There herde I play on an harpe
               That ſowned both well and ſharpe
               Hym Orpheus full craftely
               And on this ſyde faſt by
               Satte the harper Orion
               And Gacides Chirion
               And other harpers many one
               And the Briton Glaſkyrione
               And ſmal harpers with her glees
               Sat vnder them in dyuers ſees
               And gon on hem vpwarde to gape
               And countrefayted hem as an ape
               Or as a crafte countrefayte kynde
               Tho ſawe I ſtanden hem behynde
               Afarre from hem, all by hem ſelue
               Many a thouſande tymes twelue
               That made loude mynſtralſyes
               In cormuſe and ſhalmyes
               And many an other pype
               That craftely began to pype
               Both in dou
                     •
                  ed and in rede
               That bene at feeſtes with the brede
               And many a floyte and lytlynge horne
               And pypes made of grene corne
               As haue theſe lytle herde gromes
               That kepen beeſtes in the bromes
               Ther ſawe I than dan Cytherus
               And of Athenes dan Proſerus
               And Mercia that loſt her ſkynne
               Both in face, body, and chynne
               For that ſhe wolde enuyen ſo
               To pypen bette than Apollo
               There ſawe I eke famous olde and yonge
               Pypers of all the dutche tonge
               To lerne loue daunces, ſprynges
               Keyes, and the ſtraunge thynges
               Tho ſawe I in an other place
               Standyng in a large ſpace
               Of hem that maken blody ſoun
               In trumpe, beme, and claryoun
               For in fyght and blood ſheddynges
               Is vſed gladly clarionynges
               There herde I trumpe Meſſenus
               Of whom that ſpeketh Virgilius
               There herde I Ioab trumpe alſo
               Theodomas and other mo
               And all that vſed clarion
               In Caſteloygne, and Aragon
               That in her tymes famous were
               To lernen ſawe I trumpen there
               There ſawe I ſyt in other ſees
               Playing vpon other ſondry glees
               which that I can not neuen
               Mo than ſtarres ben in heuen
               Of which I nyl as now not ryme
               For eaſe of you, and loſſe of tyme
               For tyme yloſt, this knowe ye
               By no way maye recouered be
               There ſawe I playing iuggelours
               Magyciens and tragitours
               And Phetonyſſes charmereſſes
               Olde wytches, ſorcereſſes
               That vſen exorſiſacions
               And eke ſubfumigacions
               And clerkes eke which conne well
               All this magyke naturell
               That craftely do her ententes
               To maken in certayne aſcendentes
               Ymages lo, through which magyke
               To maken a man ben hole or ſeke
               There ſawe I the quene Medea
               And Cyrces eke, and Caliophia
               There ſawe I Hermes Ballenus
               Lymote, and eke Symon Magus
               There ſawe I, and knewe by name
               That by ſuche arte done, men haue fame
               There ſawe I Coll tragetour
               Vpon a table of Sycamour
               Playe an vncouth thyng to tell
               I ſawe hym cary a wynde mell
               Vnder a walnote ſhale
               what ſhulde I make lenger tale
               Of al the people that I ſey
               I coude not tell tyll domiſdey
               whan I had all this folke beholde
               And founde me loſe and not holde
               And I amuſed a longe whyle
               Vpon this wall of Beryle.
               That ſhone lyghter than a glas
               And made well more than it was
               As kynde thyng of fame is
               And than anon after this
               I gan forth comen tyll I fonde
               
                  The caſtell yate on my ryght honde
               which ſo wel coruen was
               That neuer ſuche another nas
               And yet it was by auenture
               Ywrought by great and ſubtyll cure
               It nedeth not you more to tellen
               To make you to longe dwellen
               Of theſe yates floryſhynges
               Ne of compaces, ne of karuynges
               Ne how the hackyng in maſonryes
               As corbettes and ymageryes
               But Lorde ſo fayre it was to ſhewe
               For it was all with golde behewe
               But in I went, and that anone
               There met I crying many one
               A larges a larges, holde vp well
               God ſaue the lady of this pell
               Our owne gentle lady Fame
               And hem that wyllen to haue a name
               Of vs, thus herde I cryen all
               And faſt comen out of the hall
               And ſhoke nobles and ſtarlynges
               And crowned were as kynges
               with crownes wrought full of loſynges
               And many rybans, and many frynges
               were on her clothes truly
               Tho at the laſt eſpyed I
               That purſeuauntes and heraudes
               That cryen ryche folkes laudes
               It weren, all and euery man
               Of hem, as I you tell can
               Had on hym throwe a veſture
               which men clepe a cote armure
               Embroudred wonderly ryche
               As though they were not ylyche
               But nought wyl I, ſo mote I thryue
               Be about to diſcryue
               All theſe armes that there weren
               That they thus on her cotes weren
               For it to me were impoſſyble
               Men myght make of hem a byble
               Twenty fote thycke as I trowe
               For certayne whoſo coulde knowe
               Myght there all the armes ſene
               Of famous folke that had been
               In Affrike, Europe, and Aſye
               Syth fyrſt began cheualrye
               Lo, how ſhulde I now tell all this
               Ne of the hall eke what nede is
               To tellen you that euery wall
               Of
                     •
                  e, and rofe, and flore withall
               was plated halfe a fote thycke
               Of golde, and that nas not wycke
               But for to proue in all wyſe
               As fyne as ducket in Venyſe
               Of which to lyte all in my pouche is
               And they were ſet as thycke of ouches
               Fyne, of the fyneſt ſtones fayre
               That men reden in the lapidayre
               Or as graſſes growen in a mede
               But it were all to longe to rede
               The names, and therfore I pace
               But in this luſtye and ryche place
               That Fames hall called was
               Full moche prees of folke there nas
               Ne croudyng, for to moche prees
               But all on hye aboue a dees
               Satte in a ſee imperial
               That made was of a Ruby royall
               which that a carbuncle is ycalled
               I ſawe perpetually yſtalled
               A femynine creature
               That neuer formed by nature
               was ſuche an other thyng I ſay
               For altherfyrſt, ſoth to ſay
               Me thought that ſhe was ſo lyte
               That the length of a cubyte
               was lenger than ſhe ſemed be
               But thus ſoone a in whyle ſhe
               Her ſelfe tho wondderly ſtreyght
               That with her fete ſhe therth reyght
               And with her heed ſhe touched heuen
               There as ſhyneth the ſterres ſeuen
               And therto yet, as to my wyt
               I ſawe a great wonder yet
               Vpon her eyen to beholde
               But certaynly I hem neuer tolde
               For as fele eyen had ſhe
               As fethers vpon foules be
               Or weren on the beeſtes foure
               That gods trone can honour
               As wryteth Iohn in the Apocalyps
               Her heere that was owndy and cryps
               As burned golde it ſhone to ſe
               And ſoth to tellen alſo ſhe
               Had alſo fele vp ſtandyng eares
               And tonges, as on beeſt ben heeres
               And on her ſete woxen ſawe I
               Partriche wynges redely
               But lorde the perry and the rycheſſe
               I ſawe ſyttynge on the goddeſſe
               And the heuenly melody
               Of ſonges full of armony
               I herde about her trone yſonge
               
                  That all the pallayes wall tonge
               So ſonge the myghty Muſe ſhe
               That cleped is Caliope
               And her ſeuen ſyſterne eke
               That in her faces ſemen meke
               And euermore eternally
               The ſonge of Fame tho herde I
               Heryed be thou and thy name
               Goddes of renoun and of fame
               Tho was I ware at the laſt
               As I myne eyen gan vp caſt
               That this ylke noble quene
               On her ſhulders gan ſuſtene
               Both the armes and the name
               Of tho that had large fame
               Alyſandre and Hercules
               That with a ſherte his lyfe dyd leſe
               And this founde I ſyttyng this goddeſſe
               In noble honour and rycheſſe
               Of which I ſtynt a whyle nowe
               Other thyng to tellen you
               Tho ſawe I ſtande on thother ſyde
               Streyght downe to the dores wyde
               From the dees many a pyllere
               Of metall, that ſhone not full clere
               But though they were of no rycheſſe
               Yet were they made for great nobleſſe
               And in hem great ſentence
               And 
                     •
                  olke of hye and digne reuerence
               Of which to tell wyll I ſonde
               Vpon a pyller ſawe I ſtonde
               Alderfyrſt there I ſye
               Vpon a pyller ſtonde on hye
               That was of lede and of yron fyne
               Hym of the ſecte ſaturnyne
               The Ebrayke Ioſephus the olde
               That of Iewes geſtes tolde
               And he bare on his ſhulders hye
               The fame vp of the Iurye
               And by hym ſtoden other ſeuen
               wyſe and worthy for to neuen
               To helpen hym bere vp the charge
               It was ſo heuy and ſo large
               And for they wryten of batayles
               As well as of other maruayles
               Therfore was lo this pyllere
               Of which I you tell here
               Of leed and yron both ywys
               For yron Marces metall is
               which that god of battayle
               And the leed withouten fayle
               Is lo, the metall of Saturne
               That hath full large whele to turne
               To ſtande forth on eyther rowe
               Of hem, which I coude knowe
               Though I by ordre hem not tell
               To make you to longe to dwell
               Theſ
                     •
                   of which I gan rede
               There ſawe I ſtande out of drede
               Vpon an yron pyller ſtronge
               That paynted was al endlonge
               with Tygres bloud in euery place
               The Tholaſon that hyght Stace
               That bare of Thebes vp the name
               Vpon his ſhulders, and the fame
               Alſo of Cruell Achylles
               And by hym ſtode withouten lees
               Full wonder hygh vpon a pyller
               Of yron, he the great Omer
               And with hym Dares and Titus
               Before, and eke he Lollius
               And Guydo eke de Colempnis
               And englyſh Galfride eke ywys
               And eche of theſe as I haue ioy
               was buſy to beare vp Troy
               So heuy therof was the fame
               That for to beare it was no game
               But yet I gan full well eſpye
               Betwene hem was a lytle enuy
               One ſayde, that Omer made lyes
               Feynyng in his poetryes
               And was to the grekes fauourable
               Therfore helde he it but fable
               Tho ſawe I ſtande on a pyllere
               That was of tynned yron clere
               The latyn poete Virgyle
               That hath bore vp a longe whyle
               The fame of Pius Eneas
               And next hym on a pyller was
               Of copper, Venus clerke Ouyde▪
               
               That hath ſowen wonders wyde
               The great god of loues fame
               And there he bare vp well his name
               Vpon this pyller al ſo hye
               As I myght ſe it with myne eye
               For why this hall whereof I rede
               was woxe on heyght, length, and brede
               wel more by a thouſande de
                     •
                  e
               Than it was erſt, that ſawe I wele
               Tho ſawe I on a pyller by
               Of yron wrought full ſternely
               The great poete dan Lucan
               That on his ſhulders bare vp than
               As hye as that I myght ſe
               
                  The fame of Iulyus and Pompee
               And by hym ſtoden all theſe clerkes
               That wryte of Romes mighty werkes
               That yf I wolde her names tell
               All to longe muſt I dwell
               And nexte hym on a pyller ſtode
               Of Sulphure, lyche as he were wode
               Dan Claudian, ſothe for to tell
               That bare vp all the fame of Hell
               Of Pluto, and of Proſerpyne
               That quene is of the derke pyne
               What ſhulde I more tell of thys
               The hall was all full ywis
               Of hem that wryten olde ieſtes
               As ben on t
                     ••
                  es tokes neſtes
               But it a full confuſe matere
               were all theſe ieſtes for to here
               That they of wryte, and hewe they hyght
               But whyle that I behelde thys ſyght
               I herde a noyſe approchen blyue
               That fareth as bees done in an hyue
               Agaynſt her tyme of out flyenge
               Ryght ſuche a maner murmurynge
               For all the worlde it ſemed me
               Tho gan I loke aboute and ſe
               That there come entrynge in to the hall
               A ryght great company wythall
               And that of ſondry regyons
               Of all kyns condicyons
               That dwell in erthe vnder the moone
               Poore and ryche, and alſo ſoone
               As they were come in to the hall
               They gan on knees downe to fall
               Before thys ylke noble quene
               And ſayd, graunt vs lady ſhene
               Eche of vs of thy grace aboue
               And ſome of hem ſhe graunted ſoone
               And ſome ſhe warned well and fayre
               And ſome ſhe graunted the contrayre
               Of her aſkynge vtterly
               But thys I ſay you trewly
               what her grace was I nyſt
               For of theſe folke full well I wyſt
               They had good fame eche deſerued
               All though they were dyuerſly ſerued
               Ryght as her ſyſter dame Fortune
               Is wonte to ſerue in commune
               Nowe herken howe ſhe gan to paye
               Hem that gan her of grace praye
               And yet lo, all thys company
               Seyden ſothe, and not a lye
               Madame ſayde they, we be
               Folke that here beſechen the
               That thou graunt vs nowe good fame
               And let our workes haue good name
               In full recompenſacioun
               Of good worke, gyue vs good renoun
               I warne it you (ꝙ ſhe) anone
               Ye gete of me good fame none
               By god, and therfore go your way
               Alas (ꝙ they) and welaway
               Tell vs what your cauſe may be
               For me lyſte it not (ꝙ ſhe)
               No wyght ſhall ſpeke of you ywis
               Good ne harme, ne that ne this
               And wyth that worde ſhe gan to cal
               Her meſſenger that was in hal
               And bad that he ſhulde faſt gone
               Vpon payne to be blynde anone
               For Eolus the god of wynde
               In Trace there ye ſhall hym fynde
               And byd hym brynge his clarioun
               That is full dyuers of hys ſowne
               And it is cleped clere Laude
               Wyth whiche he wont is to heraude
               Hem that me lyſt yprayſed be
               And alſo byd hym howe that he
               Brynge eke hys other claryoun
               That hyght Sclaundre in euery towne
               wyth whyche he wont is to diffame
               Hem that me lyſt and do hem ſhame
               This meſſenger gan faſt to gone
               And founde where in a caue of ſtone
               In a countre that heght Trace
               Thys Eolus wyth harde grace
               Helde the wyndes in diſtreſſe
               And gan hem vnder hym to preſſe
               That they gone as the beres rore
               He bounde and preſſed hem ſo ſore
               Thys meſſenger gan faſt crye
               Ryſe vp (ꝙ he) and faſt the hye
               Tyll thou at my lady be
               And take thy clarions eke wyth the
               And ſpede the faſt, and he anone
               Toke to one that hyght Tritone
               Hys clarions to beren tho
               And let a certayne wynde go
               That blewe ſo hydouſly and hye
               That it ne lefte not a ſkye
               In all the welken longe and brode
               Thys Eolus no where abode
               Tyll he was come to Fames fete
               And eke the man that Triton hete
               And there he ſtode as ſtyll as ſtone
               
                  And here wythall there came anone
               Another huge company
               Of good folke and gan to crye
               Lady, graunt vs nowe good fame
               And let our workes haue that name
               Nowe in honour of gentylneſſe
               And alſo god your ſoule bleſſe
               For we han well deſerued it
               Therfore is ryght that we be quyt
               As thryue I (ꝙ ſhe) ye ſhall fayle
               Good workes ſhall you not auayle
               To haue of me good fame as nowe
               But wote ye what, I graunt yowe
               That ye ſhall haue a ſhrewde name
               And wycked loos and worſe fame
               Thoughe ye good loos haue well deſerued
               Nowe gothe your way for ye ben ſerued
               And thou dan Eolus (ꝙ ſhe)
               Take forthe thy trumpe anone let ſe
               That is ycleped Sclaundre lyght
               And blowe her loos, that euery wyght
               Speke of hem harme and ſhrewdneſſe
               In ſtede of good and worthyneſſe
               For thou ſhalte trumpe all the contrayre
               Of that they haue done, well or fayre
               Alas thought I what auentures
               Haue theſe ſory creatures
               That they amonge all the prees
               Shulde thus be ſhamed gyltles
               But what, it muſt nedes be
               what dyd this Eolus, but he
               Toke out hys blacke trumpe of bras
               That fouler than the deuyll was
               And gan this trumpe for to blowe
               As all the worlde ſholde ouerthrowe
               Throughout euery regioun
               wente this foule trumpes ſoun
               As ſ
                     ••
                  yfte as a pellet out of a gonne
               whan fyre is in the pouder ronne
               And ſuche a ſmoke gan out wende
               Out of the foule trumpes ende
               Blacke, blo, grenyſſhe, ſwartyſhe rede
               As dothe where that men melte lede
               Lo, all on hye from tewell
               And therto one thynge ſawe I well
               That the ferther that it ranne
               The greter wexen it began
               As dothe the ryuer frome a well
               And it ſtanke as the pyt of hell
               Alas, thus was her ſhame yr
                     •
                  nge
               And gyltleſſe on euery tonge
               Tho came the thyrde company
               And gone vp to the dees to hye
               And downe on knees they fell anon
               And ſayden, we ben euerychon
               Folke that han full trewly
               Deſerued fame ryghtfully
               And prayde you it myght be knowe
               Ryght as it is, and forthe blowe
               I graunt (ꝙ ſhe) for nowe me lyſte
               That your good workes ſhall be wyſt
               And yet ye ſhall haue better loos
               Ryght in diſpyte of all your foos
               Than worthy is, and that anone
               Lette nowe (ꝙ ſhe) thy trumpe gone
               Thou Eolus, that is ſo blake
               And out thyne other trumpe take
               That hyght Laude, and blowe it ſo
               That through the wolde her fame go
               All eaſely and nat to faſt
               That it be knowen at the laſt
               Full gladly lady myne he ſayde
               And out hys trumpe of golde he brayde
               Anone, and ſette it to hys mouthe
               And blewe it eeſt, weſt, and ſouthe
               And northe, as loude as any thonder
               That euery wyght hath of it wonder
               So brode it ran or that it ſtene
               And certes all the brethe that went
               Out of hys trumpes mouthe ſmelde
               As men a potte full of baume helde
               Amonge a baſket full of roſes
               This fauour dyd he to her loſes
               And ryght wyth this I gan eſpy
               There came the fourth company
               But certayne they were wonder fewe
               And gonne to ſtanden on a rewe
               And ſayden, certes lady bright
               we haue done well wyth all oure myght
               But we ne kepe to haue fame
               Hyde our workes and our name
               For goddes loue, for certes we
               Haue ſurely done it for bounte
               And for no maner other thyng
               I graunt you all your aſkyng
               (ꝙ ſhe) let your workes be deed
               Wyth that aboute I tourned my heed
               And ſawe anon the fyfte route
               That to thys lady gan loute
               And downe on knees anone to fall
               And to her tho beſoughten all
               To hyden her good werkes eke
               And ſayd, they yeue nat a leke
               For no fame, ne ſuche renoun
               
                  For they for contemplacioun
               And goddes loue had it wrought
               Ne of fame wolde they nought
               What (ꝙ ſhe) and be ye woode
               And wene ye for to do good
               And for to haue of that no fame
               Haue ye diſpyte to haue my name
               Nay ye ſhall lyen euerychone
               Blowe thy trumpe and that anone
               (ꝙ ſhe) thou Eolus I hote
               And rynge theſe folkes workes by note
               That all the worlde may of it here
               And he gan blowe her loos ſo clere
               In hys golden clartoun
               That through the worlde went the ſoun
               All ſo kyndly, and eke ſo ſofte
               That theyr fame was blowe a lofte
               Tho came the ſyxt companye
               And gan faſt to Fame crye
               Ryght verily in thys manere
               They ſayden, mercy lady dere
               To tell certayne as it is
               we haue done neyther that ne thys
               But ydell all our lyfe hath be
               But natheleſſe yet pray we
               That we may haue as good a fame
               And great renome and knowen name
               As they that haue do noble ieſtes
               And acheued all her queſtes
               As well of loue as other thyng
               All was vs neuer broche ne ryng
               Ne els what fro women ſent
               Ne ones in her herte yment
               To maken vs onely frendly chere
               But mought temen vs on bere
               Yet let vs to the people ſeme
               Suche as the worlde may of vs deme
               That women louen vs for woode
               It ſhall do vs as moche good
               And to our herte as moche auayle
               The counterpeyſe, eaſe, and trauayle
               As we had wone wyth labour
               For that is dere bought honoure
               At regarde of our great eaſe
               And yet ye muſte vs more pleaſe
               Let vs be holde eke therto
               worthy, wyſe, and good alſo
               And ryche, and happy vnto loue
               For goddes loue that ſytteth aboue
               Though we may nat the body haue
               Of women, yet ſo god me ſaue
               Lette men glewe on vs the name
               Suffyſeth that we haue the fame
               I graunt (ꝙ ſhe) by my trouthe
               Nowe Eolus wythouten ſlouthe
               Take out thy trumpe of golde (ꝙ ſhe)
               And blowe as they haue aſked me
               That euery man wene hem at eaſe
               Though they go in full badde leaſe
               Thys Eolus gan it ſo blowe
               That through the worlde it was yknowe
               Tho came the ſeuenth route anone
               And fyll on knees euerychone
               And ſayd, lady graunt vs ſoone
               The ſame thyng, the ſame boone
               That this next folke haue done
               Fye on you (ꝙ ſhe) euerychone
               Ye maſty ſwyne, ye ydel wretches
               Full of roten ſlowe tet ches
               what falſe theues, where ye wolde
               Ben famed good, and nothyng nolde
               Deſerue why, ne neuer thought
               Men rather you to hangen ought
               For ye be lyke the ſlepy catte
               That wolde haue fyſh: but woſt thou what?
               He woll nothyng wete hys clawes
               Yuell thrifte come to your iawes
               And on myne yf I it graunt
               Or do fauour you to auaunt
               Thou Eolus, thou kyng of Trace
               Go blowe this folke a ſory grace
               (ꝙ ſhe) anone, and woſt thou howe
               As I ſhall tell the ryght nowe
               Say theſe ben they that wolde honour
               Haue, and do no kyns labour
               Ne do no good, and yet haue laude
               And that men wende that beelle Iſaude
               Ne coude hem nat of loue werne
               And yet ſhe that grynt at querne
               Is al to good to eaſe her herte
               This Eolus anon vp ſterte
               And with his blacke clarion
               He gan to blaſen out a ſoun
               As lounde as belleth wynde in hel
               And eke therwith ſothe to tel
               This ſowne was ſo ful of iapes
               As euer mowes were in apes
               And that went al the worlde aboute
               That euery wight gan on hem ſhoute
               And for to laugh as they were wode
               Suche game founde they in her hode
               Tho came another company
               That had ydone the trechery
               The harme and great wickedneſſe
               
                  That any herte couden geſſe
               And prayed her to haue good fame
               And that ſhe nolde do hem no ſhame
               But gyue hem loos and good renoun
               And do it blowe in claryoun
               Nay wys (quod ſhe) it were a vyce
               Al be there in me no iuſtyce
               Me lyſt nat to do it nowe
               Ne this I nyl graunt it you
               Tho came there leapyng in a route
               And gan clappen al aboute
               Euery man vpon the crowne
               That al the hall gan to ſowne
               And ſayd, lady lete and dere
               we ben ſuche folkys as ye may here
               To tel al the tale a ryght
               we ben ſhrewes euery wyght
               And haue delyte in wickedneſſe
               As good folke haue in goodneſſe
               And ioye to be knowen ſhrewes
               And ful of vyce and wicked thewes
               wherfore we praye you on a rowe
               That our fame be ſuche yknowe
               In al thing ryght as it is
               I graunt it you (quod ſhe) ywys
               But what arte thou that ſayeſt this tale
               That weareſt on thy hoſe a pale
               And on thy typpet ſuche a bell
               Madame (ꝙ he) ſothe to tell
               I am that ylke ſhrewe ywis
               That brent the temple of Iſydis
               In A
                     •
                  henes, lo that cyte
               And wherfore dyddeſt thou ſo (ꝙ ſhe)
               By my trouthe (ꝙ he) madame
               I wolde ſayne haue had a name
               As other folke had in the towne
               Although they were of great renowne
               For her vertue and her thewes
               Thought I, as great fame haue ſhrewes
               (Though it be naught) for ſhreudneſſe
               As good folke haue for goodneſſe
               And ſythen I may nat haue that one
               That other nyll I nat forgone
               As for to get a fame here
               The temple ſette I all on fyre
               Nowe don our loos be blowe ſwythe
               As wyſly be thou euer blythe
               Gladly (ꝙ ſhe) thou Eolus
               Hereſt thou not what they prayen vs
               Madame yes, full well (ꝙ he)
               And I wyll trumpen it parde
               And toke hys blacke trumpe faſt
               And gan to puffen and to blaſte
               Tyll it was at the worldes ende
               Wyth that I gan aboute wende
               For one that ſtode ryght at my bake
               Me thought full goodly to me ſpake
               And ſayd, frende what is thy name
               Arte thou come hyder to haue fame?
               Nay for ſothe frende (ꝙ I)
               I come nat hyther grant mercy
               For no ſuche cauſe by my heed
               Suffyſeth me, as I were deed
               That no wyght haue my name in honde
               I wote my ſelfe beſt howe I ſtonde
               For what I drie, or what I thynke
               I woll my ſelfe all it drynke
               Certayne for the more parte
               As ferforthe as I can myne arte
               what doeſt thou here than (ꝙ he)
               (ꝙ I) that woll I tell the
               The cauſe why I ſtande here
               Some newe tydynges for to lere
               Some newe thyng I not what
               Tydinges eyther thys or that
               Of loue, or ſuche thynges glade
               For certaynly he that me made
               To come hyder, ſayd to me
               I ſhulde bothe here and ſe
               In this place wonder thynges
               But theſe be no ſuche tidynges
               As I ment of: No (ꝙ he)
               And I anſwerde, no parde
               For well I wote euer yet
               Sythe that fyrſt I had wyt
               That ſome folke han deſyred fame
               Diuerſly, and loos and name
               But certaynly I nyſt howe
               Ne where that Fame dwelled or nowe
               Ne eke of her diſcripcion
               Ne alſo her condycion
               Ne the order of her dome
               Knewe I nat tyll I hyder come
               Why than be lo theſe tydynges
               That thou nowe hyther brynges
               That thou haſte herde (ꝙ he) to me
               But nowe no force, for well I ſe
               what thou deſyreſt for to lere
               Come forthe and ſtande no lenger here
               And I woll the wythout drede
               In to ſuche another place lede
               There thou ſhalt here many one
               Tho gan I forthe wyth hym gone
               Out of the caſtell ſothe to ſey
               
                  Tho ſawe I ſtande in a valey
               Vnder the caſtell faſte by
               An houſe, that domus Dedaly
               That Laborintus ycleped is
               Nas made ſo wonderly iwys
               Ne halfe ſo queyntly ywrought ☞
               And euermo, as ſwyfte as thought
               Thys queynt houſe aboute went
               That neuermo it ſtyll ſtent
               And there came out ſo great a noyſe
               That had it ſtonde vpon Oyſe
               Men myght haue herde it eaſely
               To Rome, I trowe ſikerly
               And the noyſe whyche that I herde
               For all the worlde ryght ſo it ferde
               As dothe the routyng of the ſtone
               That fro thengyn is letyn gone
               And all thys houſe of whyche I rede
               was made of twygges falowe rede
               And grene eke, and ſome were whyte
               Suche as men to theſe cages twhyte
               Or maken of theſe panyers
               Or els hutches or doſſers
               That for the ſwough and for the twygges
               Thys houſe was alſo full of gygges
               And alſo full eke of chyrkynges
               And of many other workynges
               And eke this houſe hath of entrees
               As many as leues ben on trees
               In ſommer whan they ben grene 
                     〈☐〉
                  
               
               And on the rofe yet men may ſene
               A thouſande holes, and well mo
               To letten the ſowne out go
               And by day in euery tyde
               Ben all the dores open wyde
               And by nyght eche one vnſhette
               Ne porte is there none to lette
               No maner tidynges in to pace ☞
               Ne neuer reſt is in that place
               That it nys fylled full of tidynges
               Eyther loude or of whyſperynges
               And euer all the houſes angles
               Is full of rownynges and of iangles
               Of werres, of peace, of maryages
               Of reſtes, and of labour of vyages
               Of abode of dethe, and of lyfe
               Of loue, of hate, accorde, of ſtryfe
               Of loſſe, of lore, and of wynnynges
               Of heale, of ſyckneſſe, or of leſynges
               Of fayre wether, and eke of tempeſtes
               Of qualme of folke, and of beeſtes
               Of dyuers tranſmutacions
               Of eſtates, and eke of regyons
               Of truſt, of dred, of ialouſy
               Of wytte, of wennyng, of foly
               Of plentie, and of great famyne
               Of chepe, of derthe, and of ruyne
               Of good or miſgouernment
               Of fyre, and of dyuers accydent
               And lo, this houſe of whiche I write
               Syker be ye it nas nat lyte
               For it was ſixtie myle of length
               Al was the tymbre of no ſtrength
               Yet it is founded to endure
               whyle that it lyſt to Auenture
               That is the mother of tydinges
               As the ſee of welles and ſpringes
               And it was ſhapen lyke a cage
               Certes (quod I) in al myn age
               Ne ſawe I ſuche an houſe as this
               And as I wondred me ywis
               Vpon this houſe, tho ware was I
               Howe myne Egle faſte by
               was perched hye vpon a ſtone
               And I gan ſtreight to hym gone
               And ſayd thus, I pray the
               That thou a whyle abyde me
               For goddes loue, and let me ſene
               what wonders in that place bene
               For yet peraunter I may lere
               Some good therin, or ſomwhat here
               That lefe me were, or that I went
               Peter, that is nowe myn entent
               (Quod he to me) therfore I dwel
               But certayne one thyng I the tel
               That but I bringe the therin
               Ne ſhal thou neuer conne the gyn
               To come in to it, out of doute
               So faſte it whyrieth lo aboute
               But ſythe that I Ioues of his grace
               As I haue ſayd, wyl the ſolace
               Finally with theſe thynges
               Vncouthe ſyghtes and tidynges
               To paſſe with thyne heuyneſſe
               Suche routhe hath he of thy diſtreſſe
               That thou ſuffredeſt debonairly
               And woſte thy ſeluen vtterly
               Deſperate of al blyſſe
               Sythe that fortune hath made a myſſe
               The ſwote of al thyn hertes reſt
               Languyſſhe, and eke in poynte to breſt
               But he through his myghtie meryte
               wyl do the eaſe, al be it lyte
               
                  
                     •
                  aue in expreſſe conmaundement
               
                  To whyche I am obedyent
               To forther the wyth all my myght
               And wyſſe and teche the a ryght
               where thou mayſte moſte tidynges here
               Thou ſhalte here many one lere
               Wyth thys worde he ryght anone
               Hent me vp bytwene hys tone
               And at a wyndowe in me brought
               That in thys houſe was, as me thought
               And there wythall me thought it ſtent
               And nothyng it aboute went
               And me ſette in the floore adoun
               But ſuche a great congregacioun
               Of folke, as I ſawe rome aboute
               Some wythin and ſome wythout
               Nas neuer ſene, ne ſhall be efte
               That certes in thys worlde nys lefte
               So many formed by nature
               Ne deed ſo many a creature
               That well vnneth in that place
               Had I a foote brede of ſpace
               And euery wyght that I ſawe there
               Rowned eueryche in others cere
               A newe tydynge pryuely
               Or els it tolde all openly
               Ryght thus, and ſayde: Noſt nat thou
               That is be tydde, lo ryght nowe
               No (ꝙ he) tel me what
               And than he tolde hym thys and that
               And ſwore therto, that it was ſothe
               Thus hath he ſayde, and thus he dothe
               And thys ſhall be, and thus herde I ſay
               That ſhall be founde, that dare I laye
               That all the folke that is on lyue
               Ne haue the connyng to diſcryue
               Tho thynges that I herde there
               what a loude, and what in eere
               But all the wonder moſte was thys
               whan one had herde a thyng ywis
               He came ſtreyght to another wyght
               And gan hym tellen anon ryght
               The ſame that hym was tolde
               Or it a furlonge way was olde
               And gan ſomwhat for to eche
               To thys tydyng in thys ſpeche
               More than euer it ſpoken was
               And nat ſo ſone departed nas
               Tho fro hym that he ne mette
               Wyth the thyrde, and er he lette
               Any ſtounde, he tolde hym alſe
               were the tydynges ſothe or falſe
               Yet wolde he tell it natheles
               And euer mo wyth more encrees
               Than it was erſt: thus northe and ſouthe
               went euery tydyng, fro mouthe to mouthe
               And that encreaſyng euermo
               As fyre is wonte to quycken and go
               Frome a ſparcle ſprongen amys
               Tyll all a cyte brent vp is
               And whan that was full vp ſpronge
               And waxen more on euerye tonge
               Than euer it was, and went anone
               Vp to a wydowe out to gone
               Or but it myght out there paſſe
               It gan out crepe at ſome creuaſſe
               And flewe forthe faſte for the nones
               And ſomtyme I ſawe there at ones
               A leaſynge, and a ſadde ſothe ſawe
               That gonnen of auenture drawe
               Out of a wyndowe for to pace
               And whan they metten in that place
               They were a checked bothe two
               And neyther of hem myght out go
               For eche other they gonne ſo croude
               Tyll eche of hem gan cryen loude
               Let me gon fyrſt, nay but let me
               And here I woll enſuren the
               Wyth nones that thou wolte do ſo
               That I ſhall neuer fro the go
               But be thyne owne ſworne brother
               we woll meddle vs eche in other
               That no man be he neuer ſo wrothe
               Shall haue one two, but bothe
               At ones, all beſyde hys leue
               Come we amorowe or on eue
               Be we cryde or ſtyll yrowned
               Thus ſawe I falſe and ſothe compowned
               Togyder flye for o tydynge
               Thus out at holes gonne wrynge
               Euerye tydynge ſtreyght to Fame
               And ſhe gan yeue eche hys name
               After her dyſpoſycion
               And yeue hem eke duracion
               Some to wexe and wane ſoone
               As dothe the fayre whyte moone
               And let hem gone, there myght I ſeen
               Wynged wonders faſte flyen
               Twenty thouſande in a route
               As Eolus hem blewe aboute
               And lorde thys houſe in all tymes
               was full of ſhypmen and pylgrymes
               wyth ſcryppes brette full of leaſynges
               Entremelled wyth tidynges
               And eke alone by hem ſelue
               
                  O many thouſande tymes twelue
               Sawe I eke of theſe pardoners
               Currours, and eke meſſangers
               wyth boxes crommed full of lyes
               As euer veſſell was wyth lyes
               And as I alther faſteſt wente
               Aboute, and dyd all myne entent
               Me for to playen and for to lere
               And eke a tydynge for to here
               That I had herde of ſome countre
               That I ſhall not nowe be tolde for me
               For it no nede is redely
               Folke can ſynge it bet then I
               For all mote out late or rathe
               All the ſheues in the rathe
               I herde a great noyſe wythall
               In a corner of the hall
               There men of loue tydynges tolde
               And I gan thyderwarde beholde
               For I ſawe rennynge euery wyght
               As faſte as that they hadden myght
               And eueryche cryde, what thynge is that
               And ſome ſayd I not neuer what
               And when they were all on an hepe
               Tho behynde gonne vp lepe
               And clamben vp on other faſte
               And vp the noyſe on hyghen caſte
               And treden faſte on others heles
               ☞ And ſtampe as men done after eles
               At the laſte I ſawe a man
               whych that I naught ne can
               But he ſemed for to be
               A man of great authorite
               And therwythall I abrayde
               Out of my ſlepe halfe afrayde
               Remembrynge well what I had ſene
               And howe hye and ferre I had bene
               In my gooſt, and had great wonder
               ☞ Of that the god of thonder
               Had let me knowen, and began to wryte
               Lyke as ye haue herde me endyte
               wherfore to ſtudye and rede alwaye
               I purpoſe to do daye by daye
               Thus in dreamynge and in game
               Endeth thys lytell boke of Fame
            
            ¶Here foloweth the Teſtament of Loue.
         
         
            
            
               The teſtament of loue.
               
                  MAny men there bene, that wyth eeres openly ſprad, ſo moche ſwalowen the deliciouſneſſe of ieſtes and of ryme, by queynte knyttynge coloures, that of the goodneſſe or of the badneſſe of the ſentence take they lytell hede or els none. Sothelye dull wytte & a thoughtfull ſoule, ſo ſore haue myned & graſſed in my ſpirites, that ſuche crafte of endytynge woll not ben of myne acquayntaunce. And for rude wordes & boyſtous percen the herte of the herer to the inreſt poynte and planten there the ſentence of thynges, ſo that wyth lytell helpe it is able to ſprynge. Thys boke that nothynge hath of the greate floode of wyt, ne of ſemelych colours, is doluen wyth rude wordes and boyſtous, and ſo drawe togyther to maken the catchers herof ben the more redy to hent ſentence.
               Some men there ben that peynten wyth colours ryche, and ſome wyth vers, as wyth red ynke, and ſome wyth coles and chalke: & yet is there good matere to the leude people of thilke chalky purtreiture, as hem thinketh for the tyme, and afterwarde the ſyght of the better colours yeuen to hem more ioy for the fyrſt leudneſſe. So ſothly thys leude cloudye occupacion is not to prayſe, but by the leude: for comenly leude, leudneſſe cōmendeth. Eke it ſhal yeue ſight that other precious thinges ſhalbe the more in reuerence. In latyn and french hath many ſoueraine wyttes had gret delyte to endyte, and haue many noble thynges fulfylde, but certes there ben ſome yt ſpeken theyr poyſy mater in frenche, of whyche ſpeche the frenche men haue as good a fantaſye as we haue in hearyng of french mennes englyſhe. And many termes there ben in englyſhe, whych vnneth we englyſhmen connen declare the knowlegynge: Howe ſhulde then a frenche man borne, ſuch termes conne iumpere in hys mater, but as the iaye chatereth englyſhe. Ryght ſo truly the vnderſtandynge of englyſhmen woll not ſtretche to the priuy termes in frenche, what ſo euer we boſten of ſtraunge langage. Let then clerkes endyten in latyn, for they haue the propertye of ſciēce And the knowynge in that facultye: and lette frenchmen in theyr frenche alſo endytē theyr queynt termes, for it is kyndly to theyr mouthes, and let vs ſhewe our fantaſyes in ſuche wordes as we lerneden of our dames tonge. And although thys boke be lytel thanke worthy for the leudneſſe in trauayle, yet ſuch wrytynges exciten men to thylke thynges yt bene neceſſarie: for euery mā therby maye as by a perpetual myrrour ſene the vyces or vertues of other, in which thynge lyghtly may be cō
                  ceyued to eſchewe peryls, and neceſſaries to catche, after as auētures haue fallen to other people or perſons. Certes ye ſoueraynſt thing of deſyre and moſte creature reaſonable, haue or els ſhulde haue ful appetyte to theyr perfection: vnreſonable beeſtes mowen not, ſyth reaſon hath in hem no werkynge. Then reaſonable that wol not, is comparyſoned to vnreſonable, and made lyke hem. Forſothe the moſte ſouerayne and fynall perfection of mā is in knowynge of a ſoth, wythouten any entent dyſceyuable, and in loue of one very god, that is inchaungeable, that is to knowe and loue hys creatour. ¶Nowe principally the meane to brynge in knowlegyng and louyng hys creatour, is the conſyderacion of thinges made by the creatour wherthrough be thylke thynges that bene made vnderſtādynge here to our wyttes, arne the vnſene priuytees of god made to vs ſightful & knowing, in our cō
                  templacion & vnderſtandyng. Theſe thinges then forſoth moch bryngen vs to ye ful knowlegynge ſothe, and to the parfyte loue of the maker of heauenly thynges. Lo Dauid ſayeth: thou haſte delyted me in makynge, as who ſayeth, to haue delite in ye tune how god hath lent me in cōſyderation of thy makynge. wherof Ariſtotle in the boke de Animalibus ſayeth to naturel philoſophers: It is a great lykynge in loue of knowynge theyr creatour and alſo in knowynge of cauſes in kyndelye thynges conſydred. Forſothe the formes of kyndly thynges & ye ſhap, a great kyndly loue mē ſhulde haue to the werkman yt hem made The crafte of a werkman is ſhewed in the werke. Herefore truly the philoſophers with a lyuely ſtudye many noble thynges, ryghte precious and worthy to memory wrytten, &

by a great ſwet ande trauayle to vs leften of cauſes the properties in natures of thynges. To whyche therfore Phyloſophers it was more ioye, more lykynge, more herty luſt in kyndly vertues & maters of reaſon ye perfection by buſy ſtudy to knowe, thē to haue had al the treaſure, al the rycheſſe, al ye vaynglory yt the paſſed Emperours, prynces, or kynges hadden. Therfore ye names of hem in ye boke of perpetual memory in vertue & peace arne wrytten, and in the contrary, that is to ſayne in ſtixe ye foule pytte of helle arne thilke preſſed that ſuche goodneſſe hated. And bycauſe thys boke ſhall be of loue, and the pryme cauſes of ſterynge in that doynge with paſſyons and dyſeaſes for wantynge of deſyre, I wyll that this boke be cleped ye Teſtamēt of loue.
               But now thou reder, who is thylke ye wyl not in ſcorne laughe, to here a dwerfe or els halfe a man, ſay he wyll rende out the ſwerd of Hercules handes, & alſo he ſhulde ſet Hercules gades a myle yet ferther, and ouer that he had power of ſtrength to pul vp the ſpere, that Aliſander ye noble myght neuer wegge.
               And that paſſyng al thynge to ben maſter of Fraunce by myght, there as the noble gracious Edwarde the thyrde for all hys greate prowes in vyctories ne myght al yet cōquere
               Certes I wote wel, ther ſhalbe made more ſcorne & iape of me, that I ſo vnworthely clothed altogether in the cloudy cloude of vncō
                  nynge wyl puttē me in prees to ſpeke of loue or els of the cauſes in that mater, ſythen all ye greateſt clerkes han had ynough to done, and as who ſayth gathered vp clene toforne hem & wyth theyr ſharpe ſythes of connynge all mowen and made therof great rekes and noble, full of all plentyes to fede me and many another. Enuye forſothe cōmendeth nought hys reaſon, yt he hath in hayne, be it neuer ſo truſty. And although theſe noble repers, as good workmen and worthy theyr hyer, haue al drawe and bounde vp in ye ſheues, & made many ſhockes, yet haue I enſample to gather the ſmale crōmes, and fullē my walet of tho that fallen from the borde among
                     •
                   the ſmale houndes, notwythſtandynge the trauayle of the almoygner, yt hath drawe vp in the cloth al the remyſſayles, as trenchours, and the relyfe to bere to the almeſſe. Yet alſo haue I leue of ye noble huſbonde Boece, although I be a ſtraunger of connynge to come after his doctrine, and theſe great workmē, and glene my handfuls of the ſhedynge after theyr handes & if me fayle ought of my ful, to encreaſe my porcion with that I ſhal drawe by priuytyes out of the ſhocke, a ſlye ſeruaunt in hys owne helpe is often moche cōmēded, knowyng of trouth in cauſes of thīges, was more hardyer in the fyrſt ſechers, and ſo ſayth Ariſtotle, & lyghter in vs yt hath folowed after. For theyr paſſyng ſtudy han freſhed our wyttes, and our vnderſtandynge han excyted in coſyderacion of trouth by ſharpneſſe of theyr reaſons. Vtterly theſe thinges be no dremes ne iapes, to throwe to hogges, it is lyfelyche meate for chyldren of trouth, and as they me betyden whē I pylgrimaged out of my kyth in wynter, when the wether out of meaſure was boyſtous, & the wylde wynde Borias as hys kynde aſketh wyth dryenge coldes, maked the wawes of the Occian ſee ſo to aryſe vnkyndely ouer the cōmune bankes that it was in poynte to ſpyl al the earth.
               ¶Thus endeth the prologue, and here after foloweth the fyrſt boke of the Teſtament of Loue.
            
            
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
                  
                     ALas Fortune alas, I that ſomtyme in delycious houres was wont to enioy blyſful ſtoundes, am nowe dryue by vnhappy heuynes to bewayle my ſondry yuels in tene. Trewlye I leaue, in myne herte is wryte of perdurable letters al the entencions of lamentacion that now ben ynempned, for any maner dyſeaſe outwarde in ſobbynge maner, ſheweth ſorowfull yexynge from wythin. Thus from my comforte I gynne to ſpylle, ſyth ſhe that ſhulde me ſolace, is ferre fro my preſence. Certes her abſence is to me an hell, my ſternyng deth thus in wo it myneth, yt endeleſſe care is throughe out myne herte clēched, blyſſe of my ioye, that ofte my murthed is turned into galle, to thynke on thynge that maye not at my wyll in armes me hent. Myrth is chaunged into tene, when ſwynke is there continually, that reſte was wonte to ſoiourne and haue dwellynge place. Thus wytleſſe thoughtfull, ſyghtleſſe lokinge, I endure my penaunce in this derke pryſone, caytiſned fro frendſhyp and acquaintaunce, and forſaken of all ye any worde dare ſpeke. Straunge hath by waye of intrucyon made hys home, there me ſhuld be, yf reaſon were herde as he ſhulde. Neuerthelater yet hertely lady precious Margarit, haue mynd on thy ſeruaunt, and thynke on hys dyſeaſe howe lyghtles he lyueth, ſythe the beames brēnende in loue of thyne eyen arne ſo be wēt that worldes and cloudes atwene vs tweye woll not ſuffre my thoughtes of hem to be enlumyned. Thynke that one vertue of a Margarite precious is amonges many other the ſorowful to cōfort, yet well of that me ſorowfull to comforte is my luſte to haue nought els at thys tyme, dede ne dethe, ne no maner trauayle hath no power myne herte ſo moche to fade, as ſhulde to here of a twynckelynge in your dyſeaſe. Ah, god forbyde that, but yet lette me dey, lette me ſterue wythouten any meaſure of penaunce, rather then myne hertely thynkynge comforte in ought were dyſeaſed. What maye my ſeruyce aueyle in abſence of her, that my ſeruyce ſhuld accepte? is thys not endleſſe ſorowe to thynke? Yes, yes god wote, myne hert breaketh nygh a ſonder howe ſhulde the groūde wythout kyndly noriture bryngen forth any frutes? how ſhulde a ſhyppe withouten a ſterne in the greate ſee be gouerned? Howe ſhulde I withouten my blyſſe, my herte, my deſyre, my ioye, my goodneſſe, endure in thys contrarious priſon, that thynke euery houre in ye day an hūdred wynter? Wel may nowe Eue ſayne to me Adam, in ſorowe fallen from welth, dryuē art thou out of paradyſe, wyth ſweate thy ſuſtenaūce to be ſwynke. Depe in thys pynynge pytte with wo I lygge yſtocked, with chaynes lynked of care & of tene. It is ſo hye from thens I lye and ye cōmune erth, there ne is cable in no lande maked, that myght ſtretche to me to drawe me in to blyſſe, ne ſteyers to ſtey on is none, ſo that wythout recouer endleſſe here to endure I wote wel I purueyd. O, where arte thou nowe frēdſhyp, that ſomtyme with laughande chere, madeſt both face and countenaunce to me wardes? truely now art thou went out of towne, but euer me thynketh he weareth hys old clothes, & that ye ſoule in the whych the lyfe of frendſhyppe was in, is drawen out from hys other ſpirites. Nowe then farewell frendſhip, and farewel felawes, me thynketh ye al han taken your leaue: no force of you all at ones. But lady of loue ye wote what I mene, yet thinke on thy ſeruaūt, that for thy loue ſpylleth, all thynges haue I forſake to folowen thyne heſtes: rewarde me wt a thought, though ye do nought els. Remembraunce of loue lyeth ſo ſore vnder my breſte, that other thought cometh not in my mynde but gladneſſe to thynke on youre goodneſſe & youre merye chere, frendes and ſorowe to thynke on youre wr
                        •
                     che and your daunger, from whych Chryſt me ſaue. My great ioye it is to haue in meditacion the bounties, the vertues. The nobley in yon prynted: ſorowe and hell comen at ones, to ſuppoſe that I be beyned: thus wyth care, ſorowe, and tene am I ſhapte myne ende wt dethe to make. Now good goodlye thynke on thys. O wretched foole that I am fallen into ſo lowe, the heate of my brēnyng tene hath me al defaſed: howe ſhulde ye lady ſette pryſe on ſo foule fylthe? My connynge is thynne, my wytte is exiled, lyke to a foole naturel am I comparyſoned. Trewly lady but your mercy the more were I wote well al my labour were in ydel: your mercy then paſſeth ryght. God graunt that

propoſycyon to be verifyed in me, ſo that by truſte of good hope, I mowe come to the hauen of eaſe, and ſythe it is impoſſyble, the colours of your qualyties to chaunge: & forſoth I wote well wemme ne ſpotte maye not abyde, there ſo noble vertue haboūdeth, ſo that the defaſynge to you is verely ymagynable, as countenaunce of goodneſſe wyth encreaſynge vertue, is ſo in you knytte to abyde by neceſſary maner, yet yf the ryuers myght fal, whych is ayenſt kynde, I wol wel myn hert ne ſhulde therfore naught flytte by the leſte poynt of gemetrye, ſo ſadlye is it ſonded, that away from your ſeruyce in loue maye he not departe. O loue, when ſhall I ben pleaſed? O charite, when ſhall I ben eaſed? O good goodly, when ſhall the dyce turne? O full of vertue do the chaunce of comforte vpwarde to fal. O loue, when wolt thou thynke on thy ſeruaunt? I can nomore but here out caſte of al welfare, abyde the daye of my dethe, or els to ſe the ſyght that myght all my wellyng ſorowes voyde, and of the floode make an ebbe Theſe dyſeaſes mowen wel by dureſſe of ſorowe, make my lyfe to vnbodye, and ſo for to dye: but certes ye ladye in a full perfection of loue ben ſo knytte wyth my ſoule, that dethe may not thylke knotte vnbynde ne departe, ſo that ye and my ſoule together is endeleſſe, in blyſſe ſhulde dwel, and there ſhal my ſoule at the full ben eaſed, that he may haue your preſence to ſhewe thentēt of his deſyres: Ah dere god, that ſhall be a great ioye. Nowe erthely goddeſſe take regarde of thy ſeruaūt, though I be feble, for thou arte wont to prayſe them better, that wold conne ſerue in loue, al be he full mener then kynges or princes, that woll not haue that vertue in mynde. Nowe precyous Margaryte, that wyth thy noble vertue haſte drawen me into loue fyrſt, me wenyng therof to haue bliſſe, as galle and aloes are ſo moch ſpronge, that ſauour of ſwetneſſe may I not attaſte. Alas that your benigne eyen, in whych that mercy ſemeth to haue al hys noriture, nyll by no waye tourne the clereneſſe of mercy to me wardes. Alas that youre brennande vertues, ſhynynge amonges all folke, and enlumynynge all other people by habundaūce of encreaſing, ſheweth to me but ſmok & no lyght. Theſe thynges to thinke in myne hert maketh euery day weping in myne eyen to renne. Theſe lyggen on my backe ſo ſore, that importable burthen me ſemeth on my backe to be charged, it maketh me backwarde to meue, when my ſteppes by comune courſe euen forth pretende: Theſe thynges alſo on ryghtſyde & lyfte, haue me ſo enuolued wyth care, that wāhope of helpe is throughout me ronne, trewly and leue that graceleſſe is my fortune, whych that euer ſheweth it mewardes by a cloudy dyſeaſe, already to make ſtormes of tene, and the blyſfull ſyde halte ſtyl awayward, & woll it not ſuffre to mewardes to turne: no force, yet wol I not ben cōquered
                  O, alas that your nobley ſo moch amonge all other creatures cōmended by folowynge ſtreme by al maner vertues, but ther ben wō
                     derful, I not which that let the flode to come into my ſoule, wherfore purely mated wyth ſorowe thorough ſought, my ſelfe I crye on your goodneſſe to haue pyte on thys caytyfe, that in the inreſt degre of ſorowe and dyſeaſe is lefte, & wythout your goodly wyll frō any helpe and recouery. Theſe ſorowes maye I not ſuſtene, but yf my ſorowe ſhulde be tolde and to you wardes ſhewed, although moche ſpace is bytwene vs twaine, yet me thynketh that by ſuche ioleynynge wordes, my dyſeaſe gyuueth ebbe. Trewly me thynketh that the ſowne of my lamentacious wepyng, is right now flowe into your preſence, & there cryeth after mercy & grace, to whyche thyng me ſemeth the lyſt none anſwere to yeue, but with a deynous chere ye cōmaunden it to auoyde, but god forbyd that any worde ſhulde of you ſprynge to haue ſo lytel routh. Parde pyte & mercy in euery Margarite is cloſed by kynde amōges many other vertues, by qualites of comforte, but comfort is to me ryght naught worth, wythouten mercy & pyte of you alone whych thynges haſtely god me graūt for his mercye.
               
               
                  
                     REherſynge theſe thinges and many other, wythout tyme or moment of reſt me ſemed for anguyſhe of dyſeaſe, that altogether I was rauiſhed, I can not tell howe, but holy all my paſſyons & felynges weren loſte, as it ſemed for the tyme, and ſodaynly a maner of drede lyght in me all at ones, nought ſuch feare as folke haue of an enemy that were myghty, & wolde hem greue or done hem dyſeaſe: For I trowe thys is wel knowe to many perſones

that otherwhyle yf a man be in hys ſoueraynes preſence, a maner of ferdneſſe crepeth in hys herte, not for harme, but of goodly ſubiection namely as men reden that aungels ben aferde of our ſauyour in heuen. And pardy there ne is, ne may no paſſyō of diſeaſe be, but it is to meane that angels ben adrade, not by frendes of drede, ſythē they ben perfytly blyſſed, as affection of wōderfulneſſe & by ſeruice of obedience, ſuch ferde alſo han theſe louers in preſence of theyr loues, & ſubiectes aforne theyr ſoueraynes: Ryght ſo wyth ferdeneſſe myne herte was caught. And I ſodaynly aſtonyed, there entred into the place there I was lodged a ladye, the ſemelyeſt and mooſt goodly to my ſyght, that euer to forne apered to any creature, and truly in the bluſtryng of her loke, ſhe yaue gladneſſe and comforte ſodaynlye to all my wyttes, and ryghte ſo ſhe dothe to euery wyght that cometh in her preſence. And for ſhe was ſo goodlye (as me thought) myne herte beganne ſomdele to be enbolded, and wexte a lytel hardy to ſpeake, but yet wyth a quakynge voyce, as I durſte, I ſalued her, and enquyred what ſhe was, and why ſhe ſo worthy to ſyghte, dayned to entre in to ſo foule a doūgeon, and namelye a pryſon, wythout leaue of my kepers. For certes althoughe the vertue of dedes of mercye ſtretchen to vyſyten the poore priſoners, and hem after that faculties ben had to comfort, me ſemed that I was ſo ferre fallē into myſerye and wretched hyd caytyfneſſe, that me ſhulde no precious thynge nyghe: and alſo that for my ſorowe euery wyght ſhulde ben heauy, and wyſhe my recouery. But when thys lady had ſomdele aperceyued, as wel by my wordes as by my chere, what thought be
                     
                        •
                     yed me wythin, wyth a good womanly coū
                     tenaunce ſhe ſayd theſe wordes.
                  O my nory, wenyſt thou that my maner be, to foryet my frendes or my ſeruauntes? naye (quod ſhe) it is my full entente to vyſyte and comforte al my frendſhyppes and alyes, as well in tyme of perturbation, as of mooſt propertye of blyſſe, in me ſhall vnkyndneſſe neuer be founden. And alſo ſythen I haue ſo fewe eſpecyal trewe nowe in theſe dayes, wherfore I maye well at more leyſar come to hem that me deſeruen, and yf my comynge maye in any thynge auayle, wete wel I woll come often.
                  Now good lady (quod I) that art ſo fayre on to loke, reynynge honny by thy wordes, blyſſe of paradyſe arne thy lokynges, ioy and comforte are thy mouynges. What is thy name? how is it that in you is ſo mokel werkynge vertues enpyght, as me ſemeth, and in none other creature, that euer ſawe I wyth myne eyen? My dyſcyple (ꝙ ſhe) me wōdreth of thy wordes and on the, yt for a lytel diſeaſe haſte foryeten my name: woſte thou not well that I am Loue, that firſt the brought to thy ſeruyce? O good lady (quod I) is thys worſhyp to the or to thyne excellence for to come into ſo foule a place? Parde ſomtyme tho I was in proſperite, and wyth foreyne goodes enuolued, I had mokel to done to drawe the to myne hoſtel, & yet many wernynges thou madeſt er thou lyſte fullye to graunt, thyne home to make at my dwellyng place: & nowe thou comeſt goodly by thyne owne vyſe, to comforte me wyth wordes, and ſo there thoroughe I gynne remembre on paſſed gladneſſe. Trewly ladye I ne wotte whether I ſhal ſay welcome or none, ſythen thy comyng wol as moch do me tene and ſorowe, as gladneſſe and myrthe: ſe why. For that me comforteth to thinke on paſſed gladneſſe, that me anoyeth efte to be in doynge. Thus thy comynge bothe gladdeth and teneth, and that is cauſe of moche ſorowe: Lo ladye, howe then I am comforted by your commyng, and with that I gan in teeres to dyſtylle, and tenderlye wepe. Nowe certes (quod loue) I ſe well (and that me ouerthynketh) that wytte in the fayleth, and arte in poynte to dote. Trewly (quod I) that haue ye maked, and that euer woll I rue. Wotteſt thou nat wel (quod ſhe) that euery ſhepeherde ought by reſon to ſeke hys ſperkelande ſhepe that arne ronne in to wylderneſſe, amonge buſhes and peryls, and hem to theyr paſture ayen bringe and take on hem priuy beſy cure of kepynge? and tho the vnconnyng ſhepe ſcattred wolde ben loſte, rennyng to wylderneſſe, and to deſertes drawe, or els wolden put hem ſelfe to the ſwalowynge wolfe, yet ſhal the ſhepherd by buſyneſſe and trauayle ſo put hym forth, that he ſhall nat let hem be loſte by no waye. A good ſhepeherd putteth rather hys lyfe to ben loſte for hys ſhepe. But for thou ſhalte not wene me beynge of werſe condicyon, truly for euerych of my folke, and for all tho that

to me warde be knyt in any condicion, I wil rather dye than ſuffre hem through erroure to ben ſpylt. For me lyſt, and it me lyketh, of all myne a ſheperdeſſe to be cleped▪ wotteſt thou not well I fayled neuer wyght, but he me refuſed, and wolde neglygently go with vnkyndneſſe? and yet parde hau
                        •
                      I manye ſuch holp and releued, and they haue oft me begyled, but euer at the ende it diſcendeth in theyr owne neckes. Haſt thou not radde how kynde I was to Parys, Priamus ſon of Troye? How Iaſon me falſed for all hys falſe beheſt? how Seſars ſonke, I left it for no tene tyll he was troned in my blyſſe, for his ſeruyce▪ what (ꝙ ſhe) moſt of all maked I not a louedaye betwene God and mankynde, and cheſe a mayde to be nompere, to put the quarell at ende? Lo, how I haue trauayled to haue thanke on all ſydes, and yet lyſt me not to reſt, & I myght fynde on whō I ſhulde werche, but truly myne owne dyſciple, bycauſe I haue the founde at all aſſayes in thy wyll to ben readye, mye heſtes to haue folowed, and haſt ben true to that margaryte peerle, that ones I the ſhewed, and ſhe alway ayenwarde hath made but daungerous cheare, I am come in propre perſon to put the out of errours and make the glad by wayes of reaſon, ſo that ſorowe ne dyſeaſe ſhall nomore hereafter the amayſtrye. wherethrough I hope thou ſhalte lyghtlye come to the grace, that thou longe haſt deſyred, of thilke iewel. Haſt thou not herde many enſamples, howe I haue comforted and releued the ſcholers of my lore? who hathe worthyed kynges in the felde? who hath honoured ladyes in boure by a perpetual myrroure of theyr trouthe in my ſeruyce? who hath cauſed worthye folke to voyde vyce & ſhame? who hath holde cyties and realmes in proſperitie? yf the lyſte cleape ayen thyne olde remēbraunce, thou coudeſt euery poynt of this declare in eſpecyall, and ſaye that I thy mayſtreſſe haue be cauſe, cauſyng theſe thynges and many mo other. Nowe ywys madame (quod I) al theſe thinges I know well my ſelfe, and that thyne excellence paſſeth the vnderſtandynge of vs beeſtes, and that nomans wyt erthly may comprehende thy vertues, well than (ꝙ ſhe) for I ſe the in diſeaſe and ſorow, I wote wel thou art one of myne nories, I maye not ſuffre the ſo to make ſorow thyne owne ſelfe to ſhende: but I my ſelfe come to be thy fere, thyne heauye charge to make to ſeme the leſſe, for woo is hym that is alone: And to the ſory to bē moned by a ſorowfull wyght it is greate gladneſſe. Right ſo with my ſycke frendes I am ſycke, and with ſorye, I can not els but ſorowe make, tyll whan I haue hem releued in ſuche wyſe that gladneſſe in a maner of countrepayſyng ſhal reſtore as mokel in ioy as the paſſed heuyneſſe beforne dyd in tene. And alſo (ꝙ ſhe) whan anye of my ſeruauntes ben alone in ſolitary place, I haue yet euer buſyed me to be with hem, in comfort of theyr hertes, and taught hem to make ſonges of playnte and of blyſſe, and to endyten letters of rethorycke in queynt vnderſtādynges, & to bethynke hem in what wyſe they mygt beſt theyr ladyes in good ſeruice pleſe and alſo to lerne maner in countenaunce, in wordes & in bearynge, and to ben meke and lowlye to euery wyght, his name & fame to encreaſe, and to yeue great yeftes and large that his renome may ſpryngen, but the therof haue I excuſed for thy loſſe and thy great coſtages, wherthrough thou art nedy, arne nothynge to me vnknowen, but I hope to god ſomtyme it ſhall ben amended, as thus as I ſayde. In nortuoure haue I taught al myne, and in curteſie made hem expert their ladyes hertes to wyn, and yf any wolde endeynous or proude or be enuious, or of wretches acquayntaunce, haſteliche haue I ſuch voyded out of my ſchole: for all vyces trulye I hate: vertues and worthyneſſe in all my power I auaunce. Ah worthye creature (ꝙ I) and by iuſte cauſe the name of goddeſſe dignely ye mowe beare: In the lyth ye grace through which any creature in this worlde hath any goodneſſe, truly all maner of blyſſe and precyouſneſſe in vertue out of the ſpringen and wellen, as brokes and ryuers proceden from theyr ſprynges, and lyke as all waters by kynde drawen to the ſee, ſo all kyndly thynges threſten by full appetyte of deſyre to draw after thy ſteppes, and to thy preſence approche, as to theyr kyndely perfectiō: How dare than beeſtes in this world ought forfayte ayenſte thy deuyne purueyaunce? Alſo ladye ye knowen all the pryuye thoughtes, in hertes no counſayle may ben hydde from your knowynge.
                  
                     wherfore I wot well lady that ye knowe youre ſelfe that I in my conſcyence am, and haue ben wyllyng to your ſeruyce, al coulde I neuer do as I ſhulde, yet forſothe fayned I neuer to loue otherwiſe thā was in myne herte: and yf I coulde haue made cheare to one, and ythought an other, as many other done all daye afore myne eyen, I trowe it wolde not me haue vayled. Certes quod ſhe haddeſt thou ſo done, I wold not now haue the here vyſited. Ye wete wel lady eke (quod I) that I haue not played racket, nettyll in, docke out, and with the wethercock waued and truly there ye me ſette, by accorde of my conſcience, I wolde not flye, tyll ye and reaſon by aperte ſtrength made myne herte to tourne. In good faythe (quod ſhe) I haue knowe the euer of tho condicions, and ſythē thou woldeſt (in as moche as in the was) a made me pryuy of thy counſayle, and iuge of thy conſcience, though I forſoke it in tho dayes, tyl I ſawe better my tyme, wold neuer god that I ſhulde now fayle, but euer I wyll be ready wytneſſynge thy ſoth in what place that euer I ſhall, ayenſte all tho that wol the contrary ſuſteyne: And for as moch as to me is nought vnknowen ne hydde of thy pryuy hert, but al haſt thou tho thinges made to me open at the full, that hath cauſed my commynge into this priſon to voyde the webbes of thyne eyen, to make the clerly to ſe the erroures thou haſt bene in, and bycauſe that men bene of dyuers condicyons, ſome adradde to ſaye a ſoth, and ſome for a ſothe anon readye to fyght, and alſo that I maye not my ſelfe bene in place to withſaye thylke men that of the ſpeaken, otherwyſe than the ſothe, I woll and I charge the in vertue of obedyence, that thou to me oweſt, to wryten my wordes, and ſet hem in wrytynges that they mowe as my wytneſſyng ben noted amonge the people. For bookes wrytten neyther dreden, ne ſhame, ne ſtryue conne, but only ſhewen the entent of the writer, and yeue remembraunce to the hearer: and yf anye woll in thy preſence ſaye anye thynge to tho wryters, loke boldlye, truſte on Mars to anſwer at the full. For certes I ſhall hym enfourme of all the trouthe in thy loue, with thy conſcience, ſo that of his help thou ſhalt not varye at thy nede.
                  I trowe the ſtrongeſte and the beſt that may be founde, woll not tranſuers thy wordes, whereof than woldeſt thou drede?
               
               
                  
                     GReatlye was I tho gladed of theſe wordes, and as who ſaith wexen ſomdele lyght in hert both for the auctoritie of wytneſſe & alſo for ſyckerneſſe of helpe of the forſayd be heſt, and ſayd. Trulye ladye now am I well gladded through cō
                     fort of your wordes: be it now lykynge vnto your nobleye to ſhewe whiche folke defame your ſeruauntes, ſyth your ſeruyce ought aboue all other thynges to bene commended. Yet (quod ſhe) I ſe well thy ſoule is not all out of the amaſed cloude, the were better to here thynge yt the myght lyght out of thyne heuy charge, and after knowynge of thyne owne heelpe, than to ſtyrr ſwete wordes & ſuche reaſons to here: for in a thoughtfull ſoule (and namelye ſuche one as thou arte) woll not yet ſuche thynges ſynken. Come of therfore and let me ſene thyne heuye charge, that I maye the lyghtlyer for thy comforte purueye.
                  Now certes ladye (quod I) the mooſt cō
                     fort I myght haue, were vtterly to wete me be ſure in herte of that Margaryte, I ſerue and ſo I thynke to done wyth all myghtes whyle my lyfe dureth. Thā (quod ſhe) mayeſt thou thereafter, in ſuche wyſe that myſpleaſaunce ne entre? In good fayth (quod I) there ſhall no myſpleaſaunce be cauſed through treſpaſſe on my ſyde. And I do the to wetē (ꝙ ſhe) I ſet neuer yet perſō to ſerue in no place (but yf he cauſed the contrary in defaultes and treſpaſſes) that he ne ſpedde of hys ſeruyce. Myne owne earthlye ladye (quod I tho) and yet remembre to your worthyneſſe how longe ſythen by many reuoluynge of yeres, in tyme whan Octobre hys leue gynneth take, and Nouembre ſheweth him to ſight, whā bernes ben full of goodes as is the nut on euery halke, and than good lande tyllers gynne ſhape for the erth, with great trauayle to bryng forth more corne to mannes ſuſtenaunce, ayenſt the nexte yeres folowynge. In ſuch tyme of plentie, he that hath an home, and is wyſe, lyſt not to wander

maruayles to ſeche, but he be conſtrayned or excited: oft the loth thynge is done by excitacyon of other mennes opinion, which wolden fayne haue myne abydynge, take in hert of luſt, to trauayle and ſe the wynding of the erth in that tyme of wynter, by woodes that large ſtretes werne in, by ſmal pathes that ſwyne and hogges haden made, as lanes with ladles theyr maſte to ſeche, I walked thynkynge aloone a wonder greate whyle, and the greate beeſtes that the wood haunten and adorneth all maner foreſtes, and heerdes gone to wylde: than er I was ware I neyghed to a ſee banke, & for ferde of the beeſtes ſhypcraft I cryed: For lady I trowe ye wete well your ſelfe nothynge is werſe than the beeſtes that ſhulden bē tame yf they catche her wyldeneſſe, and gyn ayen waxe ramage: thus forſothe was I aferde, and to ſhyppe me hyed. Than were there ynowe to latch myne handes and drawe me to ſhyppe, of which many I knewe well the names. Syght was the fyrſt, luſt was another, thought was the thyrde, and wyll eke was there a mayſter: theſe broughten me wt in boorde of this ſhyppe of trauayle. So whan the ſayle was ſprad, and this ſhyppe gan to moue, the wynde and water gan for to ryſe, and ouerthwartly to turne ye welken the wawes ſemeden as they kyſt togyther, but often vnder colour of kyſſyng is mokell olde hate priuily cloſed and kept. The ſtorm ſo ſtraungely and in deuouryng maner gan ſo faſt vs aſſayle, that I ſuppoſed the date of my deth ſhulde haue made there his gynnyng, now vp now downe, nowe vnder the wawe and nowe abouen, was my ſhyppe a great whyle. And ſo by mokel dureſſe of wethers and of ſtormes, and with greate auowynge pylgremages I was dryuen to an yle, where vtterly I wende fyrſte to haue be reſcowed, but truly at the fyrſt gynnynge, it ſemed me ſo peryllous the hauen to catche, that but thorowe grace I hadde bene comforted, of lyfe I was full diſpayred. Truly, ladye yf ye be remembred aryght of all maner thynges, your ſelfe came haſtely to ſene vs ſee driuen, and to weten what we weren but fyrſte ye were deynous of cheare, after whyche ye goone better alyght, and euer as me thought ye lyued in greate drede of diſeaſe, it ſemed ſo by your chere.
                  And whan I was certifyed of your name the lenger I looked in you, the more I you goddly dradde, and euer myne herte on you opened the more, and ſo in a lytle tyme my ſhyppe was out of mynde. But ladye as ye me lad, I was ware both of beeſtes and of fyſſhes a great nōbre throngynge togyther: among which a muſkell in a blewe ſhel had encloſed a Margaryte perle, the mooſt precyous and beſt that euer toforne came in my ſyght, and ye tolden youre ſelfe that ylke iewell in his kynde was ſo good and ſo vertuous, that her better ſhulde I neuer fynde, all ſought I therafter to the worldes ende, and wyth that I helde my peace a greate whyle: and euer ſythē I haue me bethought on the man that ſought the precious Margarytes, and whan he had founden one to his lykyng, he ſolde all his good to bye that iewell: Ywys thought I, & yet ſo I thynke, now haue I founden the iewelle that myne hert deſyreth, wherto ſhulde I ſech ferther? truly now woll I ſtynte, and on this Margaryte I 
                        •
                     et me for euer. Nowe than alſo ſythen I wyll well it was your wyl that I ſhoulde to ſuche a ſeruyce me take, and ſo to deſyre that thynge of whiche I neuer haue blyſſe, there lyueth none, but he hath diſeaſe your myght than that brought me to ſuche ſeruyce, that to me is cauſe of ſorowe and of ioye, I wondre of your worde that ye ſayne to bryngen men into ioye, and parde ye wet well that defaulte ne treſpaſſe maye not reaſonably bene put to mewardes, as farre as my conſcience knoweth. But of my diſeaſe me lyſte nowe a whyle to ſpeake, and to enforme you in what maner of blyſſe ye haue me thronge. For truly I wene that al gladneſſe, all ioye, and all myrth is beſhet vnder locke, and the keye throwen in ſuche place yt it may not be founde, my brennyng wo hath altred all my hewe. whan I ſhoulde ſlepe, I walowe and I thynke, & me diſporte. Thus cōbred, I ſeme that all folke had me maſed. Alſo ladye myne, deſyre hath longe dured, ſome ſpekynge to haue, or els at ye leeſt haue ben enmoyſed with ſyght: and for wanting of theſe thinges, my mouth wolde & he durſt pleyne right ſore, ſythen euyls for my goodneſſe arne manyfolde to me yolden. I wonder lady truly, ſaue euermore your reuerēce, how ye mowe for ſhame ſuch thinges ſuffre

on youre ſeruaunte to be ſo multyplyed: wherfore knelyng with a lowe hert I praye you to rue on this caytyfe, that of nothynge now may ſerue. Good ladye yf ye lyſt nowe your helpe to me ſhewe, that am of your priuyeſt ſeruauntes at al aſſayes in this tyme, and vnder your wynges of protection. No helpe to mewardes is ſhapen, how ſhal thā ſtraungers in any wyſe after ſuccour loke, whan I that am ſo pryuy, yet of helpe I do fayle? Further may I not, but thus in this priſon abyde: what bondes and chaynes me holden, lady ye ſe wel your ſelfe? A renyant foringed hath not halfe the care. But thus ſyghyng and ſobbynge I wayle here alone, and nere it for cōfort of your preſence, ryght here wold I ſterne. And yet alytle am I gladed, yt ſo goodly ſuche grace and none happe haue I hent, gracyouſlye to fynde the precyous Margarete, that (all other leſte) menne ſhulde bye, yf they ſhulde therfore ſel all her ſubſtaunce. wo is me that ſo manye let games and purpoſe brekers bene maked wayters ſuche pryſoners as I am, euermore to ouerloke and to hyndre, and for ſuche lettoures, it is harde any ſuche iewell to wyn. Is this lady an honour to thy deytie? me thynketh by ryght, ſuche people ſhoulde haue no mayſtry, ne ben ouerlokers ouer none of thy ſeruauntes. Truly were it leful vnto you, to all the goddes wolde I playne, that ye rule youre deuyne purueyaunce amonges youre ſeruauntes nothyng as ye ſhulde. Alſo lady my moeble is inſu
                        ••
                     yſaunt to countreuayle the pryce of this iewell, or els to make theſchaunge: eke no wyght is worthy ſuche perles to weare, but kynges or princes, or elles theyr peres: this iewel for vertue wolde adorne & make fayre al a realme, the no
                        •
                     ley of vertue is ſo moche that her goodneſſe ouer all is cōmended who is it yt wold not wayle but he myght ſuche rycheſſe haue at his wyl the vertue therof out of this priſon may me delyuer, & nought els. And yf I be not there throw holpen, I ſe my ſelfe withouten recouery: Althoughe I myght hence voyde, yet wolde I not, I wold abyde the day that deſteny hath me ordained, which I ſuppoſe is without amendement, ſo ſore is myne herte bounden, that I may thynken none other. Thus ſtrayte (lady,) hath ſyr Daunger laced me in ſtockes, I leue it be not your wyl: and for I ſe you taken ſo lytle hede, as me thynketh, & woll not maken by your myght the vertue in mercy of that Margaret on me for to ſtretch ſo as ye mow wel, in caſe that you lyſt: my blyſſe and my myrth are felde, ſykneſſe and ſorowe ben alway redy, ye cope oftene is wounde about all my bodye, that ſtondyng is me beſt, vneth may I lygge for pure myſeaſy ſorowe, and yet all this is lytel ynough to be the erneſt ſiluer, in forward of this bargayne for treble folde, ſo mockell muſt I ſuffre, er tyme come of myne eaſe. For he is worthy no welth, that may no wo ſuffre. And certes I am heuye to thynke on theſe thynges, but who ſhall yeue me water ynough to drynke, leſt myne eyen drye for rē
                     nynge ſtreames of teares? who ſhall waylē with me myne owne happy heuyneſſe▪ who ſhall counſayle me nowe in my lykyng tene, and in my goodly harſe? I not. For euer the more I brenne, the more I couete, the more that I ſorowe, the more thriſt I in gladnes who ſhal than yeue me a contrarious drink to ſtanch the thyrſt of my blyſful bytternes? Lo thus I brenne and I drenche, I ſhyuer and I ſwet, to this reuerſed euyl was neuer yet ordeyned ſalue, for ſoth all lyches ben vnconnyng, ſaue the Margaryte aloone, anye ſuche remedye to purueye
               
               
                  
                     ANd wt theſe wordes I braſt out to wepe, that euery tere of myne eyen for greatneſſe ſemed they boren oute of ye ball of my ſyght, and that all the water had ben out run. Thā thought me, that loue gan a lytle to heauye for miſcomfort of my chere, and gan ſobrely and in eaſye maner ſpeake, well aduyſynge what ſhe ſayde. Comenly the wyſe ſpeaken eaſelye and ſofte for manye ſkylles: One is, theyr wordes are the better beleued, and alſo in eaſye ſpeakyng, auyſement men maye catche, what to put forth, and what to holden in. And alſo the auctoritie of eaſye wordes is the more, and eke they yeuen the more vnderſtandyng to other intention of the mater. Ryght ſo this lady eaſely and in a ſofte maner gan ſaye theſe wordes.
                  ¶Meruayle (ꝙ ſhe) great it is, that by no maner of ſemblaunt, as farre as I can eſpy thou lyſte not to haue anye recoure, but euer

thou playneſt and ſoroweſt, and wayes of remedye for foolyſh wylfulneſſe the lyſt not to ſeche: but enquyre of thy next frēdes that is thyne in wyt, and me that haue ben thy mayſtreſſe, and the recoure and fyne of thy diſeaſe, or of diſeaſe is gladneſſe and Ioye, with a ful veſſel ſo helded, that it quencheth the felyng of the fyrſt tenes. But thou that were wonte not onely theſe thinges remembre in thyne herte, but alſo fooles thereof to enfourmen, in adnullynge of theyr errours, and diſtroying of theyr darke opinions, and in comforte of theyr ſeare thoughtes: nowe canſt thou not bene comforte of thyne owne ſoul, in thynkyng of theſe thinges. O where haſt thou ben ſo longe commenſal, that haſt ſo mykell eeten of the pottages of foryetfulneſſe: and dronken ſo of ignoraunce, that the olde ſoukyng which thou hadeſt of me, arne a mayſtred and lorne fro all maner of knowynge? O this is a worthy parſon to helpe other, that can not counſayle hym ſelfe. And with theſe wordes for pure & ſtronge ſhame I woxe all reed.
                  And ſhe than ſeing me ſo aſtonyed by dyuers ſtoundes, ſodaynly (which thyng kynd hateth) gan delyciouſlye me comforte wyth ſugred wordes, puttyng me in ful hope that I ſhulde the Margarete getten, yf I folowed her heeſtes, and gan with a fayre cloth to wypen the teares that hyngen on my chekes: and than ſayde I in this wyſe. Nowe well of wyſdome and of all welth, withouten the may nothyng be lerned, thou beareſt the keyes of all pryuye thynges. In vayne trauayle men to catche any ſtedſhyp, but yf ye lady fyrſt the locke vnſhet, ye lady learne vs the wayes and the by pathes to heauen: ye lady maken al the heuenly bodyes goodly and benigly to do her courſe, that gouernen vs beeſtes here on erth. Ye armen youre ſeruauntes ayenſt all debates, with impercyable harneys, ye ſetten in her hertes inſuperable bloud of hardyneſſe, ye leden hem to the parfyte good. Yet all thynge deſyreth, ye werne no man of helpe that wele done your lore, graunt me now a lytle of your grace, al my ſorowes to ceaſe. Myne owne ſeruaunte (ꝙ ſhe) truly thou ſytteſt nye myne herte and thy bad chere gan ſoryly me greue: but amonge thy playnyng wordes me thought thou allegeſt thynges to be lettyng of thyne helpyng, and thy grace to hyndre, wherthorowe me thynketh that wanhoope is crope through thyne herte: God forbyd that nyſe vnthryfty thought ſhulde come in thy mynd thy wyttes to trouble, ſythen euery thing in cōmyng is contingente, wherefore make nomore thy propoſition by an impoſſyble. But nowe I praye the reherſe me ayen tho thynges, that thy miſtruſt cauſen, and thilke thinges I thynke by reaſon to deſtroyen, & put full hope in thyne hert. what vnderſtandeſt thou ther (ꝙ ſhe) by that thou ſaydeſt many lette games are thyne ouerlokers. And alſo by that thy moeble is inſuffyſaunte, I not what thou therof meaneſt
                  Truly (quod I) by the fyrſte, I ſaye that iangelers euermore arne ſpeakynge rather of euyll than of good, for euerye age of man rather enclyneth to wyckedneſſe, than anye goodneſſe to auaunce. Alſo falſe wordes ſpryngen ſo wyde, by the ſteryng of falſe lyinge tonges, that fame als ſwyftly flyeth to her eares, and ſayeth many wycked tales, & as ſoone ſhall falſeneſſe ben leued as truthe, for all his great ſothneſſe. Nowe by ye other (quod I) me thynketh thylke iewel ſo precious, that to no ſuche wretch as I am, wold vertue thereof extende, and alſo I am to feble in worldly ioyes, any ſuche iewell to coū
                     treuayle. For ſuche people that worldlye ioyes han at her wyl, ben ſet at the hygheſt degree, and mooſt in reuerence bene accepted, for falſe wenynge maketh felicitie therein to be ſuppoſed: but ſuche caytyues as I am euermore ben hyndred. Certes (quod ſhe) take good hede, and I ſhall by reaſon to the ſhewen, that all theſe thynges mowe not let thy purpoſe, by the leeſte poynte that anye wyght coude prycke.
               
               
                  
                     REmembreſt not (quod ſhe) enſample is one of the ſtrōgeſt maner as for to preue a mans purpoſe. Than if I now by enſample enduce the to any propoſitiō, is it not proued by ſtrength? Yes for ſoth (ꝙ I) wel (quod ſhe) raddeſt thou neuer how Parys of Troy and Heleyne loued togyther, and yet had they not entrecomuned of ſpeche? Alſo Acriſyus ſhette Dane hys doughter in a tour, for ſurete that no wight ſhulde of her haue no maſtry in my ſeruyce,

and yet Iupiter by ſygnes withoute anye ſpech had all his purpoſe ayenſt her fathers wyll. And many ſuche mo haue ben knytte in trouth, and yet ſpake they neuer togyder: for that is a thynge encloſed vnder ſecretneſſe of priuitie, why twe perſonnes entremellen hertes after a ſyght. The power in knowynge of ſuche thynges ſo preuen, ſhall not all vtterlye be yeuen to you beeſtes, for manye thynges in ſuche precyous maters, ben reſerued to iudgement of deuine purueyaunce, for amonge lyuynge people, by mans conſyderation moune they not be determyned. wherefore I ſaye, all the enuye, all the ianglynge, that welny people vpon my ſeruauntes maken efte, is rather cauſe of eſployte than of any hyndrynge. why than (ꝙ I) ſuffre ye ſuche wronge, and moune whan ye lyſt, lyghtlye all ſuche euyls abate, me ſemyth to you it is a greate vnworſhyp. O (ꝙ ſhe) holde nowe thy peace, I haue founden to manye that han bene to me vnkynde, that truly I wol ſuffre euery wyght in that wiſe to haue diſeaſe, and who that contynueth to the ende well and truly, hem woll I helpen, and as for one of myne into blyſſe to wende as Marcial doing in Grece. who was ycrowned, by God not the ſtrongeſt, but he that ratheſt come and longeſt abode and contynued in the iourneye, and ſpared not to trauayle as longe as the play leſt.
                  But thylke perſon that profred hym now to my ſeruyce therin is a whyle, & anon voydeth and redy to an other, and ſo now one he thynketh and now an other, and into water entreth and anon reſpyreth, ſuch one liſt me not into parfyte blyſſe of my ſeruyce brynge A tree ofte ſet in dyuers places woll not by kynde endure to brynge forth frutes. Loke now I praye the, howe myne olde ſeruauntes of tyme paſſed continued in her ſeruyce, and folowe thou after theyr ſteppes, & than myght thou not fayle, in caſe thou worch in this wiſe. Certes (quod I) it is nothing lich this worlde to tyme paſſed, eke this countre hath one maner, & an other coūtrie hath another. And ſo may not a mā alway put to his eye the ſalue that he healed with his hele. For this is ſoth, betwex two thynges lyche oft dyuerſitie is requyred. Now (ꝙ ſhe) that is ſoth, diuerſitie of nacion, diuerſitie of law as was maked by manye reaſons, for that diuerſitie cōmeth in by the contrarious malyce of wicked people yt han enuyous hertes ayenſt other. But trulye my lawe to my ſeruauntes euer hath ben in generall, whyche maye not fayle, for ryght as mans lawes yt is ordeyned by many determinacions, may not be know for good or bad, tyl aſſay of the people han proued it, and to what end it draweth, and than it ſheweth the neceſſitie therof, or els the impoſſibilitie. Ryght ſo ye lawe of my ſeruauntes ſo wel hath ben proued in generall, that hytherto hath it not fayled.
                  wyſte thou not well, that all the lawe of kynde is my lawe, and by god ordeyned and ſtablyſſhed to dure by kynde reaſoun, wherfore all lawe by mans wyt purueyed, ought to be vnderput to lawe of kynde, whiche yet hath be cōmune to euery kyndly creature, yt my ſtatutes and my lawes than ben kyndly are generall to all peoples. Olde doinges, & by many turnynges of yeres vſed, and with the peoples maner proued, mowen not ſo lyghtly ben defaſed, but newe doinges contrariaunces ſuch olde, often cauſen diſeaſes and breaken many purpoſes. Yet ſaye I not therefore, that ayen newe myſchefe, menne ſhulde not ordaynen a newe remedy, but alway loke it contrary not the olde, no ferther than the malyce ſtretcheth. Than foloweth it the olde doinges in loue han bene vniuerſall, as for mooſt exployte forth vſed: wherfore I woll not yet, that of my lawes nothynge be adnulled.
                  But than to the purpoſe, ſuche iangelers and lokers, and wayters of games, yf they thynke in ought they mowe dere, yet loue well alwaye, and ſet hem at nought, and let thy portes ben lowe in euery wyghtes preſence, and redy in thyne herte to mayntayne that thou haſt begonne, and a lytle the fayne with mekeneſſe in wordes, and thus wyth ſleyght ſhalt thou ſurmoūt and dequace the euyll in theyr hertes. And wyſdome yet is to ſeme flye otherwhyle there a man wol fight Thus with ſuche thynges, the tonges or euyll ſhall ben ſtylled: els fully to graunt thy full meanynge, for ſothe euer was and euer it ſhall be, that myne enemyes ben aferde to truſt to anye fyghtynge, and therfore haue thou no cowardes herte in my ſeruyce, nomore than ſomtyme thou haddeſt in the contrary, for yf thou drede ſuche ianglers, thy

viage to make: vnderſtād wel yt he yt dredeth any rayn to ſow his cornes, he ſhal haue thā thynne bernes. Alſo he yt is aferde of his clothes, let hym daūce naked. who nothing vndertaketh, & namely in my ſeruyce, nothyng acheueth. After great ſtormes the wether is often mery and ſmoth. After much clatering there is mokyll rownynge: thus after ianglynge wordes cometh huyſhte, peace, and be ſtyl. O good lady (quod I than) ſe now how ſeuen yere paſſed and more, haue I graffed & groubed a vyne, & with all the wayes that I coude I ſoughte to a fed me of the grape, but fruite haue I none founde. Alſo haue I thys ſeuen yere ſerued Laban to a wedded Rachell his doughter, but blereryed Lya is brought to my bedde, whiche alway engendreth my tene, and is ful of children in tribulacion & in care: and although the clepinges and kyſſynges of Rachell ſhulde ſeme to me ſwete, yet is ſhe ſo barayn, that gladneſſe ne ioye by no way wol ſprynge, ſo that I maye wepe with Rachel, I may not ben counſayled wyth ſolace, ſythen iſſue of myne hertely deſyre is fayled. Nowe than I praye that to me ſone fredome and grace, in this eyght yere, this eyghteth mowe to me both by kinreſt & maſſeday after the ſeuen werkedayes of trauayle, to folowe the chriſten lawe: and what euer ye do els, that thylke Margaryte be holden ſo lady in your priuye chābre, that ſhe in thys caſe to none other perſon be committed: Loke than (quod ſhe) thou perſeuer in my ſeruice, in which I haue the groūded, that thylke ſkorne in thyne enemyes mowe this on thy perſon be not ſothed: lo this man beganne to edefye, but for hys foundemente is badde, to the ende maye he not it bringe. For mekeneſſe in coūtenaunce, wyth a manly hert in dedes, and in longe countynaunce, is the conyſaunce of my lyuerye, to al my retynue deliuered. What wenyſt thou that me lyſte auaunce ſuche perſonnes as louen the fyrſte ſyttynges at feeſtes, the hygheſt ſtoles in churches, and in hal, loutinges of peoples in markettes and fayres, vnſtedfaſte to byde in one place anye whyle togyther, wenynge hys owne wytte more excellent than other, ſcornynge all maner deuyſe but hys owne: Naye naye God wotte, theſe ſhul nothyng pertteyne of my blyſſe. Truly my maner here toforne hathe ben wyrſhyppe wyth my blyſſe, Lyons in the felde, and lambes in chambre, Egles at aſſaute and maydens in halle, foxes in counſayle, ſtyl in theyr dedes, and theyr protection is graūted redy to ben a brydge, and theyr baner is arered like wolues in the felde. Thus by theſe wayes ſhull men ben auaunced: enſample of Dauid that from kepynge of ſhepe, was drawen vp into the order of kyngly gouernaunce, and Iupiter frō a bole to bene Europes fere, and Iulius Ceſar from the loweſt degre in Rome, to be mayſter of all erthly princes, and Eneas from hel, to be kinge of the countre there Rome is nowe ſtondynge. And ſo to the I ſaye, thy grace by bearynge therafter, maye ſette the in ſuche plyghte, that no ianglynge maye greue the leſt tucke of thy hēmes, that are theyr ianghes, is noughte to counte at a creſſe in thy diſauauntage.
               
               
                  
                     EVer (quod ſhe) hath the people in thys worlde deſyred to haue had great name in worthyneſſe, & hated foule to bere anye fame, and that is one of ye obiections thou alegeſt to be ayen thyn hertely deſyre. Ye forſothe (quod I) & that ſo comenly the people wol lye, and brynge about ſuch enfame. Now (ꝙ ſhe) yf men wyth leaſynges put on enfame, weneſt thy ſelfe therby ben enpeyred▪ that wenyng is wronge, ſe why: for aſmuch as they lyen thy merite encreaſeth, and make the bene more worthy to hem that knowen of the ſoth, by what thing thou art apeyred, that in ſo mokyl thou arte encreaſed of thy beloued frendes: and ſothly a wounde of thy frend to the laſſe harme, ye ſyr, and better than a falſe kyſſyng in diſceyuable gloſynge af thyne enemye, aboue that than to be wel with thy frende maketh ſuch enfame. Ergo thou art encreaſed and not apeyred. Lady (quod I) ſomtyme yet yf a mā be in diſeaſe, theſtymacyon of the enuyouſe people ne loketh nothyng to deſertes of men ne to the merites of theyr doynges, but only to the auēture of fortune, and therafter they yeuen theyr ſentence: and ſome loken the voluntarye wyll in his herte, and therafter telleth hys iugement, not takynge hede to reaſon ne to the qualyte of the doynge, as thus. If a mā be riche and fulfylled with worldly

welefulneſſe, ſome commenden it, and ſaine it is ſo lente by iuſte cauſe: and he that hath aduerſyte, they ſayne he is weaked, & hathe deſerued thylke anoye. The cōtrary of theſe thynges ſome men holden alſo, & ſayne that to the rych, proſperyte is puruayed into his confuſyon, and vpon thys mater manye authorites of many and greate wytted clerkes they alegen. And ſome men ſayne, thoughe all good eſtimacyon forſaken folke that han aduerſyte, yet it is meryte & encreaſe of hys blyſſe, ſo that theſe purpoſes arne ſo wonderfull in vnderſtandynge, that trewlye for myne aduerſytie nowe I not howe the ſentence of the indifferent people wylingen my fame. Therfore (quod ſhe) yf anye wyghte ſhulde yeue a trew ſentence on ſuch maters, the cauſe of the diſeaſe mayſte thou ſe well, vnderſtāde thervpon after what ende it draweth, yt is to ſayne, good or badde, ſo ought it to haue his fame or by goodneſſe, enfame by badneſſe, for euery reaſonable perſon, and namely of a wyſe man, his wytte ought not wtout reaſon toforne herde, ſodainly in a mater to iuge. After the ſawes of the wiſe, thou ſhalt not iuge ne deme toforne thou knowe. Lady (ꝙ I) ye remembre wel that in mooſt laude and prayſynge of certayne ſayntes in holy churche, is to reherſen their conuercyon from badde into good, and that is ſo reherſed, as by a perpetuall myrroure of remembraunce in worſhypping of tho ſayntes, and good enſample to other miſdoers in amēdement. Howe turned the romayne zedeoreys fro the Romaynes, to be wyth Hanyball ayenſt hys kynde nacyon? and afterwardes hym ſemyng the romaynes to be at the next degree of cōfuſyon, turned to hys olde alyes by whoſe witte after was Hanibal diſcomfyted. Wherfore to enfourme you Lady the maner why I meane, ſe nowe in my youth I was drawe to bene aſſentaunt and in my myghtes helpinge to certayne coniuracions and other greate matters of rulynge of citezins, and thylke thynges ben my drawers in, & exitours to tho maters werne ſo paynted and coloured, that at the prime face, me ſemed them noble & gloryous to all the people: I than wenynge mykel meryte haue deſerued in furtherynge and mayntenaunce of tho thynges, beſyed and laboured wyth all my diligence, in werkynge of thylke maters to the ende. And trewlye lady to tell you the ſothe, me roughte, lytell of anye hate of the myghty Senatours in thylke citie, ne of comunes malyce, for two ſkyllles: One was I had comforte to bene in ſuche plyte, that both profyte were to me and to my frendes. Another was for cōmen profite in cominaltye is not but peace and tranquilytie, wyth iuſt gouernaunce proceden from thylke profyte, ſythen by counſayl of myne in witte, me thought the fyrſte paynted thynges, malyce and euell meanynge, wythouten anye good auaylynge to any people, & of tyrannye purpoſed, and ſo for pure ſorow and of my medlynge and bad infame that I was in ronne, tho teeres laſhed oute of myne eyen, were thus awaye waſhe, than the vnder hyd malyce and the rancoure of purpoſynge enuye fornecaſte and ymagined, in diſtruction of mokyl people, ſhewed ſo openly, that had I bene blynde, wyth myne hondes all the circumſtaunce I myght well haue feled.
                  Now than tho perſonnes that ſuch thynges haue caſte to redreſſe, for wrathe of my fyrſte medlynge, ſhopen me to dwell in this pynande priſon, tyll Lachaſes my threde no lēger wolde twine. And euer I was ſought yf me lyſt to haue grace of my lyfe, and freneſſe of that priſon, I ſhulde openly confeſſe how peace myght ben enduſed to endē al the fyrſte rancours. It was fully ſuppoſed my knowynge to be ful in tho maters. Than lady I thoughte that euery man that by anye waye of ryght, ryghtfully done, maye helpe any comune help to ben ſaued, which thyng to kepe aboue all thynges I am holde to mayntayne, and namely in diſtroyenge of a wronge, all ſhulde I therthroughe enpeche myne owne fere, yf he were gylty, and to do myſdede aſſentaunt, and mayſter ne frende may nought auayle to the ſoule of hym that in falſneſſe dyeth, & alſo that I nere deſyred wrathe of the people, ne indignacyon of the worthy, for nothynge that euer I wrought or dyd, in any doynge my ſelfe els, but in the mayntenaunce of theſe foreſayd erroures, & in hydinge of the priuytees therof. And that all the peoples hertes holdynge on the erroures ſyde, weren blynde and of elde ſo ferforthe begyled, that debate and ſtryfe they maynteyned, & in diſtruction on that otherſyde, by whyche cauſe the peace, that mooſt

in cominaltie ſhuld be deſyred, was in point to be broken and adnulled. Alſo the Citie of London, that is to me ſo dere and ſwete, in which I was forth growen, & more kyndly loue I haue to that peace thā to any other in earthe, as euery kyndely creature hathe full appetyte to that place of hys kyndly engendrure, and to wylne reſte and peace in that ſtede to abide: thylke peace ſhulde thus there haue bene broken, and of all wyſe it is commended and deſyred. For knowe thynge it is, all men that deſyren to comen to the perfyte peace euerlaſtynge, muſte the peace by God commended, both maintayn and kepe. Thys peace by aungelles voice was confirmed, oure God entrynge in thys worlde. Thys as for hys Teſtamente he lefte to all hys frendes, whan he retourned to the place from whence he came: thys hys Apoſtle amoneſteth to holden, wythout whyche man perfytely maye haue none inſyght. Alſo this God by hys commynge, made not peace alone betwene heuenly and erthly bodies, but alſo amonge vs on earth, ſo he peace confirmed, that in one heade of loue, one bodie we ſhulde perfourme. Alſo I remembre me wel how the name of Athenes was rather after the God of peace than of batayle, ſhewynge that peace mooſte is neceſſarye to the comunalties & cities, I than ſo ſtyred by all theſe wayes to forne nempned, declared certeyne pointes in thys wyſe. Fyrſte yt thylke perſones yt hadden me drawen to their purpoſes, and me not wetyng the priuy entent of their meaning, drawē alſo the feable witted people yt haue none inſyght of gubernatyfe prudēce to clamur & to crie on maters yt they ſtyred, and vnder poyntes for comune auauntage, they enbolded the paſſyfe to take in the actyues doynge, and alſo ſtyred innocentes of connynge to crye after thynges, whyche (quod they) may not ſtande but we bene executours of tho matters, and auctorite of excecucion by comen electiō to vs be delyuered & that muſt entre by ſtrength of your mayntenaunce, for we out of ſuche degree put, oppreſſion of theſe olde hyndrers ſhall agayne ſurmounten and putten you in ſuch ſubiection, that in endeleſſe wo ye ſhull complaine. The gouernementes (quod they) of your citie left in the handes of torcencious citezins ſhall brynge in peſtilence and diſtruction to you good men, and therfore let vs haue thecomune adminiſtration to abate ſuch yuels. Alſo (quod they) it is worthy the good to cō
                     mende, and the gyltye deſertes to chaſtice. There bene citezins many for ferde of execucyon that ſhall be doone, for extorcyons by hem committed, bene euer more ayenſt theſe purpoſes, and all other good meanynges. Neuer the latter Ladye, trewelye the meanynge vnder theſe wordes, was fullye to haue apeched the myghty ſenatours, which hadden heauy herte for the miſgouernaunce that they ſeen. And ſo lady whan it fell that free election, by great clamour of much people, for greate diſeaſe of myſgouernaunce ſo feruently ſtoden in her electiō, that they hem ſubmitted to euerye maner face, rather than haue ſuffred the maner and the rule of the hated gouernours, not wythſtandinge that in the contrary helden much comune meyny that haue no conſideration, but onely to voluntary luſtes, withouten reaſon. But than thylke gouernoure ſo forſaken, faynynge to forne hys vndoynge for miſrule in his time, ſhope to haue letted thylk election, and haue made a newe hym ſelfe to haue bene choſen, and vnder that mokyll rore haue arered. Theſe thynges Ladie knowen amonge the princes, & made open to the people, draweth in amendement, that euery degree ſhal bene ordayned to ſtande there as he ſhulde, & that of errours coming, herafter men may lightly to forne hande puruaye remedye, in thys wyſe peace and reſt to be furthered & holde. Of the whiche thinges lady, thylke perſons broughten in anſwere to forne theyr mooſte ſouerayne iuge, not coarted hy paynyng dures, openlye knowlegeden, and aſked therof grace, ſo that apertly it preueth my wordes bene ſothe, without forgyng of leaſynges.
                  But nowe it greueth me to remēbre theſe dyuers ſentences, in ianglyng of theſe ſhepy people: certes me thynketh they oughten to maken ioye that a ſothe maye be knowe. For my trouth and my conſcience bene wytneſſe to me bothe, that thys knowyng ſothe haue I ſayde for no harme ne malyce of tho perſonnes, but onely for trouth of my ſacramēt in my leigiaunce, by whych I was charged on my kynges behalfe. But ſe ye not nowe ladye howe the felonous thoughtes of thys people, and couyns of wycked men, conſpyren

                        〈6 pages missing〉
                     
                     
What myghte thou more haue doone than thou dydeſte, but yf thou woldeſte in a falſe quarell haue bene a ſtynkynge martyr? I wene thou fleddeſt as longe as thou might, theyr priuytie to conſayle, whyche thynge thou heleſte lenger than thou ſhuldeſt. And thilke that ought the money no penny wold paye, they wende thy retourne had bene an impoſſible. Howe myghte thou better haue hem proued, but thus in thy nedye diſeaſes? Nowe haſte thou enſample for whom thou ſhalte meddle: trewely thys lore is worthe many goodes.
               
               
                  
                     OFte ganne loue to ſterne me theſe wordes, thynke on my ſpeche, for trewly here after it woll do the lyking, and howe ſo euer thou ſe fortune ſhape her wheele to tourne, thys meditation by no waye reuolue. For certes fortune ſheweth her fayreſt, whan ſhe thynketh to begyle. And as me thoughte here to forne thou ſaydeſte thy loos in loue, for thy ryght weſeneſſe oughte to be rayſed, ſhulde be a lowed in tyme comynge. Thou myghte in loue ſo the haue, that loos and fame ſhull ſo bene rayſed, that to thy frendes comforte and ſorowe to thyne enemyes endeleſſe ſhul endure.
                  But yf thou were that one ſhepe amōges the hundred were loſte in deſerte, and out of the waye had erred, and nowe to the flocke arte reſtored, the ſhepeherde hathe in the no ioy, and thou ayen to the forreſt tourne. But that ryght as the ſorowe and anguyſh was greate in the tyme of thyne out way goyng, ryght ſo ioye and gladneſſe ſhall be doubled to ſene the conuerted, & not as Lothes wyfe ayen lokynge, but hoole counſayle wyth the ſhepe folowyng, and wyth them graſſe and herbes gadre. Neuer the later (quod ſhe) I ſaye not theſe thinge for no wantruſt that I haue in ſuppoſynge of the otherwiſe than I ſhulde. For trewly I watte well, that nowe thou arte ſet in ſuch a purpoſe, out of which the lyſte not to parte. But I ſaye it, for many men there bene, that to knowing of other mennes doynges ſetten all theyr cure, and lyghtlye deſyren the badde to clatter rather than the good, and haue no wyl theyr owne maner to amende. They alſo hate of olde rā
                     coure lyghtly hauen, & there that ſuch thyng abideth, ſodainly in theyr mothes procedeth the abundaunce of the herte, and wordes as ſtones, ſtones out throw. wherfore my coū
                     ſayle is euer more openlye and apertelye, in what place thou ſyt, countreplete therrours and meaninges, in as farre as thou hem wyſtyſt falſe, and leaue for no wyghte to make hem be knowe in euery bodyes eare, and be alwaye paciente and vſe Iacobes wordes, what ſo euer menne of the clappen, I ſhall ſuſtayne my ladyes wrathe whyche I haue deſerued, ſo longe as my Margaryte hathe rightwyſed my cauſe. And certes (quod ſhe) I wytneſſe my ſelfe, yf thou thus conuerted ſoroweſte in good meanynge in thyne herte, wolte from all vanytie parfytelye departe, in conſolatioun of al good pleſaunce of that Margaryte, whiche that thou deſyreſte after wyl thyne herte, in a maner of a mothers pytie, ſhull fully accepte the in to grace. For ryghte as thou renteſt clothes in open ſyght ſo openlye to ſowe hem at hys worſhyppe wythouten reprofe commended. Alſo ryght as thou were enſample of muche folde erroure, ryghte ſo thou muſte be enſample of manyfolde correction, ſo good ſauoure to forgoynge all erroure diſtroyeng cauſeth dilygent loue, with many playted prayſinges to folowe, and than ſhal all the fyrſt errours make the folowynge worſhyppes to ſeme hugely encreaſed, blacke and whyte ſette togyder, euerye for other more ſemeth, and ſo dothe euery thynges contrary in kynde. But infame that gothe alwaye to fore, and prayſynge worſhyppe by any cauſe folowing after, maketh to ryſe thylke honoure in double of welth, and that quēcheth the ſpotte of the fyrſt enfame. why weniſt I ſaye theſe thynges, in hyndrynge of thy name? Naye naye god wo
                        •
                     te, but for pure encreaſing worſhip thy ryghtwyſneſſe to cōmende, & thy trouth to ſeme the more▪ woſt not wel thy ſelfe, that thou in fourme of makynge paſſeth not Adā that ete of the apple. Thou paſſeth not the ſtedſtaſtneſſe of Noe, ye eatynge of the grape become dronke. Thou paſſeth not the chaſtyte of Lothe, that laye by hys doughter. Eke the nobley of Abraham, whō god reproued by hys pryde. Alſo Dauides mekeneſſe,

whyche for a woman made Vrye be ſlawe. What alſo Hector of Troye, in whome no defaute myght be founde, yet is he reproued that he ne hadde wyth manhode not ſuffered the warre begonne, ne Parys to haue wente into Grece, by whome ganne all the ſorowe: for trewly hym lacketh no venyme of pryue conſentynge, whyche that openlye leaueth a wronge to wythſaye.
                  Lo eke an olde prouerbe amōges many other, he that is ſtyll ſemeth as he graunted.
                  Now by theſe enſamples, thou myght fully vnderſtonde, that theſe thynges ben wryte to your lernynge, & in ryghtwyſeneſſe of tho perſones, as thus: To euery wyght hys defaute cōmitted, made goodneſſe afterwardes done, be the more in reuerēce and in open ſhe wynge, for enſample is it not ſonge in holye church. Lo howe neceſſary was Adās ſynne Dauyd the kynge gat Salomō the kynge of her that was Vries wyfe. Truly for reprofe is none of theſe thinges wrytte: Right ſo tho I reherce thy before dede, I repreue yt neuer the more, ne for no vyllany of the are they reherſed, but for worſhyppe, ſo t
                        ••
                     u contynue well here after, and for profyte of thy ſelfe, I rede thou on hem thynke.
                  Then ſayd I ryght thus. Lady of vnyte and accorde, enuye and wrathe lurken there thou comeſt in place, ye wetē well your ſelue and ſo done many other, that whyle I adminyſtred the offyce of cōmen doynge, as in rulynge of the ſtablyſhmentes amōges the people, I defouled neuer my conſcience for no maner dede, but euer by wytte and by counſayle of the wyſeſt, the maters were drawen to theyr ryght endes. And thus trewlye for you ladye I haue deſyred ſuche cure, and certes in youre ſeruyce was I not ydell, as ferre as ſuche doynge of my cure ſtretcheth. That is a thynge (quod ſhe) that may drawē many hertes of noble, and voyce of cōmune in to glorye, and fame is not but wretched and fyckle.
                  Alas that mankynde coueyteth in ſo leude a wyſe, to be rewarded of any good dede, ſith glorye of fame in this worlde, is not but hyndrynge of glorye in tyme cōmynge. And certes (quod ſhe) yet at the hardeſt ſuch fame in to heauen, is not the erthe but a centre to the cercle of heuen. And prycke is wōder lytell in reſpecte of al ye cercle, and yet in al this prycke may no name be borne in maner of peerſyng for many obſtacles, as waters and wylderneſſe, and ſtraunge langages, and not onely names of men ben ſtylled and holden oute of knowlegynge by theſe obſtacles, but alſo cyties & realmes of proſperite ben letted to be know, and theyr reaſon hyndred, ſo that they mow not ben parfytly in mennes proper vnderſtandynge. Howe ſhulde then the name of a ſynguler londenoys paſſe the gloryous name of London, whyche by many it is commended, and by many it is lacked, and in many mo places in erthe not knowen, then knowen: for in many countrees lytel is London in knowyng or in ſpeche, and yet among one maner of people may not ſuche fame in goodneſſe come, for as many as prayſen comenly as many lacken. Fye then on ſuche maner fame, ſlepe and ſuffre hym that knoweth preuyte of hertes, to dele ſuche fame, in thylke place there nothynge ayenſt a ſothe ſhal neyther ſpeake ne dare appere, by atturney ne by other maner. Howe many great named and many greate in worthyneſſe loſed, han be tofore thys tyme, that now out of memorie are ſlydden and clenely forgetten, for defaute of wrytynges, and yet ſcriptures for great elde ſo ben defaſed, yt no perpetualte maye in hem ben iuged. But yf thou wolte make compariſon to euer, what ioy mayſt thou haue in erthlye name, it is a fayre lykeneſſe, a pees or one grayne of wheate, to a thouſand ſhyppes ful of corne charged. What nombre is betwene the one and thother, and yet mowe both they be nombred, and ende in rekenyng haue. But trewly all that maye be nombred, is nothyng to recken, as to thylke that maye not be nombred, for ofte thynges ended is made comparyſon, as one lytel, another great, but in thinges to haue an ende, and another no ende, ſuche comparyſon maye not be founden. wherfore in heauen to ben loſed wyth God hath none ende, but endleſſe endureth, and thou canſte nothynge done aryght, but thou deſyre the rumoure therof be healed and in euerye wyghtes eare, and that dureth but a prycke in reſpect of the other. And ſo thou ſekeſt rewarde of folkes ſmale wordes, and of vayne prayſynges. Trewly therin thou leſeſt the guerdon of vertue, and leſeſt the greateſt valoure of conſcience, and vphap they renome

euerlaſtyng. Therfore boldely renome of fame of the erthe ſhuld be hated, and fame after deth ſhulde be deſyred, of werkes of vertue aſketh guerdoning, and the ſoule cauſeth al vertue: Thē the ſoule delyuered out of priſone of erthe, is moſt worthy ſuche guerdone amonge to haue in the euerlaſtynge fame, & not the body that cauſeth all mannes yuels.
               
               
                  
                     OF tweye thynges arte thou anſwered as me thynketh (quod Loue) and yf any thynge be in doute in thy ſoule, ſhewe it forth thyne ignoraūce to clere, and leaue it for no ſhame. Certes (quod I) there ne is no bodye in thys worlde, that ought coude ſaye by reaſon ayenſt any of your ſkylles, as I leue, & by my wytte nowe fele I wel, that euell ſpekers or bearers of enfame, may lytel greue or lette my purpoſe, but rather by ſuche thynge my quarell to be forthered. Yea (ꝙ ſhe) and it is proued alſo, that the ylke iewell in my kepynge ſhal not there thorowe be ſteered, of ye leſt moment yt myght be ymagined. That is ſoth (ꝙ I), well (ꝙ ſhe) then leueth there, to declare yt thy inſuffiſaūce is no maner letting as thus, for that ſhe is ſo worthye thou ſhuldeſt not clymbe ſo hygh, for thy moebles and thyne eſtate arne voyded, thou thynkeſt fallē in ſuche myſerye, that gladneſſe of thy purſute woll not on thy dyſcende. Certes (quod I) that is ſothe: ryghte ſuche thought is in myne herte, for cōmenly it is ſpoken, and for an olde prouerbe it is leged: He that heweth to hye, wyth chyppes he maye leſe his ſyght. Wherfore I haue ben about in al that euer I myghte, to ſtudye wayes of remedye by one ſyde or by another. Nowe (quod ſhe) god forbede ere thou ſeke any other doynges, but ſuch as I haue lerned yt in our reſtinge whyles, and ſuche herbes as ben planted in oure gardyns. Thou ſhalt well vnderſtande, that aboue man is but one god alone. How (quod I) hau mē to forne thys tyme truſted in writtes and chauntementes, and in helpes of ſpirites that dwellē in the ayre, and therby they han gettē theyr deſyres, where as fyrſt for all hys manly power he daunced behynde.
                  O (quod ſhe) fye on ſuch maters, for trewly that is ſacrilege, and that ſhal haue no ſort with any of my ſeruaūtes, in myne eyen ſhall ſuche thynge not be loked after. Howe often is it cōmaunded by theſe paſſed wyſe, that to one god ſhal men ſerue, and not to goddes. And who that lyſt to haue myne helpes, ſhal aſke none helpe of foule ſpirites. Alas, is not man maked ſemblable to god? woſt thou not wel that al vertue of lyuelych werkynge by goddes purueyaunce is vnderputte to reſonable creature in erth, is not euery thynge a thiſhalfe god made buxome to mannes cō
                     templacyon, vnderſtandynge in heuen and in erthe, and in helle? Hath not manne beynge with ſtones, ſoule of wexyng with trees and herbes? Hathe he not ſoule of felynge, wyth beeſtes, fyſhes, and foules, and he hath ſoule of reaſon and vnderſtandyng with aungels, ſo that in hym is knyt all maner of lyuynges by a reaſonable proporcion. Alſo mā is made of all the foure elementes. All vniuerſytee is rekened in him alone: he hath vnder god princypalite aboue al thynges. Now is his ſoule here, now a thouſand myle hence, now ferre nowe nygh, nowe hye now lowe, as ferre in a momente, as in mountenaunce often wynter, and al thys is in mannes gouernaunce & dyſpoſition. Then ſheweth it, yt men ben lych vnto goddes, and chyldren of moſte heyghte. But now ſythen al thynges vnderputte to ye wyll of reaſonable creatures, god forbede any man to wynne that lordſhyp, & aſke helpe of any thynge lower then hym ſelfe, & thē namely of foule thynges innominable. Nowe thē why ſhuldeſt thou wene to loue to high? ſythen nothynge is the aboue but god alone. Trewly I wote well, yt thylke iewell is in a maner euē in lyne of degre there thou art thy ſelfe, & nought aboue, ſaue thus. Angel vpon angell, man vpon man, and deuell vpon deuell, han a maner of ſoueraygnitie, and that ſhall ceaſe at the daye of dome: and ſo I ſaye, thoughe thou be putte to ſerue the ylke iewel durynge thy lyfe, yet is that no ſeruage of vnderputtynge, but a maner of trauaylynge pleaſaunce, to conquere and gette that thou haſte not. I ſette nowe the hardeſt, in my ſeruyce nowe thou deideſt for ſorowe of wā
                     tynge in thy deſyres: trewlye all heauenlye bodyes wyth one voyce ſhul come & make me lody in thy comynge, and ſaye welcome oure fere, and worthy to entre into Iupyters ioye for thou wyth myght haſte ouercome dethe,

thou woldeſt neuer flytte out of thy ſeruyce, and we all ſhul now pray to the goddes row by rowe to make thilk Margarite yt no routh had in this perſone, but vnkyndely wythout comforte let the deye, ſhall beſette her ſelfe in ſuche wyſe, that in erthe for parte of vengeaunce, ſhal ſhe no ioye haue in loues ſeruyce, and when ſhe is deed, then ſhal her ſoule ben brought vp in to thy preſence, and whyther thou wylte cheſe, thylke ſoule ſhall ben commytted. Or els after thy dethe anone all the foreſayd heuenly bodyes by one accorde, ſhall benōmen from thylke perle, all the vertues that fyrſte her were taken, for ſhe hathe hem forfeyted, by that on the my ſeruaunte in thy lyue ſhe wolde not ſuffre to worche all vertues, withdrawen by myght of the hygh bodyes: why then ſhuldeſt thou wene ſo any more? And yf thy lyſte to loke vpon the lawe of kynde, and wyth order whyche to me was ordayned, ſothely none age, none ouertournynge tyme, but hytherto had no tyme ne power to chaunge the weddinge, ne ye knotte to vnbynde of two hertes thorow one aſſent in my preſence, together accorden to enduren tyll dethe hem departe. What troweſt thou euery ydeot w
                        •
                     tte the menyng and the priuy entente of theſe thynges? they wene forſothe that ſuche accorde may not be, but the roſe of maydenhede be plucked, do waye, do waye, they knowe nothyng of thys: for conſente of two hertes alone, maketh the faſtenynge of the knotte, neyther law of kynde, ne mannes lawe, determyneth neyther the age ne ye qualyte of perſones, but onely accorde betwene thylke twaye. And trewlye after tyme that ſuche accorde by theyr conſent in hert, is enſealed & put in my treaſory amonges my priuy thynges: then gynneth the name of ſponſayle, and althoughe they breaken forwarde both, yet ſuche mater enſealed is kept in remē
                     braunce for euer. And ſe nowe that ſpouſes haue the name anone after accorde, thoughe the roſe be not take. The aungell badde Ioſeph take Marye hys ſpouſe, and to Egypte wende: Lo ſhe was cleped ſpouſe, and yet to forne ne after neyther of hem bothe mente no fleſhly luſte knowe, wherfore the wordes of trouthe accorden, that my ſeruaūtes ſhulden forſake both father and mother, and be adherande to hys ſpouſe, and they two in vnite of one fleſhe ſhulden accorde. And thys wyſe two that werne fyrſte in a lytell maner dyſacordaunt, hygher that one and lower that other, bene made euenlyche in gree to ſtonde. But nowe to enfourme the that ye ben lyche to goddes, theſe clerkes ſayne, and in determynacion ſhewen, that thre thinges hauen ye names of goddes ben cleped, that is to ſaine: man, dyuell, and ymages, but yet is there but one god, of whom al goodneſſe, all grace, and al vertue cometh, and he is louyng & trewe, and euerlaſtynge, & pryme cauſe of al beynge thynges: but men bene goddes, louynge and trewe, but not euerlaſtyng, and that is by adopcion of the euerlaſtynge god. Dyuels ben goddes ſtyrrynge by a maner of lyuynge, but neyther bene they trewe ne euerlaſtyng, and theyr name of godlyheed they han by vſurpacion, as the prophete ſayeth: Al goddes of gentyles, that is to ſaye paynims, are dyuels But ymages bene goddes by nuncupacion, and they ben neyther lyuynge ne trewe ne euerlaſtynge: After theſe wordes they celapē goddes ymages wrought with mennes handes. But nowe reaſonable creature, that by adopcion alone arte to the greate god euerlaſtynge, and therby thou arte god cleaped: let thy fathers maners ſo entre thy wyttes, that thou myght folowe, in as moche as longeth to the thy fathers worſhyppe, ſo that in nothynge thy kynde from hys wyll declyne, ne from hys nobley peruerte. In thys wyſe yf thou werche, thou arte aboue all other thynges ſaue god alone, and ſo ſay no more thyne herte to ſerue in to hye a place.
               
               
                  
                     FUlly haue I nowe declared thyne eſtate to be good, ſo thou folowe therafter, & that the abiection fyrſte be the aleged in worthines of thy margarite ſhal not the lette, as it ſhal forther ye, & encreaſe the, it is nowe to declare, ye laſt abiection in nothyng may greue.
                  Yes certes (ꝙ I) both greue and let muſte it nedes, the contrary maye not ben proued, and ſe now why. Whyle I was glorious in worldly welfuneſſe, and had ſuch goodes in welth as maken men ryche, tho was I dra
                        •
                     
                     in to companyes that loos, pryſe, and name yeuen: tho loutēden blaſours, tho curreyden gloſours, tho welcomedē flatterers, tho worſhypped thilke, that nowe deynen not to loke Euery wight in ſuch erthly wele habaūdant

is hold noble, precious, benigne, and wyſe to do what he ſhall, in any degre that men hym ſet, al be it that the ſothe be in the contrary of all tho thynges: But he that can, ne neuer ſo well hym behaue, & hath vertue haboūdaunt in manyfolde maners, & be not welthed with ſuche erthly goodes, is holde for a foole, and ſayd hys wyt is but ſotted. Lo howe falſe for auer is holde trewe. Lo howe trewe is cleaped falſe for wantynge of goodes. Alſo lady, dygnities of offyce maken men mykel comended as thus: he is ſo good, were he oute hys pere ſhuld men not fynde. Truely I trowe of ſome ſuche that are ſo prayſed, were they out ones, another ſhulde make hym ſo be knowe he ſhulde of no wyſe no more ben loked after: but onely fooles well I wotte, deſyren ſuche new thinges. Wherfore I wōder that thilke gouernoure, out of whome alone the cauſes proceden, that gouerne all thynges, whych that hath ordeyned thys world in werkes of the kyndely bodyes ſo be gouerned, not with vnſtedfaſt or happyous thynge, but with rules of reaſon, whych ſhewen the courſe of certayne thynges: why ſuffreth he ſuch ſlydyng chaunges, that myſturnen ſuche noble thynges as ben we men, that arne a fayre parſell of the erthe, and holdē the vppereſt degre vnder god of benigne thinges, as ye ſaide right nowe your ſelfe, ſhulde neuer man haue bene ſet in ſo worthy a place, but if his degre were ordeyned noble. Alas, thou that knytteſt the purueyaunce of al thynges, why lokeſt thou not to amenden theſe defautes: I ſe ſhrewes that han wicked maners, ſytten in chayres of do nes, lambes to punyſhen, there wolues ſhulden be punyſhed. Lo vertue ſhynende naturallly, for pouertie lurketh and is hydde vnder cloude▪ but the moone falſe forſworne, as I knowe my ſelfe, for aue
                        •
                      & yeftes hath vſurped to ſhyne by daye lyght, wt peynture of other mens prayſynges: and truely thylke forged lyȝt fouly ſhuld fade, were the trouth away of colours fayned. Thus is night turned into daye, and daye in to nyght, wynter into ſommer, & ſommer into wynter, not in dede, but in myſclepyng of folyſhe people.
                  Now (quod ſhe) what weneſt thou of theſe thynges? howe feleſt thou in thyne herte, by what gouernaunce yt thys cometh aboute?
                  Certes (ꝙ I) that wotte I neuer, but yf it be that fortune hath graunt from aboue, to lede the ende of men as her lyketh. Ah nowe I ſe (quod ſhe) thentent of thy meanyng: Lo bycauſe thy worldly goodes ben fullych dyſpente, thou berafte out of dygnite of offyce, in whych thou madeſt the gatheryng of thylke goodes, and yet dyddeſt in that office by coū
                     ſayle of wyſe, any thynge were ended: & true were vnto hem, whoſe profyte thou ſhuldeſt loke, and ſeeſt nowe many that in thylke herueſt made of the mokel, and now for gloſing of other, deineth the nought to forther, but enhaunſen falſe ſhrewes, by wytneſſynge of trouthe. Theſe thynges greueth thyne herte to ſene thy ſelfe thus abated, & then fraylte of mankynde ne ſetteth but lytel by the leſers of ſuche rycheſſe, haue he neuer ſo moche vertue and ſo thou weneſt of thy iewell to renne in dyſpyte, and not ben accepted into grace: All thys ſhal the nothyng hynder. Nowe (ꝙ ſhe) fyrſt thou woſt wel thou loſteſt nothing that euer thou myghteſt chalēge for thyne owne: when nature brought the forthe, come thou not naked out of thy mothers wombe? thou haddeſt no rycheſſe, and when thou ſhalt entre into the ende of euery fleſhly body, what ſhalt thou haue wyth the then? So euery rycheſſe thou haſte in tyme of thy lyuynge, nys but lente, thou myght therin chalenge no propertie. And ſe now euery thyng that is a mā
                     nes owne, he may do therwyth what hym lyketh, to yeue or to kepe: but ryches thou playneſt from the loſt, yf thy myght had ſtretched ſo ferforth, fayne thou woldſt haue hem kept multiplied with mo other: and ſo ayenſt thy wyl ben they departed frō the, wherfore they were neuer thyn. And if thou laudeſt & ioyeſt any wyght, for he is ſtuffed with ſuch maner rycheſſe, yu arte in yt beleue begyled, for thou weneſt thylke ioy to be ſelyneſſe or els eaſe, & he that hath loſte ſuche happes to ben vnſely Yea forſoth (ꝙ I). Wel (ꝙ ſhe) then woll I proue that vnſely in that wyſe is to prayſe, & ſo ye tother is ye cōtrary to be lacked. Howe ſo (ꝙ I)? For vnſely (ꝙ ſhe) begyleth not, but ſheweth thentent of her workyng. Et ecōtra Selyneſſe begyleth, for in proſperite ſhe maketh a iape in blyndneſſe, that is ſhe wyndeth hym to make ſorowe when ſhe withdraweth wolt thou not (ꝙ ſhe) prayſe hym better that ſheweth to yu hys herte, tho it be with bytāde wordes & diſpytous, thē him ye gloſeth & thinketh in theyr abſence to do the many harmes

Certes (ꝙ I) the one is to cōmende, & the other to lacke & dyſpyce. A ha (ꝙ ſhe) ryght ſo eaſe whyle he laſteth, gloſeth & flatereth, and lyghtly voydeth whē ſhe moſte pleſaūtly ſheweth, & euer in her abſence ſhe is about to do the tene & ſorowe in herte: but vnſely all be it wyth bytande chere, ſheweth what ſhe is, & ſo doth not that other, wherfore vnſely dothe not begyle. Selyneſſe dyſceyueth: vnſely put awaye doute. That one maketh men blynde, that other openeth theyr eyen in ſhewyng of wretchedneſſe. The one is ful of drede to leſe that is not his owne: that other is ſobre and maketh men dyſcharged of mokell heuyneſſe in burthen. The one draweth a man from very good, ye other haleth hym to vertue by the hookes of thoughtes. And wenyſt thou not that thy dyſeaſe hath done the mokel more to wynne, then euer yet thou loſteſt? and more then euer the contrary made the wynne. Is not a greate good to thy thynkynge, for to knowe the hertes of thy ſothfaſt frēdes▪ Pardy they ben proued to ye ful, & the trewe haue dyſceuered from the falſe. Trewly at the goynge of the ylke brotel ioy, ther yede no more awaye, then the ylke that was not thyne proper: He was neuer from that lyghtly departed, thyne owne good therfore leaueth it ſtyl wyth the. Nowe good (quod ſhe) for howe moche woldeſt thou ſomtyme haue boughte thys very knowyng of thy frendes, from the flatterynge flyes that the gloſed, when thou thought thy ſelf ſely? But thou that playneſt of loſſe in rycheſſe, haſt founden the moſt dere worthy thynge that thou clepeſt vnſely, hath made the moche thynge to wynnen. And alſo for concluſion of all, he is frende that nowe leaueth not hys herte frō thyne helpes. And yf that Margarite denyeth nowe not to ſuffre her vertues ſhyne to the wardes, wyth ſpreadynge beames, as farre or farther then yf thou were ſely in worldly ioye: trewely I ſaye not els but ſhe is ſomdele to blame.
                  Ah, peace (quod I) and ſpeake nomore of thys, myne hert breaketh, now thou toucheſt any ſuche wordes. A well (quod ſhe) then let vs ſyngen, thou heareſt no more of theſe thynges at thys tyme.
               
            
            
               ¶Thus endeth the fyrſte boke of the Teſtament of Loue, and here after foloweth the ſeconde.
               
                  
                     VEry welthe maye not be founden in al thys world and that is well ſene:
                  Lo howe in my mooſt comforte, as I wende & moſte ſuppoſed to haue hadde ful anſwere of my contrary thoughtes, ſodaynly it was vanyſſhed. And all the workes of man faren in the ſame wyſe, when folke wenen beſte her entente for to haue, and wylles to perfourme, anone chaungynge of the lyft ſyde to ye ryght halue, tourneth it ſo clene into another kynde that neuer ſhall it come to the fyrſte plyte in doynge.
                  O thys wrongful ſterynge ſo ſoone other wyſed out of knowynge, but for my purpoſe was at my begynnynge, and ſo dureth yet, yf God of hys grace tyme woll me graunt, I thynke to perfourme thys worke, as I haue begonne in loue, after as my thynne wytte, with inſpiracion of him that hildeth al grace woll ſuffre. Greuouſly god wotte haue I ſuffred a great throwe that the romayne Emperour, whyche in vnite of loue ſhulde accorde and euery wyth other, in cauſe of other to auaunce, and namely ſythe thys empyre to be corrected of ſo many ſectes in hereſie, of faith, of ſeruyce, o rule in loues religion. Trewlye al were it but to ſhende errontous opinions, I maye it no lenger ſuffre: for many menne there ben that ſayne loue to ben in grauel and ſande, that wyth ſee ebbynge and flowynge woweth, as ryches that ſodaynly vanyſheth And ſome ſayne that loue ſhuld be in wyndy blaſtes, that ſtoundmele turneth as a phane, and glorye of renome, whyche after luſtes of the varyaunt people is areyſed or ſtylled. Many alſo wenen that in the ſonne and the moone, and other ſterres, loue ſhulde ben foū
                     den, for amonge all other planettes moſte ſoueraynly they ſhynen, as dygnityes in reuerence of eſtates rather then good han and occupyen. Ful many alſo there ben that in okes and in huge poſtes ſuppoſen loue to be groū
                     ded, as in ſtrength & in might, which mowen not helpen theyr owne wretchedneſſe, when they gynne to fall. But ſuche dyuerſyte of ſectes ayenſt the ryghtfull byleue of loue, theſe errours ben forth ſpredde, that loues ſeruaū
                     tes in trewe rule and ſtedfaſte faythe, in no place darne apere: Thus irrecuperable ioy is

went, and anoy endleſſe is entred, for no man aryght reproueth ſuche errours, but confyrmen theyr wordes, and ſayne that bad is noble good, and goodnes is badde: to whyche folke the prophet byddeth, wo without ende.
                  Alſo many tonges of great falſe techinges in gylynge maner, principally in my tymes, not only wyth wordes, but alſo wyth armes loues ſeruauntes and profeſſe in hys religyō of trewe rule, purſewen to confoūden and to dyſtroyen. And for as moche as holy fathers that oure chriſten faythe aproued and ſtrengthed to the iewes, as to mē reſonable, and of dyuinite lerned, proued thilke fayth with reſones, and wyth authorities of the olde teſtament & of the newe, her pertinacye to diſtroy But to paynyms, that for beeſtes and houndes were holde, to put hem out of theyr errour, was myracles of god ſhewed. Theſe thynges were fygured by comynge of thāgel to the ſhepeherdes, and by the ſterre to paynyms kynges, as who ſayeth: angel reaſonable to reſonable creature, and ſterre of myracle to people beſtial not lerned, werne ſent to enforme. But I louers clerke in all my connyng and with al my mightes, truly I haue no ſuch grace in vertue of myracles, ne for to dyſcomfyte falſheedes, ſuffyſeth not authorites alone, ſythen that ſuche heretykes and mayntenours of falſytes. Wherfore I wote wel ſythen that they ben men, and reaſon is approued in hem, the clowde of erroure hath her reaſon bewonde probable reſons, whych that catchende wyt rightfully may not with ſytte. By my trauaylynge ſtudye I haue ordeyned hem, wyth ye authorite myſgloſed by mannes reaſon, to graunt ſhall be enduced.
                  Now gynneth my penne to quake, to thynken on the ſentences of the enuyous people, whych alwaye ben redy, both ryder and goer to ſkorne and to iape thys leude boke, and me for rancoure & hate in theyr hertes they ſhullen ſo dyſpyſe, that althoughe my booke be leude, yet ſhall it ben more leude holden, and by wycked wordes in many maner apayred. Certes me thynketh the ſowne of theyr bad ſpeche, ryght nowe is full both myne eares. O good precious Margarite, myne herte ſhulde wepe yf, I wyſte ye token hede of ſuche maner ſpeche, but trewly I wotte wel in that your wyſedom ſhal not aſterte. For of god maker of kynde wytneſſe I toke, that for none enuy ne yuell haue I drawe thys matter together, but onely for goodneſſe to maintayne, and errours in falſytees to deſtroye. Wherfore (as I ſayde) wyth reaſon I thynke, thylke forſayd errours to diſtroye and dequace.
                  Theſe reaſons and ſuche other, yf they enduce men in loues ſeruyce, trewe to beleue of parfyte blyſſe, yet to full fayth in credence of deſerte, fully mowe they not ſuffiſe, ſythen faythe hath no meryte of mede, when mannes reaſon ſheweth experience in doynge. For vtterlye no reaſon the parfyte blyſſe of loue by no waye may make to be comprehended. Lo what is a parcell of louers ioye, parfyte ſcyence in good ſeruyce, of theyr deſyre to comprehende in bodely doynge the lykyng of the ſoule, not as by a glaſſe to haue contemplacyon of tyme comynge, but thylke fyrſte ymagyned and thought, after face to face in beholdynge: what herte, what reaſon, what vnderſtandynge can make hys heuen to be feled and knowe wythout aſſaye in doynge? certes none. Sythen then of loue cometh ſuche fruyte in blyſſe, and loue in him ſelfe is the moſte amonge other vertues, as clerkes ſayne: The ſede of ſuche ſpryngynge in all places, in all countreys, in al worldes ſhulde ben ſowe.
                  But o welawaye thylke ſede is forſake, & mowen not ben ſuffred the lāde tyllers to ſee a werke, wythout medlynge of cockle, badde wedes whych ſomtyme ſtonken, hath caught the name of loue amonge ydiotes and badde meanynge people. Neuer the later, yet how ſo it be that men cleape thylke kynge precyouſeſt in kynde, wyth many eke names, that other thynges, that the foule yeuen the ylke noble name, it ſheweth well that in a maner men haue a great lykynge in worſhyppynge of thilke name, wherfore thys worke haue I wryt, and to the tytled of loues name, I haue it auowed in a maner of ſacrifice, that where euer it be radde, it mowe in merite by the excellence of thylke name the more wexe in authorite and worſhyppe of takynge in hede, and to what entente it was ordayned, the infeeres mowen be moued: Euery thynge to whome is owande occaſyon done as for hys ende Ariſtotle ſuppoſeth that the actes of euery thynge ben in a maner hys fynall cauſe.

A fynal cauſe is noblerer or els euen as noble as thylke thynge that is fynally to thilke ende, wherfore accion of thyng euerlaſtyng, is demed to be eternal, and not temporal, ſythen it is his fynal cauſe: Ryght ſo the actes of my boke loue, and loue is noble, wherfore though my boke be leude, the cauſe wt which I am ſtered, and for whom I ought it done, noble forſothe ben bothe. But bycauſe that in connynge I am yonge, and canne yet but crepe, this leude A, b, c, haue I ſette in to lernyng, for I can not paſſen the tellyng of thre as yet: and yf god wyl in ſhorte tyme I ſhall amende this leudneſſe in ioynyng ſyllables, whyche thyng for dulneſſe of wytte I maye not in thre letters declare. For trewly I ſaye the goodneſſe of my Margaryte perle wolde yeue mater in endityng to many clerkes: certes her mercy is more to me ſwetter than any lyuynges, wherfore my lyppes mowen not ſuffyſe in ſpekyng of her full laude and worſhyppe as they ſhulde. But who is that in knowynge of the orders of heuen, & putteth his reſones in the erthe? I for ſothe may not wt blere eyen, the ſhynyng ſonne of vertue in bright whele of this Margaryte behold, therfore as yet I maye her nor diſcryue in vertue as I wolde. In tyme comyng in another tretyſe thorowe goddes grace, this ſonne in clereneſſe of vertue to be knowe, and howe ſhe enlumyneth al this day, I thynke to declare.
               
               
                  
                     IN this meane whyle this cōfortable lady ganne ſyng, a wōder mater of endityng in latyn, but trewly the noble colours in rethorykwyſe knytte were ſo craftely, yt my connyng wol not ſtretche to remē
                     bre, but the ſentence I trow ſomdele haue I in mynde. Certes they were wōder ſwete of ſowne, and they were touched al in lamentacyon wyſe, and by no werbles of myrthe: Lo thus ganne ſhe ſynge in latyn, as I may cō
                     ſtrewe it in our englyſhe tonge.
                  Alas that theſe heuenly bodyes their light and courſe ſhewen, as nature yaue hem in cō
                     maundement at the gynnyng of the firſt age, but theſe thynges in free choyce of reſon han none vnderſtondynge: but man that ought to paſſe all thynge of doynge, of ryght courſe in kynde, ouer whelmed ſothneſſe by wrongfull tytle, and hath drawē the ſterre of enuye to gon by his ſyde, that the clyps of me that ſhulde be his ſhynande ſonne, ſo ofte is ſeyl, that it wened thilke errour thorowe hē come in, ſhulde ben myne owne defaute. Trewely therfore I haue me withdrawe, & made my dwellynge out of lande in an yle by my ſelfe, in the occian cloſed, and yet ſayn there many they haue me harberowed but god wote they faylen. Theſe thynges me greuen to thynke, and namely on paſſed gladneſſe, that in thys worlde was wonte me dyſporte of hygh and lowe, and nowe it is fayled: they that woldē mayſtries me haue in thylke ſtoundes. In heuen on hyghe aboue Saturnes ſphere, in ſeaſonable tyme were they lodged, but nowe come queynte conſaylours that in no houſe woll ſuffre me ſoiourne, wherof is pyte: and yet ſayne ſome that they me haue in celler wyth wyne ſhede, in gernere there corne is layde, couered wyth whete, in ſacke ſowed with wolle, in purſe with money faſt knytte, amonge pannes mouled in a wyche, in preſſe amonge clothes layde wyth ryche pelure arayed, in ſtable among horſe & other beeſtes, as hogges, ſhepe, and nete, and in other manye wyſe. But thou maker of lyght (in wynkynge of thyne eye the ſonne is queynt) woſt ryght well that I in trewe name was neuer thus herberowed. Somtyme to forne the ſonne in the ſeuenth partye was ſmyten, I bare bothe croſſe and mytre, to yeue it where I wolde. With me the pope went a fote, and I tho was worſhypped of all holye churche Kynges baden me their crownes holdē. The lawe was ſet as it ſhulde: tofore the iuge as well the poore durſte ſhewe hys grefe as the ryche, for all hys money. I defended tho taylages, and was redy for the poore to pay. I made gret feeſtes in my tyme, & noble ſōges & maryed damoſelles of gētyl feture, withouten golde or other rycheſſe. Poore clerkes for wytte of ſchole, I ſette in churches, and made ſuch perſones to preache: and tho was ſeruyce in holy churche honeſt and deuoute, in pleaſaunce bothe of god and of the people. But nowe the leude for ſymonye is auaunced, and ſhendeth all holy churche. Nowe is ſtewarde for his achates, nowe is courtyour for hys debates, nowe is eſchetoure for hys wronges, nowe is loſell for hys ſonges, perſoner and prouendre alone, wyth whych manye thriftye ſhulde encreaſe. And yet is thys

ſhrewe behynde, free herte is forſake, and loſengeour is take. Lo it accordeth, for ſuche there ben that voluntarye luſtes haunten in courte with rybaudye, that tyl midnight and more woll playe and wake, but in the churche at matyns he is behynde, for yuell diſpoſycion of hys ſtomake: therfore he ſhulde eate beane breed, & ſo dyd hys ſyre, his eſtate therwith to ſtrenghthen. Hys auter is broke, and lowe lythe in poynte to gone to the erth, but hys horſe muſte ben eaſy and hye to beare hym ouer great waters. Hys chalyce poore, but he hath ryche cuppes. No towayle but a ſhete there god ſhal ben handled. And on his meate borde there ſhal ben borde clothes and towelles many payre. At maſſe ſerued but a clergyon: fyue ſquiers in hall. Poore chaunſell, open holes in euery ſyde: beddes of ſylke wyth tapytes goyng all aboute his chambre. Poore maſſe boke and leude chapelayne, and broken ſurplyce wyth manye an hole: good houndes and many, to hounte after harte & hare, to fede in theyr feeſtes. Of poore men haue they great care, for they euer craue, and nothynge offren, they wolden haue hem doluen. But amonge legyſtres there dare I not come, my doynge they ſayne maken hem nedy, they ne wolde for nothynge haue me in towne, for than were tort and forthe nought worthe an hawe aboute and pleaſen no men but thylke greuous & torcious ben in myght and in doynge: theſe thynges to forne ſayde mowe well yf men lyſte ryme, trewly they acorde nothynge. And for as moche as al thynges by me ſhulden of ryght ben gouerned, I am ſorye to ſe that gouernaunce fayleth, as thus: to ſene ſmale and lowe gouerne the hye and bodyes aboue. Certes that poleſye is naught, it is forbode by them that of gouernaunce treaten and enformen. And right as beeſtly wytte ſhulde ben ſubiect to reaſon, ſo erthly power in it ſelfe, the lower ſhulde ben ſubiect to the hygher. What is worth thy bodye, but it be gouerned wyth thy ſoule? ryght ſo lytell or naught is worthe erthely power, but if reignatyfe prudence in heedes gouerne the ſmale, to whyche heedes the ſmale owen to obey, and ſuffre in their gouernaunce. But ſoueraynneſſe ayenwarde ſhulde thynke in thys wyſe: I am ſeruaunt of theſe creatures to me delyuered, not lorde but defendour, not mayſter but enfourmer, not poſſeſſoure but in poſſeſſyon, & to hem lyche a tree in whiche ſparowes ſhullen ſtelen, her byrdes to noryſhe and forthe brynge vnder ſuretye ayenſt all raueynous foules and beeſtes, and not to be tyraunt them ſelfe. And than the ſmale in reſte and quyete, by the heedes well diſpoſed owen for their ſoueraynes helth and proſperyte to pray, and in other doynges, in mayntenaunce therof performe, wythouten other admyniſtracion in rule of any maner gouernaūce. And they wyt haue in hem, and grace to come to ſuch thinges, yet ſhulde they ceaſe tyll theyr heedes them cleped, although profyte and pleaſaunce ſhulde folowe. But trewlye other gouernaunce ne other medlynge ought they not to clayme, ne the heedes on hem to put. Trewly amonges coſynage dare I not come, but yf rycheſſe be my meane, ſothly ſhe and other bodily goodes maketh nygh coſynage, ther neuer propynquite ne alyaūce in lyue was, ne ſhulde haue be, nere it for her medling maners, wherfore kyndly am I not ther leged. Pouert of kynred is behynde, rycheſſe ſuffreth hym to paſſe: truly he ſaith he come neuer of Iaphetes chyldre. Wherof I am ſory that Iaphetes chyldren for pouert, in no linage ben rekened, & Caynes chyldren for ryches be maked Iaphetes heires. Alas thys is a wonder chaunge bytwene tho two Noes chyldren, ſythen that of Iaphetes ofſpryng comeden knightes, & of Cayn diſcended ye lyne of ſeruage to his brothers chyldre Lo howe gentylleſſe and ſeruage as coſyns, bothe diſcended out of two bretherne of one body: wherfore I ſaye in ſothneſſe, that gentyleſſe in kynrede maken not gentyll lynage in ſucceſſion, without deſerte of a mans own ſelfe. Where is nowe the lyne of Alyſanndre the noble, or els of Hector of Troye? who is diſcended of ryght bloode of lyne fro king Artour? Parde ſyr Perdicas, whom that kyng Aliſandre made to bē his heire in Grece, was of no kynges bloode, hys dame was a tombyſtere. Of what kynred ben the gētyles in our dayes: I trow therfore if any good be in gentyleſſe, it is only that it ſemeth a maner of neceſſyte be input to gentylmen, that they ſhulden not varyen fro the vertues of their aunceſtres. Certes al maner lynage of men ben euen liche in byrth, for one father maker of al goodnes enformed hem all, & al mortal folke of one ſede arne greyned, wherto auaūt men

of her lynage, in coſynage or in elde fathers. Loke nowe the gynnyng, and to god maker of mans perſon, there is no clerke ne no worthy in gentyleſſe: and he that noryſheth hys corare wyth vyces and vnreſonable luſtes, and leaueth the kynde courſe, to whych ende hym brought forthe hys byrthe, trewly he is vngentyll, and amonge clerkes may ben nēpned. And therfore he that woll ben gentyl, he mote daūten hys fleſhe fro vyces that cauſen vngentylneſſe, and leaue alſo reignes of wicked luſtes, and drawe to hym vertue, that in all places gentylneſſe gentylmen maketh. And ſo ſpeke I in feminyne gendre in generall, of tho perſones at the reuerence of one, whom euery wyght honoureth, for her boū
                     tie and her nobleſſe ymade her to god ſo dere that hys moder ſhe became, and ſhe me hath had ſo great in worſhyp, that I nyll for nothynge in open declare, that in any thynge ayenſt her ſecte maye ſo wene: for all vertue and al worthyneſſe of pleaſaunce in hem haboundeth. And although I wold any thyng ſpeke, trewly I can not, I may fynde in yuel of hem no maner mater.
               
               
                  
                     RIght wyth theſe wordes ſhe ſtynte of that lamentable melodye, and I ganne wyth a lyuely herte to praye, yf that it were lykynge vnto her noble grace, ſhe wold her deyne to declare me the mater that fyrſte was begonne, in whiche ſhe lefte and ſtynte to ſpeke beforne ſhe gan to ſynge.
                  O (ꝙ ſhe) thys is no newe thyng to me, to ſene you menne deſyren after mater, whyche your ſelfe cauſed to voyde.
                  Ah good lady (ꝙ I) in whom victorie of ſtrength is proued aboue al other thynge, after the iugement of Eſoram, whoſe lordſhyp all lignes: who is that right as emperour hē cōmaundeth, whether thilke ben not womē, in whoſe lykeneſſe to me ye aperen. For right as man halte the principalte of all thyng vnder his beynge, in the maſculyne gender, and no mo genders ben there but maſculyne and femenyne, all the remenaunt ben no gendres but of grace, in facultie of grammer. Ryght ſo in the femenyne, the women holden the vppereſt degree of all thynges vnder thilke gendre conteyned. Who bryngeth forth kynges, whyche that ben lordes of ſee and of earthe? and al peoples of womē ben borne: they noryſſhe hem that graffen vynes, they maken men comforte in their gladde cheres. Her ſorowe is dethe to mannes herte. without women the beyng of mē were impoſſible. They conne with their ſwetneſſe the crewel herte rauyſhe and make it meke, buxome, and benigne, wythout violence meuynge. In beautie of theyr eyen, or els of other maner fetures is all mēs deſyres, yea more thā in golde precious ſtones, eyther any rycheſſe. And in thys degree lady your ſelfe manye hertes of men haue ſo bounden, that parfyte blyſſe in womankynde to ben, men wenen, and in nothynge els. Alſo lady the goodneſſe, the vertue of women, by properte of diſcrecyon, is ſo well knowen, by lytelneſſe of malyce, that deſyre to a good aſker by no waye conne they warne: and ye thanne that woll not paſſe the kynde werchynge of your ſectes by generall diſcrecyon, I wotte wel ye wol ſo enclyne to my prayere, that grace of my requeſte ſhall fully ben graunted. Certes (ꝙ ſhe) thus for the more parte fareth al mankynde to praye, and to crye after womans grace, and fayne manye fantaſyes to make hertes enclyne to your deſyres: and whan theſe ſely womē for freelte of theyr kynde beleuen your wordes, and wenen al be goſpell the promyſe of your beheſtes, than graunt they to you their hertes, and fulfyllen your luſtes, wherthrough theyr lyberte in mayſtreſhip that they toforn had is thralled, and ſo maked ſouerayn and to be prayed, that fyrſte was ſeruaunte, and voyce of prayer vſed. Anone as fylled is your luſte, manye of you be ſo trewe, that lytell hede take ye of ſuche kyndeneſſe, but wyth trayſoun anon ye thynke hem begyle, and let lyght of that thynge whyche fyrſte ye maked to you wonders dere, ſo what thyng to women it is to loue any wight er ſhe hym well knowe, & haue him proued in many halfe, for euery glyttryng thynge is nat golde, & vnder colour of fayre ſpeche many vices may be hid and conſeled. Therfore I rede no wyght to truſt on you to rath, mens chere & her ſpeche right gylefull is full ofte, wherfore without good aſſay, it is nat worthe on many on you to truſte: Trewly it is right kyndely to euery man that thynketh women betraye, & ſhewē outward al goodneſſe, til he haue his wil performed.

Lo the byrde is begyled with the mery voice of the foulers whiſtel. Whan a woman is cloſed in your nette, than wol ye cauſes fynden, and beare vnkyndeneſſe her vnhande or falſete vpon her putte, youre owne malycious trayſon wyth ſuche thynge to excuſe. Lo than han women none other wrech in vengeaunce, but bloder and wepe tyl hem lyſt ſtynte, and ſorily her miſhap complayne, and is put in to wenynge that all men ben ſo vntrewe. Howe often haue men chaunged her loues in a lytell whyle, or els for faylyng theyr wyll in theyr places hem ſette: for frenſhyp ſhal be one, and fame with another him lyſte for to haue, and a thirde for delyte, or els were he loſte bothe in packe and in clothes: Is this fayre? nay god wot, I maye nat tell by thouſande partes, the wronges in trechery of ſuche falſe people, for make they neuer ſo good a bonde, all ſette ye at a myte whan your hert tourneth: And they that wenen for ſorow of you dey, the pyte of your falſe herte is ſlowe out of towne. Alas therfore, yt euer anye woman wolde take anye wyght in her grace, tyll ſhe knowe at the full on whome ſhe myght at all aſſayes truſt. Women cone no more crafte in queynte knowynge, to vnderſtande the falſe diſceyuable coniectementes of mannes begilynges. Lo howe it fareth, though ye men gronen and cryen, certes it is but diſceyt, & that preueth well by thendes in your werkynge. Howe many women haue ben lorne, and wyth ſhame foule ſhent by long laſtyng tyme, which thorowe mēnes gyle haue ben diſceyued? euer their fame ſhal dure, and theyr dedes radde and ſonge in many londes, that they han done recoueren ſhal they neuer, but alwaye ben demed lightly, in ſuche plyte ayen ſhulde they fall, of whyche ſlaunders and tenes ye falſe men and wicked ben the verey cauſes, on you by ryght ought theſe ſhames and theſe reproues all holy diſcende. Thus arne ye all nyghe vntrewe, for all youre fayre ſpeche youre herte is full fyckell. What cauſe han ye women to diſpyſe? better fruyte than they ben, ne ſwetter ſpyces to youre behoue mowe ye not fynde, as farre as worldely bodyes ſtretchen. Loke to theyr formynge at the makynge of theyr perſones by god in ioye of paradyce, for goodneſſe of mans propre bodye were they maked, after the ſawes of the Byble, reherſynge goddes wordes in thys wyſe: It is good to mankynde that we make to hym an helper. Lo in paradyſe for your helpe was this tree graffed, out of whyche all lynage of man diſcendeth: yf a man be noble frute, of noble frute it is ſprongen: the blyſſe of paradyſe to mennes ſory hertes, yet in thys tree abydeth. O noble helpes ben theſe trees, and gentyll iewell to ben worſhypped of euery good creature: He that hem anoyeth dothe hys owne ſhame, it is a comfortable perle ayenſt all tenes. Euerye companye is myrthed by theyr preſent beyng. Trewely I wyſte neuer vertue, but a womā were therof the rote. What is heauen the worſe though ſarazins on it lyen? Is your faythe vntrewe though rennogates maken theron leaſynges. If the fyre dothe anye wyght brenne, blame hys owne wytte that put him ſelfe ſo farre in the heate. Is not fyre gentylleſt and moſte element, comfortable amonges all other▪ fyre is chefe werker in fortherynge ſuſtenaunce to mankynde: ſhall fyre ben blamed for it brende a foole naturelly, by hys owne ſtulty wytte in ſterynge? Ah wycked folkes, for youre propre malyce, and ſhreudneſſe of your ſelfe: ye blame & diſpyſe the preciouſt thyng of youre kynde, and whyche thynges amonge other moſte ye deſyren. Trewely Nero and hys chyldren ben ſhrewes, that diſpyſen ſo theyr d
                        •••
                     es. The wyckedneſſe and gylyng of me, in diſclaundryng of thylke that moſte hathe hem gladed and pleaſed, were impoſſyble to write or to nempne. Neuer ye later yet I ſay he that knoweth a way, may it lightly paſſe: eke an herbe proued may ſafely to ſmertande ſores ben layde: So I ſay, in him that is proued is nothyng ſuch yuels to geſſe. But theſe thynges haue I reherſed to warne you women al at ones that to lyghtly without good aſſaye ye aſſenten not to mannes ſpeche. The ſonne in the day light is to knowen from the moone that ſhyneth in the nyght. Nowe to the thy ſelf (quod ſhe) as I haue ofte ſayd, I knowe wel thyne herte thou arte none of al the tofore nempned people, for I knowe wel the contynaunce of thy ſeruyce, that neuer ſythen I ſet the a werke, myght thy Margaryte for pleſaunce, frendſhyp, ne fayrehede of none other, be in poynte moued frome thyne herte, wherfore in to myne houſholde haſtely I wol that thou entre, and all ye parfyte priuyte

of my werkynge make it be knowe in thy vnderſtondynge, as one of my pryuy famyliers. Thou deſyreſt (ꝙ ſhe) fayne to here of tho thynges there I lefte. Yea forſothe (ꝙ I) that were to me a great blyſſe. Nowe (ꝙ ſhe) for thou ſhalt not wene that womans condycyons for fayre ſpeche ſuche thynge belongeth.
               
               
                  
                     THou ſhalt (ꝙ ſhe) vnderſtond fyrſte amonge al other thynges, that all the cure of my ſeruyce to me in the parfyte blyſſe in doynge is deſyred in euery mannes herte, be he neuer ſo moche a wretche, but euerye man trauayleth by dyuers ſtudye, and ſeke thylke blyſſe by dyuers wayes, but al the endes are knyt in ſelyneſſe of deſyre in the perfyte bliſſe that is ſuche ioye, whan men it haue gotten, there lyueth nothynge more to ben coueyted: But howe that deſyre of ſuche perfectyon in my ſeruyce be kyndely ſette in louers hertes, yet her erronyous opinyons myſturne it by falſeneſſe of wenyng. And although mennes vnderſtandynge be myſturned, to knowe whyche ſhulde ben the way vnto my perſon, and whyther it abydeth: yet wote they there is a loue in euery wyght, weneth by yt thyng that he coueyted moſte, he ſhulde come to thylke loue, and that is parfyte blyſſe of my ſeruauntes, but than fulle blyſſe may not be, and there lacke anye thynge of that blyſſe in anye ſyde. Eke it foloweth than, that he that muſt haue full blyſſe, lacke no blyſſe in loue on no ſyde.
                  Therfore ladye (ꝙ I) tho thylke blyſſe I haue deſyred, and ſothe toforne this my ſelfe by wayes of riches, of dignite, of power, and of renome, wenynge me in tho thrages had ben thylke blyſſe, but ayenſt the heere it turneth. Whan I ſuppoſed beſte thylke blyſſe haue get and come to the ful purpoſe of your ſeruyce, ſodaynly was I hyndred, and throwen ſo fer abacke, that me thynketh an impoſſyble to come there I lefte. I woll well (ꝙ ſhe) & therfore haſt thou fayled, for thou wenteſt not by the hye way: a lytel miſgoyng in the gynnynge cauſeth mykyll erroure in the ende, wherfore of thylke blyſſe thou fayledeſt for hauynge of rycheſſe, ne none of the other thynges thou nempnedeſt, mowen nat make ſuche parfyte blyſſe in loue as I ſhall ſhew. Therfore they be nat worthy to thylke blyſſe, and yet ſomwhat muſte ben cauſe and waye to thylke blyſſe: Ergo there is ſome ſuche thyng and ſome way, but it is lytell in vſage and that is nat openlye yknowe. But what feleſt in thyne herte of the ſeruyce, in whyche by me thou art entred: weneſt aught thy ſelfe yet be in the hye waye to my blyſſe? I ſhall ſo ſhewe it to the, thou ſhalte nat conſaye the contrary.
                  Good lady (ꝙ I) altho I ſuppoſe it in my herte, yet wolde I here thyne wordes, howe ye meanen in this mater. (Quod ſhe) that I ſhall wyth my good wyl. Thylke blyſſe deſyred, ſome deale ye knowē, altho it be nat parfytly, for kyndely entention ledeth you therto, but in thre maner lyuenges is all ſuche ways ſhewed. Euery wight in this world to haue thys blyſſe one of thylke thre wayes of lyues muſte procede, whyche after opynions of great clerkes arn by names cleaped, beſtiallich, reſonablich, is vertuous: manliche is worldelich, beſtialliche is luſtes & delytable nothynge reſtrayned by brydell of reaſon, all that ioyeth and yeueth gladneſſe to the hert, and it be ayenſt reaſon, is lykened to beſtyall lyueng, whyche thynge foloweth luſtes and delytes, wherfore in ſuche thynge maye nat that precious blyſſe that is mayſter of al vertues abyde. Youre fathers to forne you haue cleaped ſuche luſty lyuenges after the fleſſhe paſſyons of deſyre, whyche are innominable to fore god and man bothe. Than after determination of ſuche wyſe, we accorden that ſuche paſſyons of deſyre ſhull nat be nempned, but holden for abſolute frome all other lyuenges and prouynges, and ſo lyueth in to lyuenges, manlyche and reſonable to declare the maters begonne. But to make the fullye haue vnderſtandynge in manlich lyuenges, whiche is holden worldlich in theſe thynges ſo that ignoraunce be made no letter. I woll (ꝙ ſhe) nēpne theſe forſayd wayes be names and cōcluſions. Firſt riches, dignyte, renome and power, ſhull in thys worke be cleped bodily goodes, for in hē hath ben a gret throwe mānes truſt of ſelyneſſe in loue, as in riches, ſuffyſance to haue mayntayned that was begon, by worldly catel in dignite, honour, & reuerēce of hem that werne vnderput by maiſtry therby to obey. In renome glorie of peoples

prayſyng, after luſtes in their hert, with out hede takyng to qualite & maner of doing, and in power, by trouth of lordſhyps mayntenaunce, thynk to procede forth in doynge. In all whyche thynges a longe tyme mans coueytiſe in commune hath ben greatly groū
                     ded, to come to the blyſſe of my ſeruyce, but trewely they were begyled, and for the princypall muſte nedes fayle and in helpynge mowe nat auaile. Se why for holdeſt hym not poore that is nedy? Yes parde (ꝙ I) And hym for diſhonored that moche folke deyne nat to reuerence. That is ſoth (ꝙ I) & what hym that his mightes faylen and mowe nat helpen? Certes (ꝙ I) me ſemeth of al men he ſhuld be holden a wretch. And weneſt nat (ꝙ ſhe) that he that is lytell in renome, but rather is out of the prayſynges of mo men thā a fewe be nat in ſhame? For ſoth (ꝙ I) it is ſhame and villany to hym that coueyteth renome, that more folke nat praiſe in name thā preyſe. Sothe (ꝙ ſhe) thou ſayſt ſoth, but all theſe thynges are folowed of ſuche maner doynge, & wenden in ryches ſuffyſaunce, in power might, in dignyte worſhyp, and in renome glorie, wherfore they diſcēded in to diſceyuable wening, & in that ſeruice diſceyte is folowed. And thus in general, thou & al ſuch other that ſo worchē faylen of my blyſſe that ye longe han deſyred, wherfore truly in lyfe of reaſon is the hye way to thys blyſſe, as I thynke more openly to declare herafter. Neuer the later, yet in a lytell to comforte thy herte, in ſhewyng of what way thou arte entred thy ſelfe, and that thy Margaryte maye know the ſet in the hye way, I wol enforme the in this wiſe. Thou haſt fayled of thy firſt purpoſe, bycauſe thou wenteſt wronge and lefteſt the hye way and on thy ryght ſyde, as thus, thou lokedeſt on worldly lyueng & that thyng ye begyled, & lightly therfore as a lytel aſſay thou ſongedeſt, but whan I turned thy purpoſe, & ſhewed the parte of the hye waye tho thou abode therin, and no dethe ne ferdneſſe of none enemy miȝt ye out of thilke way reue, but euer one in thyn hert, to come to the ylke blyſſe whan thou were areſted and fyrſt tyme enpriſoned, yu were loth to chaunge thy way, for in thy hert thou wendeſt to haue bē there thou ſhuldeſt, & for I had routh to ſene the miſcaried, & wyſt wel thyne ableneſſe my ſeruyce to forther & encreaſe, I come my ſelfe wythout other mean to viſyt thy perſon, in comforte of thy hert: and perdy in my cōming thou were greatly gladed, after whiche tyme no diſeaſe, no care, no tene, myght moue me out of thy herte. And yet am I gladde and greatly enpited, howe continually thou haddeſt me in mynde, wyth good auyſement of thy conſcience, whan thy Kyng and his princes by huge wordes and gret, loked after variaunce in thy ſpeche, and euer thou were redye for my ſake in pleſaunce of that Margarite peerle, and many mo other, thy bodye to oblyge in to Marces doynge, yf anye contraryed thy ſawes, ſtedfaſt way maketh ſtedfaſt herte wyth good hope in the ende. Trewely I woll that thou it well knowe, for I ſe the ſo ſet and not chaungyng hert haddeſt in my ſeruyce, and I made thou haddeſt grace of thy kynge in foryeueneſſe of mykell miſdede: to that gracious kyng arte thou mykell holden, of whoſe grace and goodneſſe ſomtyme herafter I thynke the enforme, whā I ſhew the grounde where as morall vertue groweth. Who brouȝt ye to werke? who brouȝt thys grace aboute? who made thy herte hardy? Trewly it was I, for haddeſt thou of me fayled, than of this purpoſe had neuer taken in this wyſe. And therfore I ſay thou might well truſte to come to thy blyſſe, ſythen thy gynnyng hath ben harde, but euer graciouſly after thy hertes deſyre hath proceded. Syluer fyned wyth manye heates men knowen for trewe, and ſafely men may truſt to the alay in werkynge. This diſeaſes hath proued what waye hence forwarde thou thynkeſt to holde. Nowe in good fayth ladye (quod I tho) I am nowe in, me ſemeth it is the hye waye and the ryght. Yea forſoth (quod ſhe) and nowe I wol dyſproue thy fyrſte wayes, by whyche many men wenen to gette thylke blyſſe. But for as moche as euery herte that hath caught full loue, is tyed wyth queynte knyttynges, thou ſhalt vnderſtande that loue and thylke forſayd blyſſe toforne declared in this prouinges, ſhal hote the knot in the hert
                  well (ꝙ I) this inpoſſeſſion I wol wel vnderſtande. Nowe alſo (ꝙ ſhe) for the knotte in the herte muſte ben from one to another, and I knowe thy deſyre: I woll thou vnderſtande theſe maters to ben ſayd of thy ſelfe in dyſprouing of thy fyrſt ſeruyce, & in ſtrenghthynge of thylke that thou haſt vndertake to

thy Margaryte perle. A goddes halfe (ꝙ I) ryght well I fele that al thys caſe is poſſible and trewe, and therfore I admitted al togither. Vnderſtāden well (ꝙ ſhe) theſe termes, and loke no contradiction thou graunt.
                  If God woll (ꝙ I) of all theſe thynges wol I not fayle, and yf I graunt contradiccyon, I ſhulde graunte an impoſſible, & that were a foule inconuenience, for whych thinges Ladye ywys herafter I thynke me to kepe.
               
               
                  
                     WEll (quod ſhe) thou knoweſte hat euerye thynge is a cauſe wherthrough any thyng hath beynge, that is cleped cauſed, than yf rycheſſe cauſen knotte in herte, thylke rycheſſe arne cauſe of thylke precious thyng beyng: but after the ſentence of Ariſtotle, euerye cauſe is more in dignitie than hys thynge cauſed, wherthrough it foloweth rycheſſe to bene more in dignitie thā thilke knot, but rycheſſes arne kindly naughty, badde, and nedy, & thylke knotte is thyng kyndely good, mooſte prayſed and deſyred: Ergo thinge naughtye, badde, and nedye, in kyndelye vnderſtandynge is more worthye than thyng kyndely good, moſt deſyred and prayſed: the conſequence is falſe, nedes the antecedent mote bene of the ſame condition. But that rycheſſes ben badde, naughty, and nedy, yt woll I proue, wherfore they mowe cauſe no ſuch thyng, that is ſo glorious and good: The more rycheſſe thou haſt, the more nede haſte thou of helpe hem to kepe. Ergo thou nedeſte in rycheſſe, whyche nede thou ſhuldeſt not haue yf thou hem wanteſt. Than muſt rycheſſe bene nedy, that in theyr hauinge maken the nedy to helpes in ſuretie thy rycheſſe to kepē, wherthrough foloweth rycheſſe to bene nedy. Euery thynge cauſyng yuels is badde and naughty: but rycheſſe in one cauſen miſeaſe, in another they mowen not euenly ſtretchē al about. wherof cometh plee, debate, thefte, begylynges, but rycheſſe to wynne, whych thynges bene bad, & by richeſſe arne cauſed: Ergo thylke ryches bene badde, whych badneſſe & nede bene knytte in to rycheſſe by a maner of kyndely propertie, and euery cauſe and cauſed accorden, ſo that it foloweth thylke rycheſſe to haue the ſame accordaunce with badneſſe & nede, that their cauſe aſketh. Alſo euery thyng hath hys beyng by his cauſe, thā yf ye cauſe be diſtroyed, the beyng of cauſed is vanyſhed: And ſo if rycheſſe cauſen loue, & richeſſe weren diſtroyed the loue ſhulde vanyſhe, but thylke knot and it be trewe maye not vanyſhe for no goynge of no richeſſe: Ergo richeſſe is no cauſe of the knotte. And many men as I ſayd, ſetten the cauſe of the knotte in rycheſſe, thilke knytten the rycheſſe, and nothynge the yuell: thylke perſons what euer they ben, wenen that rycheſſe is moſt worthy to he had, & that make they the cauſe: & ſo wene they thylke rycheſſe be better thā the perſon. Cōmenly ſuch aſkē rather after the quantyte than after the qualyte, and ſuch wenen as well by hem ſelfe as by other, that coniunction of hys lyfe and of hys ſoule is no more precious, but in as mykel as he hath of riches. Alas howe maye he holden ſuch thynges precious or noble, that neyther han lyfe ne ſoule, ne ordynaunce of werchynge lymmes: ſuch richeſſe bene more worthy whan they ben in gatherynge, in departing ginneth his loue of other mens prayſyng. And auerice gatheryng maketh be hated and nedy to many out helpes: and whan leueth the poſſeſſion of ſuche goodes, & they gynne vanyſh, than entreth ſorow and tene in theyr hertes. O badde & ſtrayte ben thylke that at theyr departing maketh men teneful and ſory, and in the gatheryng of hem make men nedy: Moche folke at ones mowen not togyder moch therof haue. A good geſt gladdeth his hoſte and al hys meyny, but he is a badde geſt that maketh his hoſt nedy & to be aferde of hys geſtes goyng. Certes (ꝙ I) me wondreth therfore that the comune opinion is thus: He is worth no more than yt he hath in catell. O (ꝙ ſhe) loke thou be not of that opinion, for yf gold or money, or other maner of richeſſe ſhinen in thy ſight, whoſe is that? not thyne: & tho they haue a lytle beautye, they be no thyng in cōpariſon of our kynd, & therfore ye ſhulde not ſet your worthineſſe in thyng lower thā your ſelf, for the ryches, the fayrenes, the worthines of thylke goodes yf ther be any ſuch preciouſneſſe in hem are not thine, thou madeſt hem ſo neuer, from other they come to the, & to other they ſhul from yt: wherfore enbraſeſt yu other wightes goodes as tho they were thine▪ kind hath draw hem by hem ſelf. It is ſoth the goodes of the erth

bene ordayned in your fode and noryſhynge, but yf thou wolte holde the apayed wyth ye ſuffyſeth to thy kynde, thou ſhalte not be in daunger of no ſuch ryches, to kinde ſufficeth lytle thynge who that taketh hede. And yf thou wolte algates wyth ſuperfluite of rycheſſe be a throted, thou ſhalt haſtelych be anoyed, or elles yuell at eaſe. And fayrneſſe of feldes ne of habitations, ne multytude of meyne, maye not be rekened as rycheſſe that are thyne owne, for if they be bad it is great ſclaunder and vylany to the occupyer, and if they be good or fayre, ye mater of the workeman that hem made is to praiſe. How ſhuld otherwyſe bountie be cōpted for thine, thilke goodneſſe & fayrneſſe be proper to tho thynges hem ſelfe, thā yf they be not thine ſorow not whā they wend, ne glad the not in pōpe and in pryde whan thou hem haſte, for their bountie & their beauties cometh out of their owne kynde, and not of thyne owne perſon: as fayre bene they in theyr not hauynge as whan thou haſte hem, they be not fayre for thou haſte hem, but thou haſt geten hem for the fayrneſſe of them ſelfe. And ther the vaylance of men is demed in rycheſſe outforthe, wenen men to haue no proper good in them ſelfe but ſeche it in ſtraunge thynges? trewly the condition of good wenyng is in ye myſtourned, to wene your nobleneſſe be not in your ſelfe, but in the goodes and beautie of other thynges. Pardy the beaſtes that han but felynge ſoules, haue ſuffyſaunce in their owne ſelfe: and ye that bene lyke to God, ſeken encreaſe of ſuffyſaunce from ſo excellent a kind of ſo low thynges, ye do great wrōge to hym that you made lordes ouer all erthly thynges, and ye put your worthineſſe vnder the nombre of the fete of lower thynges and foule, whā ye iuge thylke rycheſſe to be your worthyneſſe, than put ye your ſelf by eſtimacyon vnder thylke foule thynges, and than leue ye the knowyng of yourſelfe, ſo be ye vyler thā any dombe beeſt, ye cometh of ſhreude vice. Ryghte ſo thylke perſons yt louen none yuel for dere worthyneſſe of the perſon, but for ſtraunge goodes, and ſayth the adornement in the knotte lyth in ſuch thing, hys errour is perylous and ſhreude, and he wrieth muche venym with moch welth, & that knot moy not be good whā he hath it getten. Certes thus hath ryches wyth flyckeryng ſyght anoyed many: & often whan ther is a throw out ſhrew, he coyneth al the golde, al the precious ſtones that mowen be foundē to haue in his bandon, he weneth no wight be worthy to haue ſuch thynges but he alone. How many haſt thou knowe nowe in late tyme, yt in their riches ſuppoſed ſuffiſaunce haue folowed, & nowe it is al fayled? Ye lady (ꝙ I) that is for myſſe medlynge, & otherwyſe gouerned thylke rycheſſe than they ſhulde. Yee (ꝙ ſhe tho) had not the floode greatlye areyſed, and throwe to hemwarde both grauel & ſande, he had made no medlyng. And ryght as ſee yeueth flood, ſo draweth ſee ebbe, and pulleth ayen vnder wawe all the fyrſte out throwe, but yf good pyles of noble gouernaūce in loue, in wel meanynge maner, bene ſadly grounded, to which holde thylke gravel as for a while, ye ayen lightly mow not it turne, & yf the pyles bene trewe, the grauell and ſande wol abyde. And certes full warnyng in loue ſhalte thou neuer thorowe hem gette ne couer yt lightly with an ebbe er thou be ware it wol ayen meue. In rycheſſe many mē haue had tenes and diſeaſes, which they ſhuld not haue had, if therof they had fayled Thorowe whiche nowe declared partly it is ſhewed, that for rycheſſe ſhulde the knotte in herte neyther ben cauſed in one ne in other: trewly knott maye ben knytte, and I trowe more ſtedfaſt in loue though rycheſſe fayled and els in rycheſſe is the knotte & not in hert. And than ſuch a knotte is falſe, whan the ſee ebbeth & withdraweth the grauel, that ſuch rycheſſe voydeth, thilke knotte wol vnknytte wherfore no truſt, no way, no cauſe, no parfyte beyng is in rycheſſe of no ſuche knotte, therfore another way muſt we haue.
               
               
                  
                     HOnoure in dignitie is wened to yeuen a ful knot. Yee certes (ꝙ I) & of that opinion bene manye, for they ſame dignitie, wyth honour and reuerence, cauſen hertes to encheynen, and ſo abled to be knytte togyther, for the excellence in ſoueraynte of ſuch degrees
                  Nowe (ꝙ ſhe) yf dignitie, honour, and reuerence cauſen thilke knot in herte, this knot is good and profitable. For euery cauſe of a cauſe, is cauſe of thinge cauſed: Than thus, good thynges and profitable ben by dignite honour, and reuerence cauſed. Ergo they accorden,

and dignities bene good wyth reuerences and honoure, but contraryes mowen not accorden: wherfore by reaſon ther ſhuld no dignitie, no reuerēce, none honour accord wyth ſhrewes, but yt is falſe: they haue bene cauſe to ſhrewes in many ſhreudneſſe, for wt hem they accorden. Ergo frō begynnyng to argue ayenwarde tyl it come to the laſt concluſyon, they are not cauſe of the knot. Lo all day at eye, arne ſhrewes not in reuerence, in honoure, and in dignitie? yes forſoth, rather thā the good. Thā foloweth it that ſhrewes rather thā good ſhull ben cauſe of this knot. But of this contrary of al louers is bileued, and for a ſoth openly determyned to holde.
                  Nowe (quod I) fayne wolde I here how ſuche dignities accorden wyth ſhrewes.
                  O (quod ſhe) that woll I ſhewe in manyfolde wiſe. Ye wene (quod ſhe) that dignites of office here in your ciite is as ye ſūne, it ſhyneth bryghte wythouten any cloude, whiche thynge whan they comen in the handes of malycyouſe tyrauntes, there cometh muche harme, and more greuaunce therof, than of the wylde fyre, though it brende all a ſtrete. Certes in dignite of office, the werkes of the occupyer ſhewen the malice and the badnes in the perſonne, wyth ſhrewes they maken manyfolde harmes, and muche people ſhamen. How often han rancours for malyce of the gouernoure ſhulde bene maynteyned? Hath not than ſuch dignities cauſed debate rumours, and yuels? yes God wote, by ſuch thynges haue bene truſted to make mennes vnderſtādyng encline to many queynt thynges. Thou woteſte well what I meane. Ye (quod I) therfore as dignitie ſuche thyng in tene ywrought, ſo ayenwarde the ſubſtaūce in dignitie chaunged, relyed to brynge ayen good plyte in doyng. Doway, doway (quod ſhe) if it ſo betyde, but that is ſelde, that ſuch dignitie is betake in a good mannes gouernaunce. what thynge is to recken in the dignities goodneſſe? parde the bountie & goodnes is hers, that vſē it in good gouernaūce, and therfore cometh it that honoure and reuerence ſhulde bene done to dignitie, bicauſe of encreaſynge vertue in the occupyer, and not to the ruler, bicauſe of ſouerayntie in dignitie. Sythen dignitie may no vertue cauſe, who is worthy worſhip for ſuch goodneſſe? no
                        •
                      dignitie, but perſon yt maketh goodneſſe in dignitie to ſhyne. Thys is wonder thyng (quod I) for me thynketh, as the perſon in dignitie is worthye honoure for goodneſſe ſo tho a perſon for badneſſe magre hath deſerued, yet the dignite leneth to be commended. Let be (quod ſhe) thou erreſt right foule dignite with badnes is helper to perfourme the felonous doynge: pardy were it kyndly good or any propertie of kyndly vertue hadden in hem ſelfe, ſhrewes ſhulde hem neuer haue, wyth hem ſhulde they neuer accorde. water and fyre that ben cōtrarious mowen not togyther bene aſſembled, kynde wol not ſuff
                        •
                     e ſuche contraryes to ioyne, & ſythen at eye by experiēce in doyng, we ſene that ſhrewes haue hem more often thā good menne, ſyker mayſte thou be, ye kyndly good in ſuche thynges is not appropred. Pardy were they kyndly good, as wel one as other ſhulden euenliche in vertue of gouernaūce ben worth: but one faileth in goodnes another doth the contrary, and ſo it ſheweth kyndly goodnes in dignitie not be grounded. And thys ſame reaſon (quod ſhe) maye be made in generall on all the bodily goodes, for they comen ofte to throw out ſhrewes. After this he is ſtrōg that hath myght to haue great burthyns, & he is lyght and ſwyfte that hathe ſouerante in runnynge to paſſe other ryghte ſo he is a ſhrewe on whō ſhreude thynges and badde han moſt wyrchyng. And ryght as philoſophy maketh philoſophers, & my ſeruice maketh louers: Ryghte ſo if dignities weren good or vertuous, they ſhulde maken ſhrewes good, and turne her malyce and make hem be vertuous, but that do they not, as it is proued, but cauſē rancour & debate. Ergo they be not good, but vtterly badde. Had Nero neuer bene Emperoure, ſhulde neuer hys dame haue be ſlayn, to maken open the priuitie of his engendrure. Herodes for his dignitie ſlewe many chyldrē. The dignite of king Pompey wolde haue diſtroyed al Italy Therfore mokyl wiſedome & goodnes both nedeth in a perſon, the malyce in dignitie ſlyly to bridel, and with a good bytte of areſt to withdrawe, in caſe it wolde praunce otherwiſe than it ſhulde: trewly ye yeue to dignities wrongful names in your cleping. They ſhulde hete not dignitie, but mouſtre of badnes & mayntenour of ſhrewes. Pardy ſhyne the ſūne neuer ſo bryght, & it brynge forth no

heate, ne ſeſonably the herbes brynge out of the erth, but ſuffre froſtes and colde, and the erth baraine to lygge be time of his compas in circute aboute, ye wolde wonder and diſpreyſe that ſunne. If the mone be at full and ſheweth no lyghte but derke and dymme to your ſyghte appereth, and make diſtruction of ye waters, wol ye not ſuppoſe it be vnder cloude or in clips? and that ſome priuy thing vnknowen to your wyttes, is cauſe of ſuche contrarious doyng. Thā yf clerkes that han ful inſight and knowyng of ſuch impedimē
                     tes enforme you of the ſothe, very idiotes ye bene, but yf ye yeuen credence to thylke clerkes wordes, & yet it doth me tene, to ſene many wretches reioycen in ſuch maner planets Trewly lytle con they on phyloſophy or els on my lore, that any deſyre hauen ſuch lightyng planettes in yt wyſe any more to ſhew. Good Ladye (ꝙ I) tell ye me how ye meane in theſe thynges. Lo (quod ſhe) the dignities of your citie, ſunne & mone, nothyng in kynd ſhewe theyr ſhynyng as they ſhulde. For the ſunne made no brēnyng hete in loue, but freſed enuye in mennes hertes for febleneſſe of ſhynynge hete: and the mone was about vnder an olde cloude, the lyuenges by waters to diſtroye.
                  Lady (ꝙ I) it is ſuppoſed they had ſhined as they ſhulde. Yee (quod ſhe) but nowe it is proued at the full their beaute in kyndly ſhynynge fayled, wherfore dignitye of hym ſeluen hath no beautie in fayrneſſe, ne dryueth nat awaye vices but encreaſeth, & ſo be they no cauſe of the knot. Now ſe in good trouth holde ye not ſuch ſonnes worthy of no reuerence and dignities, worthy of no worſhyp, that maketh men to do the more harmes? I not (quod I) No (ꝙ ſhe) and thou ſe a wyſe good man, for hys goodneſſe and wyſeneſſe wolte thou not do hym worſhip? Therof he is worthy. That is good ſkyl (quod I) it is dewe to ſuche, both reuerence and worſhyp to haue. Than (quod ſhe) a ſhrewe for hys ſhreudneſſe, all tho he be put forth to forne other for ferd, yet is he worthy for ſhreudnes to be vnworſhypped: of reuerence no part is he worthy to haue, to cōtrarious doyng belongeth and that is good ſkyl. For righte as beſmyteth the dignities, thylke ſame thinge aycuwarde hym ſmyteth, or els ſhulde ſmite And ouer this thou woſt wel (quod ſhe) that fyre in euery place heateth where it be & water maketh wete: why? for kyndely werking is ſo yput in hem to do ſuch thinges: for euery kyndly in werkynge ſheweth his kynde. But though a wight had ben mayre of your citie manye wynter togyther, and come in a ſtraunge place ther he were not knowen, he ſhuld for his dignite haue no reuerence. Thā neyther worſhyppe ne reuerence is kyndelye propre in no dignitie, ſythen they ſhuldē don theyr kynde, in ſuch doyng yf any were. And yf reuerence ne worſhyppe kyndly be not ſet in dignities, & they more therin bene ſhewed thā goodneſſe, for that in dignitie is ſhewed but it proueth that goodneſſe kyndly in hem is not grounded. I wys neyther worſhyppe ne reuerence ne goodneſſe in dignitie, doone none offyce of kynde, for they haue none ſuch propertie in nature of doenge, but by falſe opinion of the people. Lo how ſomtyme thilk that in your citie werne in dignitie noble, yf thou lyſt hem nempne, they bene nowe ouerturned, bothe in worſhyppe, in name, and in reuerence: wherfore ſuche dignities haue no kyndely werchynge to worſhyppe and of reuerence, he that hathe no worthyneſſe on it ſelfe. Now it ryſeth and nowe it vanyſheth after the varyaunt opynyon in falſe hertes of vnſtable people. Wherfore yf thou deſyre the knotte of thys iewell, or els yf thou woldeſt ſuppoſe ſhe ſhuld ſette the knotte on the for ſuch maner dignitie than thou weneſte beautye or goodneſſe of thylke ſomwhat encreaſeth the goodneſſe or vertue in the body: But dignitye of hem ſelfe bene not good, ne yeuen reuerence ne worſhippe by their owne kynde, howe ſhulde they than yeue to any other a thynge, that by no waye mowe they haue hem ſelfe? It is ſene in dignitie of the Emperour and of many mo other, that they mowe not of hem ſelue kepe theyr worſhyp ne theyr reuerence, that that in a lytle whyle it is now vp and now downe, by vnſtedfaſt hertes of the people. what boūtie mow they yeue that wyth cloude lyghtlye leaueth hys ſhyning? Certes to the occupier is mokyl appeyred, ſythen ſuch doynge dothe vylany to hym that maye it not mayntayne, wherfore thylke waye to the knotte is croked: and yf anye deſyre to come to the knotte, he muſte leane thys waye on his lefte ſyde, or els ſhal he neuer come there.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AVayleth ought (ꝙ ſhe) power of myght in mayntenaunce of worthy to come to thys knot Parde (ꝙ I) yee, for hertes bene rauyſhed from ſuch maner thynges. Certes (ꝙ ſhe) though a fooles hert is with thing rauiſhed yet therefore is no generall cauſe of the powers, ne of a ſyker parfyte herte to be loked after. Was not Nero the mooſt ſhrewe one of thylke that men rede, & yet had he power to make ſenatours, iuſtices & princes of many landes? was not that great power? Yes, certes (quod I) wel (quod ſhe) yet myght he not help him ſelfe out of diſeaſe, whā hē gan fal. How many enſamples canſt thou remē
                     bre of kynges great and noble, and huge power holden, & yet they myghte not kepe hem ſelue from wretchedneſſe. Howe wretched was kyng Henry Curtmantyll er he deyed? he had not ſo moch as to couer wt hys membres: and yet was he one of the greateſt kinges of al the Normandes of ſprynge, & moſt poſſeſſion had. O, a noble thinge and clere is power, that is not founden myghty to kepe hym ſelfe. Nowe trewly a greate fole is he, that for ſuch thyng wolde ſette the knotte in thyne herte. Alſo power of realmes is not thylk greateſt power amonges the worldly powers rekened? And yf ſuche powers han wretchedneſſe in hem ſelfe, it foloweth other powers of febler condicion to ben wretched, and than that wretchedneſſe ſhulde be cauſe of ſuch a knotte. But euery wyght that hath reaſon wote well that wretchedneſſe by no waye maye bene cauſe of none ſuche knotte, wherfore ſuch power is no cauſe. That powers haue wretchedneſſe in hem ſelfe, maye ryght lyghtly bene preued. If power lacke on any ſide, on that ſide is no power, but no power is wretchedneſſe: for al be it ſo the power of emperours or kynges, or els of theyr realmes (whych is the power of the prynce) ſtretchen wyde and brode, yet beſyde is ther mokell folke of whyche he hath no cōmaundement ne lordſhyp, & ther as lacketh his power, hys nonepower entreth, where vnder ſpryngeth that maketh hem wretches. No power is wretchedneſſe, and nothynge els: but in this maner hath kinges more porcion of wretchedneſſe thā of power. Trewly ſuch powers bene vnmighty, for euer they ben in drede howe thylke power frō leſinge may be keped of ſorowe, ſo drede ſorily prickes euer in their hertes: litle is ye power which careth & ferdeth it ſelfe to maintayn. Vnmyghty is ye wretchednes whych is entred by the ferdful wenyng of the wretch him ſelfe: & knotte ymaked by wretchedneſſe is betwene wretches, & wretches all thyng bewaylen: wherfore the knotte ſhulde be bewayled, and ther is no ſuch perfyte blyſſe that we ſuppoſed at the gynning. Ergo power in nothing ſhulde cauſe ſuch knottes. wretchedneſſe is a kyndly propertie in ſuche power, as by waye of drede, whiche they mowe not eſchewe ne by no way lyne in ſikerneſſe. For thou woſt wel (ꝙ ſhe) he is nought mighty that wold done yt he may not doone ne perfourme. Therfore (quod I) theſe kynges and lordes that han ſuffyſaunce at the ful of men and other thinges, mowen well bene holden myghty: their cōmaūdemētes ben done, it is neuermore denied. Foole (ꝙ ſhe) or he wot him ſelfe mighty or wotte it not: for he is nought myghty, that is blynde of his might and wote it not. That is ſothe (quod I). Than yf he wet it, he muſt nedes ben a drad to leſen it. He that wot of his might is in dout yt he mote nedes leſe, & ſo leadeth hym drede to ben vnmyghtye. And yf he retche not to leſe, lytle is that worth yt of ye leſyng reſon retcheth nothing: & if it were myghty in power or in ſtrengthe the leſyng ſhulde bene wythſet, and whan it cometh to the leſyng he may it not wyth
                        •
                     yt. Ergo thylke myght is leude and naughty. Such mightes arne ylike to poſtes and pyllers that vpright ſtonden, and greate might han to beare many charges, & yf they croke on any ſyde, lytell thynge maketh hem ouerthrow. Thys is a good enſāple (ꝙ I) to pyllers & poſtes yt I haue ſeneouerthrowed my ſelfe, and hadden, they bene vnderput wyth any helpes, they had not ſo lyghtly fal. Thā holdeſte thou hym mighty that hath manye men armed and many ſeruauntes, and euer he is adradde of hem in his herte, and for he gaſteth hem, ſomtyme he mote ye more feare haue. Comenly he that other agaſteth, other in hym ayenwarde werchen the ſame: and thus warnyſhed mote he be, and of warniſh the houre drede: Lytel is that myght & right leude, who ſo taketh hede. Than ſemethe it (ꝙ I) that ſuch famulers about kinges and

greate lordes, ſhulde great myght haue. Although a ſypher in augrym haue no myght in ſignifycation of it ſelfe, yet he yeueth power in ſignificacion to other, and theſe clepe I the helpes to a poſt to kepe hym from fallynge. Certes (quod ſhe) thylke ſkylles bene leude. why? but yf ye ſhorers ben wel grounded, the helpes ſhullen ſlyden and ſuffre the charge to fal, her myght lytle auayleth. And ſo me thynketh (quod I) that a poſte alone ſtondynge vpright vpon a baſſe, may lenger in great burthen endure, than croken pillers for all theyr helpes, and her grounde be not ſyker. That is ſoth (ꝙ ſhe) for as the blynde in bearynge of the lame gynne ſtomble, both ſhulde fal, right ſo ſuch pyllers ſo enuyroned wyth helpes in fallynge of the grounde fayleth altogyther, how ofte than ſuche famulers in theyr mooſt pryde of proſperyte bene ſodaynly ouerthrowen. Thou haſte knowe many in a moment ſo ferre ouerthrow, that couer might they neuer, whan the heuyneſſe of ſuche faylynge cometh by caſe of fortune, they mowe it not eſchewe: and myghte and power, yf there were any, ſhulde of ſtrength ſuch thynges voyde & weyue, and ſo it is not Lo than whiche thynge is this power, that tho men han it they bene agaſt, & in no tyme of full hauyng be they ſyker, & yf they wolde weyue drede, as they mowe not, lytle is in worthyneſſe. Fye therfore on ſo naughtye thynge any knot to cauſe. Lo in aduerſitie, thylke bene his foes that gloſed and ſemed frendes in welthe: thus arne hys famylyers his foes and his enemyes: and nothynge is werſe ne more myghty for to anoy than is a familier enemye, & theſe thynges maye they not weyue: ſo trewelye theyr myghte is not worth a creſſe. And ouer all thing, he yt maye not wythdrawe the bridell of hys fleſhly luſtes and hys wretched complayntes (nowe thinke on thy ſelfe) trewly he is not mighty. I can ſe no waye yu lyeth to the knot. Thylke people thā that ſetten their hertes vpō ſuche myghtes and powers, often bene begyled. Parde he is not myghty that maye do anye thing, that another may done him the ſelue and that mē haue as great power ouer hym as he ouer other. A iuſtice that demeth men, ayenward hath bene often demed. Buſerus ſlewe his geſtes, and he was ſlaine of Hercules his geſte, Hugeſt betrayſhed many men, and of Collo was he betrayed. He that with ſwerde ſmytteth, with ſwerde ſhall be ſmitten. Than gan I to ſtudyen a while on theſe thinges, and made a countenaunce with my hande in maner to bene huyſhte. Nowe lette ſene (quod ſhe) me thynketh ſomwhat there is wythin thy ſoule, that troubleth thy vnderſtandynge, ſaye on what it is. (Quod I tho) me thynketh that although a mā by power haue ſuche myghte ouer me, as I haue ouer other, that diſproueth no myght in my perſon, but yet may I haue power & myght neuer the later. Se nowe (ꝙ ſhe) thine owne leudneſſe: He is myghty that may wythout wretchednes, and he is vnmyghty that may it not with ſitte: but then he that might ouer the, & he woll put on the wretchedneſſe, thou might it not wythſytte. Ergo thou ſeeſt thy ſelfe what foloweth. But nowe (quod ſhe) woldeſt thou not ſkorne & thou ſe a flye han power to done harme to another flye, & thilk haue no myght ne ayenturninge him ſelfe to defende? Yes certes (quod I) who is a frayler thyng (quod ſhe) than the fleſhly bodye of a man, ouer whyche haue oftentyme flyes, and yet laſſe thyng than a flye, mokel might in greuaunce and anoyenge withouten any withſytting, for al thylke mannes mightes And ſythen thou freſt thy fleſhlye bodye in kyndely power fayle, how ſhulde thā the accident of a thing ben in more ſurete of beyng than ſubſtancial? wherfore thylke thinges yt we clepe power, is but accident to the fleſhly body, and ſo they may not haue that ſuretie in might, which wanteth in the ſubſtanciall body, why there is no waye to the knot, that loketh aright after the hye way as he ſhulde
               
               
                  
                     VErily it is proued that richeſſe, dignite, & power, ben not trew way to the knot, but as rath by ſuch thynges the knotte to be vnbounde: wherfore on theſe thynges I rede no wight truſt, to gette anye good knotte. But what ſhul we ſaye of renome in the peoples mouthes, ſhulde yt ben any cauſe: what ſuppoſeſt yu in thine hert? Certes (quod I) yes I trow, for your fly reſons I dare not ſac
                        •
                     ly it ſay. Than (ꝙ ſhe) wol I preue yt ſhrewes as rath ſhul ben in ye knot as the good & yu were

ayenſt kynde. Fayne (quod I) wolde I that here, me thynketh wondre howe renoume ſhoulde as wel knyt a ſhrewe as a good perſon: renoume in euery degree hathe auaunced, yet wiſt I neuer the contrary: ſhuld thā renoume accorde with a ſhrewe? it may not ſynke in my ſtomacke tyll I heare more. Nowe (quod ſhe) haue I not ſayd alwayes the ſhrewes ſhull not haue the knot. what nedeth (quod I) to reherſe that anye more? I wote well euery wyght by kyndely reaſon, ſhrewes in knyttyng wol eſchewe. Than (ꝙ ſhe) the good ought thylke knotte to haue. Howe els? (quod I) It were greate harme (quod ſhe) that the good were weyued and put out of eſpoire of the knot, yf it be deſired O (ꝙ I) alas, on ſuche thynge to thynke I wene that heuen wepeth to ſe ſuche wrōges here bene ſuffred on erth: the good ought it to haue and no wyght els. The goodneſſe (ꝙ ſhe) of a perſon may not ben knowe outforth, but by renome of the knowers, wherfore he muſt be renoumed of goodneſſe to come to the knot. So muſt it be (ꝙ I) or els all loſt that we carpen. Sothly (ꝙ ſhe) that were great harme, but yf a good mā might haue his deſyres in ſeruyce of thylke knot, and a ſhrewe to be veyned, and they ben not knowen in general but by lackyng and pray ſing and in renome, and ſo by the cōſequēce it foloweth, a ſhrewe to ben prayſed & knyt, and a good to be forſake and vnknyt. Ah (ꝙ I tho) haue ye ladye bene here abouten, yet wolde I ſe by grace of our argumentes better declared, how good & bad do accordē by lackyng and prayſyng, me thynketh it ayēſt kynde. Nay )ꝙ ſhe) and that ſhalt thou ſe as yerne: theſe elementes han cōtrarious qualities in kynde, by whiche they mowe not accorde nomore than good & bad, and in qualities they accorde, ſo that contraryes by qualitie accorden by qualitie. Is not erth drye, & water that is nexte and bytwene therth is wete: drye and were ben contrary, & mowen not accorde, & yet this diſcordaunce is boūd to accorde by cloudes, for bothe elementes ben colde. Ryght ſo the eyre that is next the water is wete, and eke it is hote. This eyre by his hete contraryeth water that is colde, but thylke contraryouſtye is oned my moyſture, for both be they moyſt. Alſo the fyre yt is next the eyre, and it encloſeth al about, is drye: wherthrough it contraryeth eyre that is were: & in hete they accorde, for both they ben hote. Thus by theſe accordaūces, diſcordaūtes ben ioyned, and in a maner of accordaunce they accorden by connection, that is knyttyng togyther: of that accorde cōmeth a maner of melody yt is ryght noble. Ryght ſo good and bad are contrarye in doinges, by lackyng and prayſyng: good is both lacked and prayſed of ſome, and bad is both lacked and prayſed of ſome: wherfore theyr contrariouſtie accorde both by lackynge and prayſyng. Than foloweth it, though good be neuer ſo mokel prayſed, oweth more to bē knit than the bad: or els bad for the renome that he hath, muſt be takē as wel as ye good, and that oweth not. No forſoth (ꝙ I) wel, ꝙ ſhe than is renome no way to the knot: Lo fole (ꝙ ſhe) howe clerkes writen of ſuche glorye of renome. O glorie, glorie, thou arte none other thynge to thouſandes of folke, but a great ſweller of eares. Many one hath had full greate renoume by falſe opynion of varyaunt people: And what is fouler thā folke wrongfully to ben prayſed, or by malyce of the people gylteleſſe lacked? nedes ſhame foloweth therof to hem yt with wronge prayſeth, and alſo to the deſertes prayſed, and vilanye and reprofe of hym that diſclaūdreth.
                  Good chylde (quod ſhe) what echeth ſuche renome to the conſcience of a wyſe man that loketh and meaſureth his goodneſſe, not by ſleueleſſe wordes of the people, but by ſothe faſtneſſe of conſcience? by god nothyng. And if it be fayre a mans name be eched by moch folkes prayſyng, and fouler thynge that mo folke not prayſen. I ſayde to the a lytle here beforne, that no folke in ſtraunge countries nought prayſen, ſuche renoume may not comen to theyr eares, bycauſe of vnknowyng and other obſtacles, as I ſayde: wherfore more folke not prayſen, and that is ryghte foule to hym that renome deſyreth, to weteleſſe folke prayſen than renoume enhaunce. I trowe the thanke of a people is nought worth in remembraunce to take, ne it procedeth of no wyſe iudgement, neuer is it ſtedfaſt perdurable: it is veyne and flying, with wynde waſteth and encreaſeth.
                  Trulye ſuch glorye ought to be hated. Yf gentylleſſe be a clere thyng, renome and glory to enhaūce, as in rekenyng of thy lynage

than is gentylleſſe of thy kynne, for why, it ſemeth that gentyleſſe of thy kynne, is but prayſynge and renoume that come of thyne aunceſtres deſertes: and yf ſo be that prayſynge and renoume of theyr deſertes, make theyr clere gentyleſſe, than mote they nedes ben gentyl for theyr gentil dedes, & not yu: for of thy ſelfe commeth not ſuche maner gentyleſſe, prayſynge of thy deſertes. Than gentyleſſe of thyne aunceſters that forayne is to the, maketh the not gentyl, but vngētyl and reproued, and yf thou contynueſt not theyr gentylleſſe. And therfore a wyſe man ones ſayde. Better is it thy kynne to bene by the gentyled, than thou to glorify of thy kynnes gentyleſſe, and haſte no deſerte thereof thy ſelfe.
                  How paſſyng is the beautie of fleſhly bodyes? more flyttyng than mouable floures of ſommer. And yf thyne eyen were as good as the Lynx, that may ſene thorowe many ſtone walles, both fayre and foule in theyr entrayles, of no maner hewe ſhoulde appere to thy ſyght, that were a foule ſyght. Than is fayreneſſe by febleſſe of eyen, but of no kynde, wherfore thylke ſhoulde be no waye to the knot: whan thylke is went the knotte wendeth after.
                  Lo nowe at all proues, none of all theſe thinges mowe perfectlye ben in vnderſtandyng, to ben way to the duryng blyſſe of the knot. But nowe to concluſyon of theſe matters, herkeneth theſe wordes. Very ſommer is knowe from the wynter: in ſhorter cours draweth the dayes of Decēbre, than in the moneth of Iune: The ſprynges of May faden and folowen in October. Theſe thinges ben not vnbounden from theyr olde kynde, they haue not loſt her werke of their propre eſtate. Men of volūtarious wyll, withſyt ye henens gouerneth. Other thynges ſuffren thynges pacyently to werche: Man in what eſtate he be, yet wolde he bene chaunged. Thus by queynt thynges blyſſe is deſyred, and the frute that cometh of theſe ſpringes, nys but anguyſh and bytter, although it be a whyle ſwete, it may not be withholde, haſtely they departe: thus al daye fayleth thinges that fooles wende. Ryght thus haſte thou fayled in thy fyrſte wenynge. He that thinketh to ſayle and drawe after the courſe of the ſtarre, de polo antartico, ſhall he neuer come northwarde to the contrary ſtarre of polus articus: of whiche thinges yf thou take kepe, thy fyrſt out waye goinge, pryſon and exyle maye be cleped. The grounde falſed vnderneth, and ſo haſte thou fayled. No wyght I wene blameth hym that ſtynteth in miſgoing, and ſecheth redye waye of hys blyſſe. Nowe me thynketh (quod ſhe) that it ſuffyſeth in my ſhewynge the wayes, by dignitie, rycheſſe, renoume, and power, if thou loke clerely, arne no wayes to the knotte.
               
               
                  
                     EVerye argument ladye (ꝙ I tho) that ye han maked in theſe fore nempned maters, me thynketh hem in my full wytte conceyued, ſhall I nomore yf god wil in the contrary be begyled But fayne wolde I and it we
                        •
                     e your wyll, blyſſe of the knotte to me were declared, I myght fele the better how myne hert myght aſſente to purſue the ende in ſeruyce, as he hath be gone. O (quod ſhe) there is a melody in heuen, which clerkes clepen armonye, but that is not in breakynge of voyce, but it is a maner ſwete thynge of kyndly werchynge, that cauſeth ioye out of nombre to recken, & and that is ioyned by reaſon and by wyſedome, in a quantitie of proporcyon of knyttyng. God made all thynge in reaſon and in wytte of proporcyon of melodye, we mowe not ſuffyſe to ſhewe. It is wrytten by great clerkes and wyſe, that in earthlye thynges lyghtly by ſtudye and by trauayle, the knowynge maye be getten▪ but of ſuche heuenly melodye, mokell trauayle wol brynge out in knowyng ryght lytle. Swetneſſe of this paradyſe hath you rauyſhed, it ſemeth ye ſlepten, reſted from all other diſeaſes, ſo kyndly is your hertes therin ygrounded. Blyſſe of two hertes in full loue knyt, may not aright ben ymagyned: euer is theyr contemplacion in full of thoughty ſtudy to pleaſaunce, mater in bryngyng, comforte eueryche to other. And therfore of erthly thynges mokell mater lyghtly commeth in your lernynge. Knowledge of vnderſtondynge that is nygh after eye, but not ſo nygh the couetyſe of knyttynge in your hertes: More ſoueraygne deſyre hath euerye wyght in lytle hearynge of

heuenly connyng, than of mokell materyall purpoſes in earth. Ryght ſo it is in propertie of my ſeruauntes, that they ben more affyched in ſterynge of lytle thynge in his deſyre, than of mokell other mater, laſſe in his conſcience. This blyſſe is a maner of ſowne delicious, in a queynt voyce touched, and no dynne of notes: there is none impreſſyon of breakynge laboure. I can it not otherwyſe nempne, for wantynge of pryuye wordes, but Paradyſe terreſtrye full of delicyous melodye withouten trauayle in ſowne perpetual ſeruice in full ioy coueyted to endure.
                  Onely kynde maketh hertes in vnderſtandyng, ſo to ſlepe, that otherwyſe may it not be nempned, ne in other maner names for lykyng ſwetneſſe can I not it declare, al ſugre and hony, all mynſtralſye and melodye ben but ſoote and galle in compariſō by no maner proporcyon to recken, in reſpecte of thys blyſfull ioye. This armonye, this melodye, this perdurable ioye may not be in doinge, but betwene heuens and elementes, or twey kyndly hertes, ful knyt in trouth of naturall vnderſtondyng, withouten wenyng and diſceyte, as heuens and planettes, which thinges contynually for kyndely accordaunces, foryeteth all contraryous meanynges: that into paſſyue diſeaſes may ſowne, euermore it thyrſteth after more werkyng. Theſe thinges in proporcyon be ſo well ioyned, that it vndoth all thyng, which into badneſſe by any waye maye be accompted. Certes (ꝙ I) this is a thynge precious and noble. Alas, that falſeneſſe euer or wantruſte ſhoulde be mayntayned, this ioye to voyde. Alas that euer any wretche ſhulde thorowe wrath or enuy, 
                        •
                     anglyng dare make to ſhoue this melody ſo farre abacke, that openly dare it not ben vſed: truly wretches ben fulfylled with 
                        •
                     auy and wrath, and no wight els. Flebring and tales in ſuche wretches ſhall appeare openly in euery wyghtes ere, with ful mouth ſo charged, mokell malyce moued many ininnocentes to ſhende, god wold theyr ſoule therwith were ſt
                        •
                     angled. Lo, trouth in this blyſſe is hyd, and ouer all vnder couert hym hydeth: He dare not come a place for waytyng of ſhrewes.
                  Cōmenly badneſſe, goodneſſe amaſtryeth with my ſelfe and my ſoule this ioye wolde I bye, yf I the goodneſſe were as moche as the nobley in melody. O (ꝙ ſhe) what goodneſſe maye be accompted more in this materyall worlde, truly none that ſhalt thou vnderſtonde. Is not euery thyng good that is contrariant and deſtroying euyll? Howe els (ꝙ I) Enuy, wrath, and falſeneſſe ben generall (ꝙ ſhe) and that wote euery man beinge in his ryght mynde, the knotte the whiche we haue in this blyſſe, is contraryaunt and diſtroyeth ſuch maner euils: ergo it is good.
                  what hath cauſed any wyght to don any good dede? Fynde me anye good, but yf this knotte be the chefe cauſe: Nedes mote it be good, that cauſeth ſo many good dedes.
                  Euery cauſe is more and worthyer than thyng cauſed, and in that mores poſſeſſyon, all thynges leſſe ben compted. As the kynge is more than his people, and hath in poſſeſſyon all his realme after: Ryght ſo the knot is more than all other goodes, thou myght recken all thynges laſſe, and that to hym lō
                     geth, oweth into hys mores cauſe of worſhyppe and of wyll do tourne, it is els rebell and out of his mores defendynge to voyde. Ryght ſo of euery goodneſſe into the knotte and into the cauſe of his worſhyp oweth to turne. And truly euerye thyng that hath beinge profytably is good, but nothynge hath to ben more profytably than this knot: kynges it mayntayneth, and hem theyr powers to mayntayne: It maketh myſſe to ben amē
                     ded with good gouernaunce in doinge. It cloſeth hertes ſo togyther, ye rancour is out threſten. who that it lengeſt kepeth, lengeſt is gladded. I trowe (ꝙ I) heretyckes and myſmeanynge people hence forwarde woll mayntayne this knotte, for there throughe ſhall they ben mayntayned, and vtterly wol turne and leaue theyr olde euyll vnderſtondyng, and knytte this goodneſſe, and profer ſo farre in ſeruyce, that name of ſeruauntes myght they haue.
                  Theyr iangles ſhal ceaſe, me thynketh hē lacketh mater now to alege. Certes (ꝙ loue) yf they of good wyll thus tourned as thou ſayeſt wolen truly perfourme, yet ſhul they be abled partye of this blyſſe to haue: & they woll not, yet ſhull my ſeruauntes the werre well ſuſteyne in myne helpe of mayntinaūce to the ende. And they for theyr good trauayl ſhullen in rewarde ſo be ben meded, that end leſſe ioye bodye and ſoule togyther in this

ſhullen abyden, there is euer action of blyſſe withouten poſſible corruption, there is action perpetuell in werke withoute trauayle, there is euerlaſtyng paſſyfe, withouten any of labour, continuel plyte without ſeaſynge coueted to endure. No tonge may tel ne hert maye thynke the leeſt poynte of this blyſſe. God brynge me thyder (ꝙ I than). Contynueth well (ꝙ ſhe) to the ende, and yu myght not fayle than, for thoughe thou ſpede not here, yet ſhal the paſſyon of thy martred life ben wrytten and rad toforne the greate Iupyter that god is of routh, an hygh in the holowneſſe of heuen, there he ſyt in his trone: & euer thou ſhalt forwarde ben holden amōge all theſe heuens for a knyght, that myghteſt with no penaunce bene diſcomfyted. He is a very martyr that lyuynglye goinge is gnawen to the bones. Certes (ꝙ I) theſe bene good wordes of comfort, a lytle myne herte is reioyſed in a mery wyſe. Ye (ꝙ ſhe) and he that is in heuen feleth more ioye, than whā he firſt herde therof ſpeke. So it is (quod I) but wyſt I the ſothe, that after diſeaſe comfort wolde folowe with blyſſe, ſo as ye haue often declared, I wolde well ſuffre this paſſyon with the better chere, but my thoughtfull ſorowe is endleſſe, to thynke how I am caſt out of a welfare, & yet dayneth not this euyll none herte none hede to mewarde thorowe, which thynges wolde greatly me by wayes of comfort diſporte, to weten in my ſelfe a lytle with other ni
                        •
                      ben ymoued: and my ſorowes peyſen not in her balaunce the weyght of a peeſe: Slynges of her daunger ſo heuyly peyſen, they drawe my cauſes ſo hyghe, that in her eyen they ſemen but lyght and ryght lytle.
                  O, for (ꝙ ſhe) heuen with ſkyes that foule cloudes maken and darke wethers, wyth great tempeſtes and huge, maketh the mery dayes with ſoft ſhynynge ſunnes. Alſo the yere withdraweth floures & beautye of herbes and of earth. The ſame yeres maketh ſprynges and iolitie in Vere ſo to renouell with paynted colours, that erth ſemeth as gaye as heuen. Sees that blaſteth, & with wawes throweth ſhyppes, of which the lyuyng creatures for great peryll for hem dreden: ryght ſo the ſame ſees maken ſmothe waters and golden ſaylynge, and cōforteth hem wt noble hauen that firſt were ſo ferde. Haſt thou not (ꝙ ſhe) lerned in thy youth, ye Iupyter hath in his warderobe bothe garmentes of ioye and of ſorowe? what woſte thou howe ſoone he woll tourne of the garment of care, and cloth the in blyſſe? parde it is not farre fro the. Lo an olde prouerbe aleged by manye wyſe: whan bale is greateſt, than is bote a nye bore. whereof wylte thou diſmaye? hope well and ſerue well, and that ſhall the ſaue, with thy good beleue.
                  Ye, ye (quod I) yet ſe I not by reaſon how this blyſſe is comyng, I wot it is cōtingent it may fal on other. O (ꝙ ſhe) I haue mokell to done to clere thyne vnderſtandynge and voyde theſe erroures out of thy mynde, I woll proue it by reaſon thy wo maye not alway enduren. Euery thynge kyndely (quod ſhe) is gouerned, and ruled by the heauenly bodyes, which hauen full werchyng here on earth: & after courſe of theſe bodyes, all courſe of youre doinges here bene gouerned and ruled by kynde.
                  Thou woſt wel by courſe of planettes all your proceden, & to euerych of ſynguler houres be enterchaunged ſtondmele aboute, by ſubmytted worchyng naturally to ſuff
                        •
                     e, of which chaunges commeth theſe tranſitory tymes that maketh reuoluing of your yeres thus ſtondmele, euerye hath full myght of worchyng, tyl al ſeuen han had her courſe about. Of which worchinges & poſſeſſyon of houres, the dayes of the weke haue take her names, after denominacyon in theſe ſeuen planettes. Lo, your ſondaye gynneth at the fyrſt houre after noone on the ſaturdaye, in which houre is than the ſunne in ful myght of worchynge, of whom ſonday taketh hys name. Nexte hym foloweth Venus, & after Mercurius, & than the Mone, ſo than Saturnus, after whom Iouis, & than Mars, & ayen than the Sunne, and ſo forth, be .xxiiii houres togyther, in which houre gynnynge in the ſecond day ſtant the mone, as maſter for that tyme to rule, of whom mondaye taketh his name, & this courſe foloweth of all other dayes generally in doing. This cours of nature of theſe bodyes chaungynge, ſtynten at a certayne terme, lymytted by theyr fyrſt kynde, and of hem all gouernementes in this elemented worlde proceaden, as in ſprynges, conſtellacions, engendrures, and all that folowen kynde and reaſon, wherefore

the courſe that foloweth ſorowe & ioye: kyndly moten entrechaungen theyr tymes, ſo that alway on wele, as alwaye on woo, may not endure. Thus ſeeſt thou apertly thy ſorowe into wele mote bene chaunged, wherefore in ſuche caſe to better ſyde euermore enclyne thou ſhuldeſt. Truly nexte the ende of ſorowe anon entreth ioye, by maner of neceſſitie it wol ne may none other betide and ſo thy contigence is diſproued: yf thou holde this opinyon anye more, thy wytte is ryght leude. wherfore in full concluſyon of all this, thylke Margaryte thou deſyreſte, hath ben to the dere in thy herte, and for her haſt thou ſuffred many thoughtful diſeaſes hereafter ſhall be cauſe of mokell myrth and ioye, and loke how glad canſt thou ben, and ceaſe al thy paſſed heuyneſſe with manifold ioyes. And than woll I as blythlye here the ſpeken thy myrthes in ioye, as I nowe haue yherde thy ſorowes and thy complayntes. And yf I mowe in ought thy ioye encreaſe by my trouth on my ſyde ſhal not be leaued, for no maner trauayle, that I with all my myghtes ryght blythly woll helpe, and euer ben redy you both to pleſe. And than thanked I that lady with al goodly maner that I worthely coude, and truly I was greatly reioyſed in myne hert, of her fayre beheſtes, and profred me to be ſlawe in al that ſhe me wolde ordayne whyle my lyfe leſted.
               
               
                  
                     ME thynketh (ꝙ I) that ye haue ryght wel declared that way to ye knot ſhuld not ben in non of theſe diſprouing thinges, & nowe ordre of our purpoſe this aſketh, that ye ſhulde me ſhewe yf any waye be thyther, and whyche thylke waye ſhulde ben, ſo that openly may be ſey, the very hye waye in full confuſyoun of theſe other thynges.
                  Thou ſhalt (ꝙ ſhe) vnderſtande, that one of thre lyues (as I firſt ſayd) euery creature of mankinde is ſprongen, and ſo forth procedeth. Theſe lyues bene thorowe names departed in thre maner of kyndes, as beſtyallyche, manlyche, and reſonablyche, of which two bene vſed by fleſhlye bodye, and the thyrde by his ſoule. Beſtyall amonge reaſ
                        •
                     nables is forboden in euery lawe and euery ſect, both in chryſten and other, for euerye wyght diſpyſeth hem that lyueth by luſtes, and delyttes, as hym that is thrall & bounden ſeruaunt to thynges ryght foule, ſuche ben counted werſe than men, he ſhall not in theyr degre ben rekened, ne for ſuch one alowed. Heretykes ſayne they choſen lyfe beſtial, that voluptuouſlye lyuen, ſo that (as I fyrſt ſayde to the) in manly and reaſonable lyuynges, our mater was to declare, but manly lyfe in lyuyng after fleſh or els fleſhly wayes to cheſe, maye not blyſſe in this knot be conquered, as by reaſon it is proued.
                  wherfore by reſonable lyfe he muſt nedes it haue, ſyth away is to this knotte, but not by the fyrſte tway lyues, wherefore neades mote it ben to the thyrde, and for to lyue in fleſh but not after fleſh, is more reſonablyeh than manliche rekened by clerkes. Therfore how this way commeth in, I wol it blithly declare.
                  Se now (quod ſhe) that theſe bodyly goodes of manlyche lyuynges, yelden ſorowful ſtoundes and ſmeretande houres, who ſo wele remembre hym to theyr endes, in their worchynges they ben thoughtfull and ſory. Ryght as a bee that hath hadde his honye, anon at his flyght begynneth to ſtynge: So thylke bodyly goodes at the laſt mot away and than ſtynge they at her goinge, where
                        •
                      through entreth and clene voydeth al blyſſe of this knotte.
                  Forſoth (quod I) me thynketh I am wel ſerued, in ſhewīg of theſe wordes, although I had lytle in reſpect amonge other greate and worthye, yet had I a fayre parcell, as me thought for the tyme, in fortherynge of my ſuſtenaunce, whiche whyle it dured, I thought me hauyng mokell hony to myne eſtate. I had rycheſſe ſuffyciauntly to weyue nede, I had dignitie to be reuerenced in worſhip. Power me thought that I had to kepe fro myne enemyes, and me ſemed to ſhyne in glory of renoume as manhode aſketh, in meane, for no wyght in myne adminiſtration coude none euyls ne trecherye by ſothe cauſe on me put. Lady your ſelfe weten wel that of tho confedecacyes maked by my ſoueraynes I nas but a ſeruaunt, and yet mokell meane folke woll fullye ayenſte reaſon thilke maters mayntayne, in which mayntenaunce glorye them ſelfe, and as often ye

hauen ſayde, therof ought nothyng in euyll to be layde to mewardes, ſythen as repentaunt I am tourned, and nomore I thynke neyther tho thynges ne none ſuche other to ſuſteyne, but vtterly deſtroy without medlynge maner, in all my myghtes. Howe am I nowe caſte oute of all ſwetneſſe of blyſſe, and myſcheuouſly ſtongen my paſſed ioye? ſorowfullye muſte I wayle, and lyue as a wretche.
                  Euery of tho ioyes is turned into his contrary: For rycheſſe nowe haue I pouertye, for dignitie now am I empryſoned, in ſtede of power, wretchedneſſe I ſuffer, and for glory of renoume I am now diſpyſed, and ſoulyche hated: thus hath farne Fortune, that ſodaynly am I ouerthrowen, and out of all wealth diſpoyled.
                  Trulye me thynketh this way in entre is ryght harde, god graunt me better grace er it be al paſſed, ye other way lady me thought ryght ſwete. Now certes (ꝙ Loue) me lyſt for to chyde. what ayleth thy darke dulneſſe woll it not in clereneſſe ben ſharped. Haue I not by many reaſons to the ſhewed ſuche bodily goodes faylen to yeue blis, their might ſo ferforth wol not ſtretche? Shame (ꝙ ſhe) it is to ſay, thou lyeſt in thy wordes. Thou ne haſt wyſt but ryght fewe, that theſe bodyly goodes had al at ones, commenly they dwellen not togyther. He that plentie hath in richeſſe, of his kynne is aſhamed: another of lynage ryght noble and well knowe, but pouerte him hādleth he were leuer vnknow An other hath theſe, but renome of peoples prayſyng maye he not haue ouer al he is hated and defamed of thynges ryght foule.
                  An other is fayre and ſemely, but dignite hym fayleth: and he that hath dignite is croked or lame, or els miſhappen and fouly diſpyſed: thus pertable theſe goodes dwellen cōmenlye in one houſhold ben they but ſelde. Lo how reetched is your truſt, on thynge yt wol not accorde. Me thynketh thou clepeſt thylke plyte thou were in ſelynes of fortune and thou ſayeſt for that ye ſelyneſſe is departed, thou art a wretche. Than foloweth this vpon thy wordes, euerye ſoule reſonable of man, may not dye, and yf death endeth ſelyneſſe and maketh wretches, as nedes of fortune maketh it an ende. Than ſoules after deth of ye body in wretchedneſſe ſhuld lyuen.
                  But we know many that han getten the blyſſe of heuen after theyr deth. Howe than may this lyfe maken men blyſful, that whā it paſſeth it yeueth no wretchedneſſe, & manye tymes blyſſe, yf in this lyfe he con lyue as he ſhulde? And wolt thou accompt with fortune, that now at the fyrſt ſhe hath done the tene and ſorow: yf thou looke to the maner of al glad thynges & ſorowful, yu mayeſt not naye it, that yet, and namely nowe thou ſtandeſt in noble plyt in a good gynnyng, wt good forth goinge hereafter. And yf thou wene to be a wretch for ſuch welth is paſſed why thā art thou not wel fortunate for bad thynges & anguys wretchedneſſe bē paſſed? Art thou now come firſt into the hoſtrye of this lyfe, or els the booth of this world, art thou now a ſodayne geſt into this wretched exyle? weneſt there be any thing in this erth ſtable? Is not thy fyrſt areſt paſſed ye brouȝt the in mortal ſorowe? Ben theſe not mortal thinges agone with ignoraunce of beſtiall wyt, and haſt receyued reaſon in knowynge of vertue? what cōfort is in thy hert? the knowynge ſykerly in my ſeruyce be grounded. And woſt thou not wel as I ſayde, yt death maketh ende of al fortune? what thā ſtādeſt thou in noble plyte, lytle hede or rekenynge to take, yf thou let fortune paſſe dyng, or els that ſhe flye whan her lyſt, now by thy lyue. Pardy a mā hath nothyng ſo lefe as his life and for to holde that he doth al his cure and dyligent trauayle. Than ſaye I, thou arte bliſfull & fortunate ſelye, yf thou knowe thy goodes that thou haſt yet beloued, whiche nothinge maye dout, that they ne bene more worthy than thy lyfe? what is that (ꝙ I)? Good contēplacion (ꝙ ſhe) of well doinge in vertue in tyme coming, both in pleſaunce of me & of thy Margaryte perle. Haeſtly thyne hert in ful blyſſe with her ſhalbe eaſed. Therfore diſmay the not, fortune in hate greuouſly ayēſt thy bodily perſō, ne yet to gret tempeſt hath ſhe not ſēt to ye, ſithen ye holding cables & ankres of thy life holden by knytting ſo faſt, that thou diſcomforte the nought of tyme yt is nowe, ne diſpayre the not of tyme to come, but yeuen the cōfort in hope of well doing, and of gettyng agayne the double of thy leſynge, wt encreaſyng loue of thy Margarite perle therto. For this hytherto yu haſt had al her ful daūger, and ſo thou myght amende

all that is myſſe, and all defautes that ſomtyme thou dyddeſt, and that nowe in all thy tyme to that ylke Margaryte in full ſeruyce of my lore thyne herte hath contynued, wherfore ſhe ought moch the rather enclyne fro h
                        •
                     t daungerous ſete. Theſe thynges ben yet 
                        ••
                     yt by the holdynge anker in thy lyue, & holden mote they: To god I praye all theſe thynges at full ben performed. For whyle thys anker holdeth I hope thou ſhalte ſafely eſcape, and whyle thy trew meanyng ſeruice aboute brynge in diſpyte of all falſe meaners that the of newe haten, for this trew ſeruyce thou arte nowe entred.
               
               
                  
                     CErtayne (ꝙ I) amonge thynges I aſked a queſtion, which was ye way to the knot. Trewly lady howe ſo it be, I tēpt you wyth queſtions and anſwers, in ſpekyng of my fyrſt ſeruyce, I am now in full purpoſe in the pricke of the hert, yt thilke ſeruice was an enpriſonmēt, & alway bad & naughty in no maner to be deſyred. Ne yt in gettyng of the knot, may it nothyng auayle. A wyſe gentyll hert loketh after vertue, & non other bodily ioyes alone. And bycauſe toforne this, ī tho wayes I was ſette, I wote wel my ſelfe I haue erred, & of the blyſſe fayled, & ſo out of my waye hugely haue I ron. Certes (ꝙ ſhe) yt is ſothe, & there thou haſt myſwent, eſchew that path frō hens forwarde I rede. Wonder I trewly why the mortal folke of this worlde ſeche theſe wayes outforth, & it is preued in youre ſelfe. Lo howe ye ben cōfounded with errour & folly. The knowyng of very cauſe & waye is goodneſſe & vertue. Is there any thyng to the more precious than thy ſelfe? Thou ſhalt haue in thy power, yt thou woldeſt neuer leſe and that in no way may be taken fro the, and thilk thyng is that is cauſe of this knot. And yf dethe mow it nat reue more thā an erthly creature, thilke thing than abydeth with thy ſelfe ſoule, & ſo our concluſion to make ſuche a knot thus getten, abydeth with this thyng & with the ſoule, as long as they laſt, a ſoule dieth neuer, vertue & goodneſſe euermore wt ye ſoule endureth, & this knot is perfite blyſſe. Thā this ſoule in this blyſſe endleſſe ſhal enduren. Thus ſhul hertes of a trewe knot ben eaſed: thus ſhul their ſoules bē pleaſed: thus perpetually in ioye ſhul they ſynge. In good trouth (ꝙ I) here is a good begynnyng, yeue vs more of this way. (Quod ſhe) I ſayd to ye nat longe ſythen, that reſonable lyfe was one of thre thynges, & it was proued to the ſoule. euerye ſoule of reaſon hath two thynges of ſteryng lyfe, one in vertue and another in the bodily workynge: and whan the ſoule is the maiſter ouer the body, than is a man maiſter of hym ſelfe: & a mā to be a maiſter ouer him ſelfe, lyueth in vertue and in goodneſſe, & as reſon of vertue techeth, ſo the ſoule & the body worchyng vertue togider lyuen reſonable lyfe, which clerkes clepen felycite in lyueng, and theryn is the hye way to this knot, theſe olde philoſophers that hadden no knowyng of diuyne grace of kyndly reaſon alone, wenden that of pure nature, wythoutē any helpe of grace, me might haue yſhoued thother lyuenges, reſonablye haue I lyued: and for I thynke herafter, yf god woll (& I haue ſpace) thylk grace after my leude knowyng declare: I leaue it as at thys tyme. But (as I ſayd) he that outforth loketh after ye wayes of this knotte, connyng with which he ſhulde know the way inforth ſlepeth for the tyme, wherfore he that wol this way knowe muſt leaue the lokyng after falſe wayes outforth, & opē the eyen of hys conſcience and vncloſe hys herte. Seeſt nat he that hath truſt in the bodily lyfe is ſo beſy bodily woūdes to anoynt in kepynge frome ſmert (for all out may they nat be healed) that of woundes in hys true vnderſtandynge he taketh no hede, the knowynge euenforth ſlepeth ſo harde, but anone as in knowyng a wake, than gynneth ye preuy medicines for healyng of his trewe entēt, inwardes lightly healeth conſcience yf it be wel handled. Than muſt nedes theſe wayes come out of the ſoule by ſte
                        •
                     yng lyfe of the body, & els maye no man come to perfyte blyſſe of this knotte: and thus by this waye he ſhal come to the knot, and to the perfyte ſelyneſſe that he wende haue had in bodilye goodes outforthe? Yea (ꝙ I) ſhall he haue bot
                        •
                     e knotte, riches, power, dignite, and renome in this maner waye? Ye (ꝙ ſhe) yt ſhall I ſhewe the. Is he nat riche that hath ſuffiſaunce, and hath the power that no man may amaiſtriē? Is nat gret dignite to haue worſhyp and reuerēce? & hath he nat glorie of renome whoſe name perpetuall is duryng? and out of nombre

in comparation? Theſe be thynges that men wenen to getten out forth (ꝙ I). Ye (ꝙ ſhe) they that loken after a thyng that nouȝt is therof in al ne in partie, longe mowe they gapen after: That is ſoth (ꝙ I:) therfore (ꝙ ſhe) they that ſechen gold in grene trees▪ and wene to gader precyous ſtones amonge vynes, and layne her nettes in mountaynes to fyſh, & thynkē to hunt in depe ſees after hart & hynde, and ſechen in erth thylke thynges that ſurmoūteth heuen, what may I of hem ſay? but folyſhe ignoraunce myſledeth wandryng wretches by vncouth wayes that ſhulden be forleten, and maketh hem blynde fro the ryght pathe of trewe way that ſhuld ben vſed. Therfore in generall erroure in mankynde, departeth thylke goodes by myſſe ſechynge, whyche he ſhulde haue hole and he ſought by reaſon. Thus gothe he begyled of that he ſought, in hys hode men haue blowe a iape. Nowe (ꝙ I) yf a man be vertuous & all in vertue lyueth, howe hathe he all theſe thynges? That ſhall I prouen (ꝙ ſhe) what power hathe anye man to let another of lyuēg in vertue? for priſonmēt or any other diſeſe, he taketh it paciently, diſcōfyteth he nat, the tyraunt ouer hys ſoule no power maye haue? Than hathe that man ſo tourmented ſuche power, that he nyll be diſcōfit, ne ouercome may he nat ben, ſythen pacience in hys ſoule ouercometh, and as nat ouercomen. Suche thyng that may nat be a maiſtred, he hath nede to nothyng, for he hath ſuffiſaunce ynowe to helpe him ſelfe. And thylke thyng that thus hath power and ſuffyſaunce, & no tyrant may it reue, & hath dignyte to ſette at nought all thynges, here it is a great dignite that deth may a maiſtry. Wherfore thilk power ſuffiſaunce ſo encloſed wyth dignyte, by all reſon renome muſt haue. Thys is thylke ryches wt ſuffiſance ye ſhulde loke after: thys is thilke worſhipful dignite ye ſhulde coueyt this is thylke power of myght, in whyche ye ſhulde truſte, this is the ilke renome of glorie that endleſſe endureth, and all nys but ſubſtaunce in vertuous lyueng. Certes (ꝙ I) all thys is ſothe, & ſo I ſe well that vertue with ful gripe encloſeth al theſe thīges. Wherfore in ſothe I may ſaye, by my trouth, vertue of my Margarite brouȝt me firſt in to your ſeruice, to haue knytting with that iewel, nat ſodayn longinges ne folkes ſmale wordes, but onely our cōuerſation togider: & thā I ſeinge thentent of her trewe menyng wt floriſhyng vertue of pacience, that ſhe vſed nothynge in yuel, to quyte the wicked leaſynges that falſe tonges ofte in her haue layde, I haue ſey it my ſelfe, goodlye foryeueneſſe hathe ſpronge out of her herte, vnite and accorde aboue all other thynges ſhe deſyreth in a good meke maner, and ſuffereth many wicked tales.
               
               
                  
                     TRewly lady t
                        〈…〉
                      it were a gret worſhip, 
                        ••
                     at ſuch thynges by due chaſtyſment were amended. Yea (ꝙ ſhe) I haue the excuſed, al ſuche thynges as yet mowe nat be redreſſed thy Margarytes vertue I commende well the more that paciently ſuch anoyes ſuffreth. Dauid kynge was meke and ſuffred mokell hate and manye yuell ſpeches: no diſpyte ne ſhame that his enemis him deden, might nat moue pacience out of hys herte, but euer in one plyte mercy he vſed. Wherfore god hym ſelfe toke rewarde to the thynges, and therō ſuche punyſhement let fall. Trewely by reaſon it ought be enſample of drede to all maner peoples myrthe. A man vengeable in wrathe no gouernaūce in puniſhment ought to haue. Plato had a cauſe hys ſeruaunt to ſcoure, and yet cleaped he hys neyghbour to perfourme the doynge, hym ſelfe wolde nat, leſt wrath had hym a maiſtred, & ſo might he haue layde on to moche: euermore grounded vertue ſheweth thentent fro within, & trewly I wott well for her goodneſſe and vertue, thou haſt deſyred my ſeruyce to her pleaſance well the more, and thy ſelfe therto fully haſte profered. Good lady (ꝙ I) is vertue the hye waye to thys knot, that long we haue yhandled? ye for ſothe (ꝙ ſhe) and wythout vertue goodlye thys knotte maye nat be goten. Ah nowe I ſe (quod I) howe vertue in me fayleth, and I as a ſeer tre wythout burionyng or frute alwaye welke, & ſo I ſtonde in dyſpeyre of thys noble knotte, for vertue in me hathe no maner workynge. A wyde where aboute haue I trauayled. Peace (ꝙ ſhe) of thy fyrſt way thy traueyle is in ydel, and as touchynge the ſeconde way, I ſe well thy meanyng. Thou woldeſt cōclude me yf thou coudeſt, bycauſe I brought the to ſeruyce, and euery of my ſeruātes I helpe to come to this

blyſſe, as I ſayd here beforne: & thou ſaydeſt thy ſelfe, thou myghteſt nat be holpē as thou wenyſt, bycauſe that vertue in the fayleth, & thys blyſſe perfytly without vertue may nat be goten, thou weneſt of theſe wordes contradiction to folowe. Parde at the hardeſt I haue no ſeruaunt but he be vertuous in dede and thoughe I brought the in my ſeruyce, yet arte thou nat my ſeruant: but I ſay, thou myght ſo werche in vertue herafter, that thā ſhalt thou be my ſeruante, and as for my ſeruaunt acompted. For habyt maketh no mōke ne wearynge of gylte ſpurres maketh no knyght. Neuer the later, in conforte of thyne herte, yet wol I otherwyſe anſwere. Certes lady (ꝙ I tho) ſo ye muſt nedes, or els I had nyghe caught ſuche a cordiacle for ſorowe, I wotte it well I ſhulde it neuer haue recouered. And therfore nowe I praye to enforme me in this, or els I holde me wythout recouerye. I maye nat longe endure tyll thys leſſon be lerned, and of this myſchefe the remedy knowen. Nowe (ꝙ ſhe) be nat wrothe, for there is no man on lyue that maye come to a precious thynge longe coueyted, but he ſomtyme ſuffre tenefull diſeaſes, and wenyſt thy ſelfe to ben vnlyche to all other▪ that may nat ben: And with the more ſorowe that a thyng is getten, the more he hath
                        •
                      ioye, the ylke thynge afterwardes to kepe, as it fareth by chyldren in ſchole that for lernynge arne beaten, whan theyr leſſon they foryetten, commēly after a good diſciplynyng with a yerde they kepe ryght wel doctryne of theyr ſchole.
               
               
                  
                     RIght wyth theſe wordes, on thys lady I threwe vp myne eyen to ſe her countenaunce and her chere, and ſhe aperceyuynge thys fantaſye in myne herte, gan her ſemblaūt goodly on me caſte, and ſayde in this wyſe.
                  It is well knowe, bothe to Reaſon and experience in doyng, euery actyue worcheth on hys paſſyue, and whan they ben togider, actyue and paſſyue ben ycleaped by theſe philoſophers, yf fyre be in place chafynge thynge able to be chafed or hete, and thylke thynges ben ſette in ſuche a diſtaūce that the one may werche, the other ſhall ſuffre. Thylke Margarite thou deſyreſt is ful of vertue, and able to be actyue in goodneſſe: but euery herbe ſhe weth his vertue outforthe from within, the ſonne yeueth lyght that thynges may be ſey. Euery fyre heteth thylke thyng yt it neyghed and it be able to be hete, vertue of this Margarite outforth wrethe, and nothyng is more able to ſuffre worching or worke catch of the actyfe, but paſſyfe of the ſame actyfe, and no paſſyfe to vertues of thys Margaryte, but yt in all my donet can I fynde, ſo that her vertue muſt nedes on the werche, in what place euer thou be, within diſtaūce of her worthyneſſe, as her very paſſyfe thou arte cloſed: but vertue may the nothyng profyte, but thy deſyre be perfourmed and all thy ſorowes ceaſed. Ergo through werchynge of her vertue thou ſhalte eaſely ben holpen and driuen out of all care, and welcome to this ionge by the deſyred. Lady (ꝙ I) thys is a good leſſon in gynnyng of my ioye: but wete ye wel forſothe, though I ſuppoſe ſhe haue moche vertue, I wolde my ſpouſayle were proued, and than maye I lyue out of doute, and reioyce me gretly in thynkyng of tho vertues ſo ſhewed. I herde the ſay (quod ſhe) at my begynnyng whan I receyued the fyrſte for to ſerue that thy iewel, thylke Margaryte thou deſyreſt, was cloſed in a muſkle with a blew 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ Ye forſothe (ꝙ I) ſo I ſayd, and ſo it is 
                        〈◊〉
                      (ꝙ ſhe) euery thyng kyndely ſheweth 
                        〈…〉
                      thys iewell cloſed in a blewe ſhel, excelle
                        ••
                      of coloures ſheweth vertue frome wyt
                        •••
                      and ſo euery wight ſhulde rather loke to 
                        〈◊〉
                      propre vertue of thynges, thā to hys fora
                        •••
                      goodes. If a thynge be engendred of g
                        ••••
                      mater, comenly and for the more parte it 
                        •••
                     loweth after the congelement vertue of 
                        〈◊〉
                      fyrſte mater, and it be not corrupt with vyces, to procede with encreaſe of good vertues eke right ſo it fareth of badde. Trewly great excellence in vertue of lynage, for the more parte diſcendeth by kynde to the ſucceſſyon in vertues to folowe. Wherfore I ſaye, the colours of euery Margarite ſheweth frō within the fyneſſe in vertue. Kyndely heuen whan mery wether is a lofte, apereth in mānes eye of coloure in blewe, ſtedfaſtneſſe in peace betokenyng within and without: Margaryt is engendred by heuenly dewe, & ſheweth in it ſelfe by fyneneſſe of coloure, whether the engendrure were maked on morowe or on eue: thus ſayth kynd of this perle. This precious

Margaryte that thou ſerueſt, ſheweth it ſelf dyſcended by nobley of vertue from thys heuenlych dewe, noriſhed and congeled in mekeneſſe, that mother is of all vertues, and by werkes that men ſene withouten the ſignyfication of the coloures, ben ſhewed mercy and pytie in the herte wyth peace to al other, and all thys is ycloſed in a muſkle, who ſo redily theſe vertues lokē. All thyng that hath ſoule is reduced in to good by meane thynges, as thus: In to god man is reduced by ſoules reſonable, and ſo forthe beeſtes or bodyes that mowe not mouen, after place ben reduced in to manne, by beeſtes meue that mouyn from place to place: ſo that thylke bodyes that han felynge ſoules, and moue not frome places, holdē the loweſt degree of ſoulynge thynges in felynge, and ſuche ben reduced in to man by meanes. So it foloweth, the muſkle as mother of al vertues, halte the place of mekeneſſe to hys loweſt degree diſcendeth downe of heuen, and there by a maner of virgyne engendrure arne theſe Margaretes engendred and afterwarde congeled. Made not mekeneſſe ſo low the hye heuen to encloſe & catche out therof ſo noble a dewe, that after cōgelement a Margaryte wyth endeleſſe vertue & and euerlaſtyng ioy was wyth full veſſell of grace yeuen to euery creature, that goodlye wolde it receyue. Certes (ꝙ I) theſe thynges ben ryght noble, I haue er thys herde theſe ſame ſawes. Than (ꝙ ſhe) thou woſte well theſe thynges ben ſothe▪ yea forſothe (ꝙ I) at the full. Nowe (ꝙ ſhe) that thys Margaryte is full of vertue it is well proued, wherfore ſome grace, ſome mercye amonge other vertues, I wotte ryght wel on the ſhall diſcende▪ ye (ꝙ I) yet wolde I haue better declared vertues in thys Margaryte, kyndely to ben grounded. That ſhal I ſhewe the (ꝙ ſhe) and thou woldeſt it lerne? Lerne (ꝙ I) what nedeth ſuche wordes: wete ye nat well lady youre ſelfe that all my cure, all my dyligence, and all my might haue turned by your counſayle, in pleſaunce of that perle all my thought and all my ſtudye, with your helpe deſyreth, in worſhyppe thylke iewel to encreaſe all my trauayle and al my beſyneſſe in youre ſeruyce, thys Margaryte to gladde in ſomehalue: me were leauer her honoure, her pleaſaunce, and her good chere thorowe me for to be mayntayned and kepte, and I of ſuche thynge in her lykynge to be cauſe, than al ye welthe of bodyly goodes ye coude reckē And wolde neuer god, but I put my ſelfe in great ieoperdye of all that I wolde, that is nowe no more but my lyfe alone, rather than I ſhulde ſuffre thylke iewell in anye poynt ben blemyſhed, as ferre as I may ſuffre, and wyth my myghtes ſtretche. Suche thynge (ꝙ ſhe) maye mokel further thy grace and the in my ſeruyce auaunce. But nowe (quod Loue) wylte thou graunte me thylke Margaryte to ben good? O good good (ꝙ I) why tempte ye me and tene wyth ſuche maner ſpeche: I wolde graunte that, though I ſhulde anone dye, and by my trouthe fyght in the quarell, yf any wyght wolde countreplede. It is ſo moche the lighter (ꝙ Loue) to proue our entent.
                  Ye (ꝙ I) but yet wolde I here howe ye wolde proue that ſhe were good by reaſonable ſkyl, that it mowe not ben denyed, for althoughe I knowe and ſo dothe many other, manyfolde goodneſſe & vertue in this Margaryte ben prynted, yet ſome men there ben that no goodneſſe ſpekē: and wher euer your wordes ben herde and your reaſons ben ſhewed, ſuche yuell ſpekers lady by auctorite of your excellence, ſhullen ben ſtopped & aſhamed. And more they that han none acquayntaunce in her perſone, yet mowe they knowe her vertues, and ben the more enformed in what wyſe they mowe ſette theyr hertes, whan hem lyſte in to your ſeruyce any entre make: for trewly al thys to begynne, I wote well my ſelfe that thylke iewel is ſo precious perle, as a womanly woman in her kynde, in whome of goodneſſe, of vertue, and alſo of anſwerynge, ſhappe of lymmes, and fetures ſo well in all poyntes acordyng, nothyng fayleth: I leue that kynde her made wyth great ſtudye, for kynde in her perſon nothyng hath foryet, and that is well ſene. In euery good wyghtes herte ſhe hath grace of commendynge and of vertuous prayſyng. Alas that euer kynde made her deedely ſaue onely in that I wot well, that Nature in fourmyng of her in no thynge hathe erred.
               
               
                  
                  
                     CErtes (ꝙ Loue) thou haſt well begonne, and I aſke the thys queſtyon: Is not in generall euerye thynge good? I not (ꝙ I) No (ꝙ ſhe) ſawe not god euerye thynge that he made, and werne ryght good? Than is wonder (ꝙ I) howe yuell thynges comen a place, ſythen that al thynges weren right good. Thus (ꝙ ſhe) I woll declare eueryche qualyte and euery action, and euery thyng that hath any maner of beynge it is of god, and god it made, of whom is all goodneſſe and all beyng, of him is no badneſſe: badde to be is naught: good to be is ſomwhat, and therfore good and beyng is one in vnderſtandyng. Howe may this be (ꝙ I) for often han ſhrewes me aſſayled, and mokell badneſſe therin haue I founden, & ſo me ſemeth bad to be ſomwhat in kynde? Thou ſhalt (ꝙ ſhe) vnderſtande that ſuche maner badneſſe, whyche is vſed to purifye wronge doers is ſomwhat, and god it made and beyng hath, and that is good: other badneſſe no beyng hath vtterly, it is in the negatyue of ſomwhat, and that is naught, and no thyng beyng. The parties eſſenciall of beyng arne ſayde in double wyſe, as that it is, and theſe parties ben founde in euerye creature, for all thynge a this halfe the fyrſte beyng is beyng through partycipacion, takyng partye of beyng, ſo that euerye 
                        •
                     eature is dyfference bytwene beynge and of hym through whom it is & hys owne beyng: ryght as euery good is a maner of beynge, ſo is it good thorowe beynge, for it is naught other to be: and euery thynge though it be good it is not of hym ſelfe good, but it is good by that it is ordinable to the great goodneſſe. This dualite after clerkes determiſſion is founden in euery creature, be it neuer ſo ſyngle of onhed. Ye (ꝙ I) but there as it is yſayd that god ſawe euery thynge of his makyng, and were right good, as youre ſelfe ſayde to me not longe tyme ſythen. I aſke whether euery creature is yſayd good, throughe goodneſſe vnfourmed eyther els fourmed, and afterwarde yf it be accepte vtterly good? I ſhall ſaye the (ꝙ ſhe) theſe great paſſed clerkes han deuyded good in to good beyng alone, and that is nothynge but good, for nothynge is good in that wyſe but god. Alſo in good by partycipacion, and that is ycleped good, for farre fette and repreſentatyue of goodly goodneſſe, and after thys manyfolde good is ſayd, that is to ſaye, good in kynde and good in gendre, and good of grace and good of ioye. Of good in kynde Auſten ſaythe, all that ben ben good: But peraunter thou woldeſt wete whether of hem ſelfe it be good, or els of anothers goodneſſe, for naturel goodneſſe of euery ſubſtaunce is nothyng els than his ſubſtanciall beyng, whiche is ycleaped goodneſſe, after comparyſon that he hath to his fyrſte goodneſſe, ſo as it is inductatyfe by meanes in to the fyrſte goodneſſe. Boece ſheweth thys thynge at the full, that this name good is in general name in kynde as it is comparyſoned generally to his princypal ende, whyche is god, knotte of al goodneſſe. Euery creature cryeth god vs made, & ſo they han full apered to thylke god by affection, ſuche as to hem longeth: and in thys wyſe all thynges ben good of the great god, whyche is good alone. Thys wonder thyng (ꝙ I) howe ye haue by manye reaſons proued my fyrſt way to be errour and miſgoyng and cauſe of baddeſſe and feble meuynge in the grounde ye aleged to be roted: whence is it that ſuche badneſſe hathe ſprynges, ſythen all thynges thus in generall ben good, and badneſſe hathe no beynge, as ye haue declared? I wene if al thinges ben good, I might than wyth the fyrſt waye in that good haue ended, and ſo by goodneſſe haue comen to blyſſe in your ſeruyce deſyred. All thynge (ꝙ ſhe) is good by beyng in partycipacion out of the fyrſt goodneſſe, whyche goodneſſe is corrupte by badneſſe, and badde meanyng maners: god hathe in good thynges that they ben good by beyng, and not in yuel, for there is abſence of ryghtfull loue, for badneſſe is nothynge but onelye yuell wyll of the vſer, and through gyltes of the doer, wherfore at the gynnyng of the worlde, euery thynge by hym ſelfe was good, and in vnyuerſall they werne ryght good. An eye or a hande is fayrer and betterer in a body ſette in his kyndely place, than from the body diſceuered. Euerye thing in his kyndly place being kyndly, good dothe werche, and out of that place voyded, it diſſolueth and is defouled him ſelue. Oure noble god in glyterāde wyſe by armony this worlde ordeyned, as in purtreytures ſtoryed wyth colours medled, in whyche blacke and

other derke coloures cōmenden the golden & the aſured paynture, euerye putte in kyndely place one beſyde another, more for other glytereth: right ſo lytle fayre maketh right fayre more glorious, and right ſo of goodneſſe and of other thynges in vertue. Wherfore other badde, and not ſo good perles as thys Margaryte that we han of this matter, yeuen by the ayre lytell goodneſſe and lytell vertue, ryght mokell goodneſſe and vertue in thy Margaryte to ben proued, in ſhynynge wyſe to be founde and ſhewed. Howe ſhulde euer goodneſſe of peace haue ben knowe, but yf vnpeace ſomtyme reygne, and mokell yuell wrothe? Howe ſhulde mercy ben proued and no treſpeace were, by due iuſtifycacion to bepunyſſhed? Therfore grace and goodneſſe of a wyght is founde, the ſoroufull hertes in good meanynge to endure, ben comforted, vnyte and accorde bytwene hertes knytte in ioye to abyde. What weneſt thou I reioyce or els accompte hym amonge my ſeruaūtes that pleaſeth Pallas, in vndoynge of Mercurye, all be it that to Pallas he be knytte by tytle of lawe, not accordyng to reaſonable cō
                     ſcience: and Mercurye in doynge haue grace to ben ſuffered: or els hym that weneth the moone for fayreneſſe of the eue ſterre. Lo otherwhyle by nyghtes lyght of the moone, greatlye comforteth in derke thoughtes and blynde. Vnderſtandyng of loue yeueth great gladneſſe: who ſo lyſte not byleue whan a ſothe tale is ſhewed, adewe and a deblys his name is entred. Wyſe folke and worthy in gentylleſſe bothe of vertue and of lyuyng yeuen full credence in ſothneſſe of loue wyth a good hert, there as good euydence or experyence in doynge ſheweth not the contrarye. Thus myghteſt thou haue full prefe in thy Margarytes goodneſſe, by commendement of other iewels badneſſe, and yuelneſſe in doynge. Stoundemele diſeaſes yeueth ſeuerall houres in ioye.
                  Nowe by my trouthe (ꝙ I) thys is well declared that my Margaryte is good, for ſythen other ben good, and ſhe paſſeth manye other in goodneſſe and vertue, wherthrough by maner neceſſarye ſhe muſte be good: and goodneſſe of thys Margaryte is no thynge els but vertue, wherfore ſhe is vertuous, and yf there fayled any vertue in any ſyde, there were lacke of vertue: badde nothynge els is ne maye be, but lacke and wante of good and goodneſſe, and ſo ſhulde ſhe haue that ſame lacke, that is to ſaye badde, and that maye not be, for ſhe is good, and that is good methynketh all good: and ſo by conſequence me ſemeth vertuous and no lacke of vertue to haue. But the ſonne is not knowe but he ſhyne, ne vertuous herbes but they haue het kynde werchynge, ne vertue but it ſtretche in goodneſſe or profyte to another, is no vertue▪ Than by all wayes of reaſon, ſythen mercye and pytie ben moſte commended amonge other vertues, and they myght neuer ben ſhewed refreſhement of helpe and of comforte, but nowe at my moſte nede, and that is the kynde werkynge of theſe vertues: trewely I wene I ſhall not varye frome theſe helpes. Fyre and yf he yeue non heate, for fyre is not demed. The ſonne but he ſhyne for ſonne is not accompted, water but it wete, the name ſhall ben chaunged. Vertue but it werche of goodneſſe dothe it fayle, and in to his contrarye the name ſhall ben reuerſed, and theſe bē impoſſyble: wherfore the contradictorie that is neceſſarye, nedes muſte I leue.
                  Certes (ꝙ ſhe) in thy perſon and out of thy mouthe theſe wordes lyen well to ben ſayd, and in thyne vnderſtandyng to be leued, as in entent of thys Margaryte alone: and here now my ſpeche in cōcluſyon of theſe wordes.
                  
                     IN theſe thynges (ꝙ ſhe) that me lyſt now to ſhew openly, ſhal be founde the mater of thy ſyckneſſe, & what ſhal ben ye medicyn that may be thy ſorowes lyſſe and comfort, as well the as al other that amyſſe haue erred, & out of the way walked, ſo that any drope of good wyll in amendement ben dwelled in theyr hertes. Prouerbes of Salomon openly teacheth, howe ſomtyme an innocent walkyd by the waye in blyndneſſe of a derke nyght, whom mette a woman (yf it be lefely to ſaye) as a ſtrumpet arayed, redily purueyed in turnynge of thoughtes with veyne ianglynges and of reſt inpacient by diſſymulacion of my termes, ſayeng in thys wyſe: Come & be we

dronken of our ſwete pappes, vſe we coueytous collynges. And thus drawen was this innocent, as an oxe to the larder. Ladye (ꝙ I) to me this is a queynte thynge to vnderſtonde: I praye you of this parable declare me the entent. This innocent (ꝙ ſhe) is a ſcholer lernynge of my lore, in ſeckyng of my blyſſe, in whyche thynge the daye of hys thought turnyng enelyneth in to eue, and the ſonne of verye lyght faylinge, maketh derke nyght in hys connynge. Thus in derkeneſſe of many doutes he walketh, and for blyndeneſſe of vnderſtandynge, he ne wote in what waye he is in: forſothe ſuche one may lightly ben begyled. To whome came loue fayned, not clothed of my lyuery, but vnlefull iuſtye habyte, wyth ſofte ſpech and mery, and with fayre honyed wordes heretykes & myſſe menynge people ſkleren and wymplen theyr errours. Auſten wytneſſeth of an heretyke that in hys fyrſt begynnynge he was a man right expert in reſones, and ſwete in hys wordes, and the werkes myſcorden. Thus fareth fayned loue in her fyrſt werchynges: thou knoweſt theſe thynges for trewe, thou haſte hem proued by experience. Somtyme in doyng to thyn owne perſon, in which thyng thou haſt founde mater of mokel dyſeaſe, was not fayned loue redely purueyed thy wyttes to catch and tourne thy good thoughtes? trewlye ſhe hath wounded the conſcience of many wyth floryſhynge of mokel ianglynge wordes: and good worthe thanked I it for no gloſe, I am gladde of my prudence thou haſte ſo manlye her veyned. To me arte thou moche holden, that in thy kynde courſe of good meanyng I returne thy mynde: I trow ne had I ſhewed the thy Margarite, thou haddeſt neuer returned. Of fyrſte in good parfyte ioye was euer fayned loue impaciēt, as the water of Siloe whyche euermore floweth wyth ſtylneſſe & priuy noyſe, tyll it come nyghe the brynke, & then gynneth it ſo out of meaſure to bolne, with nouelleries of chaūgynge ſtormes, that in courſe of euery rennynge it is in poynte to ſpyll al his circuite of cankes. Thus fayned loue priuelye at the fulleſt of hys flowynge, newe ſtormes debate to arayſe. And all be it that Mercurius often wyth hole vnderſtandynge knowen ſuche peryllous matters, yet Venetiens ſo luſty ben and ſo leude in theyr wyttes, that in ſuche thynges ryght lytell or nought done they fele, & wryttē and cryen to theyr felawes: here is blyſſe, here is ioy, and thus into one ſame erroure, mokel folke they drawen. Come they ſayne, and be we dronken of our pappes, that ben fallas and lyenge gloſe, of whych mowe they not ſouke mylke of helthe, but deedlye venym and poyſon corrupcyon of ſorowe. Mylke of fallas, is venym of dyſcryte: Mylke of lyeng gloſe is venym of corrupcion. Lo what thynge cometh out of theſe pappes: vſe we coueyted collynges, deſyre we and meddle we falſe wordes wyth ſote, and ſote wyth falſe, trewly this is the ſoryneſſe of fayned loue, nedes of theſe ſurfettes ſyckneſſe muſt folowe. Thus as an oxe to thy langoryng deth were thou drawe, the ſote of the ſmoke hath ye all defaſed. Euer the deper thou ſomtyme wadeſt ye ſoner thou it founde: yf it had the kylled it had be lytell wonder. But on that other ſyde my trewe ſeruaūt not faynen ne dyſceyue conne, ſothly theyr doynge is open, my foundement endureth, be the burthē neuer ſo great, euer in one it laſteth: it yeueth lyfe and blyſful goodneſſe in the laſt endes, though the gynnynges ben ſharpe. Thus of two contraryes, contrarye ben the effectes. And ſo thylke Margaryte thou ſerueſt ſhall ſene the by her ſeruyce oute of peryllous trybulacyon delyuered, bycauſe of her ſeruyce into newe dyſeaſe fallen, by hope of amendement in the laſte ende, wyth ioye to be gladded, wherfore of kynde pure, her mercy wyth grace of good helpe ſhall ſhe graūt, and els I ſhal her ſo ſtraine, that with pyte ſhall ſhe ben amayſtred. Remembre in thyne herte how horrybly ſomtyme to thyne Margaryte thou treſpaſeſt, and in a greate wyſe ayenſt her thou forfeyteſt: clepe aye thy mynde, and know thyne owne gyltes. What goodneſſe, what bountye, wyth mokell folowynge pyte founde thou in that tyme? were thou not goodlye accepted into grace? by my pluckynge was ſhe to foryeueneſſe enclyned. And after I her ſtyred to drawe the to houſe and yet wendeſt thou vtterlye for euer haue ben refuſed. But well thou woſt, ſythen that I in ſuche ſharpe dyſeaſe might ſo greatly auayle, what thynkeſt in thy wyt? howe ferre maye my wytte ſtretche? And thou lache not on thy ſyde I wol make the knotte: Certes in thy good beryng I wol acorde with the pſauter. I haue foūde Dauid in my ſeruice trewe

and with holy oyle of peace and of reſt longe by hymdeſyred, vtterly he ſhalbe anoynted. Truſte well to me, and I woll the not fayle. The leuynge of ye fyrſt waye with good hert of continuaunce, that I ſe in the grounded, thys purpoſe to perfourme, draweth me by maner of cōſtraining, that nedes muſt I ben thyne helper: although myrth a whyle be taryed, it ſhall come at ſuche ſeaſon, that thy thought ſhall ben ioyed. And wolde neuer god, ſythē thyne herte to my reaſons arne aſſented, and openlye haſte confeſſed thyne amyſſe goynge, and nowe cryeſt after mercye, but yf mercy folowed: thy bliſſe ſhal ben redy ywys, thou ne woſt howe ſone. Nowe be a good chylde I rede. The kynde of vertues in thy Margarite reherſed, by ſtrength of me in thy perſon ſhul werche. Comforte the in this for thou mayſt not myſcary. And theſe wordes ſayde, ſhe ſtreyght her on lengthe and reſted a whyle.
               
            
            
               ¶Thus endeth the ſeconde booke, and here after foloweth the thyrde boke.
               
                  
                     OF nōbre ſayne theſe clerkes yt it is naturell ſūme of diſcrete thinges, as in tellynge one, two, thre & ſo forth: but amonge all nombres thre is determined for moſte certayne. Wherfore in nombre certayne this werke of my beſy leudneſſe I thynke to ende and parfourme. Enſample by thys world in thre tymes is deuyded: of whych the fyrſt is cleped Demacion, that is to ſay, goyng out of trewe way, and al that tho deyden, in hel were they punyſhed for a mans ſynne, tyll grace & mercy fette hem thence, and there ended the fyrſte tyme. The ſeconde tyme laſteth from the cō
                     mynge of merciable grace, vntyll the ende of tranſytory tyme, in whyche is ſhewed ye true way in fordoyng of the badde, and that is ycleped tyme of grace: and that thynge is not yeuen by deſerte of yeldynge one benefyte for another, but onely through goodneſſe of the yeuer of grace in thilke tyme. Who ſo cā well vnderſtande, is ſhapen to be ſaued in ſouled blyſſe. The thyrd tyme ſhal gyn when trāſytory thynges of worldes han made their end and that ſhal ben in ioye, glory, and reſt, both body and ſoule, that well han deſerued in the tyme of grace. And thus in that heuen togyther ſhul they dwel perpetuelly without any ymaginatyfe yuel in any halue. Theſe tymes are fygured by tho thre dayes that oure god was cloſed in erthe, and in the thyrde aroſe, ſhewynge our reſurrection, to ioye and blyſſe of tho that it deſeruē, by his merciable grace. So this leud boke in thre maters accordaūt to tho tymes, lyghtly by a good inſeer maye ben vnderſtande, as in the fyrſte erroure of myſſe goynge is ſhewed, with ſorowful pyne punyſhed is cryed after mercye. In the ſecōde is grace in good waye proued, whyche is faylynge wythout deſerte, thylke fyrſt myſſe amendynge in correction of tho erroures and euen waye to brynge, wyth comforte of welfare into amendement wexynge. And in the thyrde ioye and blyſſe graunted to hym that well canne deſerue it, and hath ſauour of vnderſtandynge in the tyme of grace. Thus in ioye of my thyrd boke ſhal the mater be tyl it ende. But ſpeciall cauſe I haue in my hert to make this proceſſe of a Margarit peerle, that is ſo precious a gēme with clere and lytel, of which ſtones or iewel, ye tōges of vs Engliſh people turneth ye right names, & clepeth hem Margery perles: thus varieth our ſpeche frō many other langages. For trewly Latyn, Frenche, and many mo other langages cleapeth hem Margery perles, the name Margarites or Margaryte perles: wherfore in that denominacion I wol me acorde to other mēs tonges, in that name clepyng. Theſe clerkes that treaten of kyndes, & ſtudyen out the propertye there of thynges, ſayne the Margarit is a lytel whyte perle, throughout holowe & rounde, and vertuous, and on the ſee ſydes in the more Britayne in muſkel ſhelles of ye heauenly dewe the beſt ben engendred: in which by experience ben founde thre fayre vertues. One is, it yeueth comforte to the felyng ſpirites in bodely perſones of reaſon. Another is good, it is profytable helth ayenſt paſſyons of ſorye mēs hertes. And the thyrd it is nedeful and noble in ſtaunchyng of bloode, there els to moche wolde out ren. To whych perle and vertues me lyſt to lyken at this tyme philoſophie wyth her thre ſpeces, that is naturel and moral, and reſonable: of whych thynges hereth what ſayne theſe great clerkes. Philoſophye

is knowyng of deuynly & manly thinges ioyned wyth ſtudye of good lyuyng, and thys ſtante in two thynges, that is connyng and opinion: connynge is when a thynge by certaine reſon is cōceyued. But wretches and fooles and leude men, many wyll conceyue a thynge and maynteyne it as forſoth, though reſon be in the contrarye, wherfore connyng is a ſtraūger. Opinion is whyle a thynge is in none certayne, and hydde from mens very knowlegynge, and by no parfyte reſon fully declared, as thus: yf the ſonne be ſo moke
                        •
                      as men wenen, or els yf it be more then the erth For in ſothneſſe the certayne quantyte of that planet is vnknowen to erthly dwellers, and yet by opinion of ſome men it is holden for more then mydle erthe. The fyrſt ſpece of philoſophye is naturel, whych in kyndely thynges treten, and ſheweth cauſes of heuen, and ſtrength of kyndely courſe: as by arſmetryke, geometry, muſyke, & by aſtronomye, teacheth wayes and courſe of heuens, of planetes, and of ſterres aboute heuen and erthe, and other clemetes. The ſeconde ſpece is morall, which in order of lyuyng maners techeth, and by reſon proueth vertues of ſoule moſt worthy in our lyuyng, whych ben prudence, iuſtyce, temperaunce, and ſtrength. Prudence is goodlye wyſedome in knowyng of thinges. Strēgth voydeth al aduerſitees alyche euen. Temperaunce deſtroyeth beeſtial lyuyng, wyth eaſy bearyng. And iuſtyce ryghtfully iugeth, and iugyng departeth to euery wyght that is his owne. The thyrde ſpece turneth into reaſon of vnderſtandynge, al thynges to be ſaid ſoth and dyſcuſſed, & that in two thynges is deuyded: one is art, another is rethorike, in which two al lawes of mans reaſon ben grounded or els mayntayned. And for thys booke is all of loue, and therafter beareth hys name, and phyloſophie and lawe muſte here to acorden by theyr clergiall dyſcripciōs: as philoſophie for loue of wyſedome is declared: Lawe for maynteynaunce of peace is holden, and theſe with loue muſt nedes acordē, therfore of hem in this place haue I touched. Ordre of homly thynges & honeſt maner of lyuyng in vertue, with rightful iugemēt in cauſes & profitable adminiſtracion in cōminaltyes of realmes & cites, by euenhed profitably to raigne, not by ſynguler auaūtage ne by priue enuy, ne by ſoleyn purpoſe in couetiſe of worſhip or of goodes, ben dyſpoſed in opē rule ſhewed, by loue philoſophy, & law, & yet loue toforne al other Wherfore as ſuſterne in vnite they acordē & one ende that is peace & reſt, they cauſen noryſhynge, & in the ioye maynteynen to endure.
                  Now then, as I haue declared: my boke acordeth with diſcripciō of thre thynges, & the Margarit in vertue is lykned to philoſophie wyth her thre ſpeces. In whych maters euer twey ben acordaūt with bodely reaſon, & the thyrde with the ſoule: But in cōcluſion of my boke & of thys Margarit peerle in knyttyng together lawe by thre ſondry maners ſhalbe lykened, yt is to ſaye, lawe, ryght, & cuſtome, whych I wold declare: all yt is lawe cometh of goddes ordynaūce by kyndly worchyng, & thylke thynges ordayned by mānes wyttes arne ycleped ryght, which is ordained by many maners & in conſtitucion wrytten: but cuſtome is a thynge that is accepted for ryghte or for lawe, there as lawe and ryght faylen, and there is no dyfferēce, whether it come of ſcrypture or of reaſon. Wherfore it ſheweth that lawe is kyndly gouernaunce: Ryght cometh out of mannes probable reaſon: and cuſtome is of cōmen vſage by length of tyme vſed, and cuſtome not wrytte is vſage, and yf it be wrytte conſtitucion it is ywrytten and ycleped: But lawe of kynde is cōmen to euery nation, as coniunction of man and womā in loue, ſucceſſion of chyldren in heritaunce reſtitucyon of thynge by ſtrength taken or lent and this lawe amōge al other halte the ſouerayneſt gree in worſhyp, whych lawe began at the begynnynge of reaſonable creature, it varyed yet neuer for no chaungyng of tyme: cauſe forfothe in ordaynynge of law, was to conſtrayne mens hardyneſſe into peace, and wythdrawyng his euell wyl, & turnynge malyce into goodneſſe, and that innocence ſykerly withouten tenefull anoye amōge ſhrewes ſafely myght inhabyte by protection of ſafeconducte, ſo that ye ſhrewes harme for harme by brydle of ferdeneſſe ſhulden reſtrayne. But forſothe in kyndely lawe nothynge is cōmended, but ſuche as goddes wil hath cōfyrmed, ne nothyng denyed but cōtrariouſtye of goddes wyl in heauen: eke then all lawes or cuſtome, or els cōſtitucion by vſage or wryting that cōtraryen lawe of kynde, vtterly ben repugnaunt and aduerſary to our goddes wyl of heuen. Trewly lawe of kynde for goddes

owne luſty wil is verely to mainteine, vnder which lawe (& vnworthye) both profeſſe and reguler arne obediencer and bounden to this Margarite perle, as by knotte of loues ſtatutes and ſtablyſhment in kynde, whyche that goodlye may not ben wythſetten. Lo vnder this bonde am I conſtrayned to abyde, and man vnder lyuyng lawe ruled: by that lawe oweth after deſertes to be rewarded by payn or by mede, but yf mercy weyue the payne: ſo then be parte, reaſonfully maye be ſey, that mercy both ryght and lawe paſſeth, thentent of al theſe maters is the leſt clere vnderſtandynge, to wetē at thende of this thyrde boke ful knowyng thorow goddes grace, I thinke to make neuerthelater, yet yf theſe thynges haue a good & a ſleight inſeer, which that can ſouke hony of the harde ſtone, oyle of the drye rocke, may lightly fele nobley of mater in my leude ymaginacion cloſed. But for my boke ſhalbe of ioye (as I ſayde) & I ſo ferre ſet fro thylke place, fro whēce gladneſſe ſhuld come, my corde is to ſhorte to let my boket oughte catch of that water, and fewe men ben about my corde to eche, & many in ful purpoſe be redy it ſhorter to make, & to encloſe thētre, that my boket of ioy nothing ſhuld catch, but empty returne, my careful ſorowes to encreſe, & yf I dye for payne, yt were gladneſſe at theyr hertes. Good lord ſende me water into ye cop of theſe moūtaynes, & I ſhall drynke therof, my thurſtes to ſtāch: & ſey theſe be cōfortable welles into helth of goodneſſe of my ſauiour am I holpen. And yet I ſay more, the houſe of ioye to me is not opened. How dare my ſorowful gooſt then in any mater of gladneſſe thynken to trete? for euer ſobbynges & complaintes be redy refrete in his meditaciōs, as werbles in manyfold ſtoūdes cōmyng about I not then. And therfore what maner of ioye coud
                        •
                      endite, but yet at dore ſhal I knocke, yf the key of Dauid wold the locke vnſhyt, & he bryng me in, which that chyldrēs tōges both opneth and cloſeth. Whoſe ſpirite, where he wyl worcheth, departing goodly as hī liketh
                  Now to goddes laude & reuerēce, profit of the reders, amēdemēt of maners of ye herers, encreſyng of worſhip amōge loues ſeruaūts, releuyng of my hert into grace of my iewel, & frenſhyp pleſaūce of thys peerle. I am ſtered in thys makynge, and for nothynge els: and yf any good thynge to mēnes lykynge in this ſcripture be founde, thanketh the mayſter of grace, whych that of that good and all other is authour, and pryncypall doer. And yf any thynge be inſuffycyent or els myſlykynge, wt that that the leudneſſe of myne vnable connynge, for body in dyſeaſe anoyeth the vnderſtandynge in ſoule. A dyſeaſely habitacyon letteth the wyttes many thynges, and namely in ſorowe. The cuſtome neuer the later of loue, be longe tyme of ſeruyce in termes I thynke to purſue, whiche ben lyuely to yeue vnderſtandyng in other thynges. But nowe to enform the of thys Margarites goodneſſe I may her nat half preyſe. Wherfore nat ſhe for my boke, but this boke for her is worthy to be comended, tho my boke be leude: ryght as thynges nat for places, but places for thinges oughten to be deſyred and prayſed.
               
               
                  
                     NOw (ꝙ Loue) trewly thy wortes I haue wel vnderſtād. Cettes me thinketh hē right good, & me wō
                     dreth why thou ſo lightlye paſſeſt in the lawe. Sothly (ꝙ I) my wyt is leude & I am right blynd and that mater depe, how ſhulde I than haue waded, lightly myght I haue drenched and ſpylte ther my ſelfe. Ye (ꝙ ſhe) I ſhall helpe the to ſwym. For ryght as lawe puniſheth brekers of preceptes, and the contrary doers of the written conſtitutions: ryght ſo ayenward, lawe rewardeth and yeueth mede to hem that lawe ſtrengthen. By one lawe thys rebel is puniſhed and this innocent is meded, the ſhrewe is enpriſoned & thys ryghtfull is corowned. The ſame lawe that ioyneth by wedlocke without forſaking, the ſame lawe yeueth lybel of deperticion by cauſe of deuorſe both demed and declared. Ye ye (ꝙ I) I fynde in no lawe to mede and reward in goodnes, the gyltie of deſertes. Fole (ꝙ ſhe) gyltie cōuerted in your lawe, mykell merite deſerueth. Alſo Paulin of Rome was crowned, that by hym the maynteyners of Pompeus weren knowē & diſtroyed: & yet to forn was this Paulyn chefe of Pōpeus coū
                     ſayle. This law in Rome hath yet his name of meſuryng in mede, ye bewrayeng of the cō
                     ſpiracy, ordayned by tho ſenatours the dethe. Iulius Ceſar is acōpted in to Catons right witneſſe, for euer in trouth floriſheth his name among the knowers of reaſon. Perdicas was crowned in ye heritage of Alexāder the

great, for tellynge of a preuy hate that kinge Porrus to Alexander hadde. wherfore euery wyght by reaſon of law after his rightwyſeneſſe apertly his mede maychalēge: & ſo thou that maynteyneſt lawe of kynde, & therfore diſeaſe haſt ſuffred in ye law, reward is worthy to be rewarded & ordayned, & apartly thy mede might thou chalēge. Certes (ꝙ I) thys haue I wel lerned, & euer hēſforward I ſhal drawe me therafter in onehed of wyl to abyd this lawe both mayntene & kepe, & ſo hope I beſt entre into your grace, wel deſeruynge in to worſhip of a wight, without nedful cōpulſyon, ought medfully to be rewarded. Truly (ꝙ Loue) that is ſothe, & tho by conſtitution good ſeruyce in to profyt & auaūtage ſtretch, vtterly many mē it demē to haue more deſert of mede, thē good wyl not cōpelled. Se now (ꝙ I) how may men holden of thys the contrary. And what is good ſeruice
                        •
                      of you wold I here thys queſtion declared I ſhall ſay the (ꝙ ſhe) in a fewe wordes, reaſonable workinges in pleſaunce & profyte of thy ſouerayne. How ſhuld I this performe (ꝙ I?) Riȝt wel (ꝙ ſhe) & here me nowe a lytel. It is hardely (ꝙ ſhe) to vnderſtande ye ryghte as mater by due ouerchaūgynges foloweth his perfectiō and his forme: Ryght ſo euery mā by ryghtfull werkynges ought to folowe the leful deſyres in hys herte, and ſe toforne to what end he deſerueth, for many tymes he that loketh not after thēdes, but vtterly therof is vnknowen, befalleth oftē many yuels to don, wher through er he be ware ſhamefully he is confounded, thende therof neden to be before loked to euery deſyrer of ſuche forſyght, in good ſeruyce thre thynges ſpecially nedeth to be rulers in hys workes. Fyrſte that he do good, nexte that he do by election in hys own hert, and the thyrde that he do godlye wythouten any ſurquedry in thoughtes. That your werkes ſhulden be good in ſeruice or in any other actes, authorites many may be aleged neuer the later, by reaſon thus maye it be ſhewed. All your werkes be cleped ſeconde, & mouen in vertue of the fyrſt wercher, whych in good workes wrought you to procede, and ryghte ſo your werkes mouen in to vertue of the laſt ende, & right in the fyrſt workyng were not, no man ſhulde in the ſecōde werche. Right ſo but ye feled to what ende & ſene theyr goodnes cloſed, ye ſhulde nomore retche what ye wrought but the gynnynge gan wyth good, and there ſhall it ceaſe in the laſt ende, yf it be well conſydred. Wherfore the myddle, yf other wayes it drawe then accordaunt to the endes, there ſtynteth the courſe of good, and another maner courſe entreth, & ſo it is a partye by hym ſelue, and euery part be not accordaunt to hys all, is foule & ought to be eſchewed. Wherfore euery thynge yt is wrought
                        •
                      and be not good, is not accordaūt to the
                        ••
                     es of hys all hole, it is foule, & ought to be withdrawe. Thus the perſons that neyther 
                        •
                     o good ne harme, ſhamen foule theyr makyng: wherfore wythout workynge of good actes in good ſeruyce, may no man ben accepted. Trewly the ylke that han myght to do good and done it not, the crowne of worſhyp ſhall be take from hem, and wyth ſhame ſhull they be anulled. And ſo to make one werke accordaunt wyth hys endes, euery good ſeruaunt by reaſon of cōſequēce muſte do good nedes. Certes it ſuffyſeth not alone to do good, but goodly wythall folowe, the thanke of goodneſſe els in nought he deſerueth: For ryghte as al your beyng come frō the greateſt good in whom all goodneſſe is cloſed. Ryght ſo your endes ben directe to the ſame good. Ariſtotel determineth ye end & good ben one, & cō
                     uertible in vnderſtandynge, & he that in wyll doth away good, & he that loketh not to thēd loketh not to good, but he that doth good & doth not goodly, draweth away the dyrectiō of thende not goodly, muſt nedes be bad. Lo badde is nothyng els, but abſence or negatyf of good, as derkneſſe is abſence or negatyue of lyght. Then he that doth goodly, dyrecteth thylke good in to thende of badde: So muſt thyng not good folowe, eke badneſſe to ſuche folke ofte foloweth. Thus contrariant workers of thende that is good, ben worthy the contrary of thēde yt is good to haue. How (ꝙ I) may any good dede be done, but yf goodly it helpe: Yes (ꝙ Loue) the deuell doth many good dedes, but goodly he leueth behynd, for euen badly & in diſceyuable wyſe he worketh wherfore the cōtrary of thende him foloweth And do he neuer ſo many good dedes, bicauſe goodly is away, his goodnes is not rekened. Lo then tho a mā do good, but he do goodly thende in goodneſſe wol not folowe, & thus in good ſeruice both good dede & goodly don muſten ioyne together, & that it be don wyth

free choiſe in hert: & els deſerueth he not yt merite in goodneſſe, ye woll I proue, for yf thou do any thyng good by chaūce or by happe, in what thyng art thou therof worthy to be cō
                     mended▪ for nothynge by reaſon of ye turneth into thy prayſyng ne lackyng. Lo thilke thīg done by hap by thy wyl is not cauſed, & therby ſhulde I thanke or lacke deſerue: & ſythen that fayleth, thende whych that wel ſhuld rewarde, muſt nedes faile. Clerkes ſayn, no mā but wyllyng is bleſſed, a good dede yt he hath done is not done of fre choyſe willyng, with out which blyſſedneſſe may not folowe. Ergo neither thāke of goodneſſe ne ſeruice in yt is cōtrary of the good ende, ſo thē to good ſeruice lōged good dede goodly don, thorow fre choice in hert. Truely (ꝙ I) this haue I wel vnderſtande. Wel (ꝙ ſhe) euery thynge thus done ſufficiētly by lawe, that is cleped iuſtice after reward clayme. For lawe & iuſtice was ordained in this wyſe, ſuche deſertes in goodneſſe after quantite in doynge, by mede to rewarde, & of neceſſite of ſuch iuſtice, yt is to ſay ryghtwiſeneſſe was fre choice in deſeruynge of wel or of yuel graūted to reſonable creatures. Euery man hath fre arbitremēt to choſe good or yuel to performe. Now (ꝙ I tho) yf I by my good wyl deſerue this Margarite perle & am not therto cōpelled, and haue free choice to do what me lyketh: She is thē holden as me thinketh to rewarde thentēt of my good wyl. Goddes forbode els (ꝙ Loue) no wiȝt meaneth otherwyſe I trowe, fre wyl of good hert after mede deſerueth. Hath euerye man (ꝙ I) free choice by neceſſarye maner of wyl in euery of his doynges, yt him lyketh by goddes proper purueyance? I wolde ſe ye wel declared to my leude vnderſtādynge, for neceſſary & neceſſyte ben wordes of mokel entencion, cloſyng (as to ſaye) ſo mote it be nedes & otherwyſe maye it not betyde. Thys ſhalt thou lerne (ꝙ ſhe) ſo thou take hede in my ſpeche. Yf it were not in mānes owne lyberte of fre wyl to do good or bad, but to the one tyed by bonde of goddes preordinaunce: Thē do he neuer ſo well it were by nedefull cōpulcion of thilke bonde & not by fre choice, wherby nothyng he deſerueth, & do he neuer ſo yuel it were not man for to wyte, but onelyche to hym that ſuch thynge ordayned hym to done. Wherfore he ne ought for bad be punyſhed, ne for no good dede be rewarded, but of neceſſite of ryghtwyſneſſe was therfore free choice of arbitremente put in mans proper diſpoſitiō: truely yf it were otherwiſe it cōtraryed goddes charite, ye badnes & goodneſſe rewardeth after deſerte of payne or of mede. Me thynketh this wōder (ꝙ I) for god by neceſſite forwote al thynges cōmyng, and ſo mote it nedes be: & thylke thynges yt bene done be our fre choice comen nothynge of neceſſite but onely by wyll: Howe maye thys ſtande togyther? and ſo me thynketh truely, that fre choice fully repugneth goddes for wetynge. Truly lady me ſemeth they mowe not ſtande together.
               
               
                  
                     THen gan loue nygh me nere, & with a noble coūtenaūce of vyſage & lymmes, dreſſed her nygh my ſytting place. Take forth (ꝙ ſhe) thy pen & redely wryt theſe wordes, for if god wol, I ſhal hem ſo enforme to the, yt thy leudneſſe which I haue vnderſtād in that mater, ſhal openly be clered, & thy ſight in ful loking therin amēded. Fyrſt if thou thinke that goddes preſcience repugne lyberte of arbytrye of arbitrement, it is impoſſible yt they ſhuld accorde in onheed of ſoth to vnderſtādyng. Yea (ꝙ I) forſoth ſo I it cōceyue. Well (ꝙ ſhe) yf thylke impoſſible were away, the repugnāce that ſemeth to be therin, were vtterlye remoued. Shewe me ye abſence of that impoſſibilite (ꝙ I.) So (ꝙ ſhe) I ſhall. Nowe I ſuppoſe yt they mowe ſtāde together, preſciēce of god whō foloweth neceſſite of thīges cōming & lyberte of arbitremēt, thorow whych thou beleueſt many thīges to be without neceſſite Both theſe proporcions be ſothe (ꝙ I) & wel mowe ſtāde together, wherfore thys caſe as poſſible I admyt. Truly (ꝙ ſhe) & this caſe is impoſſible. Howe ſo (ꝙ I). For herof (ꝙ ſhe) foloweth & wexeth another īpoſſible. Proue me that (ꝙ I), that I ſhal (ꝙ ſhe) for ſothyng is cōmyng without neceſſite, & god wot that toforne, for althīg cōmyng he before wote, & that he beforne wot of neceſſite is cōming: as he beforne wot be ye caſe by neceſſary maner then, or els thorow neceſſite is ſothyng to be without neceſſite, & wetherto euery wyght yt hath good vnderſtāding, is ſene theſe thīges to be repugnāt. Preſciēce of god, which that foloweth neceſſite & lyberte of arbytrement,

fro which is remoued neceſſitie, for trulye it is neceſſary yt god haue foreweting of thyng withouten any neceſſitie cōmynge. Ye (ꝙ I) but yet remeue ye not away fro myne vnder ſtandyng, the neceſſitie folowynge gods beforewetyng, as thus. God beforne wote me in ſeruice of loue to be boūden to this Margaryte perle, & therfore by neceſſitie thus to loue am I bounde, & yf I not had loued, tho rowe neceſſitie had I bene kept from al loue dedes. Certes (ꝙ loue) bicauſe this mater is good & neceſſary to declare, I thynke herein wel to abyde, and not lightly to paſſe. Thou ſhalt not (ꝙ ſhe) ſay al only god beforne wot me to be a louer or no louer, but thus: god be forne wot me to be a louer without neceſſite And ſo it foloweth whether thou loue or not loue, euery of hem is and ſhalbe. But nowe thou ſeeſt the impoſſibilitie of the caſe, and ye poſſibilitie of thylke that thou wendeſt had ben impoſſyble, wherfore the repugnaunce is adnulled. Ye (ꝙ I) & yet do ye not awaye the ſtrengthe of neceſſitie whan it is ſayde: though neceſſitie it is me in loue to abyde, or not to loue without neceſſitie for god beforn wot it. This maner of neceſſitie forſothe ſemeth to ſome men in to coaction, that is to ſayne, conſtraynyng or els prohibicion that is defendynge▪ wherfore neceſſitye is me to loue of wyll. I vnderſtande me to be conſtrayned by ſome priuy ſtrength to the wyll of louynge, and if no loue to be defended frō the wyll of louyng, and ſo thorow neceſſitie me ſemeth to loue, for I loue, or elles not to loue, if I not loue wherthrugh neither thāk ne maugre in tho thynges may I deſerue.
                  Now (ꝙ ſhe) thou ſhalt wel vnderſtande, that often we ſayne thyng thorow neceſſitie to be that by no ſtrength to be neyther is coacted ne conſtrayned, and through neceſſitie not to be, that with no defendynge is remoued, for we ſayne it is thorowe neceſſite god to be immortall nought deedlyche, and it is neceſſitie god to be ryghtfull, but not that any ſtrength of vyolente maner conſtrayneth hym to be immortall, or defendeth him to be vnryghtfull, for nothynge maye make hym deedly or vnryghtful. Ryght ſo if I ſay thorowe neceſſite is the to be a louer or els none onelye thorowe wyll, as god beforne wete: It is not to vnderſtande that any thyng defendeth or forbyt, the thy wyll whiche ſhall not be, or els cōſtrayneth it to be which ſhalbe: that ſame thyng forſoth god before wot which he beforne ſeeth any thynge cōmende of only wyll, that wyl neyther is cōſtrayned ne defended thorowe any other thynge: & ſo thorowe lybertie of arbytrement it is do, yt is done of wyll. And trulye my good chylde, yf theſe thynges be wel vnderſtond I wene that none inconuenient ſhalt thou fynde betwene gods forwetyng & lybertie of arbytre mēt, wherfore I wot wel they may ſtand togyder. Alſo ferthermore, who yt vnderſtandyng of preſciēce proprelyche cōſydreth thorow the ſame wyſe that any thyng be afore wyſt, is ſayd for to be cōmyng it is pronoū
                     ced, there is nothing to forn wyſt, but thyng cōmyng, forewetinge is but of trouth doute may not be wyſt: wherfore whā I ſey yt god toforne wot any thyng, thorow neceſſitie is thilke thyng to be cōmyng, al is one if I ſey if it ſhalbe: but this neceſſitie neither cōſtrayneth ne defēdeth any thing to be or not to be Therfore ſothly yf loue is put to be, it is ſaid of neceſſitie to be, or els for it is put not to be it is affirmed not to be of neceſſite: not for ye neceſſite cōſtraineth or defēdeth loue to be or not to be. For whā I ſay, if loue ſhalbe of neceſſitie it ſhalbe, here foloweth neceſſitie, the thyng toforn put, it is as moche to ſey, as yf it were thus pronoūced, ye thing ſhalbe: none other thynge ſignifyeth this neceſſitye but onely thus, yt ſhall be maye not togyder be & not be. Euenlyche alſo it is ſothe, loue was and is, & ſhalbe, not of neceſſitie, and nede is to haue be all that was, & nedeful is to be al that is, & cōmyng to all that ſhalbe: and it is not the ſame to ſaye, loue to be paſſed, & loue paſſed to be paſſed, or loue preſent to be preſent, and loue to be preſent, or els loue to be commynge, and loue commynge to be commynge: dyuerſitye in ſettynge of wordes, maketh diuerſitie in vnderſtonding altho in the ſame ſentēce they accordē of ſignificatiō ryght as it is not all one: loue ſweete to be ſwete, & loue to be ſwete: for moche loue is bitter & ſorowful er hertes ben eaſed, & yet it gladeth thilke ſorouful hert on ſuche loue to thynke. Forſothe (ꝙ I) otherwhyle I haue had mokell blys in hert of loue, ye ſtou
                        •
                     mele hath me ſorily anoyed: & certes lady for I ſe my ſelfe this knit with this Margarit perle as by bonde of your ſeruyce, & of no lybertie

of wyl my hert wil now not accorde this ſeruice to loue. I can demen in my ſelfe none otherwyſe, but thorowe neceſſitie am I conſtrayned in this ſeruyce to abyde. But alas than, yf I thorowe nedefull cōpultion magre me be withholde, lytle thanke for all my great trauayle haue I than deſerued. Now (ꝙ this lady) I ſaye as I ſayde: Me lyketh this mater to declare at the full, & why? for many men haue had dyuers fantaſyes, and reaſons, both on one ſyde thereof & in the other. Of whiche ryght ſone I trowe if thou wolt vnderſtōd, thou ſhalt con yeue the ſentence, to the partye more probable by reaſō, & in ſoth knowyng, by yt I haue of this mater maked an ende. Certes (ꝙ I) of theſe thī
                     ges long haue I had great luſt to be lerned, for yet I wene gods wyl & his preſcience accordeth with my ſeruyce, in louyng of thys precious Margaryte petle. After whō euer in my hert with thurſtyng deſyre wete I do brenne: vnwaſtyng I langour & fade, and yt day of my deſteny in deth or in ioy I vnbide but yet in thende I am comforted be my ſuppoſayle in blyſſe, & in ioye to determyne after my deſyres. That thyng (ꝙ loue) haſtely to the neygh, god graūt of his grace & mercy, and this ſhalbe my prayer tyl thou be lykende in hert at thyne owne wyll. But now to enfourme the in this mater (ꝙ this lady) thou woſte where lefte, that was loue to be ſwete, and loue ſwete to be ſwete, is not all one for to ſaye: for a tree is not alway by neceſſitie whyte ſometyme er it were whyte, it myght haue be not whyte: & after tyme it is whyte, it maye be not whyte: But a whyte tree euermore nedeful is to be whyte: for neither toforne ne after it was whyte, myght it be togyther whyte and not whyte. Alſo loue by neceſſitie is not preſent as nowe in ye for er it were preſent it myght haue be, that it ſhulde now not haue be, and yet it may be that it ſhal not be preſente, but thy loue preſent, which to her margarite the hath bond, nedefull is to be preſent. Truly ſeme doing of action not by neceſſitie is cōmyge ferre to forne it be, it maye be that it ſhal not be commyng: thing forſoth comynge nedefull is to be cōmynge, for it may not be that cōmynge ſhall not be cōmynge: and ryght as I haue ſayde of preſent and of future tymes, ye ſame ſentence in ſothneſſe is of the preterit, yt is to ſay tyme paſſed for thīg paſſed, muſt nedes be paſſed, & yet it wer myght haue not be, wherfore it ſhuld not haue paſſed. Ryght ſo whā loue cōming is ſaid of loue yt is to comnedeful is to be yt is ſayd, for thyng cōmyng neuer is not comyng, & ſo oft the ſame thing we ſayn of the ſame, as whā we ſayn euery man is a man, or euerye louer is a louer, ſo muſt it be nedes, in no way may he be mā & no man togyther. And yf it be not by neceſſitie, that is to ſay, nedeful al thyng cōmynge to be cōmyng, than ſom thyng commyng is not cōming, and that is impoſſible, right as theſe termes nedefull, neceſſitie, and neceſſary betoken and ſignify thyng nedes to be, & it may not otherwyſe be. Ryght theſe termes impoſſyble ſignifyeth, that thynge is not & by no way may it be, than thorow parfyte neceſſitie, al thyng cōmyng is cōmyng, but that is by neceſſitie, foloweth with nothyng to be cōſtrayned: lo whan that commyng is ſayd of thyng, not alwaye thynge thorowe neceſſitie is, altho it be commynge. For if I ſaye tomorowe loue is cōmynge in this Margarites hert, not therfore thorow neceſſitie ſhal thilke loue be, yet it maye be yt it may not be, although it were commynge. Neuerthelater, ſōtyme it is ſoth that ſomethyng be of neceſſitie, that is ſayde to come: as yf I ſay tomorow by cōmyng the riſing of the ſun. Yf therfore with neceſſitie I pronounce cōmynge of thynge to come, in this maner loue to morne cōmynge in thy Margaryte to the warde by neceſſitie is cōmyng or els the ryſyng of the ſunne to morne commyng, through neceſſitie is comynge. Loue ſothly which may not be of neceſſitie aloone folowyng, thorowe neceſſitie cōmynge it is made certayne. For futur of future is ſayde, that is to ſayne cōmyng of cōminge is ſaide as if tomorow cōmyng is thorowe neceſſite cōming it is. Aryſyng of the ſun thorowe .ii. neceſſitis in cōming, it is to vnderſtād ye one is to forgoīg neceſſite, which maketh thing to be, therfore it ſhalbe, for nedefull is that it be. Another is folowyng neceſſitie, which nothing cōſtrayneth to be, and ſo by neceſſite it is to come, why? for it is to come. Now than, whan we ſayne, ye God beforne wote thing cōmyng, nedeful it is to be commyng, yet therfore make we not in certayne, euermore thyng to be thorow neceſſitie cōmyng.

Sothly thynge commynge may not be not cōmynge by no waye, for it is the ſame ſentence of vnderſtandyng: as yf we ſaye thus. Yf god beforne wot any thynge, nedefull is that to be commynge. But yet therfore foloweth not the preſcience of God, thynge thorowe neceſſitie to be comyng: for all tho god toforne wote all thynges comynge, yet not therfore he beforne wote euery thynge commyng thorowe neceſſetie. Som thynges he beforne wot commynge of frewyll out of reſonable creature. Certes (ꝙ I) theſe termes nede and neceſſitie, haue a queynte maner of vnderſtandynge, they wolde dullen manye mens wyttes. Therfore (ꝙ ſhe) I woll hem openly declare, and more clerely thā I haue toforne er I departe hence.
               
               
                  
                     HEre of this mater quod ſhe, thou ſhalt vnderſtande▪ that ryght as it is not nedefull God to wylne, that he wyll, nomore in manye thynges is not nedeful a man to wylne that he woll.
                  And euer ryght as nedeful is to be what that god woll, ryght ſo to be it is nedefull, that man woll in tho thynges, whiche that god hath put into mans ſubiection of wyllynge: as yf a man woll loue, that he loue: & yf he ne wol loue, that he loue not, & of ſuche other thynges in mans diſpoſitiō. For why nowe than that god woll maye not be, whā he woll the wyll of man thorowe no neceſſitie to be conſtrayned or els defended for to wylne, and he woll theffecte to folowe the wyll, than is it nedefull wyll of man to be free, and alſo to be that he woll. In this maner it is ſoth, that thorowe neceſſitie is mā
                     nes werke in louyng, that he wol do althouȝ he woll it not with neceſſitie. (Quod I) thā how ſtant it in loue of thylke wyl, ſythen mē louē wyllyng of free choyce inhert wherfore yf it be thorowe neceſſitie, I pray you ladye of an anſwer this queſtyon to aſſoyle. I wil (quod ſhe) anſwere the blyuely: Ryght as men wyll not thorowe neceſſitie, ryght ſo is not loue of wyll thorowe neceſſitie, ne thorowe neceſſitie wrought thylke ſame wyll: for yf he wold it not with good wyl, it ſhuld not haue ben wrought, although yt he doeth it is nedefull to be done.
                  But yf a man do ſynne, it is nothyng elles but to wyll, that he ſhulde not: ryght ſo ſyn of wyl is not to be maner neceſſary done, no more than wyll is neceſſary. Neuerthelater this is ſoth, yf a man woll ſynne, it is neceſſary hym to ſynne, but though thylke neceſſitie nothyng is conſtrayned ne defended in the wyll, ryght ſo thylke thyng that frewyll woll and may, and not may, not wylne, and nedefull is that to wylne he may not wylne but thilke to wylne nedefull is, for impoſſyble to hym it is onethyng, and the ſame to wylne he may not wilne, but thilke to wilne nedefull is: for impoſſyble to hym it is one thynge, and the ſame to wylne and notte to wylne. The werke forſoth of wyl to whome it is yeue that it be that he hath in wyll, and that he wol not voluntary of ſpontany it is, for by ſpontany wyll it is do, that is to ſaye with good wyll, not conſtrayned: than by wyl not conſtrayned, it is conſtrayned to be and that is it may not togyther be. Yf thys neceſſitie maketh lybertye of wyll, whiche ye aforne they weren they myght haue bene eſchewed and ſhonned: God than, which that knoweth al truthe, and nothyng but truthe, al theſe thynges as they are ſpontany or neceſſarye ſyght, and as he ſeeth ſo they ben: & ſo with theſe thynges well conſydered, it is open at the full, that withoute all maner repugnaunce, god beforne wot all maner thinges ben done by frewyll, which aforen they weren myght haue ben neuer they ſhulde be and yet ben they thorowe a maner neceſſitie from frewyll diſcended.
                  Hereby maye (quod ſhe) lightly ben knowe that not all thynges to be is of neceſſytye though God haue hem in his preſcience, for ſome thynges to be is of lybertye of wyll: and to make the to haue full knowynge of goddes beforne wetynge. Heare me (quod ſhe) what I ſhall I ſaye? Blythlye ladye (ꝙ I) me lyſt this mater entyrely to vnderſtād. Thou ſhalt (ꝙ ſhe) vnderſtande, that in heauen is goddes being, although he be ouer al by power, yet there is abydynge of deuyne perſon, in which heuen is euerlaſtynge preſence, wthoutē any mouable tyme there ſole haue I not ſayd toforne this, as tyme hurteth, ryght ſo ayenwarde tyme healeth and rewardeth: and a tre oft fayled is hold more deyntye whan it frute forth bryngeth.

A marchaunt that for ones leſyng in the ſee nomore to auenture thynketh, he ſhal neuer with auenture come to rycheſſe: ſo oft muſt men on the oke ſmyte, tyll the happye dente haue entred, which with ye okes owne ſway maketh it to come all at ones. So ofte falleth the lethy water on the harde rocke, tyll it haue thorow perſed it. The euen draught of the wyre drawer, maketh the wyre to ben euen and ſupple werchyng, and if he ſtynted in his draught, the wyre breaketh a ſonder. Euery tre wel ſpringeth whā it is wel groū
                     ded and not often remoued. what ſhall this frute be (ꝙ I) nowe it gynnethe rype? Grace (quod ſhe) in parfyte ioye to endure and ther with hou begon. Grace (ꝙ I) me thīketh I ſhulde haue a rewarde for my long trauayle I ſhal tell the (quod ſhe) retrybution of thy good wylles to haue of thy Margaryte perle it beareth not the name of mede, but only of good grace, and that cometh not of thy deſerte, but of thy Margarytes goodneſſe, & vertue alone. (Quod I) ſhulde al my longe trauayle haue no reward but thorow grace and ſomtyme your ſeluen ſayde, ryghtwiſneſſe euenlyche rewardeth to quyte one benefite for an other. That is ſoth (quod loue) euer as I ſayd, as to hym that doeth good, which to done he were neyther holdē ne yet conſtrayned. That is ſoth (quod I). Truly, (quod ſhe) all that euer thou doſt to thy margaryte peerle, of wyll, of loue, and of reaſon thou oweſt to done it, yet is nothyng els but yeldynge of thy det in quytyng of thy grace, which ſhe the lent whā ye fyrſt met. I wene (quod I) ryght lytle grace to me ſhe delyuered. Certes, it was harde grace, it hath nigh me aſtrangled. That it was good grace I wot wel thou wylt it graunt er thou depart hence. Yf anye man yeue to an other wyght to whom that he ought not, and which that of hym ſelfe nothyng maye haue, a garmēt or a cote, though he weare the cote or elles thylke clothynge, it is not to put hym yt was naked the cauſe of his clothyng, but onely to him that was yeuer of the garnement. wherfore I ſaye, thou that were naked of loue, & of thy ſelfe none haue myghteſt, it is not to put thyne owne perſō, ſythen thy loue came to thorowe thy Margaryte perle. Ergo ſhe was yeuer of the loue although thou it vſe, and there lent ſhe the grace thy ſeruyce to begynne. She is worthye the thanke of this grace, for ſhe was the yeuer. All the thoughtes, beſy doinges, and pleſaūce in thy might and in thy wordes that thou canſte deuyſe, ben but ryght lytle in quytynge of thy dette: had ſhe not ben, ſuche thyng had not ben ſtudyed. So all theſe maters kyndly drawen homewarde to this Margaryte peerle, for from thence were they borowed, all is holy her to wyte the loue that thou haueſt: and thus quyteſt thou thy dette, in that thou ſtedfaſtly ſerueſt. And kepe well that loue I the rede, that of her thou haſt borowed, and vſe it in her ſeruyce thy dette to quyte, and than art thou able right ſone to haue grace, wherfore after mede in none halue mayeſt thou loke. Thus thy gynnyng and endyng is but grace alone, and in thy good deſeruyng thy det thou aquyteſt: without grace is nothing worth what ſo euer thou werche. Thanke thy Margaryte of her great grace, that hytherto the hath gyded, and praye her of contynuaunce forthe in thy werkes hereafter, and that for no myſhappe thy grace ouerthwartly tourne. Grace, glorye, and ioye, is commynge thorowe good folkes deſertes, and by gettynge of grace therin ſhulde ende. And what is more glorye or more ioye than wyſdome and loue in parfite charitie which god hath graunted to all tho that well can deſerue. And with that this lady al at ones ſtart into myne hert: here woll I onbyde (ꝙ ſhe) for euer. And neuer woll I gone hence, and I woll kepe the from medlynge whyle me lyſt here onbyde: thyne intremetyng maners into ſtedfaſtneſſe ſhullen be chaunged.
               
               
                  
                     SObrelyche tho threwe I vp myne eyen, and hugelye tho was I aſtonyed of thys ſodayne aduenture, and fayne wolde I haue learned howe vertues ſhulden ben knowē in whyche thynges, I hoope to God, hereafter ſhe ſhall me enfourmen, and namelye ſythen her reſtynge place is nowe ſo nyghe at my wyll, and anon all theſe thynges that thys lady ſayde, I remembred me by my ſelfe, and reuolued

the lyues of myne vnderſtandyng wyttes. Tho founde I fully all theſe maters parfitly there wrytten, howe myſſe rule by fayned loue both realmes and cyties hathe gouerned a great throwe. How lyghtly me might the fautes eſpye, howe rules in loue ſhoulde ben vſed, howe ſometyme with fayned loue foule I was begyled, howe I ſhoulde loue haue knowe, and how I ſhall in loue wyth my ſeruyce procede. Alſo furthermore, I founde of perdurable letters wonderly ther grauen, theſe maters which I ſhal nempne. Certes, none age ne other thynge in earthe maye the leeſt ſyllable of this in no poynte deface, but clerelye as the ſunne in myne vnderſtandyng ſoule they ſhynen. This maye neuer out of my mynde, how I may not my loue kepe, but thorowe wyllynge in herte. wylne to loue maye I not, but I louynge, haue. Loue haue I none but thorowe grace of this Margaryte peerle. It is no maner dout, that wyl woll not loue but for it is louyng, as wyl woll not ryghtfully, but for it is ryghtful it ſelue. Alſo wyll is not louyng for he woll loue, but he woll loue for he is louynge. It is all one to wyll to be louynge, and louynges in poſſeſſyon to haue. Ryght ſo wyll wol not loue, for of loue hath he in no partye, and yet I deny not louynge wyl wylne more loue to haue, which that he hath not whan he wolde more than he hath: but I ſaye he maye no loue wylne, yf he no loue haue, throughe whiche thylke loue he ſhulde wylne: but to haue this louynge wyll may no man of hym ſelfe, but onely through grace toforne going: Ryght ſo maye noman it kepe, but by grace folowynge. Conſydre nowe euery man aryght, and let ſene if that any wyght of hym ſelfe mowe this louynge wyl get, and he therof fyrſte nothynge haue: for yf it ſhulde of hym ſelfe ſprynge, eyther it muſt be wyllyng or not wyllynge▪ wyllynge by hym ſelfe maye he it not haue, ſythen him fayleth the mater that ſhulde it forth bryng, the mater hym fayleth: why▪ he may thereof haue no knowyng, tyll whan grace put it in his herte. Thus wyllyng by hym ſelfe may he it not haue, and not wyllynge maye he it not haue. Parde euery conceyt of euery reaſonable creature otherwyſe wyl not graunt wyll in affyrmatyfe with not wyllynge by no waye mowe accorde. And although this louynge woll come in myne hert by freneſſe of arbytrement, as in this boke fully is ſhewed, yet owe I not therfore as moche alow my free wyll, as grace of that Margaryte to me leaned, for neyther myght I without grace to fornegoinge, and afterwarde folowyng, thylke grace get ne kepe, and leſe ſhal I it neuer but yf frewyll it make, as in wyllyng otherwyſe than grace hath me graunted. For ryght as whan any perſon taketh wyllynge to be ſobre, and throweth that awaye, wyllynge to be dronke, or els taketh wyll of drynkynge oute of meaſure, whiche thyng anon as it is doone, maketh thorowe his owne gylte by free wyll that leſeth hys grace. In which thyng therfore vpon the nobley of grace I mote truſten, and my buſye cure ſet thylke grace to kepe, that my frewyl otherwyſe than by reaſon it ſhulde werche, cauſe not my grace to voyde: for thus muſt I both loke to frewyll & to grace. For right as naturall vſage in engendrynge of chyldren maye not bene withoute father, ne alſo but with the mother, for neyther father ne mother in begettynge maye it lacke: ryght ſo grace and frewyll accorden, and without hem both maye not louynge wyll in no partye ben getten. But yet is not frewyl in gettynge of that thyng, ſo mokell thanke worthy as is grace, ne in the kepynge thereof, ſo moche thanke deſerueth, and yet in gettyng and kepynge both done they accorde.
                  Trulye oftentyme grace frewyll helpeth in foredoinge of contrarye thynges, that to wyllynge loue not accorden, and ſtrengthe wyll aduerſities to withſytte, wherfore all togyther to grace oweth to bene accepted, that my wyllynge deſerueth. Frewyll to louynge in this wyſe is accorded.
                  I remembre me well howe all this boke (who ſo hede taketh) conſydreth all thynges to werchynges of mankynde, euenlye accordeth, as in tournynge of thys worde loue into trouth, or els ryghtwiſneſſe, whether that it lyke. For what thynge that falleth to man in helpynge of free arbytremēt, thylke ryghtwyſneſſe to take or els to kepe, thorowe whiche a man ſhall be ſaued, of whiche thyng all this booke mencyon hath maked, in euery poynt thereof grace oweth to be thanked.
                  wherfore I ſaye, euerye wyght hauynge

this ryghtfulnes ryghtfull is, and yet therfore I ſey not in my concyence, that to all ryghtfull is behoten the blyſſe euerlaſtynge but to hem that ben ryghtfull withouten any vnryghtouſneſſe. Some man after ſom degree maye ryghtfully ben accompted: as chaſte men in lyuynge, and yet ben they ianglers and full of enuye preſſed: to hem ſhal this blyſſe neuer bene delyuered. For ryght as verye blyſſe is withoute all maner nede, ryght ſo to noman ſhal it be yeuen but to the ryghtful, voyde from all maner vnryghtfulneſſe founde, ſo noman to her blyſſe ſhal ben folowed, but he be ryghtfull, and wyth vnryghtfulneſſe not bounde, and in that degre fully be knowe. This ryghtfulneſſe in as moche as in hym ſelfe is, of none euyll is it cauſe, and of all maner goodneſſe truly it is mother. This helpeth the ſpyrite to withſyt the leude luſtes of fleſhly lykyng: This ſtrē
                     gtheth and mayntayneth the lawe of kynde and yf that otherwhyle me weneth harme of this precyous thyng to folowe, therethorowe is nothynge the cauſe, of ſomwhat els commeth it aboute who ſo taketh hede. By rightfulneſſe forſoth werne many holy ſayntes good ſauour in ſwetneſſe to god almightye, but that to ſome folkes they weren ſauour of deth into deedly ende, that come not of the ſaynctes ryghtwyſneſſe, but of other wycked mens badneſſe hath proceded. Truly the ilke wyl whiche that the ladye of loue me lerned, affectiō of wyl to nempne, which is in wyllyng of profytable thynges, euel is it not, but whan to fleſhly luſtes it cōſenteth ayenſt reaſon of ſoule. But that this thyng more clerely be vnderſtand, it is for to know whence and how thylke wyll is ſo vycious, and ſo readye, euyll dedes to perfourme. Grace at the gynnyng ordeyned thylke wyl ingoodneſſe euer to haue endured, and neuer to badneſſe to haue aſſented: Men ſhoulde not beleue that God thylke wyll made to be vycious. Our fyrſt father as Adam & Eue, for vycyous appetytes and vycious wyll to ſuch appetytes conſentyng, ben not one thīg in kynde, other thyng is done for the other. And howe this wyll fyrſt into man fyrſt aſſented I holde it profytable to ſhewe, but if the fyrſte condicyon of reaſonable ceeature wol be conſydred and apertly loked lyghtly the cauſe of ſuche wyll maye ben ſhewed. Intention of God was that ryghtfully and blyſſed ſhulde reaſonable nature ben maked hym ſelfe for to kepe, but neyther blyſfull ne ryghtfull myght it not be withouten wyl in them bothe. wyll of ryghtfulneſſe is thylke ſame rightfulneſſe as heretoforne is ſhewed but wyll of blyſſe is not thylke blyſſe, for euery man hath not thylke blyſſe, in whome the wyll therof is abydynge. In this blyſſe after euery vnderſtandyng is ſuffyſaunce of couenable commodityes without anye maner nede, whether it be blyſſe of aungelles or els thylke, that grace fyrſt in paradyſe ſuffered Adam to haue. For although aungelles blyſſe be more than Adams was in Paradyſe, yet may it not be denyed, that Adam in Paradyſe ne hadde ſuffyſaunce of blyſſe, for ryght as great herte is without al maner of coldneſſe, and yet maye an other herte more heate haue, ryght ſo nothyng defruded Adā in Paradyſe to bene bleſſed, without al maner nede. Although aungels blyſſe be moche more, forſothe it foloweth not laſſe than an other to haue therefore hym nedeth, but for to wante a thynge whiche that behoueth to ben had, that may nede ben cleped, and that was not in Adam at the fyrſt gynnynge. God and the Margaryte, weten what I meane.
                  Forſothe where as is nede, there is wretchedneſſe, good withoute cauſe to fornegoinge made not reſonable creature wretched, for hym to vnderſtand and loue had he fyrſt maked. God made therfore mā blyſſed with out al maner indigēce, togyther and at ones toke reaſonable creature blyſſe, and wyll of blyſſedneſſe and wyl of rightfulneſſe, which is ryghtfulneſſe it ſelfe, and lybertye of arbitrement, that is free wyl, with which thilke ryghtfulneſſe may he kepe and leſe. So and in that wyſe ordayned thylke two, that wyl which that inſtrument is cleped, and here to forne mencyon is maked, ſhoulde vſe thylke ryghtfulneſſe by teachynge of hys ſoule to good maner of gouernaunce, in thought and in wordes, and that it ſhulde vſe the blyſſe in obedyent maner withouten any incommoditie. Blyſſe forſothe into mannes profyte, and ryghtwyſneſſe into his worſhyppe god delyuered at ones: but ryghtfulnes ſo was yeuen, that man myght it leſe, whiche yf he not loſte hadde not, but continuallye haue it

kepte, he ſhulde haue deſerued the auauncement into the felowſhyp of angels, in which thinge yf he that loſte, neuer by hym ſelfe forwarde ſhuld he it mowe ayenward recouer: and as well the blyſſe that he was in, as angels blyſſe that to himwardes was coming ſhulde be nome at ones, & he depriued of the both. And thus fyl man vnto likeneſſe of vnreaſonable beeſtes, and with hem to corrupcyon and vnluſtye appetytes was he vnder, throwen, but yet wyl of blyſſe dwelleth, that by indigence of goodes whiche that he loſte through great wretchedneſſe, by ryght ſhuld he bene punyſhed. And thus for he weyued, ryghtfulnes, loſt hath he hys blyſſe: but faile of hys deſyre in his owne comoditie may he not, and were comodities to hys reſonable nature whych he hath loſt may he not haue. To falſe luſtes, which ben veſtial appetites he is turned: foly of vnconning hath him begyled, in wening that thylke bene the comodities that owen to bene deſyred. This affection of wyll by libertie of arbitriment is enduced to wylne thys thing that he ſhuld not and ſo is wyl not maked yuyll but vnryghtful, by abſence of rightfulneſſe, whych thing by reaſon euer ſhulde he haue. And freeneſſe of arbitriment maye he not wylne, whan he it not haueth, for whyle he it hadde, thylke halpe it not to kepe: ſo yt wythout grace may it not bene recouered. Wyll of cōmoditie, in as much as vnryghtful it is maked, by wyllynge of yuell luſtes, wyllynge of goodneſſe may he not wylne: for wyll of inſtrument to affection of wyl is thralled, ſithen that other thyng maye it not wylne, for wyll of inſtrument to affection deſyreth, and yet bene both they wyl cleped: for ye inſtrumēt woll, throuȝ affection it wylneth, and affection deſyreth thylke thynge wherto inſtrumente hym ledeth. And ſo frewil to vnluſty affectiō ful ſeruaunt is maked, for vnryghtfulneſſe may he not releue, & wythout ryghtfulnes full fredō may it neuer haue. For kyndly libertie of arbytriment without it, veyne and ydell is for ſothe. wherfore yet I ſaye, as often haue I ſayd the ſame, whan inſtrument of wyl loſt hath rightfulneſſe, in no maner but by grace may he ayen returne ryghtfulneſſe to wylne For ſythen nothyng but ryghtfulneſſe alone ſhulde he wylne, what yt euer he wylneth wt oute ryghtfulneſſe, vnryghtfullye he it wylneth. Theſe than vnryghtfull appetites and vnthryfty luſtes which the flyes deſyreth, in as mokell as they bene in kynde, bene they not bad, but they ben vnryghtful and badde for they ben in reſonable creature, where as they beyng in no waye ſhulde bene ſuffred. In vnreaſonable beaſtes neyther bene they yuell ne vnryghtfull, for there is theyr kynde beyng.
               
               
                  
                     KNowen maye it wel bene nowe, of theſe thynges to forne declared, that man hathe not alwaye thylke ryghtfulneſſe, whyche by dutie of ryghte euermore hauen he ſhulde, & by no way by him ſelfe may he get ne kepe, and after he it hath if he it leſe, recouer ſhal he it neuer, without eſpecial grace: wherfore the comune ſētence of the people in opinion, yt euery thing after deſtiny is ruled, falſe and wicked is to bileue: For though predeſtinacyon be as wel of good as of badde, ſithen that it is ſayde God hadneſt made, whych he neuer ne wrought, but for he ſuffreth hem to be maked, as that he hardeth whā he naught miſſayth, or ledde into temptation whan he not delyuereth, wherfore it is none incōuenient yf in that maner be ſayd, God to forne haue deſtenyed bothe badde, & her badde werkes whan hem ne theyr yuel dedes neyther amē
                     deth, ne therto hem grace leueth. But ſpeciallyche predeſtinacion of goodneſſe alone, is ſayde by theſe great clerkes, for in him God doth that they bene, & that in goodneſſe they werchen. But the negatyfe herof in badneſſe is holdē, as the lady of loue hath me lerned, who ſo aryght in thys boke loketh. And vtterly it is to weten, that predeſtinacyon properly in God maye not bene demed, no more than beforne wetinge. For in the chapiter of gods beforne wetynge, as loue me reherſed, al theſe maters apertly may ben foundē. All thinges to god ben now togither and in preſence during. Trewly preſence & predeſtinacyon in nothyng diſacorden, wherfore as I was lerned how gods before wetyng & free choyce of wyll mowe ſtonden togyther, me thinketh the ſame reaſon me leadeth, that deſtenye and frewyll accorden, ſo that neyther of hem both to other in nothing contrarieth

And reſonablelyche maye it not ben demed, as often as any thynge fayleth frewyl werchyng, as yf a man another man wrongfully anoyeth, wherfore he him ſleyth, that it be conſtrayned to that ende, as mokel folke cryeth and ſayeth: Lo, as it was deſtenyed of God to forne knowe, ſo it is thorowe neceſſytie fall, and otherwiſe myght it not betyde Trewly neyther he yt the wronge wroughte ne he that hym ſelfe venged, none of thylke thynges thorowe neceſſitie wrought: for yf that wyth freewyll there had it not wylled, neyther had wrought that he perfourmed: & ſo vtterly grace ye frewyll in goodneſſe bryngeth and kepeth, and fro badneſſe it turneth, in all thynge mooſt thanke deſerneth. Thys grace maketh ſētēce in vertue to abide, wherfore in body and in ſoule in full plentie of conyng after theyr good deſeruyng in the euer laſtyng ioy, after the daye of dome ſhul they endeleſſe dwell, and they ſhul bene learned in that kyngdome wyth ſo mokel affect of loue & of grace, that the leſte ioy ſhall of the greateſt in glorye reioyce & bene gladded, as i
                        •
                      he the ſame ioye had. What wonder ſyth God is the greateſt loue, and ye ne ought to loke thynges wyth reſonnynge to proue, and ſo is inſtrumēt o
                        •
                      wyll, wyll: and yet varyeth he from effecte and vſynge both. Affection of wyll alſo for wyll is cleped, but it varyeth f
                        •
                     ō inſtrument in thys maner wyſe, by that name, lyche whan it commeth into minde anone ryght it is in wyllyng deſyred, and the negatyfe therof with wyllyng nyl not acord this is cloſed in hart, thoughe vſage and inſtrument ſlepe. This ſlepeth whā inſtrumēt and vs waken: and of ſuche maner affection trewly ſome man hath more and ſome man leſſe. Certes trew louers wenen euer therof to lytle to haue. Falſe louers in lytle wenen haue ryght mokel: Lo inſtrument of wyl in falſe and trewe both euen liche is proporcianed, but affection is more in ſome place than in ſome, bycauſe of the goodneſſe that foloweth, and that I thinke herafter to declare. Vſe of thys inſtrument is wyl, but it taketh hys name whan wylned thyng is in doyng. but vtterly grace to catche in thy blyſſe, deſired to ben rewarded. Thou muſt haue than affection of wyl at the ful, and vſe whan his tyme aſketh wiſely to ben gouerned. Sothly my diſciple wythout feruente affection of wyll may no man bene ſaued: thys affection of good ſeruyce in good loue, maye not bene groūded, without feruent deſire to the thing in wyll coueyted. But he that neuer retcheth to haue or not to haue, affection of wyll in yt hath no reſtyng place. why? for whan thyng cometh to mynde, and it be not taken in hede to comyn or not come, therfore in that place affection fayleth: and for thylke affection is ſo lytle, throwe which in goodneſſe he ſhulde come to his grace, the lytelneſſe wyl not ſuffre to auaile by no way in to his helpes: Certes grace & reaſon thylke affection foloweth Thys affection withe reaſon knytte, dureth in eueryche trewe herte, and euermore is encreaſyng, no ferdneſſe, no ſtrength maye it remoue whyle truthe in hert abydeth. Sothly whan falſhed gynneth entre truth draweth away, grace and ioye both: but than thilke falſheed that trouth hath thus voyded, hath vnknyt the bonde of vnderſtondyng reaſon, bytwene wyl and the hert. And who ſo that bonde vndoth, and vnknytteth wyl to be in other purpoſe thā to ye firſt accorde, knitteth hym wyth cōtrary of reaſon, and that is vnreaſon. Lo, than wyl and vnreaſon bringeth a man from the blyſſe of grace, whych thing of pure kynde, euery man ought to ſhonne & to eſchewe, & to the knot of wyll and rea
                        •
                     on confyrme. Me thynketh (ꝙ ſhe) by thy ſtud
                        •
                     
                     ent lokes, thou weneſt in theſe woordes me to contraryen, from other ſayenges here to forne in other place, as whā thou were ſomtyme in affection of wyl, to thynges yt nowe han brought the in diſeaſe, whiche I haue ye counſayled to voyde, and thyne herte diſcouer, and there I made thy wyl to ben chaunged, whyche nowe thou weneſt I arg
                        •
                     e to wythholde and to kepe. Shortly I ſay that reuers in theſe wordes may not ben founde: for thoughe dronkenneſſe be forboden, men ſhul not alway ben drinkleſſe. I trowe right for thou thy wil out of reaſō ſhuld not turne thy wyll in one reaſon ſhulde not vnbyde, I ſaye thy wyll in thy fyrſt purpoſe wyth vnreaſon was cloſed: Conſtrewe forthe of the remenante what the good lyketh. Trewly that wyll & reaſon ſhulde be knitte togyther was fre wyl of reaſō, after tyme thyne hert is aſſentaunt to them both, thou myghte not chaunge, but yf thou from rule of reaſon varye, in whyche varyaunce to come to thylke

blyſſe deſyred, cōtrariouſly thou wercheſt: & no thyng may knowe wyl & reaſon but loue alone. Than yf thou voyd loue, than weueſt the bonde that knytteth, and ſo nedes or els ryght lyghtly, yt other gone a ſondre: wherfore thou ſeeſt apertly that loue holdeth this knot, & a mayſtreth hem to be bounde. Theſe thynges, as a rynge in circuite of wrethe ben knytte in thy ſoule wythout departynge. A let be, let be (ꝙ I) it nedeth not of this no reherſayle to make, my ſoule is yet in parfyte blyſſe, in thynkynge of that knotte.
               
               
                  
                     NOw trewly lady I haue my groūde well vnderſtand, but what thyng is ye thylke ſpire that in to a tree ſhulde wexe: expowne me ye thynge, what ye therof meane. That ſhall I (ꝙ ſhe) blithly, & take good hede to the wordes I the rede. Cōtinuaunce in thy good ſeruice, by longe proceſſe of time in ful hope abiding, wythout any chaung to wylne in thyne hert: this is the ſpire, whych yf it be wel kepte & gouerned, ſhall ſo hugely ſpryng, tyl the fruite of grace is plentuouſly out ſprongen: for although thy wyl be good yet may not therfore thilke bliſſe deſyred haſtely on the diſcendē, it muſt abyde hys ſeſonable tyme. And ſo by proceſſe of growyng, wyth thy good traueyle, it ſhall in to more & more wexe, tyll it be founde ſo myghty, that windes of yuel ſpech, ne of ſtormes of enuy, make not the traueyle ouerthrow, ne froſtes of myſtruſte, ne hayles of ielouſy ryght lytle myght haue in harmyng of ſuche ſprynges. Euery younge ſetlynge lyghtly wyth ſmale ſtormes is a peyred, but whan it is woxen ſomdele in gretneſſe, than han great blaſtes and wethers but lytle myght, any diſauauntage to them for to werch. Mine owne ſouerayne lady (ꝙ I) and welth of myne herte, & it were lykynge vnto your noble grace, therthrouȝ not to be diſpleaſed, I ſuppoſe ye erren, now ye makē ielouſy enuy, & diſturbour to hem that ben your ſeruauntes. I haue lerned ofte to forne this tyme, that in euery loners hert, greate plentie of ielouſyes greues ben ſowe, wherfore me thinketh ye ne ought in no maner accompte, thylke thyng among theſe other welked wyners and venomous ſerpentes, as enuy, miſtruſt, and yuel ſpeche O foole (ꝙ ſhe) miſtruſt with foly with yuel wyl medled, engendreth that welked padde. Trewly yf they were diſtroyed, ielouſye vndone were for euer, & yet ſome maner of ielouſy I wote wel is euer redy in all the hertes of my trew ſeruauntes, as thus: to be ielous ouer hym ſelfe, leſte he be cauſe of hys owne diſeaſe. Thys ielouſy in full thoughte euer ſhulde be kepte for ferdneſſe to leſe hys loue by miſkeping, thorow his owne doyng in leudeneſſe, or els thus: Leſt ſhe that thou ſerueſte ſo feruently is beſet there her better lyketh, that of al thy good ſeruyce ſhe compteth not a creſſe. Theſe ielouſyes in herte for acceptable qualities ben demed: theſe oughten euery trew louer by kindly, euermore hauen in his minde, tyll fully the grace & blyſſe of my ſeruice be on hym diſcended at wyll. And he that than ielouſy catcheth, or els by wenyng of hys owne folyſh wylfulneſſe miſtruſteth, truely wyth fantaſy of venyme, he is foule begyled. Yuelwyll hathe grounded thylke mater of ſorowe in hys leude ſoule, & yet not for thā to euery wight ſhulde me not truſte, ne euery wyghte fully miſbeleue, the meane of theſe thynges owen to be vſed. Sothly wythouten cauſe
                        ••
                     ll euidence, myſtruſte in ielouſye ſhulde not be wened in no wyſe perſon cōmenly, ſuch leude wickednes ſhulde me not ſynde. He that is wyſe & with yuell wyll not be acomered, can abyde well hys tyme, tyl grace & blyſſe of his ſeruice folowyng, haue hym ſo mokel eaſed, as his abyding to forehande hath him diſeaſed. Certes lady (ꝙ I tho) of no thyng me wondreth ſythen thylke blyſſe ſo precious is and kyndly good, & wel is and worthy in kynde, whā it is medled with lo
                        •
                     e & reaſō, as ye to forne haue declared. Why, anone as hye one is ſpronge, why ſpringeth not the other? and anone as the one cometh, why receyueth not the other? For euery thyng that is out of his kyndly place, by full appetite, euer commeth thytherwarde kyndly to draw, & his kyndly being therto him cōſtrayneth. And the kindly ſtede of this blyſſe, is in ſuche wyl medled to vnbyde, & nedes in that it ſhulde haue hys kyndly beyng. wherfore me thynketh anone as that wyll to be ſhewed & kydde hym profreth, thylke blyſſe ſhulde him hye thylke wil to receyue, or els kynde of goodneſſe worchē not in hem as they ſhulde. Lo, be the ſunne

neuer ſo ferre, euer it hathe hys kynde werching in erth: great weyght on hye onloft caryed, ſtynteth neuer tyll it come to thys reſtyng place. waters to the ſee ward euer ben they drawyng, thynge that is lyght blythly wyl not ſynke, but euer aſcendeth & vpward draweth. Thus kynde in euery thynge hys kyndely courſe, & hys beyng place ſheweth: wherfore be kynde on thys good wyl, anone as it were ſpronge, this blyſſe ſhulde theron diſcend, her kynde wolde they dwelleden togyther, & ſo haue ye ſayd your ſelfe. Certes (ꝙ ſhe) thyne herte ſytteth wonder ſore this blyſſe for to haue, thyne hert is ſore agreued that it taryeth ſo longe, and yf thou durſteſt, as me thynketh by thyne wordes, this blyſſe woldeſt thou blame. But yet I ſaye, thylke blyſſe is kyndly good, and hys kyndly place in that wyl to vnbyde. Neuer the later, their cōmyng togyther after kyndes ordynaunce not ſodaynly may betyde, it muſt abide time as kynde yeueth hym leaue for yf a man, as thys wyl medled gonne hym ſhew, & thylke blyſſe in haſt folowed, ſo lyghtly commyng ſhulde lyghtlye cauſe goynge, longe tyme of thurſtyng, cauſeth drynke to be the more delycious whan it is ataſted. Howe is it (ꝙ I thā) that ſo many blyſſes ſe I al day at mine eye, in the fyrſt moment of a ſyght with ſuch wyl accorde. Yee, and yet other whyle wyth wyll aſſenteth, ſyngulerly by hym ſelfe there reaſon fayleth, traueyle was none, ſeruyce had no tyme. Thys is a queynt maner thing howe ſuche doing cometh aboute. O (ꝙ ſhe) that is thus, the earth kyndely after ſeaſons & tymes of the yere, bryngeth ſorth innumerable herbes and trees both profytable and other, but ſuch as men myght leaue, though they were naught in noryſhynge to mannes kynde ſeruen, or els ſuch as turnen ſoone vnto mennes confuſion in eaſe that therof they ataſt comen forthe out of the earthe by theyr owne kinde, wythouten any mannes cure or any buſyneſſe in traueyle: and thylke herbes that to mennes lyuelode neceſſaryly ſeruen, wythout whyche goodlye in thys lyfe creatures mowen not enduren, and mooſte bene nouryſhen to mankinde, wythout great traueyle, great tylth, and longe abydyng tyme, comen not out of the earth, and it with ſeede to forne ordeyned ſuch herbes to make ſprīg and forth growe. Ryght ſo the perfite bliſſe, that we haue in meanyng of duryng time to abyde maye not come ſo lyghtlye, but wyth great traueyle and ryght beſytylth, and yet good feed to be ſowe, for ofte the croppe fayleth of bad ſeed, be it neuer ſo wel traueyled. And thylke blyſſe thou ſpoke of ſo lyghtly in cōming, truely is not neceſſary nor abiding: and but it the better be ſtamped, and the venomous ieuſe out wrongen, it is likely to enpoyſonen all tho that therof taſten. Certes ryght bytter bene the herbes yt ſhewen fyrſte the yere of her owne kynde. well the more is the harueſt that yeldeth many graynes, tho longe & ſore it hath ben traueiled. what woldeſt thou demē if a mā wold yeue thre quarters of nobles of gold, that were a precious gyfte▪ Yee certes (ꝙ I). And what (ꝙ ſhe) thre quarters full of peerles? Certes (ꝙ I) yt were a rych gift. And what (ꝙ ſhe) of as mokel azure? (Quod I) a precious gyfte at ful▪ were not (ꝙ ſhe) a noble gyfte of all theſe at ones? In good fayth (ꝙ I) for wantynge of englyſh namynge of ſo noble a worde, I can not for preciouſneſſe yeue it a name. Ryghtfully (ꝙ ſhe) haſte thou demed, and yet loue knytte in vertue, paſſeth al the golde in thys erth. Good wil accordant to reaſon, with no maner properte maye be countreuayled, all the azure in the worlde is not to accompt in reſpecte of reaſon, loue that wyth good wyll & reaſon accordeth, wyth no earthly ryche ſe may not ben amenden. Thys yefte haſt thou yeuen I know it my ſelf and thy Magaryte thilke gyft hath receiued, in the which thing to reward ſhe hath her ſelfe bounde. But thy gyfte as I ſayd, by no maner rycheſſe maye be amended, wherfore wyth thynge yt maye not be amended, thou ſhalt of thy margarytes rightwiſeneſſe be rewardede. Right ſuffred yet neuer but euery good dede ſōtime to be yolde. Al wold thy Margarite with no rewarde the quite. Ryght that neuer more dieth thy mede in meryte woll puruey. Certes ſuch ſodaine blyſſe as thou firſt nēpneſt, ryȝ
                        •
                      wyl hem reward as the well is worthy, and though at thyne eye it ſemeth the rewarde yt deſert to paſſe, right can after ſende ſuch bytternes euēly it to reward: ſo ye ſodayne bliſſe by alwaies of reaſon in great goodnes may not ben accompted, but bliſſe long, both long it abydeth, & endleſſe it wol laſt. Se why thy wyl is endeleſſe, for if thou louedeſt euer, thy

wyll is euer there tabyde and neuer more to chaunge: euenhed of rewarde muſt ben done by ryght, than muſte nedes thy grace & thys bliſſe endeles in ioy to vnbide. Euēlich diſeſe aſketh euēlych ioy, which haſtely thou ſhalt haue. A (ꝙ I) it ſuffiſeth not thā a long good wyll, be it neuer ſo wel with reaſon medled, but yf it be in good ſeruice longe trauayled. And ſo throuȝ ſeruice ſhul men come to ye ioy and this me thynketh ſhulde be the wexing tree of whiche ye firſt meued.
               
               
                  
                     VEry trouth (ꝙ ſhe) haſt thou now cō
                     ceyued of theſe thinges in thyne hert haſtely ſhalt thou be able very ioye & parfite blyſſe to receyue. And nowe I wote wel thou deſyreſt to know ye maner of braū
                     ches, that out of the tree ſhulde ſpring. Therof lady (ꝙ I) hertely I you pray: for thā leue I woll, that right ſoone after I ſhall ataſte of the fruite that I ſo longe haue deſyred. Thou haſte herde (quod ſhe) in what wyſe this tree to forne this haue I declared, as in grounde and in ſtocke of wexinge. Firſte the grounde ſhuld be thy frewyl ful in thine hert & the ſtocke (as I ſaid) ſhuld be continuaūce in good ſeruice, by longe time in traueyle, tyl it were in greatneſſe right wel woxen. And whan this tree ſuch greatneſſe hath caught, as I haue reherſed: the braunches than that the frute ſhulde forth bring, ſpech muſt they be nedes in voice of prayer, in complayning wiſe vſed. Out alas (ꝙ I tho) he is ſoroufully wounded that hydeth his ſpeche and ſpareth his complayntes to make, what ſhall I ſpeke ye care: but payne euen lyke to hell, ſore hath me aſſayled, & ſo ferforthe in payne me thronge, that I leue my tree is ſeer, & neuer ſhal it frute forth bringe. Certes he is greatly eaſed, that dare his pryuy mone diſcouer to a trewe felowe, that cōninge hath & myȝt wherthrough his playnt in any thyng maye be amēded. And mokel more is he ioyed that with herte of hardyneſſe dare complayne to his Lady, what cares yt he ſuffreth, by hope of mercy with grace to be auaunced. Trewly I ſaye for me, ſyth I came this Margaryte to ſerue, durſt I neuer me diſcouer of no maner diſeaſe, and wel the later hathe myne hert hardied ſuch thinges to done, for ye gret bounties & worthy refreſhmentes that ſhe of her grace goodly without any deſerte on my halue ofte hath me rekened, & nere her goodneſſe the more wyth grace and wyth mercy medled, whiche paſſen al deſertes, traueyls, and ſeruinges, that I in any degree mighte endyte, I wolde wene I ſhulde be wythout recouer, in gettynge of thys blyſſe for euer. Thus haue I ſtylled my diſeaſe, thus haue I couered my care, that I brenne in ſorowfull anoy, as gledes and coles waſten a fyre vnder deed aſhen. Well the hoter is the fyre, that wyth aſhen it is ouerleyn: ryght longe this wo haue I ſuffred. Lo (ꝙ Loue) howe thou fareſt: me thynketh ye palaſy yuel hathe acomered thy wittes, as faſte as thou hyeſt forwarde, anone ſodaynly backwarde thou moueſt: Shall not yet al thy leudneſſe out of thy braynes? dull bene thy ſkylfull vnderſtādynges, thy wyll hath thy wyt ſo a mayſtred▪ woſte thou not well (ꝙ ſhe) but euerye tree in hys ſeſonable tyme of burionynge ſhewe his blomes fro wtin, in ſygne of what frute ſhulde out of him ſprynge, els the frute for yt yere men halte delyuered, be ye grounde neuer ſo good. And thouȝ the ſtock be mighty at the full, and the braunches ſeer and no burions ſhewe, farwell the gadiner he may pipe wt an yue leafe his frute is failed. wherfore thy braunches muſt burionen in preſēce of thy Lady, yf thou deſyre any fruite of thy ladyes grace, but beware of thy lyfe, yt thou no wodelaye vſe, as in aſkynge of thynges that ſtretchen in to ſhame, for than myghte thou not ſpede by no waye that I can eſpy. Vertue woll not ſuffre vyllanye out of hym ſelfe to ſprynge. Thy woordes maye not be queynt ne of ſubtell maner vnderſtandynge. Free wytted people ſuppoſen in ſuche poeſyes to be begyled, in open vnderſtandynge muſte euery worde be vſed. Voyce wythout clere vnderſtandynge of ſentence ſayeth Ariſtotle, ryght naught printeth in herte. Thy wordes than to a byde in herte, & clene in ful ſentence of trew meaning plattly muſt thou ſhewe & euer be obedient, her heſtes and her wyls to perfourme, and be thou ſet in ſuch a wytte to wete by a loke euer more what ſhe meaneth. And he that lyſte not to ſpeke, but ſtilly his diſeaſe ſuffre: what wōder is it tho he come neuer to his bliſſe? who yt traueileth vnwyſt, & coueyteth thing vnknowe, vnwetinge he ſhal be quyted, and wyth vnknowe thynge rewarded. Good Lady (ꝙ I than) it

hath oft ben ſene, that wethers & ſtormes ſo hugely haue fal in burionynge tyme, and by parte dureſſe han beaten of the ſprynges ſo clene, wherthroughe the fruite of thylke yere hath fayled. It is a great grace whan burions hā good wethers, their frutes forth to brynge. Alas than after ſuch ſtormes howe harde is it to auoyde, tyll efte wedrynge and yeres han maked her circute cours al about, er any fruite be able to be taſted he is ſhente for ſhame, yt foule is rebuked of hys ſpeche. He that is in fyre brenning ſore ſmarteth for diſeaſe. Him thynketh ful longe er the water come, that ſhulde the fyre quenche. Whyle men gone after a leche, the body is buryed. Lo howe ſemely this frute wexeth, me thinketh that of tho frutes maye no man ataſte, for pure bytterneſſe in ſauour. In thys wyſe bothe frute and the tree waſten away togyther, though mokel beſy occupacion haue be ſpent to brynge it ſo ferforth, that it was able to ſpring. A lyte ſpeche hath maked that al thys labour is in ydel. I not (ꝙ ſhe) wherof it ſerueth thy queſtion to aſſoyle, me thinketh the nowe duller in wittes, than whā I with the firſt mette, although a mā be leude cōmenly for a foole he is not demen, but if he no good wol lerne, ſottes & fooles le
                        •
                      lightly out of mynd, yt good that men teacheth hem. I ſayde therfore thy ſtocke muſte be ſtronge and in greatneſſe well herted, the tree is full 
                        •
                     eble that at the fyrſte dente falleth: and although frute faileth one yere or two, yet ſhal ſuche a ſeaſen come one tyme or other, that ſhall brynge out frute that is nothynge preterit ne paſſed there is nothyng future ne cō
                     myng, but all thinges togyther in that place bene preſent euerlaſtynge wythout any menyng, wherfore to God al thing is as now: and thoughe a thynge be nat in kyndely nature of thinges as yet, and yf it ſhuld be here after, yet euermore we ſhulde ſay God it maketh be time preſent, and nowe for no future ne preterit in hym maye be founde. wherfore hys wetynge and hys before wetynge, is al one in vnderſtandyng. Thā yf wetyng & before wetyng of God putteth in neceſſite to al thinges whiche he wotte or before wotte ne thyng after eternitie, or els after any time he woll or dothe of libertie but all of neceſſitie, which thing if thou wene it be ayenſt reaſon not thorowe neceſſitie to be or not to be, all thynge that God wot or before wot, to be or not to be, & yet nothyng defendeth any thing to be wyſt or to be before wyſt of hym in our wylles or oure doinges to be done, or els cō
                     mynge to be for fre arbitriment. whan thou haſt theſe declarations wel vnderſtand, thā ſhalt thou fynde it reſonable at proue, & that many thinges be not thorowe neceſſitie, but thorowe libertie of wyll, ſaue neceſſitie of fre wyl, as I to forne ſayd: & as me thynketh al vtterly declared. Me thynketh lady (ꝙ I) ſo I ſhulde you not diſpleaſe, & euermore your reuerence to kepe, that theſe thynges cōtrarien in any vnderſtanding, for ye ſayne ſomtyme is thorowe libertie of wyll & alſo thorow neceſſitie. Of this haue I yet no ſauour without better declaration. what wōder (ꝙ ſhe) is there in theſe thynges, ſythen al daye thou ſhalte ſe at thyne eye, in many thynges receyuen in hem ſelfe reuers: thorow diuers reaſons, as thus. I praye the (ꝙ ſhe) whych thinges bene more reuers than commen and gone: For yf I bydde the come to me, & thou come, after whan I bydde the go and thou go, thou reuerſeſt fro thy fyrſt commynge. That is ſoth (ꝙ I) & yet (ꝙ ſhe) in thy fyrſte alone by diuers reaſon was full reuerſynge to vnderſtande. As howe (ꝙ I) That ſhall I ſhewe the (ꝙ ſhe) by enſample of thynges that haue kyndely mouynge. Is there anye thinge that meueth more kyndely than doth the heuens eye whyche I clepe the ſunne. Sothly (ꝙ I) me ſemeth it mooſt kyndly to moue. Thou ſayeſt ſoth (ꝙ ſhe) Thā if thou loke to the ſunne, in what parte he be vnder heuen, euermore he heigheth him in mouing fro thylke place, and heygheth meuynge towarde thylke ſame place, to thylke place frō whyche he goth he heigheth commyng, and wythout any ceaſynge to that place he neigheth frō which he is chaunged & withdraw. But now in theſe thynges after diuerſitie of reaſon, reuers in one thyng may be ſey with out repugnaunce. wherfore in the ſame wiſe wythout anye repugnaunce by my reaſons to fore maked, al is one to beleue, ſomthinge to be thorowe neceſſitie commynge, for it is cōminge, and yet wyth no neceſſitie cōſtrayned to be commyng, but wyth neceſſitie that cometh out of fre wyll, as I haue ſayd. Tho lyſt me a lytle to ſpeke, & gan ſtynt my penne of my writyng, & ſayd in this wyſe. Trewly

lady as me thinketh, I can allege authorites great ye contrary your ſayenges. Iob ſayeth of mannes perſon, thou haſt put hys terme, whych thou myght not paſſe. Then ſaye I that no man may ſhorte ne length the day ordayned of hys doyng, altho ſomtyme to vs it ſemeth ſome man to do a thynge of free wyl, wherthorow hys deth he henteth. Naye forſoth (ꝙ ſhe) it is nothynge ayenſt my ſayenge for god is not begyled, ne he ſeeth nothynge whether it ſhal come of lyberte or els of neceſſite, yet it is ſaid to be ordeyned at god immouable, which at mā or it be done may be chaū
                     ged. Such thyng alſo is that Paule the apoſtel ſayth of hem that tofore were purpoſſed to be ſayntes, as thus, whych that god before wyſt, & hath predeſtined, conformes of ymages of hys ſonne, that he ſhulde be the fyrſte begotten, that is to ſay, here amonges many brethrē, & whom he hath predeſtyned, hem he hath cleped, and whō he hath cleped, hem he hath iuſtifyed, & whom he hath iuſtified, hem he hath magnifyed. This purpoſe after whiche they ben cleped ſayntes or holy in ye euerlaſtyng preſēt, wheris neither tyme paſſed ne tyme cōmynge, but euer it is only preſente, & nowe as mokel a momēt as ſeuen thouſande wynter, & ſo ayenwarde wythouten any meuyng is nothynge lych temporel preſence, for thīge yt there is euer preſent. Yet amōges you mē er it be in your preſence it is mouable thorowe lyberte of arbytremēt. And ryght as in the euerlaſtyng preſent no maner thing was ne ſhalbe, but only is, & nowe here in your tē
                     porel tyme, ſomthyng was & is, & ſhalbe, but mouynge ſtoundes, & in thys is no maner repugnaunce. Right ſo in the euerlaſtynge preſence nothynge may be chaūged: & in your tē
                     porel tyme other while it is proued mouable by lyberte of wil or it be do, wythoutē any incōuenience therof to folowe. In your tēporel tyme is no ſuch preſence as in the tother, for your preſent is done, when paſſed & to come gynnē entre, whych tymes here amōges you euerych eaſely foloweth other, but ye preſence euerlaſtyng dureth in onehed, wythout any ymaginable chaūgyng, & euer is preſent and nowe. Truely the courſe of the planetes & ouerwhelmynges of the ſonne in dayes & nightes, with a new gynnyng of his circute after it is ended, that is to ſayne, one yere to folow another. Theſe maken your trāſitory tymes wyth chaūgyng of lyues & mutation of people. But right as your tēporel preſence coueyteth euery place, & al thinges in euery of your tymes be cōteyned, & as now both ſey & wyſt to goddes very knowynge. Then (ꝙ I) me wōdreth why Paule ſpake theſe wordes, byvoice of ſignificatiō in tyme paſſed, that god his ſaītes before wyſt, hath predeſtined, hath cleped, hath iuſtifyed, & hath magnifyed: Me thynketh he ſhulde haue ſayde tho wordes in tyme preſent, & that had be more accordaunt to the euerlaſtynge preſent, thē to haue ſpoke in preterit voice of paſſed vnderſtandynge. O (ꝙ Loue) by theſe wordes I ſe well thou haſt lytel vnderſtādyng of ye euerlaſtyng preſence, or els of my before ſpoken wordes, for neuer a thing of tho thou haſt nēpned was to fore other or after other, but all at ones euenlych at ye god bē, & al together in ye euerlaſtīg preſent be nowe to vnderſtādyng, the eternal preſence, as I ſayd, hath encloſe together in one, al tymes, in which cloſe & one al thinges yt ben in dyuers tymes & in dyuers place
                        •
                      tē
                     porel wythout poſteriorite or priorite be cloſed therin perpetuel now, & maked to dwel in preſent ſight. But there thou ſayeſt yt Paule ſhulde haue ſpoke thilke forſaid ſentēce by tyme preſent, & that moſt ſhulde haue ben accordaunt to the euerlaſtyng preſence, why gabbeſt thou to thy wordes: Sothly I ſay Paul moued ye wordes by ſignificatiō of tyme paſſed, to ſhewe fully yt thylke wordes were not put for tēporel ſignification, for al thilk tyme were not thilk ſentēce tēporallich borne whiche that Paule pronounced god haue tofore knowe, & haue cleped then magnifyed, wherthorow it may wel be know that Paule vſed tho wordes of paſſed ſignificaciō, for nede & lacke of a word in mānes bodely ſpech betokenyng the euerlaſtynge preſence. And therfore worde is moſte ſemelyche in lykeneſſe to euerlaſtynge preſence, he toke his ſentēce for thynges that here beforne ben paſſed, vtterly be immouable, ylyke to ye euerlaſting preſēce. As thylke that ben there neuer mowe not be preſent, ſo thinges of time paſſed ne mowe in no wyſe not bē paſſed: but al thinges in your temporal preſence that paſſen in a lytel while ſhullen ben not preſent. So then in that it is more ſimilitude to the euerlaſtyng preſence, ſygnifycacion of tyme paſſed, then of tyme temporal preſent, & ſo more in accordaunce.

In this maner what thyng of theſe that ben don thorow fre arbytremēt, or els as neceſſary, holy wrytte pronoūceth, after eternite he ſpeketh, in which preſence is euerlaſting ſoth and nothyng but ſothe immouable, not after tyme, in which nought alway ben your wylles & your acts, & right as while they be nat, it is not nedeful hem to be: ſo oft it is not nedfull that ſomtyme they ſhulde be. As how (ꝙ I) for yet muſt I be lerned by ſome enſample Of loue (quod ſhe) woll I nowe enſample make, ſythen I know the heed knotte in that yelke. Lo, ſomtyme thou wryteſt no arte, ne arte then in no wyll to wryte. And ryght as whyle thou wryteſt not, or els wol not write it is not nedeful the to wryte, or els wylne to wryte. And for to make ye knowe vtterly, th
                        ••
                      thynges ben otherwyſe in ye euerlaſtyng preſence, thē in temporall tyme: ſe now my good chylde, for ſomthynge is in the euerlaſtynge preſence, then in temporel tyme, it was not in eternite tyme, in eterne preſence ſhal it not be Then no reaſon defēdeth, that ſomthyng ne maye be in tyme temporall mouynge, that in eterne is immouable. Forſothe it is nomore contrary ne reuers for to be mouable in tyme temporal, and mouable in eternite, then not to be in any tyme, and to be alway in eternite and haue to be or els to come in tyme temporel, & not haue be ne nought cōmyng to be in eternite. Yet neuer the later, I ſaye not ſomthynge to be neuer in tyme tēporel, that euer is eternite, but al onely in ſomtyme not to be. For I ſaye not thy loue to morne in no tyme to be, but to day alone I deny ne it to be, and yet neuer the later it is alwaye in eternite.
                  A ſo (quod I) it ſemeth to me that cōmyng thing or els paſſed here in your tēporal tyme to be, in eternite euer nowe & preſente oweth not to be demed, and yet foloweth nat thylke thynge, that was or els ſhalbe, in no maner therto ben paſſed, or els cōmyng: then vtterly ſhul we deny, for there wythout ceaſyng, it is in hys preſent maner. O (quod ſhe) myne own diſciple, now gynneſt thou able to haue the name of my ſeruaunt. Thy wytte is clered, away is now errour of cloude in vnconnyng, awaye is blyndneſſe of loue, awaye is thoughtfull ſtudy, of medlyng maners haſtly ſhalte thou entre into the ioye of me, that am thyne owne mayſtres. Thou haſte (quod ſhe) in a fewe wordes, wel and clerely concluded mokel of my mater. And ryght as ther is no reuers ne contrariouſtie in tho thynges, ryght ſo wythoutē any repugnaūce, it is ſayd ſomthyng to be mouable in tyme temporel, & for it be, that in eternite dwelleth immouable not a for
                        •
                      it be or after that it is, but wythout ceſſyng, for right nought is there after tyme, that ſame is there euerlaſtynge, that tēporallyche ſomtyme nys, and toforne it be it maye not be, as I haue ſayd. Nowe ſothlye (ꝙ I) this haue I wel vnderſtāde, ſo that nowe me thynketh that preſcience of god and fre arbytremēt wythouten any repugnaūce acorden, and yt maketh the ſtrength of eternite, which encloſeth by preſence duryng al tymes, and al thynges that ben, han ben, & ſhull ben in any tyme. I wolde nowe (ꝙ I) a lytel vnderſtād ſythen that all thyng thus beforne wot, whether thylke wetynge be of tho thinges, or els thylke thynges ben to ben of goddes wetyng and ſo of god nothynge is: and yf euery thing be thorowe goddes w
                        •
                     tynge, and therof take hys beynge, then ſhuld god be maker and author of badde werkes, & ſo he ſhuld not rightfully punyſhe yuell doynges of mankynde. (Quod Loue) I ſhal tel the thys leſſon to lerne myne owne tene ſeruaūt, the noble philoſophicall poete, in Englyſhe, whyche euermore hym beſyeth and trauayleth ryght ſore my name to encreſe, wherfore al that wyllen me good, owe to do him worſhip & reuerence both, truely his better ne his pete in ſchole of my rules conde I neuer fynde: He (ꝙ ſhe) in a treatyſe yt he made of my ſeruaūt Troylus, hath this mater touched, and at the full thys queſtyon aſſoyled. Certaynly hys noble ſayenges can I not amende: In goodnes of gē
                     tyll manlyche ſpeche, wythout any maner of nycite of ſtarteres ymaginacion in wytte and in good reaſon of ſentence he paſſeth al other makers. In ye boke of Troylus, the anſwere to thy queſtyon mayſte thou lerne, neuer the later yet may lyghtly thyne vnderſtandynge ſomdele ben lerned, if thou haue knowyng of theſe to fornſayd thiges, with that thou haue vnderſtandynge of two the laſt chapiters of thys ſeconde boke, yt is to ſay, good to be ſomthyng, and bad to want al maner beynge, for badde is nothynge els but abſence of good, & that god in good, maketh that good dedes be good, in yuel he maketh yt they ben but nauȝt that they ben bad: for to nothyng is badneſſe

to be. I haue (ꝙ I tho) ynough knowīg therī, me nedeth of other thinges to here, ye is to ſay how I ſhall come to my blyſſe ſo lōge deſired
               
               
                  
                     IN thys mater toforne declared (ꝙ loue) I haue well ſhewed, yt euery man hath fre arbytremēt of thynges in hys power to do or vndo what hym lyketh. Out of thys grounde muſt come the ſpire, that by proceſſe of tyme ſhall in greatneſſe ſprede, to haue braunches & bloſmes of warynge frute in grace, of whych the caſte and the ſauoure is endleſſe blyſſe in ioy euer to onbyde. Now lady (ꝙ I) that tree to ſet ſame wold I lerne So thou ſhalt (ꝙ ſhe) er thou departe hence. The fyrſt thynge thou muſt ſet thy werke on grounde ſyker and good, accordaunte to thy ſprynges. For yf yu deſyre grapes, thou goeſt not to the haſell, ne for to fetchen roſes, thou ſekeſt not on okes: and yf thou ſhalt haue hony ſoukles, thou leaueſt the frute of the ſoure docke Wherfore yf thou deſyre this blyſſe in parfyte 
                        •
                     oye▪ thou muſt ſet thy purpoſe there vertue foloweth, and not to loke after the bodely goodes, as I ſayd when thou were wryt
                        •
                     ng in thy ſeconde booke. And for thou haſt ſet thy ſelfe in ſo noble a place, and vtterly lowed in thyne herte the myſgoyng of thy fyrſt purpoſe, thys ſe
                        •
                     teles is the eſyer to ſprynge, and the more lyghter thy ſoule in grace to be bl
                        •
                     ſſed. And trewly thy deſyre, that is to ſaye thy wyll, algates mote ben ſtedfaſte in thys mater wythout any chaungynge, for yf it be ſtedfaſt, no man maye it voyde. Yes parde (ꝙ I
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ny wyll maye ben turned by frendes, and dyſeaſe of manace & thretnyng in leſynge of my lyfe and of my lymmes, & in many other wyſe, that nowe cometh not to mynde. And alſo it mote ofte ben out of thought, for no remembraunce may holde one thynge continually in herte, be it neuer ſo luſty deſyred.
                  Nowe ſe (ꝙ ſhe) how thy wyl ſhal folowe thy frewyl to be groūded cōtinuelly to abyde It is thy fre wil that thou loueſt and haſt loued, and yet ſhal louē thys Margaryte perle, and in thy wyl thou thinkeſt to holde it. Thē is thy wyl knyt in loue, not to chaūge for no newe luſt beſyde: thys wyll teacheth thyne hert frō al maner varyeng. But thē although thou be thretened in deth or els in otherwyſe yet is it in thyne arbitremēt to choſe, thy loue to voyde or els to holde: And thylke arbytrement is in a maner a iugement bytwene deſyre and thy herte. And yf thou deme to loue thy good wyl fayleth, then arte thou worthy no blyſſe that good wyl ſhulde deſerue: and if thou choſe contynuaunce in thy good ſeruyce then thy good wyll abydeth, nedes blyſſe folowīg of thy good wil muſt come by ſtrēgth of thylke iugement: for thy fyrſt wyl yt taught thyn hert to abyde, & halte it from theſchaūge wyth the reſon is accorded. Trewly this maner of wyl thus ſhal abyd, impoſſible it were to turne yf thy herte be trewe, & yf euery man dyligently the menynges of hys wyl cōſider, he ſhall wel vnderſtande that good wyl knyt wyth reaſon, but in a falſe herte neuer is voyded: for power & myght of kepyng thys good wyl is thorow lyberte of arbytremēt in hert, but goodwil to kepe may not fayle. Eke then yf it fayle, it ſheweth it ſelfe that goodwyl in kepyng is not there. And thus falſe wyll that putteth out the good, anone conſtrayneth the herte to accorde in louynge of thy goodwyll, & thys accordaūce bytwene falſe wyl & thyne herte, in falſyte ben lykened together. Yet a lytel wol I ſay the, in good wyll thy goodwylles to rayſe & ſtrength. Take hede to me (ꝙ ſhe) how thy wylles thou ſhalt vnderſtande. Right as ye han in your body dyuers membres, and fyue ſondrye wyttes, euerych apart to hys owne doyng, which thinges as inſtrumētes ye vſen, as your hādes aparte to handle, fete to go, tonge to ſpeke, eye to ſe: Ryght ſo ye ſoule hath in hym certayne ſterynges & ſtrengthes whych he vſeth as inſtrumētes to his certayne doynges. Reaſon is in the ſoule, which he vſeth thīges to know & to proue, & wil, which he vſeth to wilne: & yet is neither wyl ne reaſon al ye ſoule, but eueryche of hem is a thing by him ſelf in ye ſoule. And right as euerich hath thus ſinguler īſtrumētes by hē ſelfe, they han as well diuers aptes & dyuers maner uſynges, & thilke aptes mowē in wyll ben cleped affectiōs. Affectiō is an inſtrumēt of wyllyng in his apetites. Wherfore mokel folke ſayne, if a reſonable creatures ſoule any thing feruētly wylneth, affectuouſly he wylneth, & thus may wyl by terme of equiuocas in thre wayes be vnderſtād: One is inſtrmēt of wyllyng, another is affectiō of thys inſtrument: & the thyrd is vſe, yt ſetteth it a werke. Inſtrumēt of willyng is thilke ſtrēgth of the ſoule, which ye cōſtraineth to wylne, ryght as

reſon is inſtrumēt of reaſons, which ye vſen when ye loken. Affection of thys inſtrument is a thyng, by which ye be drawe deſyrouſlye any thyng to wylne in coueytous maner, all be it for the tyme out of your mynde: as yf it come in your thought thylke thyng to remē
                     bre, anone ye be wylling thilke to done or els to haue. And thus is inſtrument wyl, & affection is wyl alſo, to wylne thynge as I ſayd: as for to wylne helth, whē wyl nothing theron thiketh, for anon as it cometh to memorie it is in wyl, and ſo is affection to wylne ſlepe whē it is out of mynde, but anone as it is remembred wyl wylneth ſlepe, when his tyme cometh of yt doynge. For affection of wyll neuer accordeth to ſyckneſſe, ne alway to wake. Right ſo in a true louers affectiō of willyng inſtrument, is to wylne truth in hys ſeruyce, & this affection alway abydeth, although he be ſleping or thret
                        •
                     ed, or els not theron thinkyng, but anon as it cometh to minde, anone he is ſtedfaſt in that wil to abyde. Vſe of this inſtrument forſoth is another thyng by hym ſelfe, & that haue ye not but whē ye be doynge in wylled thyng by affect or inſtrumēt of wil purpoſed or deſyred, & this maner of vſage in my ſeruice wiſely nedeth to be ruled frō wayters wt enuy cloſed, frō ſpekers ful of iāgelig wordes, from proude folke & hautayne, that labes & innocentes both ſcornen & dyſpyſen. Thus in doyng varieth the actes of willing euerich from other, & yet ben they cleped wil, & the name of wyl vtterly owen they to haue as inſtrument of wyll is wyl, when ye turne into purpoſe of any thynge to don, be it to ſyt or to ſtande, or any ſuche thynge els. This inſtrument maye ben had, although affecte and vſage be lefte out of doynge, right as ye haue ſyght and reaſon, and yet alway vſe ye greateſt wyſedome in hem ſhall he be, and they in god. Nowe then when all falſe folke be aſhamed, which wenen al beſtialte & erthly thing be ſwetter and better to the body, then heuēly is to the ſoule: thys is the grace & the frute yt I longe haue deſyred, it doth me good the ſauoure to ſmel. Chriſt nowe to the I crye of mercy and of grace, and graunt of thy goodnes to euery maner reder full vnderſtādynge in thys leude pamflet to haue, and let no man wene other cauſe in thys werke, then is verely the ſoth: For enuy is euer redy all innocē
                     tes to ſhende, wherfore I wolde that good ſpeche enuye euermore hynder. But no man wene thys werke be ſufficiently maked, for goddes werke paſſeth mans, no mās wyt to perfit werke may by no way puruay thende: How ſhuld I thē ſo leude, ought wene of perfectiō any ende to get? Neuer the later grace glorie, & laude I yeld & put wt worſhypful reuerēces to yt ſothfaſt god ī thre, with vnite cloſed which yt the heuy lāgour of my ſyckneſſe hath turned into mirth of helth forecouer: for right as I was ſorowed thorow the gloton cloude of manyfolde ſyckly ſorowe, ſo myrth ayen comyng helth hath me gladed & greatly cōforted. I beſech & pray therfore, & I crye on goddes gret pyte & on hys mokel mercy, that thys preſent ſcorges of my fleſhe mow make medecyn & lech craft of my inner mans helth, ſo yt my paſſed treſpas & tenes, throughe wepyng of myne eyen ben waſh, & I boyded frō al maner dyſeſe, & nomore to wepe herafter, I now be kept thorow goddes grace: ſo th
                        ••
                      goddes hāde whych that mercyably me ha
                        ••
                      ſcorged, herafter in good plyte frō thens mercyably me kepe & defēde. In thys boke be many preuy thynges wympled & folde, vnneth ſhul leude mē the plytes vnwynde, wherfore I pray to the holy gooſt he lene of hys oynt mētes mens wyttes to clere, and for goddes loue no man wonder why or howe thys queſtion come to my mynde, for my great luſtye deſyre was of thys lady to be enfourmed, my leudneſſe to amende. Certes I knowe not other mennes wyttes what I ſhuld aſke, or in anſwere what I ſhulde ſaye, I am ſo leude my ſelfe, that mokel more lernynge yet me behoueth. I haue made therfore as I coud, but not ſufficiently as I wolde, & as mater yaue me ſentence, for my dull wytte is hyndered by ſtepmother of foryetynge, & wyth cloud of vnconnynge, that ſtoppeth the lyghte of my Margarite perle, wherfore it may not ſhyne on me as it ſhulde. I deſyre not onely a good reder, but alſo I coueyte & praye a good boke amender, in correction of wordes and of ſentence: and onely thys mede I coueyte for my trauayle, that euery inſeer and herer of thys leude fantaſye, deuoute oriſons and prayers to god the great iudge yelden, and prayen for me, in that wyſe that in hys dome my ſynnes mowe ben releaſed & foryeuen: He that prayeth for other, for him ſelfe trauayleth. Alſo I pray that euery man parfytly mowe knowe

thorowe what intencion of herte this tretyſe haue I drawe. How was it yt ſyghtfull Mā
                     na in deſerte to chyldrē of Iſrael was ſpirituall meate: bodely alſo it was, for mennes bodies it noriſheth. And yet neuer ye later Chriſt it ſygnifyed. Ryght ſo a iewell betokeneth a gemme, & that is a ſtone vertuous, or els a perle Margarite a womā betokeneth grace, lernyng or wyſedō of god, or els holy church Yf breed thorow vertue is made holy fleſhe, what is that our god ſayth? It is the ſpirete that yeueth lyfe, the fleſhe of nothynge it profyteth. Fleſhe is fleſhly vnderſtandyng: Fleſh wythout grace and loue nought is worth. The letter ſleeth, ye ſpirite yeueth lyfelich vnderſtādyng. Charite is loue, and loue is charyte, god graunt vs all therin to be frended. And thus the Teſtament of Loue is ended.
               
            
         
         
            ¶Thus endeth the Teſtament of Loue And here after foloweth The lamentatyon of Mary Magdaleyne.
            
               
                  PLonged in the wawe of mortall dyſtreſſe
               Alas for wo, to whom ſhall I compleyne
               Or who ſhall deuoyde thys great heuyneſſe
               Fro me wofull Mary, wofull Magdaleyne
               my lord is gon, alas who wrouȝt this treine
               This ſodeine chaūce, perſeth my hert ſo depe
               That nothing can I do, but wayle and wepe
            
            
               My lorde is gone, yt here in graue was layde
               After hys great paſſion, and deth cruell
               who hath hym thus agayne betrayde?
               Or what man here about can me tell
               where he is become, the prynce of Iſraell
               Ieſus of Nazareth, my goſtly ſocour
               My parfyte loue, and hope of all honour
            
            
               what creature hath hym hence caryed?
               Or howe myght thys ſo ſodeynly befall?
               I wolde I had here wyth hym taryed
               And ſo ſhulde I haue had my purpoſe all
               I bought oyntmentes full precious & royall
               wherwyth I hoped his corps to anoynted
               But he thus gone, my mynde is dyſpoynted
            
            
               whyle I therfore aduertyſe and beholde
               This pytous chaunce, here in my preſence
               Ful lytel maruayle though my herte be colde
               Conſydrynge lo, my lordes abſence
               Alas that I ſo full of negligence
               Shulde be founde, bycauſe I come ſo late
               All men may faye I am infortunate
            
            
               Cauſe of my ſorowe, mē maye vnderſtande
               (Quia tulerunt dominum meum)
               Another is, that I ne maye fonde
               I wotnere, Vbi poſuerunt eum
               Thus I muſte bewayle, Dolorem meum
               wyth herty wepyng, I can no better deſerue
               Tyl deth approche, my herte for to kerue
            
            
               My herte oppreſt wyth ſodeyne auenture
               By feruent anguyſhe is be wrapped ſo
               That longe thys lyfe I may not endure
               Such is my payne, ſuche is my mortall wo
               Neuertheleſſe, to what partye ſhall I go
               In hope to fynde myne owne turtyll true
               My lyues ioye, my ſouerayne Lorde Ieſu
            
            
               Syth all my ioye, that I call hys preſence
               Is thus remoued, nowe I am ful of mone
               Alas the whyle, I made no prouidence
               For thys myſhap, wherfore I ſygh & grone
               Socour to find, to what place might I gone
               Fayne I wolde to ſome man my herte breke
               I note to whom I may complayne or ſpeke
            
            
               Alone here I ſtande, ful ſory and ful ſadde
               which hoped to haue ſene my lorde & kynge
               Small cauſe haue I to be mery or gladde
               Remembrynge thys bytterfull departynge
               In thys worlde is no creature lyuynge
               That was to me ſo good and gracious
               Hys loue alſo then golde more precious
            
            
               Ful ſore I ſygh, wythout comforte agayne
               There is no cure to my ſaluation
               Hys brēnyng loue, my herte ſo doth cōſtraine
               Alas here is a wofull permutacion
               wherof I fynde no ioye nor conſolacion
               Therfore my payne all onely to confeſſe
               wyth dethe I feare woll ende my heuyneſſe
            
            
               Thys wo and anguyſhe is intollerable
               
                  Yf I byde here, lyfe can I not ſuſtayne
               Yf I go hence my paynes be vncurable
               wher hī to fynde, I knowe no place certayne
               And thus I not of theſe thynges twayne
               whych I maye take, & whych I may refuſe
               My hert is woūded heron to thynke or muſe
            
            
               A whyle I ſhall ſtande in thys mournyng
               In hope yf any vyſyon wol appere
               That of my loue might tel ſome good tiding
               whych into ioy, myght chaūge my wepynge there
               I truſt in his grace & hys mercy dere
               But at the leeſt, though I therwyth me kyll
               I ſhal not ſpare to wayle and wepe my fyll
            
            
               And yf that I dye in ſuche auenture
               I can nomore, but welcome as my chaunce
               My bones ſhall reſt here in thys ſepulture
               My lyfe, my dethe, is at hys ordinaunce
               It ſhalbe tolde in euerlaſtyng remembraūce
               Thus to departe, is to me no ſhame
               And alſo therof I am nothynge to blame
            
            
               Hope agaynſt me hath her courſe ytake
               There is nomore, but thus ſhall I dye
               I ſe ryght wel my lorde hath me forſake
               But in my cōceyte, cauſe knowe I none why
               Though he be farre hence, and nothyng nye
               Yet my wofull herte after hym doth ſeke
               And cauſeth teeres to ren down by my cheke
            
            
               Thynkyng alas, I haue loſt hys preſence
               whych in this worlde was al my ſuſtenaūce
               I crye and cal wyth herty dyligence
               But there is no wyght gyueth attendaunce
               Me to certifye of myne enquyraunce
               wherfore I wyll to al thys worlde bewraye
               Howe that my lorde is ſlayne & borne awaye
            
            
               Though I mourne it is no great wonder
               Syth he is al my ioye in ſpeciall
               And nowe I thynke we be ſo farre a ſonder
               That hym to ſe I feare neuer I ſhall
               It helpeth no more after hym to call
               Ne after hym to enquyre in any coſte
               Alas howe is he thus gone and loſte?
            
            
               The iewes I thynke full of myſery
               Sette in malyce, by theyr beſy cure
               wyth force and myght of gylefull trechery
               Hath entermyned my lordes ſepulture
               And borne awaye that precious fygure
               Leuynge of it nothynge, yf they haue done ſo
               Marred I am, alas what ſhall I do
            
            
               wyth theyr vengeaunce inſaciable
               Nowe haue they hym entreated ſo
               That to reporte it is to lamentable
               They bete hys body from toppe to the too
               Neuer man was borne that felte ſuche wo
               They wounded hym alas wyth al greuaūce
               The blode downe reyled in moſt habūdaūce
            
            
               The blody rowes ſtremed downe ouer all
               They hym aſſayled ſo malycyouſly
               wyth theyr ſcourges and ſtrokes beeſtyall
               They ſpared not, but ſmote inceſſauntly
               To ſatiſfye theyr malyce they were full beſy
               They ſpit in his face, they ſmote here & there
               He groned ful ſore, and ſwette many a tere
            
            
               They crowned him wt thornes ſharpe & kene
               The vaynes rent, the blode ran downe apace
               wyth bloode ouercome were both hys eyen
               And bolne with ſtrokes was his bleſſed face
               They hym entreated, as men without grace
               They kneled to hym, & made many a ſcorne
               Lyke helhoundes they haue hym al to corne
            
            
               Vpon a myghty croſſe in length and brede
               Theſe turmētours ſhewed theyr curſydneſſe
               they nayled hym wythout pyte or brede
               Hys precious bloode braſt out in largeneſſe
               They ſtrayned him alonge, as mē mercyleſſe
               The very ioyntes all to myne apparence
               Ryued aſonder, for theyr great vyolence
            
            
               All thys I beholdyng wt myne eyen twayne
               Stode there beſyde, wyth rufull attendaūce
               And euer me thought, he beyng in that paine
               Loked on me, wyth deedly councenaunce
               As he had ſayd in hys ſpeciall remembraūce
               Farewell Magdalen, departe muſt I nedes hens
               My herte is, Tāquā cera liqueſcens
            
            
               whych rufull ſyght when I gan beholde
               Out of my wytte I almoſt dyſtraught
               Tare my heere, my handes wrange & ſolde
               And of ye ſight my herte drāke ſuch a draught
               That many a fal ſwounyng there I caught
               I bruſed my body, fallyng on the grounde
               wherof I fele many a greuous woūde
            
            
               Thē theſe wretches, full of al frowardneſſe
               
                  Gaue him to drynke eyſell tempred with gal
               Alas, that poyſon full of bytterneſſe
               My loues chere cauſed than to appall
               And yet therof might he nat drinke at all
               But ſpake theſe wordes, as him thought beſt
               Father of heuen, Conſummatum eſt
            
            
               Than kneled I downe, in paynes outrage
               Clipping ye croſſe within myn armes twayn
               His bloode diſtylled downe on my vyſage
               My clothes eke the droppes dyd diſtayne
               To haue dyed for him I wolde full fayne
               But what ſhulde it auayle yf I dyd ſo
               Sythe he is, Suſpenſus in patibulo
            
            
               Thus my lorde full dere was all diſgyſed
               with bloode, payne, and woundes many one
               His veynes braſt, hys ioyntes all to ryued
               Partyng a ſonder the fleſhe fro the bone
               But I ſawe he hynge nat there alone
               For Cum iniquis deputatus eſt
               Nat lyke a man, but lyke a leprous beeſt
            
            
               A blynde knyght men called Longias
               wyth a ſpeare aproched vnto my ſouerayne
               Launſyng his ſyde full pytouſly alas
               That his precious herte he claue in twayne
               The purple bloode eke fro the hertes vayne
               Down rayled right faſt, in moſte ruful wyſe
               wyth chriſtal water brought out of paradyſe
            
            
               whan I behelde thys wofull paſſyon
               I wote nat howe, by ſodayne auenture
               My herte was peerſed with very compaſſyō
               
               That in me remayned no lyfe of nature
               Strokes of dethe I felte wythout meaſure
               My dethes woūde I caught, wt wo oppreſt
               And brought to poynt as my hert ſhuld breſt
            
            
               The woūde, hert, and blood of my darlyng
               Shall neuer ſlyde fro my remoriall
               The bytter paynes alſo of tourmentyng
               wythin my ſoule be grauen principall
               The ſpeare alas, that was ſo ſharpe withall
               So thrilled my herte, as to my felyng
               That body and ſoule were at departyng
            
            
               As ſone as I might I releued vp agayne
               My brethe I coude nat very well reſtore
               Felyng my ſelfe drowned in ſo great payne
               Both body & ſoul me thought were al to tore
               Vyolent falles greued me right ſore
               I wepte, I bledde, & with my ſelfe I fared
               As one that for his lyfe nothyng had cared
            
            
               I lokyng vp to that rufull Roode
               Sawe firſt the vyſage pale of that fygure
               But ſo pytous a ſyght ſpotted wyth bloode
               Sawe neuer yet no lyueng creature
               So it exceded the boundes of meaſure
               That mānes mynd, with al his wyttes fyue
               Is nothynge able, that payne for to diſeryue
            
            
               Than gan I there myne armes to vnbrace
               Vp lyftyng my handes full mournyngly
               I ſyghed and ſore ſobbed in that place
               Both heuen & erth might haue herde me crye
               wepyng, and ſayd alas inceſſauntly
               Ah my ſwete herte, my goſtly paramour
               Alas I may nat thy body ſocour
            
            
               O bleſſed lorde, howe feirſe and howe cruell
               Theſe curſed wightes nowe hath the ſlayne
               Kernyng alas thy body euerydell
               woūde within woūd, ful bytter is thy payne
               Nowe wolde that I might to the attayne
               To nayle my body faſt vnto thy tree
               So that of this payne thou might go free
            
            
               I can nat reporte ne make no reherſayle
               Of my demenyng, wyth the cyrcumſtaunce
               But wel I wote the ſpeare with euery nayle
               Thirled my ſoule by inwarde reſemblaunce
               whiche neuer ſhall out of my remembraunce
               Duryng my lyfe it woll cauſe me to wayle
               As ofte as I remembre that batayle
            
            
               Ah ye iewes, worſe than dogges rabyate
               what moued you thus cruelly him to aray
               He neuer diſpleaſed you nor cauſed debate
               Your loue and true hertes he coueyted aye
               He preched, he teched, he ſhewed ye right way
               wherfore ye lyke tyrantes wode & wayward
               Now haue him thus ſlayne for his rewarde
            
            
               Ye ought to haue remēbred one thing ſpecial
               His fauour, his grace, and his magnifycence
               He was your prince borne, and lorde ouer all
               Howe be it ye toke him in ſmall reuerence
               He was full meke in ſuffryng your offence
               Neuertheles ye deuoured him wt one aſſent
               As hungry wolues dothe the lambe innocēt
            
            
               where was your pyte, o people mercyleſſe
               
                  Armyng your ſelf with falſheed and treaſon
               On my lord ye haue ſhewed your woodneſſe
               Lyke no men, but beeſtes without reaſon
               Your malyce he ſuffred all for the ſeaſon
               Your payne wol come, thynke it nat to ſlacke
               Man without mercy of mercy ſhall lacke
            
            
               O ye traytours & mayntayners of madneſſe
               Vnto your folly I aſcribe all my payne
               Ye haue me depriued of ioye and gladneſſe
               So dealyng with my lorde and ſouerayne
               Nothyng ſhulde I nede thus to complayne
               If he had lyued in peace and tranquillyte
               whom ye haue ſlayne through your iniquite
            
            
               Farwel your nobleneſſe yt ſōtyme dyd rayne
               Farewel your worſhyp, glorie and fame
               Here after to lyue in hate and diſdayne
               Maruayle ye nat, for your treſpas & blame
               Vnto ſhame is turned all your good name
               Vpon you nowe woll wonder euery nacion
               As people of moſt. vyle reputacion
            
            
               Theſe wycked wretches, theſe hoūdes of hel
               As I haue tolde playne here in this ſentence
               were nat content my dere loue thus to quell
               But yet they muſte embeſyle his preſence
               As I perceyue by couert vyolence
               They haue him conueyed to my diſpleſure
               For here is lafte but naked ſepulture
            
            
               Wherfore of truthe and rightfull iugement
               That their malyce agayne may be acquyted
               After my verdyte and auyſement
               Of falſe murder they ſhall be endyted
               Of thefte alſo, whiche ſhall nat be reſpyted
               And in all haſte they ſhal be hanged & drawe
               I woll my ſelfe plede this cauſe in the lawe
            
            
               Alas yf I with true attendaunce
               Had ſtyll abydden with my lordes corſe
               And kept it ſtyll wyth trewe perceueraunce
               Than had nat befall thys wofull deuorſe
               But as for my payne welcome and no force
               This ſhall be my ſonge where ſo euer I go
               Departyng is grounde of all my wo
            
            
               I ſe right wel nowe in my paynes ſmerte
               There is no wounde of ſo greuous dolour
               As is the wounde of my carefull herte
               Sythe I haue loſte thus my paramour
               All ſwetneſſe is tourned in to ſour
               Myrthe to my herte nothyng may conuey
               But he that beareth therof bothe locke & key
            
            
               The ioye excellent of blyſſed paradyſe
               Maye me alas in no wyſe recomforte
               Songe of angell nothyng may me ſuffyſe
               As in myne herte nowe to make diſporte
               All I refuſe, but that I might reſorte
               Vnto my loue, the well of goodlyheed
               For whoſe longyng I trowe I ſhalbe deed
            
            
               Of paynfull labour and tourment corporall
               I make therof none exceptioun
               Paynes of hell I woll paſſe ouer all
               My loue to fynde in myne affectioun
               So great to him is my dilectatioun
               A thouſande tymes martred wolde I be
               His blyſſed body ones yf I might ſe
            
            
               About this worlde ſo large in all compace
               I ſhall nat ſpare to renne my lyfe duryng
               My fete alſo ſhall nat reſt in one place
               Tyll of my loue I may here ſome tidyng
               For whoſe abſence my hādes now I wryng
               To thinke on him, ceaſe ſhal neuer my mynd
               O gentyll Ieſu where ſhall I the fynde
            
            
               Ieruſalem wol I ſertche place fro place
               Syon, the vale of Ioſophath alſo
               And yf I fynde hym nat in all this ſpace
               By mount Olyuet to Bethany woll I go
               Theſe wayes woll I wander and many mo
               Nazareth, Bethleem, Mountana Iude
               No traueyle ſhall me payne hym for to ſe
            
            
               His blyſſed face yf I might ſe and fynde
               Sertche I wolde euery coſte and countrey
               The fardeſt parte of Egipt or hote Inde
               Shulde be to me but a lytell iourney
               Howe is he thus gone or taken away
               Yf I knewe the full trouthe and certente
               Yet from this care releaſed might I be
            
            
               In to wylderneſſe I thynke beſt to go
               Sith I can no more tidynges of him here
               There may I my lyfe lede to and fro
               There may I dwell, and to no man appere
               To towne ne vyllage woll I come nere
               Alone in woodes, in rockes, & in caues depe
               I may at myne own wil both wayle & wepe
            
            
               Myne eyen twayne withouten varyaunce
               
                  Shall neuer ceaſe, I promyſe faithfully
               There to wepe wyth great abundaunce
               Bytter teares rennyng inceſſauntly
               The whiche teares medled ful pitouſly
               wyth the very blode euer ſhall renne alſo
               Expreſſyng in myne herte the greuous wo
            
            
               worldly fode and ſuſtenaunce I deſyre none
               Suche lyueng as I fynde, ſuch woll I take
               Rotes that growen on the craggy ſtone
               Shall me ſuffyſe wyth water of the lake
               Than thus may I ſay for my lordes ſake
               (Fuerunt mihi lachrime mee)
               (In deſerto panes die ac nocte)
            
            
               My body to clothe it maketh no force
               A mournyng mantell ſhalbe ſuffycient
               The greuous woundes of hys pytous corſe
               Shalbe to me a full royall garnement
               He departed thus, I am beſt content
               His croſſe with nayles and ſcourges withal
               Shalbe my thought and payne ſpeciall
            
            
               Thus woll I lyue, as I haue here tolde
               Yf I may any longe tyme endure
               But I feare dethe is ouer me ſo bolde
               That of my purpoſe I can nat be ſure
               My paynes encreaſe wythout meaſure
               For of longe lyfe who can lay any reaſon
               All thyng is mortall, and hath but a ſeaſon
            
            
               I ſyghe full ſore, and it is ferre yfet
               Myne herte I fele nowe bledeth inwardly
               The blody teares I may in no wyſe let
               Sythe of my payne I fynde no remedy
               I thanke god of all yf I nowe dye
               His wyl perfourmed I holde me content
               My ſoule let hym take that hath it me lent
            
            
               For lenger to endure it is intollerable
               My wofull herte is enflamed ſo huge
               That no ſorowe to myne is comparable
               Sythe of my mynde I fynde no refuge
               Yet I hym requyre as ryghtfull iuge
               To deuoyde fro me the inwarde ſorowe
               Leſt I lyue nat to the nexte morowe
            
            
               wythin myne herte is impreſſed full ſore
               His royall forme, his ſhappe, his ſemelyneſſe
               His porte, his chere, his goodneſſe euermore
               Hys noble perſone wyth all gentylneſſe
               He is the welle of all parfytneſſe
               The very redemer of all mankynde
               Him loue I beſt, with hert, ſoule and mynde
            
            
               In his abſence my paynes full bytter be
               Rightwell I maye it fele nowe inwardly
               No wonder is though they hurte or ſlee me
               They cauſe me to crye ſo rewefully
               Myne herte oppreſſed is ſo wonderfully
               Onely for hym, whiche is ſo bright of blee
               Alas I trowe I ſhall hym neuer ſe
            
            
               My ioye is traſlate full farre in exile
               My myrthe is chaunged in to paynes colde
               My lyfe I thynke endureth but a whyle
               Anguyſhe and payne is that I beholde
               wherfore my handes thus I wrynge & folde
               In to this graue I loke, I call, I pray
               Dethe remayneth, and lyfe is borne away
            
            
               Nowe muſt I walke & wander here & there
               God wote to what partes I ſhall me dreſſe
               wyth quakyng herte, wepyng many a tere
               To ſeke out my loue and all my ſwetneſſe
               I wolde he wyſt what mortall heuyneſſe
               About myne herte reneweth more and more
               Than wolde he nat kepe pyte long in ſtore
            
            
               wythout hym I may nat long endure
               Hys loue ſo ſore worketh wythin my breſt
               And euer I wepe before thys ſepulture
               Sighyng ful ſore, as myne hert ſhulde breſt
               Duryng my lyfe I ſhall optayne no reſt
               But mourne & wepe, where that euer I go
               Makyng complaynt of all my mortall wo
            
            
               Faſt I crye, but there is no audyence
               My commyng hider was him for to pleaſe
               My ſoule oppreſt is here with his abſence
               Alas he lyſt nat to ſette myne hert in eaſe
               wherfore to payne my ſelfe withall diſeaſe
               I ſhall nat ſpare tyll he take me to grace
               Or els ſhall I ſterue here in this place
            
            
               Ones yf I myght wyth him ſpeke
               It were all my ioye, with parfyte pleſaunce
               So that I myght to him myne hert breke
               I ſhulde anone deuoyde all my greuaunce
               For he is the blyſſe of very recreaunce
               But nowe alas, I can nothyng do ſo
               For in ſtede of ioye naught haue I but wo
            
            
               His noble corſe within myne herfes rote
               
                  Depe is graued, whiche ſhall neuer ſlake
               Nowe is he gone, to what place I ne wote
               I mourne, I wepe, and all is for his ſake
               Sythe he is paſte, here a vowe I make
               wyth hertely promyſe, & therto I me bynde
               Neuer to ceaſe tyll I may hym fynde
            
            
               Vnto hys mother I thynke for to go
               Of her haply ſome comforte may I take
               But one thyng yet me feareth and no mo
               Yf I any mention of hym make
               Of my wordes ſhe wold trymble and quake
               And who coude her blame, ſhe hauīg but one
               The ſon borne away, the mother woll mone
            
            
               Sorowes many hath ſhe ſuffred trewly
               Syth that ſhe fyrſt conceyued hym and bare
               And ſeuyn thynges there be moſt ſpecially
               That drowneth her hert in ſorowe and care
               Yet lo, in no wyſe may they compare
               wyth this one nowe, the which yf ſhe knewe
               She wolde her paynes euerichone renewe
            
            
               Great was her ſorowe by mennes ſayeng
               When in the temple Symeon Iuſtus
               Shewyng to her, theſe wordes propheſieng
               (Cuam anumam pertranſidit glaoius)
               Alſo whan Herode that tyrant 
                     •
                  urious
               Her chylde purſued in euery place
               For his lyfe went neyther mercy ne grace
            
            
               She mourned whan ſhe knewe hym gone
               Ful long ſhe ſought or ſhe him founde ayene
               whan he went to dethe hys croſſe him vpon
               It was to her ſyght a rewefull payne
               whā he hong theron, betwene theues twayn
               And the ſpeare vnto his hert thruſt ryght
               She ſwouned, & to the grounde there pight
            
            
               Whan deed and blody in her lappe lay
               Hys bleſſed body, both handes & fete all tore
               She cryed out and ſayd, nowe welaway
               Thus arayde was neuer man before
               whan haſte was made his body to be bore
               Vnto hys ſepulture here to remayne
               Vnnethes for wo ſhe coude her ſuſtayne
            
            
               Theſe ſorowes ſeuyn, lyke ſwerds eueryone
               Hys mothers hert wounded fro ſyde to ſyde
               But yf ſhe knewe her ſonne thus gone
               Out of this worlde ſhe ſhuld with deth ryde
               For care ſhe coude no lenger here abyde
               Hauyng no more ioye nor conſolatioun
               Than I here ſtandyng in this ſtatioun
            
            
               Wherfore her to ſe I dare nat preſume
               Fro her preſence I woll my ſelfe refrayne
               Yet had I leuer to dye and conſume
               Thā his mother ſhuld haue any more payne
               Neuertheleſſe her ſonne wold I ſe ful fayne
               His preſence was very ioye and ſwetneſſe
               Hys abſence is but ſorowe and heuyneſſe
            
            
               There is no more, ſyth I may him nat mete
               whom I deſyre aboue all other thyng
               Nedes I muſt take the ſoure with the ſwete
               For of hys noble corſe I here no tydyng
               Full ofte I crye, and my handes wryng
               Myne herte alas, relenteth all in payne
               whyche wol braſt bothe ſenewe and vayne
            
            
               Alas howe vnhappy was this wofull houre
               wherin is thus myſpended my ſeruyce
               For myne entente and eke my trewe labour
               To none effecte may come in any wyſe
               Alas I thynke yf he do me dyſpiſe
               And lyſt nat to take my ſymple obſeruaunce
               There is no more, but deth is my fynaunce
            
            
               I haue him called, Sed non reſpondit mihi
               wherfore my myrth is tourned to mourning
               O dere lorde, Quid mali feci tibi
               That me to cōforte I fynde non erthly thing
               Alas, haue compaſſyon of my cryeng
               If fro me, Faciem tuam abſcondis
               There is no more, but Comſumere me vis
            
            
               wythin myne hert is grounded thy fygure
               That all this worldes horryble tourment
               May nat it aſwage, it is ſo without meaſure
               It is ſo brennyng, it is ſo feruent
               Remembre lorde I haue ben dilygent
               Euer the to pleaſe onely and no mo
               Myne herte is with the where ſoeuer I go
            
            
               Therfore my dere darling, Trahe me poſt te
               And let me nat ſtande thus deſolate
               (Quia non eſt, qui conſoletur me)
               Myne herte for the is diſconſolate
               My paynes alſo nothyng me moderate
               Nowe yf it lyſte the to ſpeke with me a lyue
               Come in haſt, for my hert a ſonder wyll ryue
            
            
               To the I profer lo my poore ſeruyce
               
                  The for to pleaſe after myne owne entent
               I offre here, as in deuout ſacrifyce
               My boxe replete with precious oyntment
               Myne eyen twayne, wepyng ſuffycient
               Myne herte with anguyſhe fulfylled is alas
               My ſoule eke redy for loue about to pas
            
            
               Naught els haue I the to pleaſe or pay
               For if myne hert were gold or precious ſtone
               It ſhulde be thyne without any delay
               wyth hertely chere yu ſhuldeſt haue it anone
               why ſuffreſt thou me than to ſtande alone
               Thou haſt I trowe my wepyng in diſdayne
               Or els thou knoweſt nat what is my payne
            
            
               Yf thou withdrawe thy noble dalyaunce
               For ought that euer I diſpleaſed the
               Thou knoweſt ryghtwel it is but ignoraūce
               And of no knowlege for certaynte
               If I haue offended lorde forgyue it me
               Gladde I am for to make full repentaunce
               Of all thyng that hath ben to thy greuaunce
            
            
               Myne herte alas, ſwelleth wythin my breſt
               So ſore oppreſt with anguiſhe & with payne
               That all to peces forſothe it woll breſt
               But yf I ſe thy bleſſed corſe agayne
               For lyfe ne dethe I can nat me refrayne
               If thou make delay thou mayſt be ſure
               Myne herte wol leape in to this ſepulture
            
            
               Alas my lord, why fareſt thou thus with me
               My tribulation yet haue in mynde
               where is thy mercy? where is thy pyte?
               whiche euer I truſted in the to fynde
               Sōtyme thou were to me both good & kynde
               Lette it pleaſe the my prayer to accept
               whiche with teares I haue here bewept
            
            
               On me thou oughteſt to haue very routh
               Syth for the is all thys mournyng
               For ſythe I to the aplyghted fyrſt my trouth
               I neuer varyed with diſcordyng
               That knoweſt thou beſt myne owne darling
               why conſtrayneſt thou me thus to wayle?
               My wo forſoth can the nothyng auayle
            
            
               I haue endured wythout variaunce
               Right as thou knoweſt, thy louer iuſt & trew
               with hert & thought aye, at thyne ordynaūce
               Lyke to the ſaphire alwaye in one hewe
               I neuer chaunged the for no newe
               why withdraweſt thou my preſence
               Sith all my thought is for thyne abſence
            
            
               wyth herte entier, ſwete lorde I crye to the
               Enclyne thyne eares to my petycioun
               And come, Velociter exaudi me
               Remembre myne hertes diſpoſitioun
               It maye nat endure in this conditioun
               Therfore out of theſe paynes, Libera me
               And where thou arte, Pone me iuxta te
            
            
               Lette me beholde, O Ieſu thy blyſſed face
               Thy faire glorious angelyke viſage
               Bowe thyne eares to my complaynt, alas
               For to conuey me out of this rage
               Alas my lorde, take fro me this dōmage
               And to my deſyre for mercy condiſcende
               For non but thou, may my greuaūce amende
            
            
               Nowe yet good lorde, I the beſeche and pray
               As thou rayſed my brother Lazarous
               Frome dethe to lyfe the fourth day
               Come ayen in body and ſoule precious
               As great a thyng mayſt thou ſhewe vnto vs
               Of thy ſelfe, by power of thy goodheed
               As thou dyd of hym, lyenge in graue deed
            
            
               Myne hert is wounded with thy charite
               It brenneth, it flameth inceſſauntly
               Come my dere lorde, Ad adiuuandum me
               Nowe be nat longe my payne to mulpiply
               Leſt in the meane tyme I departe and dye
               In thy grace I put bothe hope and cōfidence
               To do as it pleaſeth thy hye magnifycence
            
            
               Floodes of dethe, and tribulatyon
               In to my ſoule I fele entred full depe
               Alas that here is no conſolatioun
               Euer I wayle, euer I mourne and wepe
               And ſorow hath woūded myne hert ful depe
               O dere loue, no marueyle though I dye
               (Sagitte tue infixe ſunt mihi)
            
            
               Wandryng in this place, as in wylderneſſe
               No comforte haue I, ne yet aſſuraunce
               Deſolate of ioye, replete with fayntneſſe
               No anſwere receyuyng of myne enquiraūce
               Myne herte alſo graued wyth diſpleſaunce
               wherfore I may ſaye, O deus deus
               (Non eſt dolor ſicut dolor meus)
            
            
               Myne hert expreſſeth, Quod dilexi multum
               
                  I may nat endure though I wolde fayne
               For now, Solum ſupereſt ſepulchrum
               I knowe it right well by my huge payne
               Thus for loue I may nat lyfe ſuſtayne
               But o god, I muſe what ayleth the
               (Quod ſic repente precipitas me)
            
            
               Alas, I ſe it wyll none otherwyſe be
               Nowe muſt I take my leaue for euermore
               This bytter payne hath almoſt diſcōfyte me
               My loues corſe I can in no wyſe reſtore
               Alas to this wo that euer I was bore
               Here at his tombe now muſte I dye & ſtarue
               Dethe is aboute my herte for to carue
            
            
               My teſtament I wolde begyn to make
               To god the father, my ſoule I commende
               To Ieſu my loue, that dyed for my ſake
               My herte and all, bothe I gyue and ſende
               In whoſe loue my lyfe maketh an ende
               My body alſo to this monument
               I here bequeth, bothe boxe and oyntment
            
            
               Of all my wylles, lo nowe I make the laſt
               Right in this place within this ſepulture
               I wol be buryed whan I am deed and paſt
               And vpon my graue I woll haue this ſcripture
               Here within reſteth a gooſtly creature
               Chriſtes trewe louer, Mary Magdalayne
               whoſe hert for loue, brake in peces twayne
            
            
               Ye vertuous women, tender of nature
               Full of pyte and of compaſſyoun
               Reſorte I pray you, vnto my ſepulture
               To ſynge my di
                     •
                  ige with great deuotioun
               Shewe your charyte in this condicioun
               Syng with pyte, and let your hertes wepe
               Remembring I am deed and layde to ſlepe
            
            
               Than whan ye begyn to parte me fro
               And ended haue your mournyng obſeruaūce
               Remembre where ſo euer that ye go
               Alway to ſertche and make due enqueraunce
               After my loue, myne hertes ſuſtenaunce
               In euery towne and in euery vyllage
               Yf ye maye here of this noble ymage
            
            
               And yf it happe by any grace at laſte
               That ye my treweloue fynde in any coſt
               Say that his Magdaleyne is deed and paſt
               For his pure loue hath yelded vp the goſt
               Say that of all thyng I loued him moſt
               And that I might nat this dethe eſchewe
               My paynes ſo ſore dyde euer renewe
            
            
               And in token of loue perpetuall
               whan I am buryed in this place preſent
               Take out myne hert, the very rote and all
               And cloſe it within this boxe of oyntment
               To my dere loue make therof a preſent
               Knelyng downe with wordes lamentable
               Do your meſſage, ſpeke fayre and tretable
            
            
               Say that to him my ſelfe I commende
               A thouſande tymes with herte ſo free
               This poore token ſay to hym I ſende
               Pleaſeth his goodneſſe to take it in gree
               It is hys owne of ryght, it is hys ſee
               whyche he aſked, whan he ſayd longe before
               Gyue me thy herte, and I deſyre no more
            
            
               A due my lorde, my loue ſo fayre of face
               A due my turtel doue ſo freſhe of hue
               A due my myrthe, a due al my ſolace
               A due alas, my ſauyour lorde Ieſu
               A due the gentylleſt that euer I knewe
               A due my moſt excellent paramour
               Fayrer than roſe, ſweter than Lylly flour
            
            
               A due my hope of all pleſure eternall
               My lyfe, my welth, and my proſperite
               Myne herte of golde, my peerle orientall
               Myne adamant of parfyte charite
               My chefe refuge and my felycite
               My comforte, and all my recreatioun
               Farwell my perpetuall ſaluatioun
            
            
               Farewell myne Emperour celeſtyall
               Moſt beautyful prince of al mankynde
               A due my lorde, of herte moſt lyberall
               Farwell my ſweteſt, bothe ſoule and mynde
               So louyng a ſpouſe ſhall I neuer fynde
               A due my ſouerayne, and very gentylman
               Farewell dere herte, as hertely as I can
            
            
               Thy wordes eloquent flowing in ſwetneſſe
               Shall no more alas, my mynde reconforte
               wherfore my lyfe muſt ende in bytterneſſe
               For in this worlde ſhall I neuer reſorte
               To the, whiche was myne heuenly diſporte
               I ſe alas it woll none other be
               Nowe farwell the grounde of all dignite
            
            
               A due the fayreſt that euer was bore
               
                  Alas I may not ſe your bleſſed face
               Nowe welaway that I ſhal ſe no more
               Thy bleſſed vyſage, ſo replete wyth grace
               wherin is printed my parfyte ſolace
               A due myne hertes roote and al for euer
               Nowe farewel, I muſt from the diſceuer
            
            
               My ſoule for anguyſh is nowe full thurſty
               I faynt ryght ſore for heuyneſſe
               My lorde, my ſpouſe: Cur me dereliquiſti?
               Syth I for the ſuffre al thys diſtreſſe
               what cauſeth the to ſeme thus mercyleſſe
               Sith it the pleaſeth of me to make an ende
               (In manus tuas) my ſpirite I cōmende.
            
            ¶Finis.
         
         
            The Remedy of Loue.
            
               
                  
                     SEyng the manyfolde inconuenience
                  Fallynge by vnbridled proſperite
                  which is not tempred with moral prudence
                  Nothyng more welthy thā youthes frelte
                  Moued I am, both of ryght and equyte
                  To youthes wele, ſomwhat to write
                  wherby he may hym ſelfe ſafecondyte
               
               
                  Fyrſt I note, as thyng mooſt noyous
                  Vnto youth a greuous malady
                  Amonge vs called loue encombrous
                  Veryng yonge people ſtraungely
                  Ofte by force cauſeth hem to dye
                  Age is eke turmented by loue
                  Byneth the gyrdle, and not aboue
               
               
                  wherfore thys werke, which is ryght laborous
                  For age me nede not in hande to take
                  To youth me oweth to be obſequious
                  Nowe I begyn thus to worke for hys ſake
                  whych may the feruence of loue a ſlake
                  To the louer, as a mitigatyue
                  To hym that is none a preſeruatyue
               
               
                  That myghty lorde whych me gouerneth
                  Youth I meane, meaſure yf I pace
                  In euery mater whiche hym concerneth
                  Fyrſt as is behoueful, I woll aſke grace
                  And forth wythal in thys ſame place
                  Er I begyn, I wol knele and ſaye
                  Theſe fewe wordes, and hym of helpe pray
               
               
                  Flourynge youth, whych haſt auauntage
                  In ſtrength of body in luſt and beaute
                  Alſo a precellyng haſte aboue age
                  In many a ſinguler commodite
                  Howe be it one thyng he hath beyonde the
                  To thy mooſt profyte and greateſt auayle
                  which ſhlud ye cōduit, I meane ſad coūſayle
               
               
                  And yet good lorde, of a preſumption
                  I nyl depraue thy myght and deite
                  I lyue but vnder thy protection
                  I am thy ſubiecte, I weare thy lyuerie
                  For thou arte grounde of my proſperite
                  And freſheſt floure of al my garlonde
                  My ſinguler ayde, as I wel vnderſtonde
               
               
                  But as he that oweth hys lorde beſte ſeruice
                  And entyre fayth, his honour to ſupporte
                  Ryght ſo I ſpeke, and in none other wyſe
                  I knowlege my ſelfe one of the leſte ſorte
                  Of thy ſeruauntes, to our elders comforte
                  Drawe ſadde counſayle to they yf thou lyſt
                  The and thy power, who may than reſyſt
               
               
                  Fye on age, vnder wordes fewe
                  And his erconyous opinyon
                  what ſpekeſt of him, whyche ſayth moſt vntrew
                  Al youth to be of yl diſpoſition
                  Dampneth vs al wythout exception
                  And for a colerable auauntage
                  He ſayth in him reſteth counſayle ſage
               
               
                  Wel may ſadde counſayle in hym reſt
                  But yet hys dedes bene ferre therfro
                  He may ſay wyth our paryſhe preeſt
                  Do as I ſay, and not as I do
                  For I my ſelfe knowe one or two
                  wel ſtryken in age, for neyghbourhedde
                  wol to theyr neyghbours wyues bedde
               
               
                  He wyl in preſence of the yonge man
                  Her clyppe and kyſſe, yee and downe laye
                  To bleare hys eye, thus he ſayth than
                  O ſuffre yet olde Morel to playe
                  
                     Nowe haue I done that I can or may
                  Thus he ſaeth, her huſbonde to queme
                  That he nor no man ſhulde not miſdeme
               
               
                  In worde nor dede, nedeth hym not be coye
                  It is impoſſible that he do amyſſe
                  If the yonge mā ſpeke, anone he ſayeth boye
                  To rebuke age, beſemeth the not ywys
                  Thus hys olde face aye hys warant is
                  Al is in hym, ſleyght and ſubtylte
                  And ferre from reaſon I tel the
               
               
                  And ſhortly age is not aboue me
                  Age is impotent, and of no reſiſtence
                  Age vnweldy may not fyght nor flye
                  what were age wythout my defence
                  Sad counſayle ſayſt gyueth hym aſſiſtence
                  Reaſon is freſheſt where that I ame
                  wherfore in thy ſayeng thou art to blame
               
               
                  Syth reaſon to me is rather acompanyed
                  Than vnto age, whyche is the opinyon
                  Of euery wyſe man not to be denyed
                  And ſyth ſad counſayle procedeth of reaſon
                  Sad coūſaile in me hath his chefe mancion
                  Thys is no naye, but what is the ende
                  Of thys thy ſuaſion what doeſt entende
               
               
                  Age to compare vnto thyne excellence
                  I nyl preſume hym ſo to dignifye
                  Ye be not egal, howe be it experience
                  Him auauntageth, for ſhe moſt certaynly
                  Him teacheth what thyng to him is cōtrary
                  And oft to fore ſe it, and warely eſchewe
                  which thou neuer aſſaydeſt yet nor knewe
               
               
                  Experience maketh a man mooſt certayne
                  Of any thyng erthly, and of neceſſite
                  Sad counſayle requyreth certaynte playne
                  So ferre to moue thus wherto nede we
                  But to my purpoſe, as thou cōmaundeſt me
                  Shortly myne entente is thus, & none other
                  Vnder thy licence to counſayle my brother
               
               
                  Howe ſhuldeſt gyue any counſayle ſo yonge
                  Lacking experience vnto thyne owne ſpeche
                  I reporte me, I wote wel as for thy tonge
                  wyl ſerue the right wel, but than for to teche
                  I dout me leſt that thy wytte wol not reche
                  Youth & experience thou ſayeſt be not cōuert
                  Howe ſhuldeſt than teach
                        •
                      wel vnexpert
               
               
                  Scripture wytneſſeth that god wyl oft ſhyt
                  Fro the hye witted man, & ſhew it to ye childe
                  To hym I meane that of hys owne wyt
                  Preſumeth not, but is debonayre & mylde
                  By counſayle I entende vertue for to bylde
                  which of myne elders part haue I borowed
                  & part of experience, which I haue ſorowed
               
               
                  wel than, yf it be as thou letteſt fare
                  Shewe forth thy doctrine be not agaſt
                  I wol the ſupporte, loke thou not ſpare
                  Maugre age, though he frete or gnaſt
                  To aſke age counſayle herin were but waſt
                  Boldely begyn, go forth to thy proceſſe
                  Feare not ſyth thou arte of ſuch ſureneſſe
               
               
                  Graunt mercy lorde ſyth it the doth lyke
                  To licence me, nowe I wol and dare boldly
                  Aſſayle my purpoſe, wt ſcriptures autentike
                  My werke wol I groūd, vnderſet, & fortify
                  Aſpire my begynnyng, O thou woode fury
                  Allecto wyth thy ſuſters, and in eſpicial
                  To the mother of ielouſye Iuno I call
               
               ¶Explicit prologus.
            
            
               
                  
                     THis werke who ſo ſhall ſe or rede
                  Of any incongruite do me not impeche
                  Ordinatly behoueth me fyrſt to procede
                  In deduction thereof, in maner as the leche
                  His paciētes ſyckenes oweth firſt for to ſech
                  The which knowē, medicyne he ſhulde aply
                  And ſhortly as he can than ſhape a remedy
               
               
                  Ryght ſo by coūſayle, wyllyng the to exhort
                  O yong mā proſperous, which doth aboūde
                  In thy floures of luſt belongeth on the ſorte
                  Me fyrſt to cōſider what is roote & grounde
                  Of thy miſchefe, whiche is playnly founde
                  woman farced wyth fraude and diſceyte
                  To thy confuſyon mooſt allectyue bayte
               
               
                  Flye the miſwoman, leſt ſhe the diſceyue
                  thus ſayth Salomō, which tauȝt was fully
                  the falſheed of womē in his daies to cōceyue
                  The lippes of a ſtrūpet ben ſweter thā hony
                  Her throte he ſaith ſuppled wt oyle of flatery
                  Howe be it the ende and effecte of al
                  Byttrer is than any wormwode or gall
               
               
                  
                  Flye the miſwoman, louyng thy lyfe
                  ware the ſtraungers blande eloquence
                  Straunge I cal her that is not thy wyfe
                  Of her beautie haue me no concupiſcence
                  Her countenaunce, pretendyng beneuolence
                  Beware her ſignes and eye ſo amiable
                  Holde it for ferme, they bene diſceyuable
               
               
                  Lo an enſample what women be
                  In theyr ſignes and countenaunce ſhortly
                  I wol ſhewe the howe louers thre
                  Loued one woman ryght entierly
                  Eche of them knewe others malady
                  wherfore was al theyr dayly labour
                  who coude appproche next in her fauour
               
               
                  At ſondrye ſeaſons, as fortune requyreth
                  Seuerally they came to ſe her welfare
                  But ones it hapened, loue them ſo fyreth
                  To ſe theyr lady they al wolde not ſpare
                  Of others comyng none of them were ware
                  Tyl al they mette, where as they in place
                  Of her lady ſawe the deſyred face
               
               
                  To ſupper ſette, ful ſmally they ete
                  Full ſobre and demure in countenaunce
                  For there taryed none of hem for any mete
                  But on hys lady to gyue attendaunce
                  And in ſecrete wyſe ſome ſignifyaunce
                  Of loue to haue, whych parceyuyng ſhe
                  Fetely executed thus her properte
               
               
                  In due ſeaſon, as ſhe alway eſpyed
                  Euery thyng to execute conueniently
                  Her owne louer fyrſt frendly ſhe eyed
                  The ſeconde ſhe offred the cuppe curteſly
                  The thyrde ſhe gaue token ſecretly
                  Vnderneth the borde ſhe trade on hys fote
                  Through his entrayles tikled the herte rote
               
               
                  By your leue, myght I here aſke a queſtion
                  Of you my mayſtres that fewe louers trace
                  To you lykely belongeth the ſolucion
                  whych of theſe thre ſtode nowe in grace
                  Clerely to anſwere ye wold aſke long ſpace
                  The mater is doutful and opinable
                  To acertayne you I woll my ſelfe enable
               
               
                  Of the foreſayd thre my ſelfe was one
                  No man can anſwere it better than I
                  Hertely of vs beloued was there none
                  But wattes packe we bare al by and by
                  whych at the laſt I my ſelfe gan aſpye
                  And time as me thouȝt, thā I left the daūce
                  O thoughtful hert, great is thy greuaunce
               
               
                  Hence fro me hence, that me for to endyte
                  Halpe aye here afore, O ye muſes nyne
                  whylō ye were wont to be mine ayde & light
                  My penne to directe, my brayne to illumyne
                  No lenger alas may I ſewe your doctrine
                  The freſhe luſty meters, yt I wont to make
                  Haue bene here afore, I vtterly forſake
               
               
                  Come hyther thou Hermes, and ye furies al
                  which fer ben vnder vs, nigh the nether pole
                  where Pluto reigneth, O kyng infernal
                  Send out thine arpies, ſend anguyſh & dole
                  Miſery and wo, leaue ye me not ſole
                  Of right be preſent muſt paine & eke turmēt
                  The pale deth beſemeth not to be abſent
               
               
                  To me nowe I cal al thys lothſome ſorte
                  my paines tencreſe, my ſorowes to augmēt
                  For worthy I am to be bare of al comforte
                  Thus ſyth I haue conſumed and miſpent
                  Not only my daies, but my fiuefolde talent
                  yt my lorde cōmitted me, I can not recōpence
                  I may not to derely abye my negligence.
               
               
                  By the path of penaunce yet wol I reuert
                  To the welle of grace, mercy there to fetche
                  Diſpiſeſt not god the meke contrite hert
                  Of the cocke crow, alas yt I wolde not retch
                  And yet it is not late in the ſeconde wetche
                  Mercy ſhal I purchace by inceſſaunt crieng
                  The mercyes of our lorde euer ſhal I ſyng
               
               
                  But well mayſt thou wayle wicked woman
                  that thou ſhuldeſt diſceyue thus any innocēt
                  And in recompence of my ſynne, ſo as I can
                  To al mē wol I make & leue this monumēt
                  in ſhewing part of thy falſheed is myn entēt
                  For al were to much, I can not wel I wote
                  The cauſe ſheweth playnly he yt thus wrote
               
               
                  If al the erth were parchement ſcribable
                  Spedy for the hande, and al maner wode
                  were hewed & proporcioned to pennes able
                  Al water ynke, in damme or in flode
                  Euery man beyng a perfyte ſcribe & good
                  The curſedneſſe yet and diſceyte of women
                  Coude not be ſhewed by the meane of penne
               
               
                  
                  I flye at odyous reſemblaunces
                  The dyuels bronde cal women I myght
                  wherby man is encenſed to miſchaunce
                  Or a ſtynkyng roſe that fayre is in ſyght
                  Or deedly empoyſon, lyke the ſuger whyte
                  whych by hys ſwetneſſe cauſeth man to taſt
                  and ſodaynly ſleeth & brīgeth him to his laſt
               
               
                  It is not my maner to vſe ſuch langage
                  But thys my doctrine, as I may laufully
                  I wol holy grounde wyth auctoritie ſage
                  wyllynge both wyſdom and vertue edify
                  wyne and women in to apoſtaſy
                  Cauſe wyſe men to fall, what is that to ſay
                  Of wyſdome cauſe them to forget the way
               
               
                  wherfore the wyſe man dothe the aduyſe
                  In whoſe wordes can be founde no leaſyng
                  wyth the ſtraunger to ſytte in no wyſe
                  which is not thy wyfe, fal not in clyppyng
                  wyth her, but beware eke of her kyſſyng
                  kepe wyth her in wyne no altercacion
                  Leſt that thyne hert fal by enclination
               
               
                  May a man thynkeſt hyde and ſafe lay
                  Fyre in his boſom, wythout enpayrement
                  & brēnynge of his clothes, or wheder he may
                  walke on hotte coles, his fete not brent
                  As who ſayth nay, and wherby is ment
                  Thys foreſayd prouerbe and ſimilitude
                  But that thou rydde the playnly to denude
               
               
                  From the flatterers forgettynge her gyde
                  The gyde of her youth, I meane ſhāfaſtnes
                  which ſhulde cauſe her maydenheed to abide
                  Her goddes beheſt eke ſhe ful recheleſſe
                  Not retchyng, cōmitteth it to forgetfulneſſe
                  Neyther god ne ſhame in her hauynge place
                  Nedes muſt ſuch a woman lacke grace
               
               
                  And al that neygh her in way of ſyn
                  To turne of grace ſhal lacke the influence
                  The pathes of lyfe no more to come in
                  wherfore fyrſt frende the wyth ſapience
                  Remembring god, and after with prudence
                  To thyne owne wele that they the kepe
                  Vnto thyne herte, leſte her wordes crepe
               
               
                  In his boke where I take my moſt grounde
                  And in hys prouerbes ſage Solomon
                  Telleth a tale, whych is playnly founde
                  In the fyfth chapiter, wheder in dede don
                  Or mekely feyned to our inſtruction
                  Let clerkes determyne, but thus I am ſure
                  Much lyke thyng I haue had in vre
               
               
                  At my wyndowe ſayth he I loked out
                  Fayre yonge people, where I ſawe many
                  Amonge hem all, as I loked about
                  To a yonge man fortuned I lent myne eye
                  Eſtraunged from his mynde it was lykely
                  By ye ſtrete at a corner, nygh his owne hous
                  He went about wyth eye ryght curyous
               
               
                  whā that the day his lyght gan wythdrawe
                  And the nyght approched in the twynlyght
                  Howe a woman came and met him I ſawe
                  Talkyng with him vnder ſhade of the night
                  Nowe blyſſed be god (ꝙ ſhe) of his myght
                  whych hath fulfylled myne hertes deſyre
                  Aſlaked my paines, which were hote as fire
               
               
                  And yet myne auctour, as it is ſkyl
                  To folowe, I muſt tel her arayment
                  She was ful nyce, ſoules lyke to ſpyl
                  As nyce in countenaunce yet as in garment
                  For ianglyng ſhe was of reſt impacient
                  wandryng ſtyl in no place ſhe ſtode
                  But reſtleſſe nowe and nowe out ſhe yode
               
               
                  Nowe in the houſe, nowe in the ſtrete
                  Nowe at a corner ſhe ſtondeth in awayte
                  Inceſſauntly beſy her praye for to gete
                  To brynge to the lure whom ſhe dothe layte
                  Now where I left, vnto my mater ſtrayte
                  I wol turne agayne, howe ſhe hym mette
                  Swetely kyſſed, and frendly hym grette
               
               
                  With wordes of curteſy many and diuerſe
                  Ryght as in parte I haue before tolde
                  Nowe as I can I purpoſe to reherſe
                  How ſhe flateryng ſayd wyth vyſage bolde
                  I haue made vowes & offringes manifolde
                  For thy ſake, O myne hert, O my loue dere
                  This day I thāke god al perfourmed were
               
               
                  Therfore I came out, and made thus aſtert
                  Very deſyrous your welfare to ſe
                  Now I haue ſene you, pleaſed is myne hert
                  In fayth ſhall none haue my loue but ye
                  As trewe as I am to you be to me
                  I praye you hertely dere herte come home
                  No man ſhulde be to me ſo welcome
               
               
                  
                  And in good fayth, the ſoth for to ſay
                  Your comynge to me ranne in my thought
                  Harke in your care, my bed freſhe and gay
                  I haue behanged wt tapettes newe bought
                  Frō Egypt, & from ferre countrees brought
                  Steyned wyth many a luſty freſhe hue
                  Excedyng golde or Iaſper in value
               
               
                  My chābre is ſtrowed with myrre & enſence
                  with ſote ſauoring aloes, & with ſynamome
                  Breathyng an aromatyke redolence
                  Surmountyng olybane, in any mans dome
                  Ye ſhall betwene my breſtes reſt yf ye come
                  Let vs haue our deſyred halſyng
                  For we maye ſafe be tyl in the mornyng
               
               
                  Myne huſbonde is not at home, he is went
                  Forth in hys iourney, a ferre way hence
                  A bagge with money he hath wt him hent
                  As hym thought nedeful for hys expence
                  Vnto my worde gyue fayth and credence
                  Nowe is the mone yonge, & of ſyght dulle
                  Er he come home it woll be at the fulle
               
               
                  Thus craftely hath ſhe hym beſette
                  wyth her lyme roddes, panter, and ſnare
                  The ſely ſoule caught in her nette
                  Of her ſugeed mouth, alas nothyng ware
                  Thus is he lefte graceleſſe and bare
                  Of helpe, comforte, and gooſtly ſocour
                  And furthermore as ſayth myne auctour
               
               
                  As a beeſt ledde to hys deth doth pant
                  Thys yonge man foloweth her in ye ſtoūde
                  And as a wanton lambe ful ignorant
                  Howe he is pulled and drawen to be boūde
                  Vnto the tyme he hath his dethes wounde
                  And lyke a byrde that haſteth to the grynne
                  Not knowyng the peryll of his lyfe therin
               
               
                  Now gentle ſōne ſaith Salomon take hede
                  My wordes in thy breſt kepe and make faſt
                  Let her not thy minde in her wayes miſlede
                  Be not diſceyued, leſe not thy taſt
                  Many hath ſhe woūded, many downe caſt
                  Many ſtronge by her hath loſt theyr breth
                  Her wayes, wayes of hel leadyng to deth
               
               
                  And in thys lytle naration precident
                  The womans manyfolde gylt I attende
                  The yonge man alas howe ſhe hath ſhent
                  Diſceyued her huſbāde, her owne next frēde
                  In theſe both her God ſhe doth offende
                  To breke her ſpouſayle, to her is of no weiȝt
                  furdermore to ſhew womans craft & ſleight
               
               
                  A woman at her dore ſate on a ſtal
                  To ſe folkes paſſe by ſtretes of the cite
                  wyth eye & countenaunce eke ſhe gan cal
                  If there be any prety one, come nere to me
                  Come hyther ye pygges nye, ye lytlel abe
                  At laſt ſhe ſayd to a yonge man hertel
                        •
                     ſſe
                  Of her diſceyte vnware and defenceleſſe
               
               
                  Much ſwetter ſhe ſayth, & more acceptable
                  Is drynke whan it is ſtolen priuely
                  Than whā it is taken in fourme auowable
                  Breed hyd and gotten ieoperdouſly
                  Muſt nedes be ſwete, and ſemblably
                  Venyſon ſtolne is aye the ſwetter
                  The ferther the narower fette the better
               
               
                  And whō thys womā ſayth Solomō feſtes
                  The yong mā woteth not whō ſhe doth fede
                  Of the derke depeneſſe of hel bene her geſtes
                  Beware yonge man therfore I the rede
                  And howe be it chefely for thy good ſpede
                  This werke to cōpile, I haue take in charge
                  I muſt of pyte my charyte enlarge.
               
               
                  wyth the ſely man which is thus begyled
                  Her huſband I meane, I wol wepe & wayle
                  His payneful infortune, wherby reuyled
                  Cauſeleſſe he is, neuer to conuayle
                  Euery man yonge & olde wyl hym aſſayle
                  with wordes of occaſyon, with ye loth name
                  And alas good ſoule, he nothynge to blame
               
               
                  But ſhe that coude ſo yl do and wolde
                  Hers be the blame for her demeryte
                  And leaue that opprobrous name cokolde
                  To apropre to hym as in diſpyte
                  Ranſake yet we wolde yf we myght
                  Of thys worde the trewe ortography
                  The very diſcent and ethymology
               
               
                  The wel and grounde of the fyrſt enuention
                  To knowe the ortography we muſt deryue
                  whych is coke and colde, in compoſicion
                  By reaſon, as nyghe as I can contryue
                  Than howe it is written we knowe belyue
                  But yet lo, by what reaſon and grounde
                  was it of theſe two wordes compounde
               
               
                  
                  As of one cauſe to gyue very iugement
                  Themylogy let vs fyrſt beholde
                  Eche letter an hole worde doth repreſent
                  As C, put for colde, and O, for olde
                  K, is for knaue, thus diuers men holde
                  The fyrſt part of thys name we haue foūde
                  Let vs ethymologyſe the ſecounde
               
               
                  As the fyrſt fynder mente I am ſure
                  C, for calot, for of, we haue O
                  L, for leude, D, for demeanure
                  The crafte of the inuentour ye may ſe lo
                  Howe one name ſignifyeth perſons two
                  A colde olde knaue, cokolde him ſelfe wening
                  And eke a calot of leude demeanyng
               
               
                  The ſeconde cauſe of thympoſycion
                  Of thys forſayde name was ielouſye
                  To be ielouſe is greateſt occaſyon
                  To be cokolde, that men can aſpye
                  And though the paſſyon be very fyrye
                  And of coutynuel feruence and hete
                  The pacient aye ſuffreth colde on hys fete
               
               
                  And who that is ielous, and aye in a drede
                  Is ful of melancoly and gally yre
                  Hys wyues noſe yf ſhe miſſe trede
                  He wolde cutte of, ye and conſpyre
                  His death who that wol her deſyre
                  whych ſhe perceyuyng braſteth hys gal
                  And anone hys great wodeneſſe doth fal
               
               
                  As ſone as ſhe hath knytte him that knot
                  Nowe is he tame that was ſo ramagious
                  Mekely ſytteth he downe and taketh his lot
                  Layd bene nowe hys lokes ſo furyous
                  And he but late as a cocke bataylous
                  Hote in hys quarel, to auenge hym bolde
                  Nowe is he called both coke and colde
               
               
                  Thys ſayeng, to al curteſy diſſonant
                  whych ſemeth that it of malyce grewe
                  In this rude treatyſe I wol not plant
                  As parcel therof, but onely to ſhewe
                  The opinion of the talcatyfe ſhrewe
                  whych in yl ſayeng is euer mery
                  No man as I therof ſo wery
               
               
                  But I as parcel of thys my boke
                  woll graffe in ſome ſadde counſayle wherby
                  The wedded man, yf he daigne to loke
                  In it, the better ſhal mowe him gye
                  And proued for hys ſayd infortunye
                  whyche as I haue ſayd, with hym cōplayne
                  I wol, as partener of hys great payne
               
               
                  As mooſt expedient to hys wele
                  I wolde al ielouſy were abiecte
                  If he be ielous, that he it concele
                  And in his labour be circumſpecte
                  To knowe her wayes, yf they ſeme ſuſpecte
                  And not for to breke, for one worde broken
                  She wol not myſſe but ſhe wol be wroken
               
               
                  Forbyd her not, that thou noldeſt haue done
                  For loke what thinge ſhe is forbood
                  To that of al thynges ſhe is mooſt prone
                  Namely yf it be yl and no good
                  Tyll it be executed ſhe is nygh wood
                  Such is woman, and ſuch is her feate
                  Her crafte by crafte, labour to defeate
               
               
                  If thou herafter, nowe a ſyngle man
                  Shuldeſt be ielous yf thou haddeſt a wyfe
                  wedde not but yf thou can truſt woman
                  For els ſhuldeſt lede a carefull lyfe
                  That thou mooſt lotheſt ſhulde be full ryfe
                  Yet I nyl gaynſay matrimony
                  But Melius eſt nubert quam vri.
               
               
                  That is to ſaye, better is in wedlocke
                  A wyfe to take, as the church doth kenne
                  Than to be vnder the fleſhes yoke
                  In fleſhly luſt alwaye for to brenne
                  But as I ſayd, for all ielous men
                  So they lyue chaſte, I holde it laſſe yll
                  That they wedde not, than them ſelfe ſpyll
               
               
                  The ſyngle man whych is yet to wedde
                  And not the wedded man, thus I rede
                  To warne him nowe he is to farre ſpedde
                  It is to late him for to forbede
                  But let him take as for his owne nede
                  Such counſayle as is hym before tolde
                  Theſe wordes folowyng eke ſhe beholde
               
               
                  Thy water to kepe the wyſe man doth teche
                  That thou in no wyſe let it haue iſſue
                  At a narowe ryfte, way it wol ſeche
                  And ſemblably the woman vntrewe
                  To gyue her frewalke in all wyſe eſchewe
                  If ſhe at large, not at thyne hande walke
                  ſhe wol the ſhame, thou ſhalt it not balke
               
               
                  
                  wedded or ſyngle, thus ſayth the wyſe man
                  Her that both day and nyght euermore
                  Lyth in thy boſome, wyfe or yet lemman
                  Loue not to hote, leſt thou repent ſore
                  Leſt ſhe the bryng into ſome yll lore
                  Thy wyfe not to loue yet I nyll ſupporte
                  But that thou dote not, thus I the exhort.
               
               
                  Lo, if thou loue her, loue eke thyne honeſtie
                  Be ſhe not ydle, for what woll betyde
                  Yf ſhe ſyt ydle, of very neceſſitie
                  Her mynde woll ſerche ferre and eke wyde
                  Namely yf ſhe be not accompanyde
                  How accōpanyed? not with yonge men
                  But with maydens I meane, or women
               
               
                  Mayden ſeruauntes be ryght conuenient
                  In houſe to helpe to do her ſeruyce
                  In whom ſhe maye vſe her cōmaundement
                  In the ſeaſon at her owne deuyſe
                  To teache hem good, yeue her thyne aduyce
                  To make them huſwyues, thus beſyneſſe
                  May yet refrayne her from ydleneſſe.
               
               
                  But byd her not that thou wolt haue do
                  Of thyne entent that myght be lettyng
                  But craftely encourage her therto
                  By other meanes, as by cōmendyng
                  And not to moche, but duly mengyng
                  Both prayſe and blame, and in thy reaſon
                  Fyrſt prayſe wyſely the place and ſeaſon
               
               
                  Of faythfull wyll and herte full tendre
                  One thynge I call into remembraunce
                  Agayne, which though my wyt be ſlendre
                  After my power and ſuffyſaunce
                  I purpoſe to make a purueyaunce
                  Syth women of nature ben chaungeable
                  Frayle, not ware, alſo diſceyuable.
               
               
                  Be it that thy wyfe be excellently good
                  That none be better of diſpoſicion
                  In proces of tyme ſhe might turn her mode
                  By ſome myſlyuers inſtigation
                  Dyuers men to thylke occupacion
                  Applyen dayly, mynde and eke herte
                  From her goodneſſe women to peruerte.
               
               
                  Yf thou eſpye any ſuſpect perſon
                  Drawe to thy wyfe, beware in all wyſe
                  To hym nor her of thy ſuſpection
                  Breke not one word, thouȝ thy herte agryſe
                  Kyndle no fyre, no ſmoke woll aryſe
                  Though he be of a corrupt entent
                  She paraduenture is not of aſſent.
               
            
            ¶Explicit
         
         
            The complaynt of Mars and Venus.
            
               
                  
                     GLaddeth ye louers in the morowe graye
                  Lo venus riſſē amōg you rowes rede
                  And floures freſh honour ye this daye
                  For whan ye ſunne vp riſt thā wil they ſpred
                  But ye louers that ly in any drede
                  Flyeth, leſt wycked tonges you eſpye
                  Lo yonde the ſunne, the candle of ielouſye
               
               
                  with teres blewe, and with a woūded hert
                  Taketh your leue, & wt ſaint Iohn toborow
                  Apeſeth ſomwhat of your ſorowes ſmert
                  Tyme cōmeth eft, yt ceſſen ſhal your ſorowe
                  The glad nyght is worth an heuy morowe
                  Saynt Valentyne a foule thus herd I ſing
                  Vpon thy day or ſunne gan vp ſprynge.
               
               
                  Yet ſange this foule, I rede you all awake
                  And ye that haue not choſen in humble wiſe
                  without repentyng cheſeth your make
                  Ye at the leeſt, renoueleth your ſeruyce
                  And ye that haue full choſen as I deuyſe
                  Confermeth it perpetually to dure
                  And pacyently taketh your auenture.
               
               
                  And for the worſhyp of this hye feeſt
                  Yet wol I in my bryddes wyſe ſynge
                  The ſentence of the complaynt at the leeſt
                  That wofull Mars made at the departing
                  Fro freſh Venus in a morownyng
                  whan Phebus with his fyry torches rede
                  Ranſaked hath euery louer in his drede.
               
               
                  whylom the thre heuens lorde aboue
                  
                     As well by heuenlyche reuolution
                  As by deſert hath won Venus his loue
                  And ſhe hath take hym in ſubiection
                  And as a mayſtreſſe taught hym his leſſon
                  Cōmaundynge hym neuer in her ſeruyce
                  He were ſo bolde no louer to diſpyſe
               
               
                  For ſhe forbade hym ielouſye at all
                  And crueltie and boſte and tyrannye
                  She made hym at her luſt ſo humble & tall
                  That whā ſhe dayned to caſt on him her eye
                  He toke in pacience to lyue or dye
                  And thus ſhe brydleth hym in her manere
                  with nothing, but wt ſcornyng of her chere.
               
               
                  who raygneth now in blyſſe but Venus
                  yt hath this worthy knyght in gouernaunce
                  who ſingeth now but Mars yt ſerueth thus
                  The fayre Venus, cauſer of pleaſaunce
                  He bynt hym to perpetual obeyſaunce
                  And ſhe bynt her to loue hym for euer
                  But ſo be that his treſpaſſe it diſceuer
               
               
                  Thus be they knyt, and reignen as in heuen
                  By lokyng moſt, as it fel on a tyde
                  That by her both aſſent was ſet a ſteuen
                  That Mars ſhall entre as faſt as he maye glyde
                  Into her next paleys to abyde
                  walkyng his courſe tyl ſhe had hym atake
                  And he prayed her to haſte her for his ſake.
               
               
                  Than ſayd he thus, my hertes lady ſwete
                  Ye knowe wel my myſchefe in that place
                  For ſykerly tyl that I with you mete
                  My lyfe ſtant there in auenture and grace
                  But whan I ſe the beautye of your face
                  There is no drede of deth may do me ſmerte
                  For all your luſt is eaſe to myne hert
               
               
                  She hath ſo great cōpaſſyon of her knyght
                  That dwelleth in ſolytude tyl ſhe come
                  For it ſtode ſo that thylke tyme no wyght
                  Counſayled hym, ne ſayd to hym welcome
                  That nygh her wyt for ſorowe was ouercō
                  
                  wherfore ſhe ſped as faſt in her way
                  Almoſt in one day as he dyd in twaye
               
               
                  The great ioye that was betwyxt hem wo
                  whan they be met, there may no tonge 
                        •
                     ell
                  There is nomore, but vnto bed they go
                  And thus in ioye and blyſſe I let hem dwel
                  This worthy Mars yt is of knyghthod wel
                  The flour of fairneſſe happeth in his armes
                  And venus kyſſeth Mars ye god of armes
               
               
                  Soiorned hath this Mars, of which I rede
                  In chambre amydde the palays priuely
                  A certayne tyme, tyl hym fel a drede
                  Through Phebus that was comen haſtely
                  within the palays yates ſturdely
                  with torch in hand, of which ye ſtremes briȝt
                  On venus chambre knockeden ful lyght
               
               
                  The chambre there as lay this freſſhe quene
                  Depaynted was with whyte boles grete
                  And by ye lyght ſhe knewe that ſhon ſo ſhene
                  That Phebus came to bren hem wt his hete
                  This ſelly Venus me dreynt in teares wete
                  Embraceth Mars, and ſayd alas I dye
                  The torch is com yt al this world wyl wrye
               
               
                  Vp ſtert Mars, hym lyſt not to ſlepe
                  whan he his lady herde ſo complayne
                  But for his nature was not for to wepe
                  In ſtede of teares from his eyen twayne
                  The fyry ſparcles ſprongen out for payne
                  And hent his hauberke yt lay hym beſyde
                  Flye wold he nouȝt, ne might him ſelf hyde.
               
               
                  He throweth on his helme of huge weyght
                  And gyrt hym wt his ſwerde, & in his hond
                  His mighty ſpere as he was wōt to fyght
                  He ſhaketh ſo, that it almoſt to wonde
                  Full heuy was he to walken ouer loude
                  He may not holde with Venus company
                  But bad her flyen leſt Phebus her eſpye
               
               
                  O woful Mars alas, what mayſt yu ſayne
                  That in the palays of thy diſturbaunce
                  Art left behynde in peryl to be ſlayne
                  And yet therto is double thy penaunce
                  For ſhe yt hath thyne hert in gouernaunce
                  Is paſſed halfe the ſtremes of thyne eyen
                  That yu nere ſwyft, wel mayeſt thou wep
                        •
                      & cr
                        •
                     en
               
               
                  Now flyeth Venus into Ciclinius tour
                  with voyde corſe, for feare of Phebus lyght
                  Alas, and there hath ſhe no ſocour
                  For ſhe ne foūde ne ſey no maner wyght
                  And eke as there ſhe had but lytle myght
                  wherfore her ſeluen for to hyde and ſaue
                  within the gate ſhe fled into a caue.
               
               
                  Darke was this caue, and ſmokīg as ye hell
                  
                     Nat but two paas within the yate it ſtode
                  A naturel day in darke I let her dwell
                  Now wol I ſpeke of mars furious & wode
                  For ſorow he wolde haue ſene his hert blod
                  Syth yt he might haue done her no cōpanye
                  He ne rought not a myte for to dye
               
               
                  So feble he wert for hete and for his wo
                  That nigh he ſwelt, he might vneth endure
                  He paſſeth but a ſter in dayes two
                  But neuertheleſſe, for al his heuy armure
                  He foloweth her that is his lyues cure
                  For whoſe departyng he toke greater yre
                  Than for all his brennyng in the fyre
               
               
                  After he walketh ſoftely apace
                  Complaynyng, that it pytie was to here
                  He ſayd, O lady bryght Venus alas
                  That euer ſo wyde a cōpas is my ſphere
                  Alas, whan ſhall I mete you hert dere
                  This twelue dayes of Apryll I endure
                  Through ielous Phebus this myſauēture
               
               
                  Now god helpe ſely Venus alone
                  But as god wolde it happed for to be
                  That whil ye weping venus made her mone
                  C
                        •
                     elimus rydyng in his chyuauche
                  Fro Venus Valanus might his paleys ſe
                  And venus he ſalueth, and maketh chere
                  And her receyueth as his frende ful dere.
               
               
                  Mars dwelleth forth in his aduerſitie
                  Complaynyng euer in her departyng
                  And what his cōplaynt was remēbreth me
                  And therfore in this luſty morownyng
                  As I beſt can, I wol it ſayne and ſynge
                  And after that I woll my leaue take
                  And god yeue euery wyght ioy of his make
               
            
            
               ¶The complaynt of Mars.
               
                  
                     THe ordre of complaynt requyreth ſkylfully
                  That yf a wyght ſhall playne pytouſlye
                  There mote be cauſe wherfore yt mē playne
                  Or men may deme he playneth folyly
                  And cauſeles alas that am not I
                  wherfore ye grounde & cauſe of al my payne
                  So as my troubled wyt may it attayne
                  I wol reherſe, not for to haue redreſſe
                  But to declare my grounde of heuyneſſe
               
               
                  The fyrſt tyme alas, that I was wrought
                  And for certayne effectes hyder brought
                  By hym that lordeth eche intelligence
                  I yaue my true ſeruyce and my thought
                  For euermo how dere I haue it bought
                  To her that is of ſo great excellence
                  That what wight yt ſheweth firſt her offēce
                  whan ſhe is wroth, & taketh of him no cure
                  He may not longe in ioye of loue endure
               
               
                  This is no fayned mater that I tell
                  My lady is the very ſours and well
                  Of beautie, luſt, fredome and gentylleſſe
                  Of ryche araye how dere men it ſell
                  Of all diſport in which men frely dwel
                  Of loue and play, and of benigne hūbleſſe
                  Of ſowne of inſtrumentes, & of al ſwetneſſe
                  And therto ſo well fortuned and thewed
                  yt through ye worlde her goodnes is ſhewed
               
               
                  what wonder is than though that I beſet
                  My ſeruyce on ſuch one that may me k
                        •
                     et
                  To wele or wo, ſith it lyth in her myght
                  Therfore myne hert for euer I vnto her het
                  Ne truly for my deth, ſhal I not let
                  To ben her trueſt ſeruaunt & her knyght
                  I flatter not, that may wete euery wyght
                  For this day in her ſeruyce ſhall I dye
                  But grace be, I ſe her neuer with eye
               
               
                  To whom ſhal I playne of my diſtreſſe
                  who may me help, who may my hert redres
                  Shall I complayne vnto my lady free
                  Nay certes, for ſhe hath ſuche heuyneſſe
                  For feare and eke for wo, that as I geſſe
                  In lytle tyme it wolde her bane be
                  But were ſhe ſafe, it were no force of me
                  Alas that euer louers mote endure
                  For loue ſo many perylous auenture
               
               
                  For though ſo be, that louers be as trewe
                  As any metall that is forged newe
                  In many a caſe hem tydeth oft ſorowe
                  Somtyme her ladyes wol not on hem rew
                  Somtyme yf that ielouſye it knewe
                  They myght lyghtly lay her heed to borow
                  Somtyme enuyous folke wt tanges horow
                  Deprauen hem alas, whom may they pleſe
                  But he be falſe, no louer hath his eaſe.
               
               
                  But what auayleth ſuche a longe ſermoun
                  Of auentures of loue vp and downe
                  
                     I woll retourne, and ſpeken of my payne
                  The poynt is this of my deſtructioun
                  My ryght lady, my ſaluacioun
                  Is in a fray, and not to whom to playne
                  O hert ſwete, O lady ſouerayne
                  For your diſeſe I ought wel ſwoun & ſwelt
                  Though I none other harme ne drede felt
               
               
                  To what fyne made the god that ſyt ſo hye
                  Beneth hym loue other company
                  And ſtrayneth folke to loue maugre her heed
                  And than her ioye, for ought I can eſpye
                  Ne laſteth not the twynklyng of an eye
                  And ſome haue neuer ioye tyll they be deed
                  what meaneth this, what is this myſtihed
                  wherto conſtrayneth he his folke ſo faſt
                  Thynge to deſyre, but it ſhulde laſt
               
               
                  And though he made a louer loue a thyng
                  And maketh it ſeme ſtedfaſt and duryng
                  Yet putteth he in it ſuche miſauenture
                  That reſt nys there in his yeuyng
                  And that is wondre that ſo iuſt a kynge
                  Doth ſuche hardneſſe to his creature
                  Thus whether loue breke or els dure
                  Algates he that hath with loue to done
                  Hath ofter wo than chaunged is the mone
               
               
                  It ſemeth he hath to louers enmitie
                  And lyke a fyſſher as men maye all daye ſe
                  Bayteth his angle hoke with ſome pleſaūce
                  Tyl many a fyſh is wode to that he be
                  C
                        •
                     aſed therwith, and than at erſt hath he
                  Al his deſyre, and therwith al miſchaunce
                  And though ylyne breke he hath penaunce
                  For with that hoke he wounded is ſo ſore
                  That he his wages hath for euermore
               
               
                  The broche of Thebes was of ſuche kynde
                  So full of rubies and of ſtones of Inde
                  That euery wyght that ſet on it an eye
                  He wende anon worth out of his mynde
                  So ſore the beautie wolde his hert bynde
                  Tyl he it had, him thought he muſt dye
                  And whan that it was his than ſhulde he dry
                  Such wo for dred ay, while yt he it had
                  That welnygh for the feare he ſhuld mad
               
               
                  And whan it was fro his poſſeſſyon
                  Than had he double wo and paſſyon
                  That he ſo fayre a iewel hath forgo
                  But yet this broche as in concluſyon
                  was not the cauſe of his confuſyon
                  But he that wrought it enfortuned it ſo
                  That euery wyght yt had it ſhulde haue wo
                  And therfore in the worcher was the vyce
                  And in the coueyture that was ſo nyce
               
               
                  So fareth it by louers, and by me
                  For though my lady haue ſo great beautie
                  That I was made to, I had get her grace
                  She was not cauſe of myne aduerſitye
                  But he that wrought her, as mote I the
                  That put ſuche a beautye in her face
                  That made me coueyten and purchace
                  Myne owne deth hym wyte I that I dye
                  And myne vnwyt yt euer I clambe ſo hye.
               
               
                  But to you hardy knyghtes of renowne
                  Syth that ye be of my deuyſyoun
                  Al be, I nat worthy to ſo great a name
                  Yet ſayne theſe clerkes I am your patrone
                  Therfore ye ought haue ſome compaſſioun
                  Of my diſeaſe, and take it nat a game
                  The proudeſt of you may be made full tame
                  wherfore I pray you of youre gentyleſſe
                  That ye complayne for myne heuyneſſe
               
               
                  And ye my ladyes that ben true and ſtable
                  By way of kynde ye ought to ben able
                  To haue pytye of folke that ben in payne
                  Now haue ye cauſe to cloth you in ſable
                  Syth that your empres the honorable
                  Is deſolate, wel ought ye to playne
                  Now ſhulde your holy teares fal & rayne
                  Alas your honour and your emprice
                  Nygh deed for drede, ne can her not cheuyce
               
               
                  Complayneth eke ye louers al in fere
                  For her that with vnfayned humble chere
                  was euer redy to do you ſocour
                  Cōplayneth her that euer hath be you dere
                  Cōplayneth beautye, fredome and, manere
                  Cōplayneth her that endeth your labour
                  Cōplayneth thylke enſample of al honour
                  That neuer dyd but gentleneſſe
                  Kytheth therfore in her ſome kyndneſſe.
               
            
            
               
               ¶The complaynt of Venus.
               
                  
                     THere nys ſo hygh comfort to my pleaſaunce
                  whan that I am in anye heuyneſſe
                  As for to haue layſer of remembraunce
                  Vpon the manhode and the worthyneſſe
                  Vpon the trouth and on the ſtedfaſtneſſe
                  Of hym whoſe I am all whyle I may dure
                  There ought to blame me no creature
                  For euery wight prayſeth his gentyleſſe
               
               
                  In hym is bountie, wyſdome & gouernaūce
                  wel more than any mans wyt can geſſe
                  For grace hath wolde ſo farforth him auaū
                     ce
                  That of knyghthode he is parfyt ryches
                  Honour honoureth hym for his nobleſſe
                  Therto ſo wel hath fourmed him nature
                  That I am his for euer I hym enſure
                  For euery wyght prayſeth his gentyleſſe
               
               
                  And notwithſtandyng all his ſuffyſaunce
                  His gentle hert is of ſo great humbleſſe
                  To me in worde, in werke & in countenaūce
                  And me to ſerue is all his beſyneſſe
                  That I am ſet in very ſykerneſſe
                  Thus ought I blyſſe wel myne auenture
                  Syth that hym lyſt me ſeruen & honoure
                  For euery wyght prayſeth his gentyleſſe
               
               
                  Now certes loue it is ryght couenable
                  That men full dere abye thy noble thynges
                  As wake a bed, and faſten at the table
                  weping to laugh, & ſyng in complayninges
                  And downe to caſt viſage and lokynges
                  Often to chaunge vyſage & countenaunce
                  Playe in ſlepyng, & dremen at the daunce
                  All the reuers of any glad felynge
               
               
                  Ielouſye he hanged by a cable
                  She wolde al knowe through her eſpyinge
                  There doth no wyght nothyng ſo reſonable
                  That all nys harme in her ymaginyng
                  Thus dere abought is loue in yenyng
                  which oft he yeueth without ordinaunce
                  As ſorowe ynough, and lytle of pleſaunce
                  All the reuers of any glad felynge
               
               
                  A lytle tyme his yefte is agreable
                  But full accombrouſe is the vſyng
                  For ſubtel ielouſye the diſceyuable
                  Ful often tyme cauſeth diſtourbyng
                  Thus ben we euer in drede and ſuffryng
                  In no certayne, we languyſhen in penaunce
                  And haue wel oft many an harde miſchaūce
                  All the reuers of any glad felyng
               
               
                  But certes, loue (I ſaye) not in ſuche wyſe
                  That for to ſcape out of your lace I ment
                  For I ſo longe haue ben in your ſeruyce
                  That for to lete of wyll I neuer aſſent
                  No force though ielouſye me tourment
                  Suffyſeth me to ſe hym whan I may
                  And therfore certes to myne endyng day
                  To loue hym beſt ſhal me neuer repent
               
               
                  And certes loue, whan I me wel auyſe
                  Of any eſtate that men may repreſent
                  Than haue ye made me through your fraū
                     chyſe
                  Cheſe the beſt that euer in erth went
                  Now loue wel hert and loke thou neuer ſtēt
                  And let the ielous put it in aſſaye
                  That for no payne woll I not ſay nay
                  To loue hym beſt, ſhal I neuer repent
               
               
                  Herte to the it ought ynough ſuffyſe
                  That loue ſo hye a grace to you ſent
                  To choſe the worthyeſt in all wyſe
                  And mooſt agreable vnto myne entent
                  Seke no ferther, neyther way ne went
                  Syth ye haue ſuffiſaunce vnto my paye
                  Thus wol I ende this cōplayninge or this laye
                  To loue hym beſt ſhal I neuer repent.
               
            
            
               ¶Lenuoye.
               
                  PRynces receyueth this complaynyng in gree
               Vnto your excellēt benignite
               Dyrecte after my lytle ſuſtyſaunce
               For elde, that in my ſpirit dulleth me
               Hath of indytyng al the ſubtiltie
               welnygh beraft out of my remēbraunce
               And eke to me it is a great penaunce
               Sith ryme in englyſh hath ſuche ſcarcitie
               To folowe worde by worde the curioſitie
               Of Granſonſtoure, of hem that make in Fraunce.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            
            ¶Hereafter foloweth the letter of Cupyde.
            
               
                  CUpyde, vnto whoſe commaundement
               The gentyl kynred of goddes on hye
               And people infernall bene obeddyent
               And al mortall folke ſeruē buſylye
               Of the goddeſſe ſone Cythera onely
               To all tho that to our deitie
               Ben ſubiectes, hertely gretyng ſende we
            
            
               In generall we wolde that ye knowe
               That ladyes of honour and of reuerence
               And other gentylwomen hauen ſowe
               Suche ſeed of cōplaynt in our audyence
               Of men that do hem outrage and offence
               That it our eares greueth for to here
               So pytous is theffect of this matere
            
            
               Paſſyng al londes on the lytle yle
               That cleped is Albyon, they moſt cōplayne
               They ſay that there is crop and rote of gyle
               So con tho men diſſymule and fayne
               with ſtandyng dropes in her eyen twayne
               whan that her hertes feleth no diſtreſſe
               To blynden women with her doubleneſſe.
            
            
               Her wordes ſpoken be ſo ſyghingly
               with ſo pytous chere and countenaunce
               That euery wyght that meneth truly
               Demeth they in hert haue ſuche greuaunce
               They ſay ſo importable is her penaunce
               That but her lady luſt to ſhewe hem grace
               They ryght anon muſt ſteruen in the place
            
            
               Ah lady myne they ſaye, I you enſure
               As doth me grace, and I ſhall euer be
               whyle that my lyfe may laſt and endure
               To you as humble and lowe in eche degree
               As poſſyble is, and kepe al thinges as ſecre
               Ryght as your ſelfe lyſt that I do
               And els myne hert mote braſt in two
            
            
               Ful harde it is to knowe a mans hert
               For outwarde may no mā the trouth deme
               whan worde out of mouth may none ſterte
               But it by reſō ſemed euery wyght to queme
               So it is ſayde of hert as it wolde ſeme
               O faythful woman ful of innocence
               Thou art diſceued by falſe apparence
            
            
               By proces moueth oft womans pytie
               wenyng all thyng were as theſe men ſay
               They graunt hem grace of her benignitie
               For that men ſhulde not for her ſake dey
               And with good hert ſet hem in the wey
               Of blyſful loue, kepe it yf they con
               And thus otherwhyle women beth ywon
            
            
               And whan this man ye pan hath by the ſtele
               And fully is in his poſſeſſyoun
               with that woman kepeth he nomore to dele
               After yf he may fynde in the toun
               Any woman his blynde affectioun
               Vnto beſtowe, euyl mote he preue
               A man for al his othes is harde to beleue
            
            
               And for that euery falſeman hath a make
               As vnto euery wight is lyght to knowe
               whā this traitour this womā hath forſake
               He faſte ſpedeth him vnto his felowe
               Tyl he be there his herte is on a lowe
               His falſe deſerte may him nat ſuſfyſe
               But of his trayſon telleth al the wyſe
            
            
               Is this afayre auaunt? is this honour?
               A man hym ſelfe accuſe thus and diffame
               Is it good to confeſſe hym ſelfe a traytour
               And brynge a woman to ſclaundros name
               And tell howe he her body hath do ſhame
               No worſhyp may he thus to hym conquer
               But great diſclaundre vnto hym and her
            
            
               To her nay, yet was it no reprefe
               For al for vertue was that ſhe wrought
               But he that brewed hath al this myſchefe
               yt ſpake ſo fayre, & falſly inward thought
               His be the ſclaundre, as it by reaſon ought
               And vnto her thanke perpetuel
               That in ſuche a nede helpe can ſo well
            
            
               Although through mens fleyght & ſubteltie
               I ſely ſymple and innocent woman
               Betrayde is, no wondre ſyth the cytie
               Of Troye, as the ſtory tell can
               Betrayde was through the diſceyte of man
               And ſet on fyre, and al downe ouerthrowe
               And finally deſtroyed as men knowe.
            
            
               
               Betray nat men cytes great and kynges
               what wight is it that can ſhape remedy
               Ayenſt theſe falſely purpoſed thynges
               who can the crafte ſuche craftes teſpy
               But man, whoſe wytte is euer redy taply
               To thyng that ſownyng in to falſehede
               women bethe ware of falſe men I rede
            
            
               And furthermore haue theſe men in vſage
               That where they nat lykely ben to ſpede
               Suche as they ben, with a double viſage
               They procuren for to purſewe her nede
               He prayeth him in his cauſe to procede
               And largely guerdoneth he his trauayle
               Lytell wote women howe men hem aſſayle
            
            
               Another wretche vnto his felowe ſayth
               Thou fyſſheſt faire, ſhe that the hath fyred
               Is falſe, inconſtaunt, and hath no fayth
               She for the rode of folke is ſo deſyred
               And as an horſe fro day to day ſhe is hyred
               That whan thou twynneſt fro her company
               Cometh another, and blered is thyne eye
            
            
               Nowe pricke on faſt, and ryde thy iourney
               while thou art there, for ſhe behynd thy backe
               So lyberall is, ſhe woll nothyng withſey
               But ſmartly of another take a ſmacke
               Thus fare theſe women all the packe
               who ſo hem truſteth hanged mote he be
               Euer they deſyre chaunge and nouelte
            
            
               Wherof procedeth this but of enuy?
               For he hun ſelfe her ne wynne may
               He ſpeketh her reprefe and vyllany
               As maunes blabbyng tong is wont alway
               Thus dyuers men full ofte make aſſay
               For to diſtourbe folke in ſondrye wyſe
               For they may nat eſchewe her empryſe
            
            
               Many one eke wolde for no good
               That hath in loue hys tyme ſpent and vſed
               Men wyſt yt his lady hys aſkyng withſtode
               Er that he were of her playnly refuſed
               Or waſte and vayne all that he had muſed
               wherfore he can none other remedy
               But on his lady ſhapeth hym to lye
            
            
               Euery woman he ſaythe is lyght to gete
               Can none ſay nay, yf ſhe be well yſought
               who ſo may leyſer haue wyth her to trete
               Of hys purpoſe ſhall he fayle nought
               But he on madneſſe be ſo depe brought
               That he ſhende all wyth open homlyneſſe
               That louen women, they doten as I geſſe
            
            
               To ſclaūder women thus what may profyte
               To gentylleſſe namely that hem arme ſhulde
               In defence of women, and hem delyte
               As that the ordre of gentylleſſe wolde
               If that a man lyſt gentyll to be holde
               He muſte all eſchewe that therto is contrary
               A ſclaundrous tonge is hys great aduerſary
            
            
               A foule vyce is of tonge to be lyght
               For who ſo moche clappeth gabbeth ofte
               The tonge of man ſo ſwyfte is and ſo wight
               That whan it is reyſed vp on lofte
               Reaſon is ſhewed ſo ſlowly and ſofte
               That it hym neuer ouertake may
               Lorde ſo theſe men ben truſty in aſſay
            
            
               All be it that men fynde one woman nyce
               Inconſtaunt, recheleſſe, and varyable
               Deignous, proude, fulfylled of malyce
               wythout faythe or loue, and diſceyuable
               Slye, queynt, falſe, in all vntruſt coulpable
               wycked, feirſe, or full of cruelte
               Yet foloweth it not that ſuche all women be
            
            
               Whan the hyghe god aungels fourmed had
               Amonge hem all, were there none
               That founden was malicious and bad?
               Yes all men wote there were many one
               That for her pryde fyll fro heuen anone
               Shuld me for thy yeue al angels proude name
               Nay, he that ye ſuſteyneth is to blame
            
            
               Of twelue apoſtels, one a traytour was
               The remenante yet good were and trewe
               So yf it happe men fynde percas
               O woman falſe, ſuche good is to eſchewe
               And deme not yt they al therfore be vntrewe
               I ſe well mennes owne falſeneſſe
               Hem cauſeth woman to truſt the leſſe
            
            
               O euery man ought haue an herte tendre
               Vnto a woman, and deme her honourable
               where hys ſhape be thycke or ſlendre
               Or he be good or badde, it is no fable
               Euery wight wote yt wytte hath reſonable
               That of a woman he diſcended is
               Than is it ſhame of her to ſpeke amyſſe
            
            
               A wicked tre good frute may non forthbring
               
                  For ſuche the frute is as is the tre
               Take hede of whō thou toke thy begynning
               Let thy mother be myrrour vnto the
               Honour her, yf thou wolte honoured be
               Diſpyſe her than not in no manere
               Leſt that therby thy wyckedneſſe apere
            
            
               An olde prouerbe ſayd is in englyſhe
               That byrde or foule is full diſhoneſt
               what that he be, and holde full churlyſhe
               That vſeth to defoule hys owne neſt
               Men to ſay well of women it is the beſt
               And naught to diſpyſe hem ne depraue
               If they woll her honour kepe or ſaue
            
            
               The ladyes euer complayne hem on clerkes
               That they haue made bokes of her diffame.
               In which they diſpyſe women & her werkes
               And ſpeke of hem great reprofe and ſhame
               And cauſeleſſe yeue hem a wicked name
               Thus they diſpyſed be on euery ſyde
               Diſclaundred and blowen on full wyde
            
            
               Tho ſory bokes maken mencion
               Howe women betrayde in eſpeciall
               Adam, Dauid, Sampſon, and Salomon
               And many one mo, who may reherce hem al
               The treyſon that they haue do and ſhall
               The worlde her malyce may not cōprehende
               As clerkes ſayne, for it hath none ende
            
            
               Ouyde in hys boke called Remedye
               Of loue, great reprofe of women writeth
               wherin I trowe he dyd great folye
               And euery wight yt in ſuch caſe him delyteth
               A clerkes cuſtome is whan he endyteth
               Of women, be it proſe, ryme, or vers
               Say they be wycked, all know he the reuers
            
            
               And ye boke ſcholers lerned in her chyldhede
               For they of women beware ſhulde in age
               And to loue hem euer be in drede
               Sythe to diſceyue is ſet all her corage
               They ſay of perel mē ſhuld caſt thauaūtage
               Namely of ſuche as men haue in bewrapped
               For many a man by women hath miſhapped
            
            
               No charge is what ſo theſe clerkes ſayne
               Of all her writyng I do no cure
               All her labour and trauayle is in vayne
               For bytwene me and my lady nature
               ſhall not be ſuffred, while ye world may dure
               Thus theſe clerkes by her cruell tyrannye
               On ſely women kythen her mayſtrye
            
            
               Whylom for many of hē were in my cheyne
               Tyed, and nowe for vnweldy age
               And vnluſt, may not to loue atteyne
               And ſayne now that loue is but very dotage
               Thus for they hem ſelfe lacken corage
               They folke excyce by her wicked ſawes
               For to rebell ayenſt me and my lawes
            
            
               But maugre hem that blame women moſte
               Suche is the force of myne impreſſyon
               That ſodaynly I can fell her boſte
               And all her wronge ymaginacion
               It ſhall not be in her election
               The fouleſt ſlutte in all the towne to refuſe
               If that me luſte, for al that they conne muſ
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               But her in herte as brennyngly deſyre
               As though ſhe were a ducheſſe or a quene
               So can I folkes hertes ſet on fyre
               And as me lyſt ſende hem ioye or tene
               They that to women be whet ſo kene
               My ſharpe perſyng ſtrokes how they ſmyte
               Shul ſele & know howe they kerne and by
                     •
                  e
            
            
               Parde this clerke, this ſubtyll Ouyde
               And many an other diſceyued haue be
               Of women, as it is knowe full wyde
               what no men more, and that is great deynte
               So excellent a clerke as was he
               And other mo that couden full well preche
               Betrapped were, for aught yt they coude tech
            
            
               And truſteth well that it is no meruayle
               For women knowen playnly her entent
               They wyſte howe ſoftly they coude aſſayle
               Hem, and what falſheed they in herte mente
               And thus they clerkes in her daunger hente
               wyth o venym an other is diſtroyed
               And thus theſe clerkes ofte were anoyed
            
            
               Theſe ladyes, ne theſe gentyls neuertheleſſe
               were none of tho that wrought in this wyſe
               But ſuche as were vertuleſſe
               They quytten thus theſe olde clerkes wyſe
               To clerkes leſſe ought ſuffyſe
               Than to diſpraue women generally
               For worſhyp ſhull they none get therby
            
            
               If that theſe men, that louers hem pretende
               
                  To women were faythfull, good, and trewe
               And dredde hem to diſceyue, or to offende
               women to loue hem wolde not eſchewe
               But euery day hath man an herte newe
               It on one abyde can no whyle
               what force is it ſuche a wight to begyle
            
            
               Men beare eke women vpon honde
               That lightly and without any payne
               They womē be, they can no wight wtſtonde
               That his diſeaſe lyſt to hem complayne
               They be ſo freele, they may hē not refrayne
               But who ſo lyketh hem may lightly haue
               So be her hertes eaſy in to graue
            
            
               To mayſter Iohan de Moone, as I ſuppoſe
               Than it was a leude occupacioun
               In makyng of the Romance of the roſe
               So many a ſlyghe ymagynacioun
               And perylles for to rollen vp and doun
               The longe proceſſe, ſo many a ſlyght cautell
               For to diſceyue a ſely damoſell
            
            
               Naught can I ſay, ne my wytte comprehēde
               That arte, payne, and ſubtylte ſhulde ſayle
               For to conquere, and ſone make an ende
               whan men a feble place ſhall aſſayle
               And ſone alſo to venquiſhe a batayle
               Of whiche no wight may make reſyſtence
               Ne herte hath none to make any defence
            
            
               Than mote folowe of neceſſyte
               Sythe arte aſketh ſo great engyn & payne
               A woman to diſceyue what ſo ſhe be
               Of cōſtaunce be they not ſo barayne
               As that ſome of theſe clerkes ſayne
               But they be as women ought to be
               Sadde, conſtante, and fulfylled of pyte
            
            
               Howe frendly was Medea to Iaſon
               In conqueryng of the f
                     •
                  ece of golde
               Howe falſely quyt he her trewe affection
               By whom vyctorie he gate as he wolde
               Howe may this man for ſhame be ſo bolde
               To falſen her, that fro his dethe and ſhame
               Him kept, and gate him ſo great priſe & name
            
            
               Of Troy alſo the traytour Eneas
               The faithleſſe wretch, how he him forſwore
               To Dydo, that quene of Cartage was
               That him releued of hys ſmertes ſore
               what gentylleſſe might ſhe haue do more
               Than ſhe with herte vnfayned to him kydde
               And what miſchefe to her therof after betydde
            
            
               In my legende of natures may men fynde
               who ſo lyketh therin for to rede
               That othe ne beheſt may man bynde
               Of reprouable ſhame haue they no drede
               In mannes herte trouth hath no ſtede
               The ſoyle is nauȝt, there may no trouth growe
               To women namely it is not vnknowe
            
            
               Clerkes ſayne alſo there is no malyce
               Vnto womans wycked crabbydneſſe
               O woman, how ſhalt thou thy ſelfe cheuyce
               Sythe men of the ſuche harme wytneſſe
               Beth ware women of her fykelneſſe
               Kepe thyne owne, what men clappe or crake
               And ſome of hem ſhal ſmerte I vndertake
            
            
               Malyce of women what is it to drede
               They ſlee no man, diſtroye no cytees
               Ne oppreſſe folke, ne ouerlede
               Betray empires, realmes, or duchees
               Ne byreuen men her londes ne her mees
               Enpoyſon folke, ne houſes ſet on fyre
               Ne falſe contractes make for no hyre
            
            
               Truſt, parfyte loue, entyre charyte
               Feruent wyll, and entalented corage
               All thewes good, as ſytteth well to be
               Haue women euer of cuſtome and vſage
               And wel they conne mānes yre aſwage
               with ſoft wordes, diſcrete & benigne
               what they be inward they ſhew outward by ſigne
            
            
               womans herte vnto no cruelte
               Enclyned is, but they be charytable
               Pytous, denoute, full of humylite
               Shamefaſte, debonayre, and amyable
               Dredefull, and of wordes meaſurable
               what women theſe haue not, parauenture
               Foloweth not the way of her nature
            
            
               Men ſayne our fyrſt mother natheleſſe
               Made all mankynde leſe his lyberte
               And naked it of ioye doutleſſe
               For goddes heſte diſobeyed ſhe
               whan ſhe preſumed to taſte of the tre
               That god forbade, that ſhe eate therof ſholde
               And ne had the dyuell be, nomore ſhe wolde
            
            
               The enuyous ſwellynge, yt the fende our foe
               
                  Had vnto man in herte for hys welth
               Sent a ſerpent, and made her for to go
               To diſceyue Eue, & thus was mans welthe
               Byrafte hym by the fende in a ſtelthe
               The woman not knowyng of that diſceyte
               God wote ful ferre was it from her conceyte
            
            
               Wherfore I ſay, this good woman Eue
               Our father Adam diſceyued nought
               There may no man for diſceyte it preue
               Properly, but that ſhe in herte and thought
               Had it compaſſed fyrſt or ſhe it wrought
               And for ſuche was not her impreſſyon
               Men may it call no diſceyte of her by reaſon
            
            
               Ne no wight diſceyueth, but he purpoſe
               The fende this diſceyte caſte, & nothynge ſhe
               Than is it wronge to deme or ſuppoſe
               That of hys harme ſhe ſhulde the cauſe be
               wyte the fende, and hys be the maugre
               And excuſed haue her innocence
               Saue onely that ſhe brake obedyence
            
            
               And touchyng this, full fewe men there be
               Vnnethes any dare I ſafely ſay
               Fro day to day, as men may all day ſe
               But that the heſte of god they diſobay
               Haue this in mynde ſyrs I you pray
               If that ye be diſcrete and reſonable
               Ye woll her holde the more excuſable
            
            
               And where men ſay in man is ſtedfaſtneſſe
               And woman is of her corage vnſtable
               who may of Adam beare ſuche a wytneſſe
               Telleth me this, was he not chaungeable
               They bothe weren in o caſe ſemblable
               Saue wyllyng the fende diſceyued Eue
               And ſo dyd ſhe not Adam by your leue
            
            
               Yet was this ſynne happy to mankynde
               The feude diſceyued was for all hys ſleyght
               For a
                     •
                  ȝt he coude him ī his ſleyghtes wynde
               For hys treſpace came fro heuen on heyght
               God, to diſcharge man of hys weyght
               Fleſhe and bloode toke of a virgyne
               And ſuffred dethe, hym to delyuer of pyne
            
            
               And god, to whō there may nothyng hyd be
               If he in woman knowen had ſuche malyce
               As men recorde of hem in generalte
               Of our lady of lyfe reperatryce
               Nolde haue be borne, but that ſhe of vyce
               was voyde, and full of vertue well he wyſte
               Endawed, of her to be borne hym lyſte
            
            
               Her heaped vertue hath ſuche excellence
               That all to leane is mannes faculte
               To declare it, and therfore in ſuſpence
               Her dewe prayſyng put nedes muſt be
               But thus I ſay, verely that ſhe
               Next god, beſt frende is that to man longeth
               The key of mercy by her gyrdle hongeth
            
            
               And of mercy hath euery man ſuche nede
               That reſyng that, farwell the ioy of man
               And of her power now taketh riȝt good hede
               She mercy may wel, and purchace can
               Diſpleſeth her not, honoureth that woman
               And other women all for her ſake
               And but ye do, your ſorowe ſhall awake
            
            
               In any boke alſo where can ye fynde
               That of the werkes of dethe or of lyfe
               Of Ieſu, ſpelleth or maketh any mynde
               That women hym forſoke for wo or ſtryfe
               where was there any wight ſo ententyfe
               Aboute hym as woman, proued none
               The apoſtels hym forſoken euerychone
            
            
               women forſoke hym not for all the faythe
               Of holy churche in woman lefte onely
               This is no lees, for thus holy writte ſaythe
               Loke and ye ſhall ſo fynde it hardely
               And therfore I may well preue therby
               That in woman reigneth ſtable conſtaunce
               And in men is the chaunge of varyaunce
            
            
               Thou precious gēme of martyrs Margarete
               That of thy bloode dredeſt none effuſyon
               Thou louer trewe, thou mayden manſuete
               Thou conſtante woman in thy paſſyon
               Ouercame the fendes temptacion
               And many a wight conuerted thy doctryne
               Vnto the faythe of holy god thou vyrgyne
            
            
               But vnderſtādeth this, I onely cōmende her nought
               By encheſon of her virgynyte
               Truſteth it came neuer in thought
               For euer werre I ayenſt chaſtyte
               And euer ſhall, but lo this meueth me
               Her louyng herte, and conſtante to her lay
               Driue out of remembraunce I ne may
            
            
               Nowe holdeth this for ferme, and for no lye
               
                  That this trewe and iuſte commendation
               Of women tell I for no flatterye
               Ne bycauſe of pryde or elation
               But onely lo, for this entention
               To yeue hem corage of perſeueraunce
               In vertue, and her honour to auaunce
            
            
               The more vertue, the laſſe is the pride
               Vertue ſo digne is and ſo noble in kynde
               That vyce and he woll not infere abyde
               He putteth vyces clene out of hys mynde
               He flyeth fro hem, he leaueth hem behynde
               O woman that of vertue arte hoſtreſſe
               Great is thy honour and thy worthyneſſe
            
            
               Than woll I thus conclude and defyne
               we you commaunde our myniſtres echone
               That redy ye be our heſtes to enclyne
               That of theſe falſe men our rebel fone
               Ye do puniſhment and that anone
               Voyde hem our court, & banyſh hem for euer
               So that therin more come they neuer
            
            
               Fulfylled be it, ceaſyng all delaye
               Loke there be none excuſacion
               wrytten in the luſty monthe of Maye
               In our paleys where many a millyon
               Of louers trewe haue habytacion
               The yere of grace ioyfull and ioconde
               A thouſande foure hundred and ſeconde.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            ¶Thus endeth the letter of Cupyde, and here after foloweth a balade in commendation of oure Lady.
            
               
                  A Thouſande ſtoryes coude I mo reherce
               Of olde poetes, touchyng thys matere
               Howe that Cupyde yt hertes gan ſo perce
               Of his ſeruauntes ſettyng hem in fere
               Lo here the fyne of therrour and the fere
               Lo here of loue the guerdon and greuaunce
               That euer with wo her ſeruaūtes do auaūce
            
            
               wherfore now playnly I wol my ſtyle dreſſe
               Of one to ſpeke, at nede that woll not fayle
               Alas for dole I ne can ne may expreſſe
               Her paſſyng priſe, and that is no meruayle
               O wynde of grace, now blow vnto my ſayle
               O auryate lycour of Cleo for to write
               My penne enſpyre of that I woll endyte
            
            
               Alas, vnworthy I am and vnable
               To loue ſuche one, all women ſurmountyng
               But ſhe be benigne to me and merciable
               That is of pyte the welle and eke the ſpryng
               wherfore of her in laude and in prayſyng
               So as I can, ſupported by her grace
               Ryght thus I ſay, knelyng tofore her face
            
            
               O ſterre of ſterres with thy ſtremes clere
               Sterre of the ſee, to ſhypmen lyght and gyde
               O luſty lyuyng moſte pleſaunt to apere
               whoſe briȝt beames ye cloudes may not hyde
               O way of lyfe to hem that go or ryde
               Hauen after tempeſt ſureſt vp to ryue
               On me haue mercy for thy ioyes fyue
            
            
               O rightfull rule, o bote of holyneſſe
               And lyghtſome lyne of pyte for to playne
               Original begynnyng of grace & al goodneſſe
               And cleneſt cōduyt of vertue moſt ſouerayne
               Mother of mercy, our trouble to reſtrayne
               Chambre and cloſet clenneſt of chaſtyte
               And named herbrough of the deyte
            
            
               O cloſed garden all voyde of wedes wycke
               Cryſtallyn welle, of clereneſſe clere cōſigned
               Fructyfyed olyue of foyles fayre and thycke
               And redolēt cedre moſt dereworthly digned
               Remembre on ſynners that to yt be aſſigned
               Or wicked fendes her wrath on hem wreche
               Lanterne of lyght, thou her lyues leche
            
            
               
               Paradyſe of pleſaunce, gladſome to all good
               Benigne braunchelet of the pyne tre
               Vynarie enuermayled, refreſher of our bote
               Lycour ayen al langour yt palled may not be
               Blyſfull blomy bloſome, bydyng in bounte
               Thy mantell of mercy on our myſerie ſprede
               And er wo awake wrappe vs vnder thy wed
            
            
               O rody roſyer, flouryng without ſpyne
               Foūtayne al fylthleſſe, as byrel currant clere
               Sōe drop of thy graceful dew to vs propyne
               O light without nebule, ſhining ī thy ſphere
               Medecyne to miſcheues, pucelle wtout pere
               Flambe downe the dolefull lyght of thyne influence
               Remēbring thy ſeruātes for thy magnifycēce
            
            
               Of al chriſten protectryce and tutele
               Returne of exiled put in the preſcripcion
               To hem that erren in the pathe of her ſequele
               To wery forwandred tent and pauylion
               To faynte and to freſhe the pauſacion
               Vnto vnreſty, bothe reſt and remedye
               Frutefull to all tho that in her allye
            
            
               To hem that rennen thou arte itenerarie
               O blyſfull brauie to knightes of thy werre
               To wery werkmen ſhe is diourne denarie
               Mede vnto maryners that haue ſayled ferre
               Laureate crowne ſtremyng as a ſlerre
               To hem that put hem in palaſtre for thy ſake
               Cours of her cōqueſt, thou white as any lake
            
            
               O myrthe of martyrs, ſwetter than ſytole
               Of confeſſours alſo rycheſt donatyfe
               Vnto virgynes eternall lauriole
               Afore all women hauyng prerogatyſe
               Mother and mayde, bothe wydowe & wyfe
               Of all the worlde is none but thou alone
               Nowe ſyth thou may, be ſocour to my mone
            
            
               O truſty turtle truefaſteſt of all trewe
               O curteyſe columbe, replete of all mekeneſſe
               O nyghtyngale with thy notes newe
               O popyniay pured wyth all clenneſſe
               O laueroke of loue, ſyngyng with ſwetneſſe
               Phebus awaytyng tyll on thy breſt he lyght
               Vnder thy wynge at domeſday vs dyght
            
            
               O rubye rubifyed in the paſſyon
               Of thy ſonne, vs haue amonge in mynde
               O ſtedfaſt dyametre of duracion
               That fewe feres any tyme might thou fynde
               For none to him was foundē halfe ſo kynde
               O hardy herte, o louyng creature
               what was it but loue that made yt ſo endure
            
            
               Semely ſaphre, depe loupe and blew ewage
               Stable as the loupe ewage of pyte
               This is to ſay the freſheſt of vyſage
               Thou loueſt vnchaunged hem that ſeruē the
               And yf offence or varyeng in hem be
               Thou arte aye redy vpon her wo to rewe
               And hem receyueſt wyth hert full trewe
            
            
               O goodly gladed whan that Gabriell
               wyth ioye the grette, that may not be nūbred
               Or halfe the blyſſe who coude write or tell
               whan the holy goſte to the was obumbred
               wherthrough fendes were bytterly encūbred
               O wemleſſe mayde embelyſhed in his byrth
               That man and aungel therof hadden myrth
            
            
               Lo here the bloſme and the budde of glorie
               Of whiche ye prophete ſo longe ſpake beforn
               Lo here the ſame that was in memorie
               Of Yſaye, ſo longe or ſhe was borne
               Lo here of Dauid the delycious corne
               Lo here the grounde of lyfe in to bylde
               Becomyng man our raunſom for to yelde
            
            
               O glorious vyole and vyte inuyolate
               O firy Tytan, perſyng with thy bemes
               whoſe vertuous briȝtues was ī breſt vrbrate
               That all ye world embelyſhed with ye lemes
               Cōſeruatryce of kynges, dukes, and realmes
               Of Yſayes fede ſwete ſunamyte
               Meſure my mourning myn own margaryte
            
            
               O ſoueraigneſt ſought out of Syon
               Cockle wt golde dewe from aboue berayned
               Dewe buſhe vnbrent, fyreleſſe fyre ſet on
               Flābyng with feruēte, not with hete payned
               Duryng dayſye that no wether ſtayned
               Fleece vndefouled of gentyleſt Iedeon
               And fructifyeng fayreſt the yerde of Aaron
            
            
               The mighty arche, probatyfe piſ
                     •
                  yne
               Laughyng aurore, and of peace olyue
               Columpne & baſe, vp bearyng from abyme
               why nere I connyng here to diſcryue
               Choſen of Ioſeph, whom he toke to wyue
               Vnknowyng hym, chyldyng by myracle
               And of our manly fygure the tabernacle
            
            
               
               I haue none Englyſhe conuenient & dygne
               Myne hertes heale lady the wyth to honour
               Iuorie cleane, therfore I wol reſygne
               Into thyne hande, tyl thou lyſt ſocour
               To helpe my makynge both floryſhe & flour
               Then ſhulde I ſhewe in loue how I brende
               In ſonges makynge, thy name to cōmende
            
            
               For yf I coude before thyne excellence
               Syngen in loue I wolde what I fele
               And euer ſtanden lady in thy preſence
               To ſhewe in open howe I loue you wele
               And ſyth although your hert be made of ſtele
               To you wythouten any dyſceueraunce
               Iay en vous tout ma fiance
            
            
               where myght I loue euer better beſet
               Then in thys lylye lykyng to beholde
               The lace of loue, the bonde ſo wel thou knyt
               That I maye ſe the or myne herte colde
               And or I paſſe out of my dayes olde
               Tofore ſyngyng euermore vtterly
               Your eyen two woll ſlee me ſodaynly
            
            
               For loue I langour, blyſſed be ſuch ſyckneſſe
               Syth it is for you my hertely ſuffyſaunce
               I can not els ſay in my dyſtreſſe
               So fayre one hath myne hert in gouernaūce
               And after that I begynne on eſperaunce
               with feble entune, though it thyne hert perce
               Yet for thy ſake thys letter I do reherce
            
            
               God wote on muſyke I can not, but I geſſe
               Alas why ſo, that I myght ſaye or ſynge
               So loue I you myne owne ſouerayne maiſtres
               And euer ſhal wythout departyng
               Myrrour of beute, for you out ſhuld I ryng
               In remembraunce eke of your eyen clere
               Thus ferre frō you my ſouerayne lady dere
            
            
               So wolde god your loue wolde me ſlo
               Syth for your ſake I ſynge day by day
               Herte why nylte thou breake a two
               Syth wyth my lady dwell I ne may
               Thus many a roundel and many a virelay
               In freſhe englyſhe, when I me layſer fynde
               I do recorde, on you to haue mynde
            
            
               Nowe lady myne, ſyth I you loue and drede
               And you vnchaunged euer fynde in o degre
               whoſe grace ne may flye fro your womāhede
               Dyſdayneth not for to remembre on me
               Myne herte bledeth for I may not you ſe
               And ſyth ye wotte my meanyng deſyrous
               Plures pur moy ſi vous playſt amorous
            
            
               what maruayle is though I in payne be
               I am departed from you my ſouerayne
               Fortune alas, dont vient la deſtenie
               That in no wyſe I can ne may attayne
               To ſe the beaute of your eyen twayne
               wherfore I ſay, for tryſteſſe doth me grame
               Tant me fait male departyr de ma dame
            
            
               why nere my wyſhyng brouȝt to ſuch eſploit
               That I myght ſay for ioye of your preſence
               Ore a mon cuer ce quil veuilloit
               Ore a mon cuer, the hygheſt excellence
               That euer had wight, & ſyth myne aduertēce
               Is in you, reweth on my paynes ſmerte
               I am ſo ſore wounded to the herte
            
            
               To lyue wel mery two louers were yfere
               So may I ſaye wythouten any blame
               Yf any man to wylde were
               I coude hym teche for to be tame
               Lette hym go loue and ſe where it be game
               For I am brydled vnto ſoberneſſe
               For her that is of women chefe princeſſe
            
            
               But euer whē thouȝt my herte ſhuld enbrace
               Then vnto me is beſt remedy
               when I loke on your goodly freſhe face
               So mery a myrrour coude I neuer eſpye
               And yf I coude I wolde it magnifye
               For neuer none was ſo fayre yfounde
               To reken hem all, and alſo Roſamounde
            
            
               And fynally wyth mouthe and wyl preſent
               Of double eye wythout repentaunce
               Myne herte I yeue you lady in thys entent
               That ye ſhall holy therof haue gouernaūce
               Takynge my leaue wyth hertes obeyſaunce
               (Salue regina) ſyngynge laſt of al
               To be our helpe when we to the cal
            
            
               All our loue is but ydelneſſe
               Saue your loue alone, who might therto attayne
               who ſo wol haue a name of gentylneſſe
               I counſayle hym in loue that he not fayne
               Thou ſwete lady, refute in euery payne
               whoſe mercy moſte to me auayleth
               To gye by grace, when that fortune fayleth
            
            
               
               Nought may be tolde wythouten any fable
               Your hygh renome, your womanly beaute
               Your gouernaunce to al worſhyp able
               Putteth euery herte in eaſe in hys degree
               O violet, o floure deſyree
               Syth I am for you ſo amerous
               Eſtreynes moy de cuer ioyous
            
            
               with feruēt herte my breſt hath broſt on fyre
               Lardant eſpoir que mō cuer poynt eſt mort
               Dauoir lamour de celle que ie deſyre
               I meane you ſwete moſte pleſaunt of porte
               Et ie ſay bien que ceo neſt pas mon tort
               That for you ſynge, ſo as I maye for mone
               For your departynge, alone I lyue alone
            
            
               Though I myght I woll none other cheſe
               In your ſeruyce I wolde be founden ſadde
               Therfore I loue no labour that ye leſe
               when in longyng ſoreſt ye be ſtadde
               Loke vp ye louers and be ryght gladde
               Ayenſt ſaynt Valentynes daye
               For I haue cheſe that neuer forſake I may.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            ¶Iohan Gower, vnto the worthy and noble Kynge Henry the fourth.
            
               
                  O Noble worthy kyng Henry the ferthe
               In whome the glad fortune is befall
               The people to gouerne here vpon erthe
               God hath the choſen in comforte of vs all
               the worſhip of this lāde which was doun fal
               Now ſtant vpryȝt thrugh grace of thy goodneſſe
               which euery man is holde for to bleſſe
            
            
               The hygh god of his iuſtice alone
               The ryght whych longeth to thy regaly
               Declared hath to ſtande in thy perſone
               And more then god may no man iuſtifye
               Thy tytel is knowe vpon thyne aunceſtrye
               The landes folke hath eke thy right affirmed
               So ſtante thy reygne, of god & mā cōfyrmed
            
            
               There is no man may ſaye in otherwyſe
               That god hymſelfe ne hath ye ryght declared
               wherof the lande is bounde to thy ſeruyce
               whych for defaute of helpe hath longe cared
               But nowe there is no mannes herte ſpared
               To loue and ſerue, and worthe thy pleſaunce
               And all thys is through goddes purueyaūce
            
            
               In all thynge whych is of god begonne
               There foloweth grace yf it be wel gouerned
               Thus tellen they whych olde bokes conne
               wherof my lord I wote well thou art lerned
               Aſke of thy god, ſo ſhalt thou not be warned
               Of no requeſt whych is reaſonable
               For god vnto the good is fauourable
            
            
               Kyng Salomon whiche had at hys aſkynge
               Of god, what thyng him was leueſt craue
               He chaſe wyſedom vnto gouernynge
               Of goddes folke, the whiche he wolde ſaue
               And as he chaſe it fyll him for to haue
               For through his wyt while yt his reigne laſt
               He gate him peace and reſt in to his laſt
            
            
               But Alexander as telleth hys ſtorie
               Vnto the god beſought in other wey
               Of all the worlde to wynne the vyctorie
               So that vnder hys ſwerde it myght obey
               In warre he had al that he wolde prey
               The mighty god behight him that beheſt
               The worlde wanne, and had it of conqueſt
            
            
               But though it fyll at thylke tyme ſo
               That Alexander his aſkyng hath atcheued
               This ſynfull worlde was all paynem tho
               was none which hath the highe god beleued
               No wōder was though thilk world was greued
               Though a tyrāt his purpoſe miȝt wyn
               All was vengeaunce and in fortune of ſyn
            
            
               But nowe the faith of Chriſt is come a place
               Among the princes in this erthe here
               It ſytte hem well to do pyte and grace
               But yet it muſt be tempred in manere
               For they fynden cauſe in the matere
               Vpon the poynt, what afterwarde betyde
               The lawe of right ſhall nat be layde a ſyde
            
            
               So may a kynge of warre the voyage
               Ordayne and take, as he therto is holde
               To clayme & aſke hys ryghtfull heritage
               In all places where it is wyth holde
               
                  But otherwyſe yf god hym ſelfe wolde
               Affyrme loue and peace betwene the kynges
               Peace is the beſt aboue al erthly thynges
            
            
               Good is to eſchewe warre, and nathelees
               A kynge may make warre vpon hys ryght
               For of batayle the fynall ende is pees
               Thus ſtant the lawe that a worthy knyght
               Vpon hys trouth may go to the fyght
               But yf ſo were that he myght cheſe
               Better is the peace of whych may no mā leſe
            
            
               To ſtere peace ought euerych on lyue
               Fyrſt for to ſet hys liege lorde in reſt
               And eke theſe other men that they ne ſtryue
               For ſo thys lande maye ſtande at beſt
               what kynge that wolde be the worthyeſt
               The more he myght our deedly warre ceaſe
               The more he ſhuld his worthyneſſe encreaſe
            
            
               Peace is the chefe of al the worldes welth
               And to the heuen it ledeth eke the waye
               Peace is of ſoule and lyfe the mannes helth
               Of peſtilence, and doth the warre awaye
               My liege lorde take hede of that I ſaye
               Yf warre may be lefte, take peace on hande
               whych may not be wythout goddes ſande
            
            
               wyth peace ſtante euery creature in reſt
               wythout peace there may no lyfe be gladde
               Aboue all other good peace is the beſt
               Peace hath hym ſelfe whē werre is al beſtad
               The peace is ſafe, the warre is euer adrad
               Peace is of al charite the kay
               whych hath the lyfe and ſoule for to way
            
            
               My liege lorde yf that thy lyſt to ſeche
               The ſoth enſāples what ye war hath wrouȝt
               Thou ſhalt wel here of wyſe mēnes ſpeche
               That deedly warre tourneth into nought
               For yf theſe olde bokes be wel yſought
               There myght yu ſe what thing ye war hath do
               Both of conqueſt and conquerour alſo
            
            
               For vayne honoure, or for the worldes good
               They that whylom the ſtrōge warres made
               wher be they now, bethinke wel in thy mood
               The day is gone, the nyght is derke & fade
               Hir cruelte whych made hem then glade
               They ſorowē now, & yet haue nauȝt ye more
               The blode is ſhad, whych no mā may reſtore
            
            
               The warre is mother of the wronges all
               It ſleeth the preeſt in holy church at maſſe
               Forlyth the mayde, & doth her flour to fall
               The warre maketh the great cyte laſſe
               And doth the lawe hys rules ouerpaſſe
               Ther is nothīg wherof myſchefe may grow
               whych is not cauſed of the warre I trowe
            
            
               The warre bringeth in pouerte at hys heles
               wherof the cōmen people is ſore greued
               The warre hath ſet his cart on thylk wheles
               where that fortune may not be beleued
               For when men wene beſt to haue acheued
               Full ofte it is all newe to begyn
               The warre hath nothyng ſyker tho he wyn
            
            
               For thy my worthy prince in Chriſtes halue
               As for aparte whoſe faith thou haſt be gyde
               Ley to this olde ſore a newe ſalue
               And do the warre away what ſo betyde
               Purchace peace and ſet it by thy ſyde
               And ſuffre not thy people be deuoured
               So ſhal thy name euer after ſtāde honoured
            
            
               Yf any man be nowe or euer was
               Ayen the peace thy preuy counſaylour
               Let god be of thy counſayle in thys caas
               And put away the cruel warryour
               For god whych is of man the creatour
               He wolde not men ſlough hys creature
               wythout cauſe of deedly forfayture
            
            
               where nedeth moſt, behoueth moſt to lok
                     •
                  
               
               My lorde, howe ſo thy warres be wythout
               Of tyme paſſed, who that hede toke
               Good were at home to ſe ryght wel about
               For euermore the worſt is for to doute
               But yf thou myghteſt parfyte peace attayne
               There ſhulde be no cauſe for to playne
            
            
               About a kyng good counſayle is to preyſe
               Aboue al other thynges moſte vaylable
               But yet a kynge wythin hym ſelfe ſhal peyſe
               And ſene the thynges that be reſonable
               And thervpon he ſhall hys wyttes ſtable
               Amonge the men to ſette peace in euen
               For loue of hym whych is the kyng of heuen
            
            
               A, well is hym that ſhedde neuer blode
               But yf it were in cauſe of ryghtwyſeneſſe
               For yf a kyng the peryl vnderſtode
               what is to ſlee the people, then I geſſe
               
                  The deedly warres and the heuyneſſe
               wherof peace dyſtourbed is full ofte
               Shulde at ſome tyme ceſſe and wexe ſofte
            
            
               O kyng fulfylled of grace and knyghthode
               Remembre vpō this poynt for Chriſtes ſake
               Yf peace be profered vnto thy manhode
               Thyne honour ſaue, let it not be forſake
               Though yu the warres darſte wel vndertake
               After reaſon yet temper thy courage
               For lyke to peace there is none auauntage
            
            
               My worthy lorde, thynke well how ſo befall
               Of thylke lore, as holy bokes ſayne
               Chriſt is the heed, and we be membres all
               As well the ſubiecte as the ſouerayne
               So ſyt it wel that charite be playne
               whych vnto god hym ſelfe moſte accordeth
               So as the lore of Chriſtes worde recordeth
            
            
               In tholde lawe or Chriſt him ſelfe was bore
               Amonge the .x. cōmaundementes I rede
               Howe that manſlaughter ſhulde be forbore
               Suche was the wyl that tyme of ye godhede
               But afterward whē Chriſt toke hys māhede
               Peace was the fyrſt thynge he let do crye
               Ayenſt the worldes rancour and enuy
            
            
               And or Chriſt went out of thys erth here
               And ſlyghed to heuen, he made hys teſtamēt
               where he bequath to hys dyſcyples there
               And yaue hys peace, which is the foūdemēt
               Of charite, wythout whoſe aſſent
               The worldes peace may neuer wel be tryed
               Ne loue kepte, ne lawe iuſtifyed
            
            
               The iewes wyth ye paynyms hadden werre
               But they amōge hem ſelf ſtode euer in peace
               why ſhulde then our peace ſtande out of erre
               which chriſt hath thoſe to his owne encreſe
               For Chriſt is more then was Moſes
               And Chriſt hath ſet the parfyte of the lawe
               The whych ſhuld in no wyſe be wythdrawe
            
            
               To yeue vs peace was cauſe why chriſt dyde
               wythout peace may nothynge ſtāde auayled
               But nowe a man may ſe on euery ſyde
               Howe Chriſtes fayth is euery daye aſſayled
               wyth the paynems deſtroyed & ſo batayled
               That for defaute of helpe and of defence
               Vnneth hath Chriſt hys due reuerence
            
            
               The ryght fayth to kepe of holy churche
               The fyrſt poynt is named of knyghthode
               And euery man is holde for to wurche
               Vpon the poynt that ſtante to hys manhode
               But nowe alas, the fame is ſpred ſo brode
               That euery man thys thynge complayneth
               And yet is there no mā that helpe ordayneth
            
            
               The worldes cauſe is wayted ouer all
               There be the warres redy to the full
               But Chriſtes owne cauſe in ſpeciall
               There ben the ſwerdes and the ſperes dull
               And wyth the ſentence of the popes bul
               As for to done the folke payne obey
               The churche is turned all another wey
            
            
               It is wonder aboue any mannes wyt
               wout warre howe Chriſtes fayth was won
               And we that be vpon thys erth yet
               Ne kepe it not as it was fyrſt begon
               To euery creature vnder the ſonne
               Chriſt badde hym ſelfe that we ſhulde preche
               And to the folke hys Euangely teche
            
            
               More lyght it is to kepe then to make
               But that we founden made to fore honde
               we kepe not, but lette it lyghtly ſlake
               That peace of chriſt hath all to broke his bōde
               we reſt our ſelfe, and ſuffren euery londe
               To ſlee eche other, as thyng vndefended
               So ſtant the warre, & peace is not amended
            
            
               But though the heed of holy church aboue
               Ne do not al hys hole buſyneſſe
               Amonge the people to ſet peace and loue
               Theſe kynges oughten of her rightwyſneſſe
               Her owne cauſe amonge hem ſelfe redreſſe
               Tho Peters ſhyp as now hath loſte his ſtere
               It lyeth in hem the barge for to ſtere
            
            
               Yf holy churche after the dewte
               Of Chriſtes worde ne be not all auyſed
               To make peace, accorde, and vnite
               Amonge the kynges that be nowe deuyſed
               Yet natheles the lawe ſtante aſſyſed
               Of mannes wytte to be ſo reſonable
               wythout that to ſtande hym ſelfe ſtable
            
            
               Of holy church we ben chyldren all
               And euery chylde is holde for to bowe
               Vnto the mother, howe that euer it fall
               Or els he muſte reaſon dyſalowe
               
                  And for that cauſe a knyght ſhal firſt auowe
               The ryght of holy church to defende
               That no man ſhal the priuylege offende
            
            
               Thus were it good to ſette al in euen
               The worldes princes, and the prelates both
               For loue of hym which is the kynge of heuen
               And yf men ſhuld algate waxen wrothe
               The Sarazins, whych vnto Chriſt ben loth
               Let men be armed ayenſt hem to fyght
               So may the knyght hys dede of armes right
            
            
               Vpō thre pointes ſtāt Chriſtes peace oppreſſed
               Fyrſt holy church in her ſelfe deuyded
               whych ought of reaſon fyrſt to be redreſſed
               But yet ſo hygh a cauſe is not deſyded
               And thus when humble pacience is pryded
               The remnaunt whych that they ſhulde rule
               No wonder is though it ſtande out of rule
            
            
               Of that the heed is ſyck the lymmes aken
               Theſe reignes that to Chriſtes peace belōgē
               
               For worldes good theſe deedly warres makē
               
               whych helpleſſe, as in balaunce hongen
               The heed aboue hem hath not vnderfongen
               To ſette peace, but euery man ſleeth other
               And in thys wyſe hath charite no brother
            
            
               The two defautes bryngen in the thyrde
               Of myſcreauntes that ſene howe we debate
               Betwene the two, they fallen in amydde
               where nowe al daye they fynde an open gate
               Lo, thus the deedly werre ſlante algate
               But euer I hope of kynge Henries grace
               That he it is, whych ſhal the peace embrace
            
            
               My worthy noble prynce and kynge anoynt
               whome god hath of hys grace ſo preſerued
               Beholde and ſe the worlde vpon this poynt
               As for thy part, that Chriſtes peace be ſerued
               So ſhal thy hygh mede be deſerued
               To hym whych all ſhall quyte at laſte
               For thys lyfe here may no whyle laſte
            
            
               Se Alexander, Hector, and Iulius
               Se Machabeus, Dauid, and Ioſue
               Se Charlemayne, Godfray, and Arthus
               Fulfylled of warre and of mortalite
               Her fame abytte, but all is but vanite
               For deth, whych hath the warres vnder fote
               Hath made an ende, of whych ther is no bote
            
            
               So many a mā the ſoth wete and knowe
               That peace is good for euery kynge to haue
               The fortune of the warre is euer vnknowe
               But where peace is, ther is the marches ſaue
               That nowe is vp, to morow is vnder graue
               The myghtye god hath all grace in hande
               wythout hym men may not longe ſtande
            
            
               Of the tennes to wynne or leſe a chace
               May no lyfe wete or that the bal be ronne
               Al ſtant in god what thing mē ſhal purchace
               Thende is in hym or that it be begonne
               Men ſayne the wolle when it is well ſponne
               Doth that the cloth is ſtronge & profytable
               And els it maye neuer be durable
            
            
               The worldes chaunces vpon auenture
               Ben euer ſette, but thylke chaunce of pees
               Is ſo behouely to the creature
               That is aboue al other peerles
               But it may not beget natheles
               Amonge the men to laſte any whyle
               But where the herte is playne without gyle
            
            
               The peace is as it were a ſacrament
               Tofore the god, & ſhall wyth wordes playne
               wythout any double entendement
               Be treated, for the trouth can not fayne
               But yf the men wythin hem ſelfe ben vayne
               The ſubſtaūce of the peace may not be 
                     •
                  rew
                     •
                  
               
               But euery day it chaungeth vpon newe
            
            
               But who that is of charite parfyte
               He voydeth al ſleyghtes ferre awaye
               And ſette hys worde vpon the ſame plyte
               where that his hert hath foūde a ſyker waye
               And thus when conſcience is trewly waye
               And that theſe ben handled wyth the wy
                     •
                  e
               It ſhall abyde, and ſtande in all wyfe
            
            
               The Apoſtle ſayth, ther may no lyfe be good
               whych is not grounded vpon charite
               For charite ne ſhedde neuer blood
               So hath the warre as there no properte
               For thylke vertue whych is ſayd pyte
               wyth charite ſo ferforth is acquaynted
               That in her may no falſe ſēblant be paynted
            
            
               Caſſodore, whoſe wrytynge is authoriſed
               Sayth: where that pyte reygneth is grace
               Thrugh whych ye peace hath al his welth aſſyſed
               So yt of warre he dredeth no manace
               
                  where pyte dwelleth in the ſame place
               There maye no deedly cruelte ſoiourne
               wherof that mercy ſhulde hys way tourne
            
            
               To ſe what pyte forth wyth mercy doth
               The cronique is at Rome in thylke empyre
               Of Conſtantyne, whych is a tale ſothe
               when hym was lyuer hys owne deth deſyre
               Then do the yonge chyldren to martyre
               Of crueltie he lefte the quarele
               Pyte he wrought, and pyte was hys hele
            
            
               For thylke mannes pyte whych he dede
               God was pytous, and made hym hole at all
               Sylueſter came, and in the ſame ſtede
               Yaue hym baptyme fyrſt in ſpecial
               whych dyd awaye the ſynne origynall
               And all hys lepre it hath ſo purifyed
               That hys pyte for euer is magnifyed
            
            
               Pyte was cauſe why thys Emperour
               was hole in body and in ſoule bothe
               And Rome alſo was ſette in thylke honour
               Of Chriſtes fayth, ſo that the leue of loth
               whych hadden be wyth Chriſt tofore wroth
               Receyued were vnto Chriſtes lore
               Thus ſhall pyte be prayſed euermore
            
            
               My worthy liege lorde Henry by name
               whych Englande haſte to gouerne & ryght
               Men ought well thy pyte to proclame
               whych openlyche in all the worldes ſyght
               Is ſhewed, wyth the helpe of god almyght
               To yeue vs peace which lōg hath be debated
               wherof thy pryſe ſhal neuer be abated
            
            
               My lorde, in whom hath euer yet be founde
               Pyte, wythout ſpotte of violence
               Kepe thylke peace alwaye wythin bounde
               whych god hath planted in thy conſcience
               So ſhall the cronyque of thy pacience
               Amonge the ſayntes be taken into memorye
               To the legende of perdurable glorye
            
            
               And to thyne ert hely pryſe, ſo as I can
               whych euery man is holde to cōmende
               I Gower, whych am all thy liege man
               Thys letter vnto thyne excellence I ſende
               As I whych euer vnto my lyues ende
               woll pray for the ſtate of thy perſone
               In worſhyppe of thy ſceptre and thy throne
            
            
               Not onely to my kynge of peace I wryte
               But to theſe other prynces chriſten all
               That eche of hem hys owne herte endyte
               And ſeſe the warre or more myſchefe fall
               Sette eke the ryghtful puppe vpon hys ſtall
               Kepe charite, and drawe pyte to hande
               Mainteyn lawe, and ſo the pence ſhal ſtande
            
            Explicit carmē de pacis cōmēdatione quod ad laudem et memoriā ſereniſſimi principis domini regis Henrici Quarti, ſuns humilis orator Iohannes Gower compoſuit.
            
               Electus Chriſti, pie rex Henrice fuiſti
               Qui bene veniſti, cum propria regna petiſti
               Tu mala viciſti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   bonis bona reſtituiſti
               Et populo triſti, noua gaudia contribuiſti
               Eſt mihi ſpes lata, qd adhuc per te renouata
               Succedent fata, veteri probitate beata
               Eſt tibi nam grata, gratia ſponte data
               Henrici quarti, primus regni fuit annus
               Quo mihi defecit biſus ad acta mea
               Oia tēpus habent finem natura miniſtrat
               Quem virtute ſua frangere nemo poteſt
               Vltra poſſe nihil quāuis mihi velle remanſit
               Amplius vt ſeribam non mihi poſſe manet
               Du potui ſcripſi, ſed nūc quia curua ſenectus
               Turbauit ſenſus ſcripta relinquo ſcolis
               Scribat qui veniet poſt me diſcretior alter
               Ammodo nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   manus er mea penna ſilent
               Hoc tamen in fine verborum queſo meorum
               Proſpera quod ſtatuat regna futura deus.
            
            Explicit.
         
         
            
            Of the Cuckow & the nightyngale.
            
               
                  THe god of loue, ah benedicite
               How myghty and howe great a lorde is he
               For he can make of lowe hertes hye
               And of hye lowe, & lyke for to dye
               And harde hertes he can maken free
            
            
               He can make within a lytle ſtounde
               Deſycke 
                     ••
                  lke hole, freſh and ſounde
               And of hole he can make ſeke
               He can bynd
                     •
                   and vnbynden eke
               That he wo
                     •
                   haue bounden or vnbounde
            
            
               To tel his myght my wyt may not ſuffyſe
               For he can make of wyſe folke ful nyce
               For he may do al that he wol deuyce
               And lythy folke to deſtroyen vyce
               And proude hertes he can make agryſe
            
            
               Shortly all that euer he wol he may
               Agaynſt hym dare no wyght ſay naye
               For he can glad & greue whom hym lyketh
               And who that he wol he loweth or ſyketh
               And moſt his might he ſhedeth euer in may
            
            
               For euery true gentle hert free
               That with hym is or thynketh for to be
               Agayne May now ſhal haue ſome ſterynge
               Or to ioye or els to ſome mournyng
               In no ſeaſon, ſo moche as thynketh me
            
            
               For whan they may here the byrdes ſynge
               And ſe the floures and the leues ſprynge
               That bryngeth into her remembraunce
               A maner eaſe medled with greuaunce
               And luſty thoughtes full of great longyng
            
            
               And of that longyng cometh heuyneſſe
               And therof groweth oft great ſyckneſſe
               And for lacke of that that they deſyre
               And thus in May ben hertes ſet on fyre
               So that they brennen forth in gret diſtreſſe
            
            
               I ſpeke thys of felyng trewly
               If I be olde and vnluſty
               Yet I haue felt of the ſicknes through May
               Both hote and colde, and axes euery day
               How ſore ywys there wote no wight but I
            
            
               I am ſo ſhaken with the feuers whyte
               Of al thys May ſlepe I but a lyte
               And alſo it is not lyke to me
               That any hert ſhulde ſlepy be
               In whom that loue his firy dart wol ſmyte
            
            
               But as I laye thys other nyght wakyng
               I thought howe louers had a tokenyng
               And amonge hem it was a comune tale
               That it were good to here the nyghtyngale
               Rather than the leude cocko we ſyng
            
            
               And than I thought anone as it was daye
               I wolde go ſomwhere to aſſay
               If that I myght a nyghtyngale here
               For yet had I none herde of al that yere
               And it was tho the thyrde nyght of May
            
            
               And anone as I the day aſpyde
               No lenger wolde I in my bedde abyde
               But vnto a woode that was faſt by
               I went forth alone boldely
               And helde the way downe by a broke ſyde
            
            
               Tyl I came to a launde of whyte and grene
               So fayre one had I neuer in bene
               The groūd was grene, ypoudred wt dayfye
               The floures and the greues lyke hye
               Al grene and whyte, was nothyng els ſene
            
            
               There ſate I downe among ye fayre floures
               And ſaw ye byrdes trippe out of her bowres
               There as they reſted hem al the nyght
               They were ſo ioyful of the dayes lyght
               They began of Maye for to done houres
            
            
               They coude that ſeruice al by rote
               There was many a louely note
               Some ſonge loude as they had playned
               And ſome in other maner voice yfayned
               And ſome al out wyth the ful throte
            
            
               They proyned hem, & made hem ryght gay
               And daunſeden and lepten on the ſpray
               And euermore two and two in fere
               Ryght ſo as they had choſen hem to yere
               
                  In Feuerere vpon ſaynct Valentynes daye
            
            
               And the ryuer that I ſat vpon
               It made ſuche a noyſe as it ron
               Accordaunt with the byrdes armony
               Me thought it was the beſt melody
               That myght ben yherde of any mon
            
            
               And for delyte I wot neuer how
               I fel in ſuche a ſlombre and a ſwowe
               Nat all aſlepe ne fully wakyng
               And in ye ſwowe me thought I herde ſynge
               The ſory byrde the leude cuckowe
            
            
               And that was on a tree ryght faſt by
               But who was than euyl apayde but I
               Now god (ꝙ I) that dyed on the croys
               Yeue ſorowe on the, and on thy leude voys
               Full lytle ioye haue I now of thy crye
            
            
               And as I wt the cuckowe thus gan chyde
               I herde in the next buſh beſyde
               A nyghtyngale ſo luſtely ſynge
               That with her clere voyce ſhe made rynge
               Through all the grene wood wyde
            
            
               Ah, good nyghtyngale (ꝙ I then)
               A lytle haſt thou ben to longe hen
               For here hath ben the leude cuckowe
               And ſōgen ſonges rather than haſt thou
               I pray to god euyll fyre her bren
            
            
               But now I wol you tel a wondre thyng
               As longe as I laye in that ſwownyng
               Me thought I wyſt what the byrdes ment
               And what they ſayd, & what was her entēt
               And of her ſpeche I had good knowynge
            
            
               There herde I the nyghtyngale ſay
               Now good cuckowe go ſome where awaye
               And let us that can ſyngen dwellen here
               For euery wyght eſchueth the to here
               Thy ſonges be ſo elenge in good ſay
            
            
               what (ꝙ he) what may the aylen nowe
               It thynketh me, I ſynge as wel as thou
               For my ſonge is both true and playne
               And thaugh I can not crakel ſo in vayne
               As thou doſt in thy throte, I wot neuer howe
            
            
               And euery wyght may vnderſtand me
               But nyghtyngale ſo may they not done the
               For thou haſt many a nyce queynt crye
               I haue the herde ſayne, ocy ocy
               How might I knowe what that ſhulde be
            
            
               Ah foole (ꝙ ſhe) woſt thou not what it is
               whan that I ſay, ocy ocy ywys
               Than meane I that I wolde wondre fayne
               That all they were ſhamefully yſlayne
               That meanen ought agayne loue amys
            
            
               And alſo I wolde that al tho had the dede
               That thynke not in loue her lyfe to lede
               For who ſo yt woll not the god of loue ſerue
               I dare wel ſay he is worthy to ſterue
               And for that ſkyll, ocy ocy I grede
            
            
               Eye (ꝙ the cuckowe) this is a queynt lawe
               That euery wight ſhal loue or be to drawe
               But I forſake al ſuche company
               For myne entent is not for to dye
               Ne neuer whyle I lyue on loues yoke to drawe
            
            
               For louers ben the folke that ben on lyue
               That mooſt diſeaſe haue, & mooſt vnthryue
               And moſt endure ſorowe, wo and care
               And leſt f
                     •
                  len o
                     •
                   welfare
               what nedeth it ayenſt trouth to ſtryue
            
            
               what (ꝙ ſhe) thou art out of thy mynde
               How myght thou in thy churleneſſe fynde
               To ſpeke of loues ſeruauntes in this wyſe
               For in this worlde is none ſo good ſeruyce
               To euery wyght that gentle is of kynde
            
            
               For therof truly cōmeth all goodneſſe
               All honour and al gentleneſſe
               worſhyp, eaſe, and al hertes luſt
               Parfyte ioye, and ful aſſured truſt
               Iolytie, pleaſaunce and freſhneſſe
            
            
               Lowlyhed, largeſſe, and curteſye
               Semelyhed, and trewe company
               Drede of ſhame for to done amys
               For he that truly loues ſeruaunt is
               were lother be ſhamed than to dye
            
            
               And that this is ſoth that I ſey
               In that beleue I wyll lyue and dey
               And cuckow ſo I rede that thou do ywys
               Than (ꝙ he) let me neuer haue blyſſe
               Yf euer I vnto that counſayle obey
            
            
               
               Nyghtyngale thou ſpekeſt wondre fayre
               But for al that is the ſoth contrayre
               For loue is in yonge folke but rage
               And in olde folke a great dotage
               who moſt it vſeth moſt ſhal enpayre
            
            
               For thereof cōmeth diſeaſe and heuyneſſe
               So ſorowe & care & many a great ſykneſſe
               Deſpyte, debate, angre and enuy
               Deprauyng, ſhame, vntruſt and ielouſye
               Pryde, miſchefe, pouertie & wodneſſe
            
            
               Louyng is an offyce of diſpayre
               And one thyng is therin that is not fayre
               For who that getteth of loue a lytle blyſſe
               But yf he be alway therwith ywys
               He may ful ſone of age haue his heyre
            
            
               And nyghtyngale therfore holde the nye
               For leue me wel, for al thy queynt crye
               Yf thou be farre or longe fro thy make
               Thou ſhalt be as other that ben forſake
               And than thou ſhalt hoten as do I
            
            
               Fye (ꝙ ſhe) on thy name and on the
               The god of loue ne let the neuer ythe
               For yu art worſe a thouſandfolde thā wood
               For many one is ful worthy and ful good
               That had be nought ne had loue ybe
            
            
               For euermore loue his ſeruauntes amēdeth
               And from all yuyl taches hem defendeth
               And maketh hem to bren ryght in a fyre
               In trouth and in worſhypful deſyre
               And whā hem lyketh, ioye ynough hem ſendeth
            
            
               Thou nyghtyngale he ſayd be ſtyll
               For loue hath no reaſon, but it is wyll
               For oft tyme vntrue folke he eaſeth
               And trewe folke ſo bytterly he diſpleaſeth
               That for default of corage he let hym ſpyll
            
            
               Than toke I of the nyghtingale kepe
               How ſhe caſt a ſygh out of her depe
               And ſayd, alas that euer I was bore
               I can for tene not ſay one worde more
               And ryght with that worde ſhe braſt out to wepe
            
            
               Alas (ꝙ ſhe) my hert woll to breke
               To heren thus this leude byrde ſpeke
               Of loue, and of his worſhypful ſeruyce
               Now god of loue thou helpe me in ſomwiſe
               That I may on this cuckowe ben awreke
            
            
               Me thought than he ſterte vp anon
               And glad was I that he was agon
               And euermore the cuckowe as he flaye
               Sayd, farewel farewel popyngaye
               As though he had ſcorned me alone
            
            
               And than came the nyghtyngale to me
               And ſayd, frende forſoth I thanke the
               That thou haſt lyked me to reſcowe
               And one auowe to loue make I nowe
               That all this May I woll thy ſynger be
            
            
               I thanked her, and was ryght well apayde
               Ye (ꝙ ſhe) and be thou not diſmayde
               Tho thou haue herde ye cukowe erſt than I
               For yf I lyue it ſhal amended be
               The next May, yf I be not afrayde
            
            
               And one thyng I wyll rede the alſo
               Ne leue thou not the cukow ne his loues ſo
               For all that he hath ſayd is ſtronge leſyng
               Nay (ꝙ I) therto ſhal nothyng me brynge
               For loue, and it hath do me moche wo
            
            
               Ye vſe (ꝙ ſhe) this medicyne
               Euery day this May or thou dyne
               Go loke vpon the freſh dayſye
               And though thou be for wo in poynt to dye
               That ſhal full greatly leſſen the of thy pyne
            
            
               And loke alwaye that thou be good & trewe
               And I woll ſynge one of the ſonges newe
               For loue of the, as loude as I may crye
               And than ſhe began this ſonge full hye
               I ſhrewe all hem that ben of loue vntrewe
            
            
               And whan ſhe had ſonge it to the ende
               Now farewel (ꝙ ſhe) for I mote wende
               And god of loue, yt can ryght wel and maye
               As moche ioye ſende the this day
               As any yet louer he euer ſende
            
            
               Thus taketh ye nyghtingale her leaue of me
               I praye to god alwaye with her be
               And ioye of loue he ſende her euermore
               And ſhylde vs fro the cuckowe and his lore
               For there is not ſo falſe a byrde as he
            
            
               Forthe ſhe flewe the gentle nyghtyngale
               To all the byrdes in that were that dale
               
                  And gate hem all into a place in fere
               And beſoughten hem that they wold here
               Her diſeaſe, and thus began her tale
            
            
               The cuckowe, well it is not for to hyde
               How the cuckowe and I faſt haue chyde
               Euer ſythen it was day lyght
               I praye you al that ye do me ryght
               Of that foule falſe vnkynde bride
            
            
               Than ſpake o byrde, for al by one aſſent
               This mater aſketh good auyſement
               For we ben byrdes here in fere
               And ſoth it is, the cuckowe is not here
               And therfore we wol haue a parlyment
            
            
               And therat ſhal the egle be our lorde
               And other peres that ben of recorde
               And the cuckowe ſhalbe after ſent
               There ſhalbe yeue the iugement
               Or els we ſhal fynally make accorde
            
            
               And this ſhalbe without nay
               The morow after ſaynt Valentynes day
               Vnder a maple that is fayre and grene
               Before the chambre wyndowe of the quene
               At wodſtocke vpon the grene laye
            
            
               She thanked hem, and than her leaue toke
               And into an hauthorne by that broke
               And there ſhe ſat and ſonge vpon that tree
               Terme of lyfe loue hath withholde me
               So loude that I with that ſonge awoke
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            
               
                  O Leude booke wyth thy foule rudeneſſe
               Syth thou haſt neither beautie ne eloquence
               who hath the, cauſed or yeue the hardyneſſe
               For to appeare in my ladyes preſence?
               I am ful ſyker thou knoweſt her beneuolēce
               Ful agreable to al her abeying
               For of all good ſhe is the beſt lyuyng
            
            
               Alas that thou ne haddeſt worthyneſſe
               To ſhewe to her ſome pleaſaunt ſentence
               Syth that ſhe hath through her gentyleſſe
               Accepted ye ſeruaūt to her digne reuerence
               O, me repenteth that I ne had ſcience
               And leyſer als, to make the more floriſhinge
               For of al good ſhe is the beſt lyuyng
            
            
               Beſeche her mekely with all lowlyneſſe
               Though I be ferre from her in abſence
               To thinke on my trouth to her & ſtedfaſtnes
               And to abrege of my ſorowes the violence
               which cauſed is, wherof knoweth your ſapience
               ſhe lyke amōg to notify me her lykinge
               For of all good ſhe is the beſt lyuyng.
            
            
               ¶Lenuoye.
               
                  AVrore of gladneſſe, and daye of luſtyneſſe
               Lucerne, a nyght with heuē
                  ly influence
               Illumined, rote of beutie and goodneſſe
               Suſpyres which I effunde in ſcilence
               Of grace I beſeche alege let your wrytyng
               Now of all good, ſyth ye be beſt lyuynge.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            
            Scogan vnto the lordes and gentlemen of the Kynges houſe.
            
               
                  MY noble ſonnes, and eke my lordes dere
               I your father, called vnworthely
               Sende vnto you this lytyll treatyſe here
               wrytten with myne own hande full rudely
               Although it be that I not reuerently
               Haue wrytten to your eſtates, I you pray
               Myne vncounyng taketh benignely
               For gods ſake, and herken what I ſay
            
            
               I cōplayne me ſore whan I remembre me
               The ſodayne age that is vpon me fall
               But more I cōplayne my miſpent inuētute
               The which is impoſſyble ayen for to call
               But certaynly the moſt cōplaynt of all
               Is to thynke that I haue be ſo nyce
               That I ne wolde vertues to me call
               In al my youth, but vyces aye cheryce.
            
            
               Of which I aſke mercy of the lorde
               That art almyghty god in maieſtie
               Beſekyng to make ſo euen accorde
               Betwyxe the and my ſoule that vanitie
               worldly luſt, ne blynde proſperitie
               Haue no lordſhyp ouer my fleſh to frele
               Thou lorde of reſt and parfyte vnitie
               Put fro me vyce, and kepe my ſoule hele
            
            
               And yeue me myght whyle I haue lyfe and ſpace
               Me to cōfyrme fully to thy pleaſaūce
               Shewe to me aboundaunce of thy grace
               and in good werkes graūt me perſeueraūce
               Of all my youth forget the ignoraunce
               Yeue me good wyl to ſerue ye aye to queme
               Set all my lyfe after thyne ordinaunce
               And able me to mercy or thou deme
            
            
               My lordes dere, why I this cōplaint wryte
               To you whom I loue mooſt enterely
               Is for to warne you, as I can endyte
               That tyme loſt in youth folyly
               Greueth a wyght bodily and ghoſtly
               I meane hem that to luſte & vyce entende
               wherfore lordes I praye you ſpecially
               Your youth in vertue ſhapeth to dyſpende
            
            
               Plante the rote of youthe in ſuch a wyſe
               That in vertue your growynge be alway
               Loke alwaye goodneſſe be in your exercyſe
               That ſhall you myghty make at eche aſſay
               The fende to wythſtande at eche affray
               Paſſeth wyſely thys peryllous pylgrymage
               Thynke on thys worde, & werke it euery day
               That ſhall you yeue a parfyte floured age
            
            
               Taketh alſo hede howe yt theſe noble clerkes
               wrytten in her bokes of great ſapience
               Sayeng ye fayth is deed wythouten werkes
               And ryght ſo is eſtate wyth negligence
               Of vertue, and therfore wyth diligence
               Shapeth of vertue ſo to plante the rote
               That ye therof haue full experience
               To worſhyp of your lyfe and ſoules bote
            
            
               Taketh alſo hede that lordſhyp ne eſtate
               wythout vertue may not longe endure
               Thynketh eke howe vyces & vertue at debate
               Haue ben & ſhall whyle the worlde may dure
               And euer the vycious by auenture
               Is ouerthrowe, and thynketh euermore
               That god is lorde of al vertue, and fygure
               Of all goodneſſe, & therfore folowe his lore
            
            
               My mayſter Chaucer, god hys ſoule ſaue
               That in hys langage was ſo curious
               He ſayd that ye father whych is deed & graue
               Byqueth nothynge hys vertue wt his houſe
               Vnto hys chyldren, and therfore laborouſe
               Ought ye be, beſekynge god of grace
               To yeue you myght for to be vertuous
               Through whych ye might haue parte of his place
            
            
               Here may ſe that vertuous nobleſſe
               Cometh not to you by way of aunceſtrye
               But it cometh by leful beſyneſſe
               Of honeſt lyfe, and not by ſlogardrie
               wherfore in youth I rede you ye edifye
               The houſe of vertue in ſuche a manere
               That in your age may you kepe and gye
               Fro the tempeſt of worldes wawes here
            
            
               Thynketh howe betwyxe vertue and eſtate
               There is a parfyte bleſſed mariage
               Vertue is cauſe of peace, vyce of debate
               
                  In mans ſoule the which be full of corage
               Cheryſheth than vertue, vyces to outrage
               Driueth he away, let hem haue no wōning
               In your ſoules leſeth not the heritage
               which god hath yeue to vertuous lyuyng.
            
            
               Taketh hede alſo, how men of pore degree
               Through vertue haue be ſet in great honour
               And euer haue lyued in great proſperitie
               Through cheryſhyng of vertuous labour
               Thynketh alſo how many a gouernour
               Called to eſtate, hath be ſet full lowe
               Through miſvſyng of ryght, and of errour
               And therfore I coūſel you vertue to knowe
            
            
               thus by your aūceſtres ye may nothīg claim
               As yt my maſter Chaucer ſayth expreſſe
               But tēporal thīg, yt men may hurt or maym
               Than is god ſtocke of vertues nobleſſe
               And ſyth that he is lorde of blyſſedneſſe
               And made vs al, and for vs all deyde
               Foloweth hym in vertue with full beſyneſſe
               And of this thing herk how my maſter ſeyd
            
            
               The fyrſt ſtocke, father of gentylneſſe
               what man that claymeth gentle for to be
               Muſt folow his trace, & al his wyttes dres
               Vertue to loke, and vyces for to flye
               For vnto vertue longeth dignitie
               And not the reuers, ſafely dare I deme
               All weare he mytre, crowne or dyademe
            
            
               The fyrſt ſtocke was full of ryghtwyſneſſe
               True of his worde, ſobre pytous and free
               Clene of his ghoſt, and loued beſyneſſe
               Ayenſt the vyce of ſlouth in honeſtie
               And but his heyre loue vertue as dyd he
               He is not gentle though he ryche ſeme
               Al weare he mytre, crowne or dyademe
            
            
               Vyce may be an heyre to olde rycheſſe
               But there may no man, al men may ſe
               Byqueth his heyre his vertuous nobleſſe
               That is appropred vnto no degree
               But to the fyrſt father in maieſtie
               that maketh his heyres hem yt cā hī que
                     •
                  e
               Al weare he mytre, crowne or dyademe
            
            
               Lo here this noble poete of Bretayne
               How lyghtly in vertuous ſentence
               The loſſe on youth of vertue can cōplayne
               And therfore I pray you with your diligēce
               For your profyte and gods reuerence
               Tempreth fully vertue in your mynde
               That whā ye come to your iuges preſence
               Ye be not vertuleſſe than behynde.
            
            
               Many lordes haue a maner now adayes
               Though one ſhewe hem a vertuous matere
               Her feruent youth is of ſo falſe alayes
               That of that arte they haue no ioy to here
               But as a ſhyp that is without a ſtere
               Dryueth vp & downe without gouernaūce
               wenyng that calme wolde laſte yere by yere
               Ryght ſo fare they for very ygnoraunce.
            
            
               For very ſhame knowe they not by reaſon
               yt after an ebbe there cōmeth a floud ful rage
               In ye ſame wyſe whā youth paſſeth his ſeſō
               
               Cōmeth croked and vnweldy palled age
               And ſone after cōmen ye kalendes of dotage
               And if yt her youth haue no vertue prouided
               All men wol ſay, fye on her vaſſalage
               Thus hath her ſlouth fro worſhyp hem deuyded
            
            
               Boetius the clerke, as men may rede and ſe
               Sayth in his boke of Conſolation
               what man deſyreth of vyne or tree
               Plenteous frute in reapyng ſeaſon
               Muſt euer eſchue to do oppreſſyon
               Vnto the rote whyle it is yonge and grene
               Thus may ye ſe wel by that incluſyon
               That youth vertuleſſe doth moche tene
            
            
               Now ſeeth there ayenſt howe vertuous nobleſſe
               Roted in youth wt good perſeueraūce
               Dryueth away al vyces and wretchedneſſe
               As ſlogardrye, ryote, and diſtaunce
               Seeth eke how vertue cauſeth ſu
                     ••
                  ſaunce
               Seeth eke how vertue voydeth al vyſe
               And who ſo hath vertu hath al abūdaunce
               Of wele, as ferre as reaſon can deuyſe,
            
            
               Taketh hede of Tullius Hoſtylius
               That fro pouerte came to hygh degree
               Through vertue, redeth eke of Iulius
               The conquerour, howe poore a man was he
               Yet through his vertue and his humilitie
               Of many countrie had he gouernaunce
               Thus vertue bringeth a man to great degre
               Eche wyght that luſt to do him entēdaunce
            
            
               Rede here ayenſt now of Nero vertulees
               Taketh hede alſo of proude Baithaſare
               
                  They hated vertue, equyte and pees
               And loke howe Antyochus fyl fro his chare
               That he his ſkyn and bones al to tare
               Loke what miſchaūce they had for her vices
               who ſo wol not by theſe ſignes beware
               I dare wel ſay infortunate and nyce is
            
            
               I cā no more nowe ſay, but herby may ye ſe
               Nowe vertue cauſeth perfyte ſykerneſſe
               And vices exilen al proſperite
               The beſt is eche man to choſe as I geſſe
               Doth as you lyſt, I my excuſe expreſſe
               I wolde be ryght ſory yf that ye miſchefe
               God confirme you in vertuous nobleſſe
               So that through negligence ye not it leſe.
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            
               
                  SOmtyme the worlde ſo ſtedfaſt was and ſtable
               That mannes worde was an obligation
               And nowe it is ſo falſe and diſceyuable
               That worde and dede as in concluſion
               Is nothyng lyke, for turned is vp ſo downe
               Al the worlde, through mede and fykelneſſe
               That al is loſt for lacke of ſtedfaſtneſſe
            
            
               what maketh the worlde to be ſo variable
               But luſt that men haue in diſcention
               For amonge vs a man is holde vnable
               But yf he can by ſome colluſion
               Do his neighbour wronge and oppreſſion
               what cauſeth this but wylful wretchedneſſe
               That al is loſt for lacke of ſtedfaſtneſſe
            
            
               Trouth is put downe, reaſon is holde fable
               Vertue hath nowe no domination
               Pite is exiled, no man is merciable
               Through couetyſe is blente diſcretion
               The worlde hath made a permutation
               Fro ryght to wrong, fro trouth to fykelneſſe
               That al is loſt for lacke of ſtedaſtneſſe.
            
            
               ¶Lenuoye.
               Prince deſyre to be honourable
               Cheryſh thy folke, and hate extorcion
               Suffre nothyng that may be reprouable
               To thyne eſtate done in thy region
               Shewe forth the yerde of caſtigation
               Drede god, do law, loue trouth & worthines
               And wedde thy folke ayen to ſtedfaſtneſſe.
               ¶Explicit.
            
         
         
            ¶Good counſayle of Chaucer.
            
               
                  FLye ye fro the preaſe & dwell wyth ſothfaſtneſſe
               Suffice vnto thy good yf it be ſmal
               For horde hathe hate, & clymbynge tykelneſſe
               Preaſe hath enuye, and wele is blent ouer al
               Sauour no more than the behoue ſhall
               Rede wel thy ſelfe that other folke ſhal rede
               And trouth the ſhal delyuer it is no drede
            
            
               Payne the not eche croked to redreſſe
               In truſt of her that turneth as a balle
               Great reſt ſtondeth in lytle beſyneſſe
               Beware alſo to ſpurne agayne a nalle
               Stryue not as doth a Crocke wyth a walle
               Deme thy ſelfe that demeſt others dede
               And trouth the ſhal delyuer it is no drede
            
            
               That the is ſent receyue in buxomneſſe
               The wraſtlyng of this worlde aſketh a fal
               Here is no home, here is but wylderneſſe
               Forth pylgrym, forth beeſt out of thy ſtal
               Loke vpon heygh and thanke god of al
               weyue thy luſt and let thy gooſt the lede
               And trouth the ſhal delyuer it is no drede
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            ¶Balade of the vyllage wythout payntynge.
            
               ¶Playntyfe to fortune.
               
                  THys wretched worldes tranſmutation
               As wele & wo now pore and nowe honour
               Wythout order or dew diſcretion
               Gouerned is by fortunes errour
               But nathleſſe the lacke of her fauour
               Ne may not do me ſinge though that I dye
               Iay tout pardu mon temps et labour
               For finally fortune I defye.
            
            
               Yet is me lefte the ſyght of my reaſoun
               To knowe frende fro foe in thy myrrour
               So much hath yet thy turnyng vp & doun
               I taught me to knowen in an hour
               But trewly no force of thy reddour
               
                  To hym that ouer hym ſelfe hath mayſtry
               My ſuffiſaunce ſhalbe my ſocour
               For finally fortune I defye
            
            
               O Socrates thou ſtedfaſt champion
               She myght neuer be thy turmentour
               Thou neuer dreddeſt her opreſſion
               Ne in her chere founde thou no fauour
               Thou knewe the diſceyte of her colour
               And that her mooſt worſhyp is for to lye
               I knowe her eke a falſe diſſimulour
               For finally fortune I defye
            
            
               ¶The anſwere of fortune.
               No man is wretched but hym ſelfe it wene
               He that hath hym ſelfe hath ſuffiſaunce
               why ſayſt thou than I am ſo to the kene
               That haſt thy ſelfe out of my gouernaunce
               ſay thus, graūt mercy of thyne abundaunce
               That thou haſt lent or this, yu ſhalt not ſtriue
               what woſt yu yet howe I wyl the auaunce
               And eke thou haſt thy beſt frende on lyue
            
            
               I haue the taught diuiſyon betwene
               Frende of effecte, and frende of coūtenaunce
               The nedeth nat the galle of an hyne
               That cureth eyen derke for her penaunce
               Nowe ſeeſt thou clere yt were in ignoraunce
               Yet holt thyne anker, & yet thou maiſt ariue
               there bounte bereth the key of my ſubſtaūce
               And eke thou haſt thy beſt frende alyue
            
            
               Howe many haue I refuſed to ſuſtene
               Syth I haue the foſtred in thy pleaſaunce
               wolt thou than make a ſtatute on thy quene
               That I ſhalbe aye at thyne ordynaunce
               Thou borne arte in my reigne of varyaunce
               Aboute ye whele with other muſt thou dryue
               My lore is bette, thā which is thy greuaūce
               And eke thou haſt thy beſt frende a lyue
            
            
               ¶The anſwere to fortune.
               Thy lore I dampne, it is aduerſite
               My frende mayſt yu not reue blynd goddeſſe
               That I thy frendes knowe I thanke it the
               Take hem agayne, let hem go lye a preſſe
               The nygardes in kepyng her rycheſſe
               Prouoſtyke is thou wolt her toure aſſayle
               wicke appetyte cometh aye before ſyckeneſſe
               In general thys rule may not fayle
            
            
               ¶Fortune.
               Thou pyncheſt at my mutabilyte
               For I the lent a droppe of my rycheſſe
               And nowe me lyketh to wythdrawe me
               why ſhuldeſt thou my royalte oppreſſe
               The ſee may ebbe and flowe more and leſſe
               The welkē hath mixt to ſhyne, rayne & hayle
               Ryght ſo muſt I kyth my brotylneſſe
               In general thys rule may not fayle
            
            
               ¶The playntyfe.
               Lo, the execution of the maieſte
               That al purueyeth of hys ryghtwyſeneſſe
               That ſame thyng fortune clepen ye
               Ye blynde beeſtes ful of leudneſſe
               The heuen hath properte of ſykerneſſe
               Thys worlde hath euer reſtleſſe trauayle
               The laſte day is ende of myne entreſſe
               In general thys rule may not fayle
            
            
               ¶Thenuoye of fortune.
               Princes I pray you of your gentylneſſe
               Let not thys man on me thus crye & playne
               And I ſhal quyte you thys beſyneſſe
               And yf ye lyſt releue hym of hys payne
               Pray ye hys beſt frende of his nobleſſe
               That to ſome better eſtate he maye attayne
            
            
               ¶Lenuoye.
               
                  
                     TO broken ben the ſtatutes hye in heuen
                  That create were eternally tendure
                  Syth yt I ſe the bryght goddes ſeuen
                  Mowe wepe and waile and paſſion endure
                  As maye in earth a mortal creature
                  Alas, fro whence may thys thynge procede
                  Of which errour I dye almoſt for drede
               
               
                  By worde eterne whilom was it ſhape
                  That fro the fyfth cercle in no manere
                  Ne myght of teares downe eſcape
                  But nowe ſo wepeth Venus in her ſphere
                  that wyth her teares ſhe wol drench vs here
                  Alas Skogan thys is for thyne offence
                  Thou cauſeſt thys deluge of peſtilence
               
               
                  Haſt yu not ſayd in blaſpheme of the goddis
                  through pride, or through thy gret rekilneſſe
                  ſuch thinges as in ye lawe of loue forbode is
                  That for thy lady ſawe not thy diſtreſſe
                  Therfore thou yaue her vp at Myghelineſſe
                  Alas Skogon of olde folke ne yonge
                  was neuer erſt Skogā blamed for his tong
               
               
                  
                  Thou drewe in ſcorne Cupide eke to recorde
                  Of thilke rebel worde that thou haſt ſpoken
                  For which he wol no lenger be thy lorde
                  And Skogan though hys bow be not brokē
                  
                  He wol not wyth his arowes ben ywroken
                  On the ne me, ne none of our figure
                  we ſhal of him haue neyther hurte ne cure
               
               
                  Now certes frend I drede of thine vnhappe
                  Leſt for thy gylt the wretche of loue procede
                  On al hem yt bene hore and rounde of ſhappe
                  That bene ſo lykely folke to ſpede
                  Than we ſhal for our labour haue our mede
                  But wel I wotte thou wolte anſwere & ſay
                  Lo olde gryſel lyſt to renne and play
               
               
                  Nay Skogan ſay not ſo, for I me excuſe
                  God helpe me ſo, in no ryme doutles
                  Ne thynke I neuer of ſlepe wake my muſe
                  That ruſteth in my ſheth ſtyl in pees
                  whyle I was yong I put her forth in prees
                  But al ſhal paſſe that men proſe or ryme
                  Take euery man his tourne as for his tyme
               
               
                  Skogan thou kneleſt at the ſtremes heed
                  Of grace, of al honour, and of worthyneſſe
                  In thende of whych I am dul as deed
                  Forgoten in ſolatary wylderneſſe
                  Yet Skogan thinke on Tullius kindeneſſe
                  Mynde thy frende there it may fructify
                  Farewel, & loke thou neuer efte loue defye
               
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            
               
                  GO forthe kynge, rule the by ſapience
               Byſhoppe be able to miniſtre doctrine
               Lorde to trewe counſayle yeue audience
               womanheade to chaſtyte euer enclyne
               Knyght let thy dedes worſhyp determyne
               Be ryghtous iuge in ſauyng thy name
               rych do almeſſe, leſt thou leſe blyſſe wt ſhame
            
            
               People obey your kyng and the lawe
               Age be thou ruled by good reugion
               trew ſeruaūt be dredeful & kepe ye vnder awe
               And thou poor fye on preſumption
               Inobedience to youth is vtter deſtruction
               Remembre you howe god hath ſet you lo
               And do your parte as ye be ordayned to.
            
            
               ¶Chaucer vnto hys empty purſe.
               To you my purſe and to none other wight
               Complayne I, for ye be my lady dere
               I am ſory nowe that ye be lyght
               For certes ye nowe make me heuy chere
               Me were as lefe be layde vpon a bere
               For which vnto your mercy thus I crye
               Be heuy agayne or els mote I dye
            
            
               Nowe vouchſafe thys daye or it be nygt
               That I of you the blyſful ſowne may here
               Or ſe your colour lyke the ſunne bryght
               That of yelowneſſe had neuer pere
               Ye be my lyfe, ye be my hertes ſtere
               Quene of comforte and of good company
               Be heuy agayne, or els mote I dye
            
            
               Nowe purſe that arte to me my lyues lyght
               And ſauiour, as downe in thys worlde here
               Out of thys towne helpe me by your myght
               Syth that ye wol not be my treaſourere
               For I am ſhaue as nygh as any frere
               But I pray vnto your curteſye
               Be heuy agayne, or els mote I dye
            
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            ¶Chaucer vnto the kynge.
            O conquerour of Brutes Albyon
            Whych that by lyne and free election
            Bene very kynge, thys to you I ſende
            And ye that maye al harmes amende
            Haue mynde vpon my ſupplycation.
            ¶Explicit.
         
         
            
               
                  COnſyder wel euery circūſtaunce
               Of what eſtate ſo euer thou be
               Rych, ſtronge, or myghtye of puiſſaunce
               Prudent or wyſe diſcrete or beſy
               The dome of folke in ſoth thou maye not flye
               what euer thou doſt truſt wel thys
               A wycked tonge wol alway ſay amys
            
            
               
               For in thy porte or in thyne apparayle
               If thou be cladde and honeſtly be ſeyne
               Anone the people of malice wol not fayle
               wythout aduyce or reaſon for to ſayne
               That thyn array is made & wrouȝt in vaine
               what ſuffre hem ſpeke, and truſt wel thys
               A wycked tonge wol alway ſay amys
            
            
               Thou wolde to kynges be equiuolent
               wyth great lordes euyn and peregal
               And yf thou be torne and al to rent
               Than wol they ſay, and iangle ouer al
               That thou art a ſlogarde yt neuer thriue ſhal
               Yet ſuffre hem ſpeke, and truſt wel thys
               A wycked tonge wol alway ſay amys
            
            
               If it befal that thou take a wyfe
               They wol falſly ſay in theyr entent
               That thou art lykely euer to lyue in ſtryfe
               Voyde of al reſt, wythout alegement
               wyues hem mayſtren, thys is their iugemēt
               Yet ſuffren theyr ſpeche, and truſt well thys
               A wycked tonge wol alway ſay amys
            
            
               If thou be fayre and excellent of beaute
               Yet wol they ſay that thou arte amerous
               If thou be foule and vglye on to ſe
               They woll affirme that thou art vicious
               The peoples langage is ſo diſpytous
               Suffre al theyr ſpeche, and truſt wel thys
               A wycked tonge wol alway ſay amys
            
            
               If ſo be that thou of parfyreneſſe
               Haue auowed to lyue in chaſtite
               Than wol folke of thy perſon expreſſe
               that thou art impotēt tengēdre in thy degre
               And thus whether thou be chaſt or delauie
               Suffre hem ſpeke, and truſte wel thys
               A wycked tonge wol alwaye ſay amys
            
            
               If thou be fatte or corpulent
               Than woll they ſay thou art a gloton
               A denouret, or els vynolent
               If thou be megre or leane of faſhyon
               Cal the a nygarde in theyr opinyon
               Yet ſuffre them ſpeke, and truſte wel thys
               A wycked tonge wol alway ſay amys
            
            
               If thou be ryche, ſome wol yeue the laude
               And ſaye it cometh of prudent gouernaunce
               And ſome wol ſay it cometh of fraude
               Or by ſleyght, or by falſe cheuyſaunce
               To ſay the worſt, folke haue ſo gret pleſaūce
               what ſuffre hem ſay, and truſt wel thys
               A wycked tonge wol alway ſay amys
            
            
               If thou be ſadde or ſobre of countenaunce
               Men wol ſay thou thynkeſt ſome treaſon
               And yf thou be glad of dalyaunce
               Men wol deme it diſſolution
               Callyng fayre ſpeche adulation
               Yet let hem ſpeke, and truſt wel thys
               A wycked tonge wol alway ſay amys
            
            
               And who that is holy by perfection
               Men of malyce wol cal hym an ypocrite
               And who that is mery of clene entencion
               Mē ſay in ryot he him doth delyte
               ſome mourne in black, ſome lauȝe in clothes white
               what ſuffre hem ſay, and truſt wel thys
               A wycked tonge wol alway ſay amys
            
            
               who ſpeketh much is holden prudent
               And who debateth, mē ſaye that he is hardy
               And who yt ſayth lytle wyth great ſentemēt
               Some men yet wol wyte hym of foly
               Trouth is put downe, & nowe goth flattery
               & who yt lyſt playnly know ye trouth of thys
               It is a wycked tong, yt alway ſayth amys
            
            
               For though a man were as pacient
               As was Dauid thorowe humilitie
               Or with Salomon in wiſdome as prudent
               Or in knyghthode egal with Ioſue
               Or manly proued, as Iudas Machabe
               Yet for al that, truſt ryght wel thys
               A wycked tonge wol alway ſay amys
            
            
               And though a mā had the hygh proweſſe
               Of worthy Hector, Troyes champion
               The loue of Troylus, or the kyndneſſe.
               Or of Ceſar the famous hygh renoun
               wyth al Alyſaunders domination
               Yet for al that truſt ryght wel thys
               Some wycked tonge of hym wol ſay amys
            
            
               Or though a man of hyghe or lowe degre
               Of Tullius had the ſugred eloquence
               Or of Seneca the great moralite
               Or of Caton the 
                     •
                  oreſyght and prouidence
               the cōqueſt of Charles Artures magnificēce
               Yet for al that truſt ryght well thys
               Some wycked tonge wol ſay of hym amys
            
            
               
               The wyſely trouth of Penelope
               Though they it had in her poſſeſſion
               Holyneſſe, beautie, the kyndeneſſe of Medee
               The lyfe vnfeyned of Mertia Caton
               Or of Alceſt the trewe affection
               Yet dare I ſay, and truſt ryght well thys
               A wycked tonge wol ſay of her amys
            
            
               Than ſythen it is ſo, no man may eſchewe
               The ſwerde of tonge, but it kerue and byte
               Ful harde it is a man for to remewe
               Out of theyr daunger him for to aquyte
               wo to the tonges that hem ſo delyte
               To hynder or ſclaunder, & ſet theyr ſtudye in thys
               And theyr pleaſaunce to do and ſay amys
            
            
               Mooſt noble princes, cheryſhers of vertue
               Remembreth you of hygh diſcrecyon
               The fyrſt vertue and moſt pleaſyng to Ieſu
               (By the wrytyng and ſentence of Caton)
               Is a good tonge in hys opinyon
               Chaſtyſe the reuerſe, & of wyſdome do thys
               withdraw your hering frō al ye ſame amys.
            
            ¶Et ſic eſt finis.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Thus endeth the workes of Geffray Chaucer, Prynted at London. The yere of our lorde. 1542.
         
         
            ¶ Epitaphtū Galfridi Chaucer, per poet am lauriatum Stephanum Surigonum Mediolanenſem in decretis licentiatum.
            
               
                  PYerides muſe ſi poſſint numina fletus
               Fundere, diuinas at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   riga re genas.
               Galfridi vatis Chaucer crudelia fata
               Plāgite: ſit lachrymis abſtinuiſſe nephas.
               Vos coluit viuēs: at vos celebrate ſepul
                     •
                  ū
               
               Reddatur merito gratia digna viro.
               Grāde decus vobis ē docti muſa Maronis,
               Qua didicit melius lingua latma loqui.
               Grāde, nouū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   decꝰ Chaucer, famā
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ꝑanit
               Hen quantu fuerat priſca Britanna rudis
               Reddidit inſignē maternis uerſibus, 
                     •••
                  am
               Aurea ſplendeſcat, ferrea facta prius.
               Hūc latuiſſe virū nil, ſi tot opuſcula vertes,
               Direris, egregiis que decorata modis,
               Socratis ingenium, vel fōtes philoſophie,
               Quicquid et archani dogmata ſacra 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Et quaſcū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   velis, tenuit digniſſimus a
                     •••
                  s
               Hic vates, paruo conditus hoe tumulo.
               Ah laudis 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  tū preclara Britannia perdis.
               Dum rapuit tantum mors odiola vi
                     ••
                  .
               Crudeles parce, crudelia 
                     •
                  ila ſorores,
               Non tamen extineta co
                     •••
                  re, lama p
                     •••
                  
               
               Viuet meternum, viuent dum ſcripta po
                     •••
                  
               
               Viuant eterno rot monumenta die.
               Si qua bonos tāgit pietas, ſi carmie dign
               Carmia qui cecinit tot cumulata mo
                     •••
                  
               
               Hec ſibi marmoreo ſcribāt verba ſepul
                     •
                  h
                     ••
                  
               
               Hec maneat laudis ſarcina ſumma 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Galfridus Chaucer vates, et fama poeſ
                     ••
                  
               
               Materne, hac ſacra ſum tumulatꝰ hum
                     •
                  .
            
            
               ¶Poſt obitum Caxton voluit te viuere cura
               willelmi, Chaucer clare poeta tui,
               Nam tua nō ſolū cōpreſſit opuſcula formis
               Has quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſed laudes iuſſit hic eſſe tuas.
            
         
      
   