
      
         
            
            
               
AN HARMONY OF THE CONFESSIONS OF THE FAITH OF THE CHRISTIAN AND REFORMED CHVRCHES, which purelie profeſſe the holy doctrine of the Goſpell in all the chiefe Kingdomes, Nations, and Prouinces of Europe: the Catologue and order whereof the Pages following will declare.
            
            There are added in the ende verie ſhorte notes: in which both the obſcure thinges are made plaine, & thoſe thinges which maie in ſhew ſeeme to be contrarie each to other, are plainelie and verie modeſtlie reconciled, and if anie points doe as yet hang in doubt, they are ſincerelie pointed at.
            All which things, in the name of the Churches of Fraunce and Belgia, are ſubmitted to the free and diſcrete iudgement of all other Churches.
            Newlie tranſlated out of Latine into Engliſh.
            Alſo in the end is added the Confeſſion of the Church of Scotland.
            Alowed by publique authoritie.
            Imprinted by THOMAS THOMAS, Printer to the Vniuerſitie of Cambridge. 1586.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            
               
A PREFACE IN THE NAME OF THE CHVRCHES OF FRAVNCE AND BELGIA, VVHICH PROfeſſe the reformation of the Goſpell. ⁂
            
               AMbroſe in a certaine place ſaith notablie, There ought to be no ſtrife, but conference, among the ſeruants of Christ. For, ſeeing the dulnes of mans vnderſtanding, eſpeciallie in heauenlie matters, is ſuch, that we can not oft times perceiue matters otherwiſe verie plaine, it can by no meanes be denied, but that by mutuall conference, and friendly, and brotherly debating of the matter, we come to verie great light. And that eſpeciallie ſeemeth profitable and needful, that ſome ſhould be ſet on edge by others, that thoſe thinges which the Lord hath particularlie beſtowed vpon ſeuerall members of the Church, may redound to the common benefit of the wholl bodie, and that all ſiniſter affection ſet a part, Chriſt, who is the Fathers wiſdome,

and the onely Maſter and teacher of the Church may be heard: and as he is the Prince of peace may ſo by his ſpirit ioyne together our mindes, that if it be poſſible, we maie all think
                  •
                one and the ſame thing in the Lorde. But to ſtriue▪ braule, and fiercelie, and frowardlie to contend, as fenſers doe, is ſo farre from becomming men that are taught of god, as that it is not ſeemely for modeſt or ciuill perſons. And if ſo be that in all, yea euen in the verie leaſt affaires of mans life, that rule of modeſtie is to be kept, what, I pray you, is to be done, when we are in hand with God and Gods matters? Surelie holie things are holily and deuoutly to be handled, in the feare of god & loue of our neighbour. Who, if he goe out of the way▪ is by the Spirit of me
                  •
               kenes to be called backe againe: but if he take the right waie, he is more and more to be inſtructed therein, to the end it may appeare, that we are not driuen by any motion of man, but that in all things our mindes are ruled and gouerned by God. Yet alas, ſuch is the ſpot and ſtaine of our times, that the euill cuſtome of writing whatſoeuer, and euen of railing, hath ſeiſed vpon the wits & mindes not of meane men onely, but euen of thoſe▪ whom i
                  •
                moſt of all behooued to doe the cleane contrary. The roble of Ieſuites, and ſuch other like fellows, (whoſe verie rewarde is the earneſt of bondage and curſed ſpeaking) how ſhameleſlie and outragiouſlie they are caried againſt vs and the trueth: & woh what bitternes they caſt out againſt vs ſuch things, as they haue bin taught in the ſchoole of ſhameleſnes, it ma
                  •
               e be ſufficientlie perceiued of any man.
            
               
For th
                  •
               y, when they feele them ſelues preſſed with moſte ſtrong reaſons, and ouercome with expreſſe places of ſcripture, they runne to cauills and ſlaunders, as to the onelie refuge of their errours. They ſay wee haue reuolted from the Catholique Church▪ that we might follow the diuers imaginations of men: they cr
                  •
               e aloud that we are heretikes, ſchiſ
                  •
               atiques, and ſectaries, and they oft times in mockage cal vs Confeſſioniſts: and moreouer they la
                  •
               e in our diſh, that wee neither agree with our ſelues, nor with others, whoe deteſt the biſhoppe of Rome: but there are as many Religions among vs, as there are Confeſſions of Faith. And that they may ſeeme to procure credit to themſelues, and to giue a check to the Germane Churches eſpeciallie, they bring forth both certeine other writings, and eſpeciallie that Forme of Agreement, of late publiſhed in Germanie, in which there are certaine things to be ſeene farre differing from thoſe auncient Confeſſions of Faith, which the Churches of the Goſpell haue euen ſince the beginning giuen out. But let them ſo thinke, that the fault of hereſie is not to be laide vpon thoſe, whoſe faith altogether relieth on moſte ſure grounds of ſcripture: that they are no ſchiſmatiques who intierly cleaue to Gods Church ſuch an one as the Prophets & Apoſtles doe deſcribe vnto vs: nor to be accounted ſectaries, who embrace the truth of God, which is one and alwaies like it ſelfe. What doe they mean, I praie you, by the name of Confeſſioniſts ſo often repeated? For if euerie man be commaunded to make confeſſion of his Faith ſo often as Gods glorie, and the edifying of the Church ſhall require;

what a wonderfull or ſtrange thing ought it to ſeeme, if Cities, if Prouinces, if wholl kingdomes haue made profeſſion of their faith, when they were falſely charged by the Popiſh ſorte, that they had gone from the doctrine of the true beleeuing Church? but they will ſaie, there ought to be one confeſſion of faith and no moe: as though forſooth, a confeſſion of faith were to be valued rather by the words, then by the thing it ſelfe. What therefore will they ſaie to our ancetours, who when they had the Apoſtles Creede, yet for all that ſet out the Nicene, Chalcedonian, and manie moe ſuch like Creedes? Thoſe Creedes, ſaie you, were generall. Yea ſurelie, but ſo generall▪ that a great part of the world in thoſe elder times followed the frantique hereſies of the Arrians, whom the godlie forefathers by ſetting forth thoſe Creedes deſired to bring home into the Church againe. The trueth, ſaith Hilarie, was by the aduiſe and opinions of Biſhops many waies ſought, & a reaſon of that which was meant was rendered by ſeuerall confeſſions of faith ſet downe in writing: And a litle after. It ought to ſeeme no maruell right welbeloued breethren, that mens faiths began to be declared ſo thick: the outrage of heretiques laieth this neceſſitie vpon vs. Thus much ſaide Hilarie. What that Athanaſius, Auguſtine, and many other auncients ſet forth their Creedes alſo, that the puritie of Chriſtian faith might more and more ſhine ſorth. Therefore if Kingdoms, Cities, & and whole prouinces haue priuatelie made confeſſion of their faith, this was the cauſe therof, for that hitherto the ſtate of times hath not ſuffered, that a generall Councell of all thoſe, who profeſſe the reformed

religion, might be holden. But if it once come to paſſe (and the Lord graunt that the Churches maie at length inioy ſo great a benefit) then there may be one onelie confeſſion of faith extant, conceiued in the ſame wordes, if the ſtate of the Churches ſhal ſeeme to require it. Let them therefore leaue of in mockage to terme vs Confeſſioniſtes, vnles perhaps they looke for this anſwere at our hands, that it is a farre more excellent thing to beare a name of confeſſing the faith, then of denying the trueth. For euen as moe ſmal ſtreames may flow from one ſpring, ſo moe confeſſions of faith, may iſſue out from one and the ſame truth of faith.
            Now to ſpeake ſomewhat alſo of thoſe, who while they will ſeeme to embrace the trueth of the Goſpell, and renounce popiſh errours, ſhew themſelues more vniuſt towards vs, then was meet they ſhould, we are compelled to finde want of Chriſtian charitie inthem. This one thing in deed was remaining, that after ſo many daungers, loſſes, baniſh ments, downefalles, woes without number, griefes and torments, we ſhould alſo be euill intreated by thoſe, of whome ſome comforte was rather to be looked for. But that ancient enimie of the Church is farre deceiued (by whoſe ſubtilties this euil is alſo wrought for vs) while he hopeth that we ma
                  •
               e by his craftes be ouerwhelmed. But bearing our ſelues bolde on that loue, which the mercifull God through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord beareth vnto vs, and whoe hath planted a loue and feare of him in our mindes, we leape for ioye in theſe verie thinges, and boaſt with the Apoſtle, that it will neuer be, (the ſame grace of God alwaies preuenting vs) that

tribulation, anguiſh, hunger, nakednes, the ſword, falſe accuſation, or curſed ſpeaking ſhall withdraw vs from the trueth once knowne and vndertaken. For we knowe that ſaying of Chryſoſtome to be true, It is not euill, to ſuffer; but to doe euill. Neither are we anie whit diſgraced hereby, but they whom I know not what diſtemperature whetteth againſt vs hauing deſerued nothing, & to repaie them like for like, quitting rayling with rayling, far be it from vs, whom God vouchſafeth this honour, that being faſhioned like to the image of his Sonne we might through good reporte and euill reporte walke on, vpholden with the ſtaie of a good conſcience, yea we haue reſolued with our ſelues not only to abide the open wronges of our enimies, but euen the diſdaine of our bretheren, although neuer ſo vniuſt.
            And what we furthermore think of the doctrine of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the confeſſion of our faith, ſet forth manie yeares agoe, hath made it knowen to the wholl world: and we haue God, and Angells, together with men, witneſſes of that ſincere endeuour, by which we laboured, and doe as yet, to the vttermoſte of our power, labour to ſet vp againe and maintaine the pure worſhipe of God among vs out of Gods word.
            And, euen as we ſhewed our ſelues to be readie at all times to render a reaſon of the hope that is in vs: ſo we thought it a matter worth the paines, to make all men priuie to that bonde which one our parte is verie ſtraight with the holie and truelie Catholike Church of God, with euerie Saint and ſounde member thereof, that ſo farre as we c
                  •
               n, we might deliuer, partlie our ſelues, partly

the Churches ioyned with vs from thoſe moſte greeuous crimes, by which ſome mens ſpeaches & bookes are laid to our charge. And when we be thought our ſelues by what means it might beſt be done, this eſpeciallie for the preſent time ſeemed a meet waie vnto vs, which would giue offence to no man, & might ſatisfie al that would yeald vnto reaſon, namelie to publiſh this Harmonie of confeſſions, whereby it might ſufficientlie be vnderſtood, howe falſelie we are charged, as though we, that haue reiected popiſh errors, agreed not at al among our ſelues. For (to beginne with thoſe ſtout maintainers of the Romiſh tyranny, who wil yet ſeeme to be defenders of the truth, this conference of confeſſions will plucke euery viſard from their faces, when as itſhal plainely appeere, that al the opinions in theſe confeſſions of faith were in other ſondrie words ſo laid down, that yet the ſame truth alwaies abideth, & there is none at al, or very litle difference in the thinges themſelues. And how narrow muſt they needs perceiue the boundes of that their Catholique Churche to be, when it ſhalbe openlie knowen, that ſo many kingdomes, prouinces, cities, peoples, & nations profeſſing the truth of the Goſpell, doe with common conſent renounce the abuſes and orders of the Romiſh Church? As for thoſe whome (without anie deſert) it pleaſeth to count vs among the Arrians and Turkes, they ſhal ſee alſo how farre through the benefit of God we be from ſuch hainous and wicked errours. And they alſo, who accuſe vs of ſedition ſhall perceiue how reuerentlie we thinke of the dignitie of kings, and the Magiſtrates authoritie, and they to

conclude that not being content with thoſe publique confeſſions of the Churches of Germanie, may by laying againſt vs that forme of new agreement ſeem worthelie more and more to ſeuer them ſelues from vs, and who haue alreadie very pithilie been refuted by moſte learned writings, they alſo ſhall, if true agreement be earneſtlie ſought, be ſatisfied with this Harmonie. For (that we maie freelie ſaie as it is in deede) that long rancke of names ſealed and written at that booke is ſuch, that it ſeemeth rather to ſtand idlelie in the field, then to fight manfullie.
            And if it had pleaſed vs to followe this pollicie, we might haue ſet downe the names not of ſeuen or eight thouſand meane men (moſt famous Princes and ſome other excepted) of whome it maie worthelie be doubted, whether there euer were anie ſuch, or what they were, but alſo the names of farre moe Churches. And this our diligence had beene farre more commendable, namele, beeing beſtowed, not in wringing out and begging from village to village ſome hundreds of names, but in laying out the opinions of moſte gracious Kinges, moſte renoumed Princes, of noble nations, and peoples, of moſte mightie common wealthes and Cities: of which a great parte hath not bin vſed to diſpute in corners, or to trifle, but hath knowen theſe manie yeares how euen vnto bloode to ſuffer manie and greeuous thinges for Gods trueth ſake. But we know that the truth hath not it warrant from men, nor by men: it is ſimple, it wilbe ſimplie publiſhed and taught. Therfore we are purpoſed for this time not to deale by any long

diſputation with anie man, but bar
                  •
               lie to open the meaning of the reformed Churches, to knit all the Churches of Chriſt together with one bond of brotherlie loue, to keepe peace with all men, and ſo farre as it ought to be done, to iudge well of all men: yea and to intreat thoſe, whoe thinke ſomwhat too hardlie of vs, that if we diſagree from the confeſſion of no Church that doth truelie beleeue, they would themſelues alſo beginne to be of the ſame minde with vs, and quietlie, and ſoberlie conferre with their bretheren, of what thinges they ſhall thinke good, rather then themſelues to ſlaunder & giue the aduerſaries occcaſion to rayle vpon the Goſpell. But if they will not doe it, let this publique and euerlaſting monument witnes to all that come after, that we and all of our ſide are & ſhall be free not onelie from the grieuous reproches, with which wee are vndeſeruedlie laden, but alſo without blame of all the hurlie burlies and diſſentions that haue beene hitherto and that (which God forbid) are peraduenture like tobe more greeuous, vnles it be ſpeedelie preuented on both ſides.
            And ſeeing in this Harmonie we ſpeake not onlie with our owne, but euen with the mouth of all thoſe nations, whoſe confeſſions we haue brought into one forme of one and the ſame doctrine; we hope it will come to paſſe that not ſo much the ſeuerall names of the French, Belgia, and other Confeſſions ſhal hereafter be heard, as that one onlie vniuerſall, ſimple, plaine, and abſolute Confeſſion of all Churches (ſpeaking as it were with one & the ſame tongue of Chanaan) ſhall be ſeene▪ and that they who were thought to be farre wide (as

hath hitherto not altogether without deſert by reaſon of ouer many mens priuate writings beene thought of vs and the brethren of the Confeſſion of Auſpurge) if ſo be that men keepe within the boundes of the Confeſſions, and all cauilling and ſophiſtrie be laide aſide and as well faithfull as fauourable expoſition be admitted, ſhall be thought very neerelie to agree in al things. And this was the cauſe why we deſired to put the confeſſion of Auſpurge, together alſo with that of Saxony, & Wirtemberge, in this Harmonie, that it might be the more eaſilie known, that both we agree with them in all particular points of faith, and that there are verie few matters hanging in controuerſie betweene vs. For concerning that doubt about the Lords Supper, in the, thing and of the thing i
                  •
                ſelfe, there is no ſtrife, we differ in certaine adiuncts and circumſtances of the thing. In the thing it ſelfe, I ſaie, we agree: although as the gifts of God are diuers, ſo ſome do more plainly, ſome do not ſo plain lie, and perhaps not ſo fitlie, vtter that which they thinke. For we all acknowledge that the holie ſignes, haue not a bare ſignification, but that by the ordinance of God they aſſure our conſciences that the things themſelues are as truelie and certainlie giuen of God to all that come, as the ſignes themſelues are giuen by Gods miniſter. But this queſtiō remaineth, whether as the ſigne, ſo alſo the preſent thing it ſelfe be giuen to the body, or rather the preſent ſigne be giuen to the bodie, but the preſent thing giuen onelie to the minde and faith▪ Againe, whether as both be giuen to al, ſo both be receiued of al, of ſome vnto life, and of other ſome

vnto death. In like ſort, we all beleeue the true Communication of the true bodie and the true bloode of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. The controuerſie ſtandeth in the manner of communicating, but who may therefore of right thinke, that the holie vnitie of the Churches is to be plucked a ſunder? That they of our ſide were alwaies deſirous of peace and agreement, the hiſtorie of the conference at Marpurge, and ſuch things as were afterward done in the yeare 1536. doe ſufficientlie witnes.
            Moreouer, ſo often as there appeared any hope of agreement, it is cleare, that there was no other cauſe, but the importunitie of ſome certaine men, why new and ſudden braules beeing raiſed, the matter could not come or long continue in that agreement which was hoped for. For that we may let paſſe very many other things, although in the beginning it were openlie knowne among all, that there was no controuerſie betweene vs (no not ſo much as the verie Papiſts excepted) in the opinion about worſhipping the myſterie of the holie Trinitie; loe about the latter end that vnhappie monſter of Vbiquitie came forth, which if it be admitted, will quite ouerthrow the true doctrine of Chriſts perſon, and his natures. Hence then come the diſtractions of Churches, hence come ſo deadlie quarrellings. But ſeeing this wholl matter hath beene often handled by verie learned men, it is no time for vs to deale any farther therein. For it is ſufficient for vs to ſhew in few wordes, that our men ſo farre as was poſſible, alwaies prouided for the peace of the Church.
            Neither truelie hath any man cauſe after the example

of certain moderators (ſuch as not long ſince haue beene) why he ſhould perſwade himſelfe that we would here of this hotch-potch of opinions make a certaine medlie as it were of contrarie qualities. But we leaue all thinges wholl, that euerie one may ſo know his owne words beeing compared with the ſayings of others, that he ſhall finde nothing forged, nothing taken away, nothing put to, or wreſted. And to conclude, the forme and drift of this wholl work, if it be more narrowlie vowed, ſhal not vnworthily be iudged a ſound body of chriſtian doctrine, framed and alowed by the writings, and as it were by 
                  •
                common councell of the godlie Churches well nigh of all Europe. For here all the chiefe points of our Religion, beeing diſcuſſed and approoued, are by the publique authoritie of all the chiefe nations in Chriſtendome with one conſent publiſhed and knit together: yet we muſt confeſſe, as we afore touched, that through the manifolde and buſie braulings of priuate perſons, and gloſſes (as men commonly ſpeak) the matter was brought farre from the groundes thereof to things cleane beſides the purpoſe and impertinent. For firſt there beganne to be dealing onely about the ſupper: then it came to Chriſts Aſcenſion and ſitting in heauen: and within a while after to the perſonall vnion of both his natures, and what ſtay will there be in the ende? for many, (by all mens leaue be it ſpoken) ſeeme to be delighted with this continual ſtriuing, that howſoeuer, and whatſoeuer it might coſte them, they might not be vnknowne. But it becommeth the Diſciples of Chriſt to ſeeke peace, and to deſpiſe glorie. For as Bernard ſaith, They that deſpiſe
               
               peace, and ſeeke after glorie, they loſe both peace and glorie. A way therefore with thoſe ſpeaches, I am of Paull, I am of Cephas, & let that one ſaying be heard, I am Chriſts, I am the Churches.
            There is ſomething that may be miſliked, yet there are verie manie things that may wel be liked: the ſame ground work of faith abideth, let therfore the ſame loue continue: and let vs not think much to take them for brethren, whome God vouchſafeth to take for ſonnes: neither let vs deſpiſe thoſe, for whome Chriſt deſpiſed him-ſelfe. That thing is aſſuredlie true, and very much liked of vs, that nothing in holy doctrine is to be thought of ſmal importance: but rather that euen in the leaſt pointes thereof a certeine faith and full aſſurance is required, flat contrarie to the wauering of the Academikes: yet we can not like of too too much peeuiſhnes, through which ſome do ſtraight waie vpon verie ſmal occaſion cal their brethren heretikes, ſchiſmatikes, vngodlie, Mahumetanes: let theſe ſpeeches be throwne out againſt Atheiſts, Epicures, Libertines, Arians, Anabaptiſts, and ſuch like miſchieuous perſons, which deſire to haue the Lords field vtterlie deſtroied: but let vs euerie daie grow in faith and loue: and let vs teach the flocks committed to our charge, to feare God, to hate vices, and follow after vertues, to denie the world and themſelues: obeying the commaundement of our Lord & teacher Ieſus Chriſt, who biddeth vs not tobraule but to loue each other. Whoſe example in gouerning the Church if we will follow, we ſhal raiſe vp thoſe that are afflicted, take vp thoſe that are fallen, comfort the feeble, waken the drouſy, & not negligentlie

denounce Gods wrath againſt ſinnes, and ſhall draw out the ſword of the ſame word which is no blunt one againſt hypocrites, wolues, dogges, ſwine, goates, and to conclude againſt all wicked ones which in our Churches mingle them-ſelues with the true ſheepe, and which cauſe the word of God to be euill ſpoken of. It were a farre better thing ſurelie then that which ſome do, buſying the ſharpnes of their wit in making of certeine trifles, that forſooth the knowledge of ſuch ſubtilties, may ſhake out of our mindes all conſcience. It was iuſtlie ſaid that the ſtrength of the goſpel was weakened through the thornie ſubtelties of ſchoolequeſtions: and we through our wayward diſputations what els do we, then cauſe that the authority thereof be not ſtrengthened, but rather weakned, and doe euen ſtagger among the wicked. We read it excellentlie written in Liuie, a verie graue writer, that not onelie grudges, 
                     •
                  ut alſo warres haue an end, and that oftentimes deadlie foes become faithfull confederates, yea and ſometimes Citizens: & that by the ſame ſpeeches of the people of Rome, very bitter or cruel enmities haue bene taken vp betweene men of great account. And that which theſe few wordes wrought with the heathen, ſhall not godlines toward God obteine at the hands of Chriſtians, of deuines, and of Paſtours of Churches? yea if the trauell of reading & diligentlie examining & conferring of this booke ſhall not be irkſome, if vpright and ſincere iudgement, if not preiudicate opinions, but the loue of one truth ſhall beare ſwaie in al mens hearts, it will ſhortly obteine it. That olde contention about the celebrating of Eaſter very hotlie toſſed to and fro

for two hundred years, or there about, between the Greekes and the Latines, was long ſince by vs thought worthie of laughter: but we muſt take good heed, leſt in a matter not altogether vnlike, we ſeeme to be wiſer then both, if ſo be that we deſire to haue the Church wholl, and not to leaue it rent vnto the poſteritie, and would haue our ſelues be counted not fooliſh among men, and not ſtub born in the ſight of god. There hath ſcarce beene anie age, which hath in ſuch ſort ſeen al Churches following altogether one thing in all points, ſo as there hath not alwaies been ſome difference, either in doctrine, or in ceremonies or in manners: and yet were not Chriſtian Churches through the world therefore cut a ſunder, vnles peraduenture then, when the Biſhop of Rome brake of all agreement, & tyrannically 
                  •
               ioyned to other Churches, not what ought to be done, but what him-ſelfe would haue obſerued: but the Apoſtle did not ſo. Barnabas in deed departed from Paull, and Paull alſo withſtood Peter, and ſurelie for no trifle: and yet the one became not more enemie or ſtrange to the other, but the ſelfe ſame ſpirit, which had coupled them from the beginning, neuer ſuffred them to be diſioyned from them-ſelues. It is the faſhion of Romiſts to commaund, to enforce, to preſſe, to through out curſings, and thunder excommunications vpon the heades of thoſe that whiſper neuer ſo litle againſt them: but let vs, according to the doctrine of the holie Ghoſt, ſuffer, and gentlie admoniſh each other: that is, keeping the groundwork of faith, let vs build loue vpon it, and let vs ioyntlie repaire the walls of Sion lying in their ruines.
            
               
It remaineth, that through the ſame Lord Chriſt we beſech our reuerent brethren in the lord, whoſe confeſſions publiſhed we ſet forth, that they take this our paines in good parte: and fuffer vs to leane, as it were to a certaine ſtaie, to the common conſent of the reformed Churches, againſt the accuſations and reproches of the common aduerſaries of the trueth. But it had beene to be wiſhed, that we might at once haue ſet out all the Confeſſions of all the reformed Churches: but becauſe we had them not all, therfore we ſet out them onelie, that were come to our hands, to which the reſt alſo, ſo farre as we ſuppoſe, may eaſilie be drawne. And we alſo could haue wiſhed, that the thing might haue bin made common to all the reformed Churches. But when as the ſtate of our Churches ſeemed to force the matter, & that they could not abide any longer delaie, the right well beloued brethren will pardon vs, with whom by reaſon of the time we could not impart both the Harmony it ſelfe, and the obſeruations▪ as alſo the intent of this wholl edition. Whereas moreouer we haue put to moe confeſſions of one and the ſame nation, as of Auſpurge, & Saxonie, as alſo the former and latter of Heluetia, that was not done without cauſe: for beſides that one expoundeth another, we thought it good alſo hereby to ridde them from all ſuſpicion of inconſtancy and wauering in opinion, which the aduerſaries are wont to catch at, by ſuch repetitions o
                  •
                confeſſions.
            Yet why we would not adde ſome confeſſion
                  •
                of the brethren of Bohemia often repeated, we 
                  〈◊〉
                ſtraight way ſhew a cauſe▪ and we hope that ou
                  •
               
               
reaſon will eaſilie be liked of them. And we haue ſet downe euerie where two, yea and in ſome places three editions of Auſpurge, for this reſpect, leſt in this diuerſitie we might ſeeme to haue picked out that, which rather fauoured ourſide, & to haue vtterlie miſliked the other. Wherein notwithſtanding we haue not euery where followed the order of times, in which euery of them came to light, but the c
                  •
               ppie which we had in our hands printed at Wirtemberge 1572. with a double edition. And w
                  •
                therefore thought it meete to paſſe ouer the Apologies adioyned to the confeſſions (as of Auſpurge, Bohemia, Sucueland, and England) as wel that the work might not grow to be exceeding bigge, as alſo that we might not ſeeme rather to increaſe diſputations & controuerſies, then to make an Harmony of doctrine. And as for our obſeruations, our minde was to meete with the cauills of ſophiſters, who we know well enough will take holde on the leaſt matters, that they may thereby ſet vs on worke. Wherefore leſt they ſhould charge vs to ſet out a diſcorde rather then a concorde of confeſſions▪ we haue added in the end very ſhort obſeruations, in which we lay open thoſe things which might ſeeme ſomewhat obſcurelie ſpoken, and doe fauourablie and freelie, giuing them an interpretation, expounde thoſe thinges, which either haue, or ſeeme to haue any ſhew of repugnancie. And we beſeech the brethren to beare with vs therein, as the moſt diſtreſſed, and deſirous of the peace and agreement of the Curches among thoſe, who in theſe laſt times haue imbraced the truth of the goſpel. For God forbid, that we ſhould

deſire to be counted Cenſurers of others, who are ready rather to be taught of our brethren, and to be ſtrengthned in this face of truth, which is begun. We would therfore haue them ſo to thinke, that theſe obſeruations are laid before them, that they maie iudge of them, and maie, if they ſhall thinke it any where needefull, better and more fitlie declare their owne opinion, and in the meane while accept of our paines.
            YE therefore moſte gracious Kings, Dukes, Earles, Marqueſſes, moſte famous Barrons, & noble Lords, ye Cities, and Common wealthes, ye moſt wiſe Paſtours, Doctours, and, to be ſhort, all Chriſtian people, profeſſing the trueth of the Goſpell, be preſent in ſoules and bodies, ſuffer not the poyſon of diſcord to ſpread any farther: but kill this hurtfull ſerpent, and receiue with a Chriſtian minde as is meete, and as is offered vnto you this moſt ſure token & earneſt of the euerlaſting friendſhip of the French and Belgian Churches with you, offered to you in the face of the whol world: that we beeing by a friendly league coupled together in Chriſt may vanquiſh all Antichriſtes, and may ſing that hymne to the Lord our God, Beholde how good and ioyfull a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in vnitie.
            
         
         
            
            A CATALOGVE OF THE CONFESSIONS WHEREOF THIS HARMONIE IS FRAMED, ACCORding to the order of the times, wherein euery of them were written and publiſhed.
            
            
               I
               
                  
                     THe confeſſion of Auſpurge was firſt preſented in the Germane tongue at the Citie Auſpurge, in the yeare 1530. to Charles the fift being Emperor, by certein moſt renoumed Princes of Germanie, and other ſtates of the ſacred Empire, whome they call Proteſtants. Secondlie the ſelfe ſame yeare it was ſet out and publiſhed at Wirtemberge in latine, ſomewhat corrected in certaine Articles, with a preface, and the ſubſcription of the authors names.
            
            
               II.
               
                  THat confeſſion of the foure cities was preſented both in the Germane, and alſo in the Latine tongue, to the ſame moſt ſacred Emperor Charles the fift, in the ſame aſſemblie held at Auſpurge, in the ſame yere, by the Embaſſadours of the Cities of Strauſbrough, Conſtance, M
                     •
                  mi
                     •
                  ga, Lindaw: both which we haue in certein Articles compared together, that the readers might haue the one made more ample by the other: and we haue

therefore in the titles called it the confeſſion of Sueueland, for that thoſe foure Cities, by whome it was preſented, are commonlie counted neighbours to Sueueland.
            
            
               III.
               
                  THat of Baſill about the yere 1532. was firſt written in the Germane tongue by the miniſters of the Church of Baſill, & alſo by a common ſubſcription alowed of the Paſtors of Strausbrough, then again in the yere 1561. both recogniſed and receiued by the ſelfe ſame miniſters of Baſill. Afterward alſo it was publiſhed by the magiſtrate of Millaine in his owne name in the Germane tongue with a preface, as though it had beene that Churches own confeſſion. And at the laſt it was turned into latine. Whichwe, as more auncient then the reſt of Heluetia, haue thought good to be ſet downe here alſo, and doe elſe where in like ſort call it the confeſſion of Millaine.
               
            
            
               IIII.
               
                  THe former Confeſſion of Heluetia was written at Baſill about the yere 1536. in the behalfe of all the Churches of Heluetia, and ſent and preſented to the aſſemblie of diuines at Wirtemberge by Maſter Bucer and Maſter Capito: and in the yeare following 1537. it was againe propounded together with the declaration thereof to the aſſemblie at Smalcaldia by Bucer himſelfe, and alowed of that wholl aſſemblie, namely, of al
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  he diuines 
                     〈◊〉
                   degrees of Proteſtantes, as Luther his ow
                     •
                  e latters to 
                     〈…〉
                   Heluetians doe teſtifie. And the d
                     ••
                  lara
                     •
                  ion in 
                     〈…〉
                   as conferred in very manie places 
                     〈◊〉
                   the more am
                     •••
                   copie written in the Germane 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               V.
               
                  TH
                        •
                     t of Saxonie was written in latine in th
                     •
                   yeere 1551. in the behalfe of the Saxon Churches, by Maſter Philip Melancthon, that it might be preſented to the councell of 
                     •
                  rent: to which not onelie the Saxon and Meiſſen Churches, but alſo verie manie other did ſuſcribe, as if it had beene to the confeſſion of Auſpurge repeated.
            
            
               VI.
               THat of Wirtemberge was of the moſt renoumed prince and Lord, Lord Chriſtopher Duke of Wirtemberge & Tecca, Earle of Mountbelgard, by his embaſſadours preſented to the aſſemblie of the Tridentine councell the 24. daie of the moneth of Ianuarie in the yeare 1552.
            
            
               VII.
               
                  THe French confeſſion was in the yere 1559. preſented to Frauncis the ſecond King of France firſt at Amboiſe, in the behalfe of all the godly of that Kingdome: Secondlie in the yere 1561. at Poiſie. It was preſented againe in French, to Charles the ninth: and at length alſo publiſhed by the Paſtors of the French Churches, with a preface to all other Euangelicall Paſtors, in the yeare 1566.
               
            
            
               VIII.
               
                  THe Engliſh confeſſion was inſerted in the generall apologie written in the yere 1562. in the behalfe of the Engliſh Churche.
            
            
               
               IX.
               
                  THe latter confeſſion of Heluetia was written by the Paſtors of Zurich, in the yeare 1566. and approoued and ſubſcribed vnto, not onlie of the Tigurines them ſelues and their confederates of Bern, Scaphuſia, Sangallia, Rhetia, Myllaine, and Bienna: but alſo of all them of Geneua, and of Sauoi, of Polonie and likewiſe by the Churches of Hungarie, and Scotland.
               
            
            
               X.
               
                  THe confeſſion of Belgia was publiſhed in french in the name of al the Churches of Belgia, in the yere 1566. and in the yere 1579. in a pub
                     ••
                  que Synode helde at Belgium, it was repeated, confirmed, and turned into the Belgian tongue.
            
            
               XI.
               
                  THat of Bohemia beeing the laſt of the four former, which were farre more auncient, (which for the largenes we thought good not to be inſerted into this harmonie) being recited in the ſame order of Chapters & arguments, & ſomewhat more plainly expreſſed, & in the yere 1573. publiſhed in diuers places, was alſo approoued by common teſtimony of the vniuerſitie of Wirtemberge, euen as Maſter Luther, & Melancton had approoued the former, publiſhed in the yere 1532. beeing altogether the ſame in doctrine with this, as Luther his preface wit
                     •
                  esſeth▪ and we haue called it elſe where the confeſſion of the Waldenſes, following the common title aſſigned therunto by thoſe Churches: which we would haue to be ſpoken without any preiudice to thoſe brethrē.
            
         
         
            
            AN ADMONITION TO THE GODLY AND GENTLE READER, TOVCHING THE ORDER and courſe of this wholl Harmonie. ⁂
            
               THis wholl Harmonie of Confeſſions (genie Reader) is parted into 19. Sections, which wee haue taken ſometimes out of noe, ſomtimes out of fewer Confeſſions in 
                  •
               umber, as each ſeemed euerie one in his 
                  •
               wne pl
                  •
               ce to handle one & th
                  •
                ſ
                  •
               me matter or chief point of doctrine. But in 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               ing the context of euerie Confeſſion, becauſe we w
                  •
               r
                  •
                
               
                  •
               o haue regard of the order of things and doctrine, rather then either of the time, or worthines of the Churches & Authors that wrote them, or other ſuch like circumſtance▪ the
                  •
               fore it ſeemed good without anie enuie or preiudice of other Confeſſions, either more auncient or more famous, to giue the firſt place to the latter Confeſſion of Heluetia; 
                  •
               oth becauſe the order thereof ſeemed more fitie, and 
                  •
               he wholl handling of doctrine more full and conuenient and alſo becauſe that Confeſſion was publiquelie approoued & ſubſcribed vnto by verie manie Churches of d
                  •
               uers Na
                  ••
               on
                  •
               . Farther vpon 
                  •
               his do the re
                  •
               t fitly follow, to wit, 
                  •
               he former confeſſion of Heluetia▪ & then all other, without any 
                  •
               ho
                  •
               ſ
                  •
               , indifferentlie, ſaue that we had rather ioyne together th
                  •
                Confeſſions of Germanie, then ſ
                  •
               uer them 
                  •
               ach 
                  〈…〉
                according to 
                  •
               h
                  •
                argument of euerie Section. 
                  〈…〉
                info
                  ••
               ed to p
                  •
               t that Confeſſion of th
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                as rece
                  •
               u
                  •
               d ſomewhat 
                  ••
               te, in the la
                  ••
                pl
                  •
               ce. 
                  〈…〉
                if it ſhall not ſeeme fitte and conuenient to 
                  〈◊◊〉
                may

eaſilie be altered in the ſecond edition, as other Confeſſions alſo, if anie ſuch beſide theſe ſhall be wanting, may in their due place be adioyned.
            To conclude, that the godly Reader may want nothing, and that no man may ſuſpect anie thing to be taken awaie or added to anie of thoſe Confeſſions, we haue here ſet downe the articles or chiefe points in the order wherin they were firſt written. Which we deſire euerie man fauourably to interprete, and to enioy this our labour, rather ſeeking peace and agreement, then malitiouſlie hunting after occaſions of diſſenſions.
         
         
            
            PROPER CATALOGVES FOR EVERIE CONFESSION, CONTEINED IN THIS HARMONIE, AFTER THAT ORDER WHEREIN They were firſt written.
            
               THE ARTICLES OF THE FORMER CONFESſion of Heluetia.
               
                  
                     SCripture 1
                  
                     Interpretation 2
                  
                     Fathers 3
                  Humane Traditions 4
                  
                  The drift of the Scripture 5
                  
                  
                     God 6
                  Man, and his ſtrength 7
                  
                  Originall ſinne. 8
                  
                  Free will. 9
                  
                  The eternall Counſell, touching the reſtoring of man. 10
                  
                  Ieſus Chriſt, and thoſe benefites which we reape by him. 11
                  
                  The drift of the doctrine of the Goſpell. 12
                  
                  Faith, and the force thereof. 13
                  
                  The Church. 14
                  
                  Of the Miniſters of the word. 15
                  
                  Eccleſiaſticall power. 16
                  
                  The chooſing of Miniſters 17
                  
                  The head and Shepherd of the Church. 18
                  
                  The dueties of Miniſters. 19
                  
                  Of the force and efficacie of the Sacraments. 20
                  
                  
                     Baptiſme. 21
                  The Euchariſt. 22
                  
                  Holie aſſemblies. 23
                  
                  Of Heretikes & Schiſmatikes▪ 
                     24
                  
                  Of thinges indifferent. 25
                  
                  Of the Magiſtrate 26
                  
                  Of Holie Wedlocke. 27
                  
               
            
            
               THE CHIEFE POINTS OF THE LATTER CONfeſſion of Heluetia.
               
                  Of the holie Scripture, being the true word of God. 1
                  
                  Of Interpreting the holie Scripture, and of 
                        •
                     athers, Councels, and Traditions. 2
                  
                  Of God, his vnitie and the Trinitie. 3
                  
                  Of Idoles, or Images of God, Christ, and Saintes. 4
                  
                  Of the Adoration, worſhippe, and In
                        •
                     ocation of God, through the onelie Mediatour Ieſus Chriſt. 5
                  
                  
                     
Of the Prouidence of God. 6
                  
                  Of the creation of all thinges, of Angells, the Deuill, and man. 7
                  
                  Of the fall of man, ſinne, and the cauſe of ſinne. 8
                  
                  Of free w
                        •
                     ll, and ſo of mans power and abilitie. 9
                  
                  Of the Predeſtination of God, and Election of the ſaintes. 10
                  
                  Of Ieſus Chriſt being true God, & man, and the onlie Sauiour of the world. 11
                  
                  Of the lawe of God. 12
                  
                  Of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, of the Promiſes, alſo, of the ſpirit, and the letter. 13
                  
                  Of Repentance, and the Conuerſion of man. 14
                  
                  Of the true iuſtification of the faithfull. 15
                  
                  Of Faith, and good workes, and of their reward, and the merit of man. 16
                  
                  Of the Catholique & holy Church of God, and of the onely head of the Church. 17
                  
                  Of the Miniſters of the Church their inſtitution, & dueties. 18
                  
                  Of the Sacramentes of the Church of Chriſt. 19
                  
                  Of holie Baptiſme. 20
                  
                  Of the holy Supper of the Lord. 21
                  
                  Of holie and Eccleſiaſticall aſſemblies. 22
                  
                  Of the Praiers of the Church, of ſinging & Canonicall houres. 23
                  
                  Of Holy daies, faſtes, and choiſe of meates. 24
                  
                  Of Comforting, or viſiting the ſicke. 25
                  
                  Of the buriall of the faithfull, and the care that is to be had for the dead, and of Purgatorie, and the appeering of Spirites. 26
                  
                  Of Rites, Ceremonies, and thinges Indifferent. 27
                  
                  Of the goods of the Church. 28
                  
                  Of ſingle life, Wedlocke, and the ordering of a Family. 29
                  
                  Of the Magiſtrate. 30
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARTICLES OF THE CONFESSION OF Baſill.
               
                  Of God. 1
                  
                  Of man. 2
                  Of the care of God toward vs. 3
                  Of Chriſt, being true God, and true man. 4
                  
                  Of the Church. 5
                  
                  Of the Supper of our Lord. 6
                  
                  Of the Magiſtrate. 7
                  
                  Of Faith, and workes. 8
                  
                  Of the laſt daie. 9
                  
                  Of thinges commaunded, and not commaunded. 10
                  
                  Againſt the error of the Anabaptiſtes. 11
                  
               
            
            
               THE CHIEFE POINTS OF THE CONFESSION OF Bohemia.
               
                  Of the holy Scripture, and of Ecc
                        •
                     
                     ſiaſticall writers. 
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     
Of Chriſtian Catechizing. 2
                  
                  Of the vnitie of the diuine eſſence, & of the three Perſons. 3
                  
                  Of the knowledge of himſelfe. Alſo,
                  Of ſinne, the cauſes and fruites hereof, and of the promiſes of God. 4
                  
                  Of repentance. 5
                  
                  Of Chriſt the Lord, and of Iuſtification through faith in him. 6
                  
                  Of good workes, which be holie actions. 7
                  
                  Of the holie Catholique Church, the order and diſcipline hereof, and moreouer of Antichriſt. 8
                  
                  Of the Miniſters of the Church. 9
                  
                  Of the word of God. 10
                  
                  Of the Sacraments in general. 11
                  
                  Of holy Baptiſme. 12
                  
                  Of the Supper of the Lord. 13
                  
                  Of the keies of Christ. 14
                  
                  Of thinges acceſſorie, that is, of rites, or Eccleſiaſticall ceremonies. 15
                  
                  Of the politique or Ciuill Magiſtrate. 16
                  
                  Of Saints, and their worſhip. 17
                  
                  Of faſting, 18
                  
                  Of ſingle life, and Wedlocke, or the order of maried folke. 19
                  
                  Of the time of Grace. 20
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARTICLES OF THE FRENCH CONFEſſion.
               
                  Of God, and his one onelie eſſence. 1
                  
                  Of the knowledge of God. 2
                  
                  Of the Ca
                        •
                     onicall bookes of the holy Scripture. 3
                  
                  Of diſtinguiſhing the Canonicall book
                        •
                      from the Apocryphall. 4
                  
                  Of the authoritie of the word of God. 5
                  
                  Of the Trinitie of the Perſons in one onely eſsence of God. 6
                  
                  Of the Creation of the world. 7
                  
                  Of the eternal Prouidence of God 8
                  
                  Of the fall of man, and his free will 9
                  
                  Of Originall ſinne. 10
                  
                  Of the propagation of Originall ſinne, and of the effectes thereof. 11
                  
                  Of the free Election of God. 12
                  
                  Of the reparing of man from his fall through Chriſt. 13
                  
                  Of two natures in Chriſt. 14
                  
                  Of the hypoſtaticall vnion of his two natures. 15
                  
                  Of the death and reſurrection of Chriſt, and of the fruit thereof. 16
                  
                  Of the merit, and fruit of the ſacrifice of Chriſt. 17
                  
                  Of the remiſſion of ſinnes, and true Iuſtification. 18
                  
                  Of the Interceſſion, or Mediation of Chriſt. 19
                  
                  Of iuſtifying Faith, and the gift, and effectes thereof. 20. 21. 22
                  
                  Of the aboliſhing of Ceremonies, and true vſe of the Morall lawe. 23
                  
                  Of the interceſſion of Saintes, Purgatorie, and other ſuperſtitious traditions of the Popiſh ſorte. 24
                  
                  Of the Miniſterie of the Goſpell. 25
                  
                  Of the vnitie of the Church, and the true notes thereof. 26. 27. 28
                  
                  Of Eccleſiaſticall functions. 29
                  
                  Of the power, and authoritie of the miniſters. 30
                  
                  Of their lawfull calling, and election. 31
                  
                  
                     
Of Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline. 32
                  
                  Of Excommunication, and other Cenſures. 33
                  
                  Of the Sacraments in generall. 34
                  
                  Of Baptiſme. 35
                  
                  Of the holie Supper of the Lorde. 36
                  
                  Of the efficacie, and true communication of the thing ſignified by the ſignes. 37. 38
                  
                  Of the Magiſtrate, and politike lawes 39. 40
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARTICLES OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               
                  Of one God in three Perſons. 1
                  
                  Of Ieſus Chriſt being the true Sonne of God, and of the Incarnation, & other workes of Redemption, and of his two natures being vnſeperablie vnited and vnconfounded. 2
                  
                  Of his laſt comming
                  Of the holie Ghoſt, and his workes in vs. 3
                  
                  Of the Catholique Church, and the one onelie King, head, and huſband thereof. 4
                  
                  Of the diuers degrees of the Church. 5
                  
                  Of the prima
                        •
                     ie of the Antichriſt of Rome. 5
                  
                  Of the lawful calling and Election of miniſters. 6
                  
                  Of their power, and the vſe of the keies. 7
                  
                  Of mariage and a Single life. 8
                  
                  Of the Canonicall ſcriptures. 9
                  
                  Of the Sacramentes, and the number thereof. 10
                  
                  Of Baptiſme. 11
                  
                  Of the holy Euchariſt. 12
                  
                  Of the 
                        ••
                     le of Maſſes. 13
                  
                  Of Purgatorie. 14
                  
                  Of Ceremonies, and Eccleſiaſticall rites. 15
                  
                  Of prayer in a vulgare tounge. 16
                  
                  Of the onelie Interceſsour, and Mediatour Chriſt. 17
                  
                  Of the corruption of man through ſinne, of his iuſtification through Chriſt. 18
                  
                  Of the one onely ſacrifice of Chriſt, whereby we are perfectly reconciled to God. 19
                  
                  Of good workes. 20
                  
                  Of the laſt reſurrectiō of this fleſh. 21
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARTICLES OF THE CONFESSION OF Belgia.
               
                  Of the eſſence, or nature of God. 1
                  
                  Of the double knowledge of God. 2
                  
                  Of the beginning, and author of the word of God. 3
                  
                  Of the Canonicall bookes of the olde and new Teſtament. 4
                  
                  Of their authoritie. 5
                  
                  Of the Apochryphall bookes. 6
                  
                  Of the perfection of the Canonicall Scripture aboue all the doctrines of all men. 7
                  
                  Of three perſons in one onelie eſſence of God. 8
                  
                  Of the teſtimonies of both the teſtaments, whereby both the Trinitie of the perſons, & alſo their properties m
                        ••
                      be prooued 9
                  
                  Of the diuine nature, and generation of Ieſus Chriſt the Sonne of god. 10
                  
                  Of the diuine nature of the holy ghoſt. 11
                  
                  Of the creation of the world, and Angells, and the diſtinguiſhing of

them. 12
                  
                  Of the Prouidence of God, and of his iuſt gouernement, both general, & ſpecial. 13
                  
                  Of the creation of man, his fal, corruption, and ſeruile free wil. 14
                  
                  Of Original ſinne. 15
                  
                  Of free election, & iuſt reprobation. 16
                  
                  Of the repairing of man through Chriſt. 17
                  
                  Of the firſt comming of Chriſt, and his true incarnation of the ſeede of Dauid. 18
                  
                  Of his two natures hypostatically vnited in one onelie perſon. 19
                  
                  Of the cauſe, or end of his death, and reſurrection. 20
                  
                  Of his onelie Priesthoode, and expiatorie ſacrifice. 21
                  
                  Of faith, the onelie inſtrument of our Iuſtification. 22
                  
                  Of true iuſtification through Chriſt. 23
                  
                  Of regeneration and good workes. 24
                  
                  Of the abrogating of the law and ſhadowes. 25
                  
                  Of the onelie Mediatour or interceſſour Chriſt, againſt the interceſſion of Saints. 26
                  
                  Of the Catholique Church. 27
                  
                  Of the vnitie and communion thereof. 28
                  
                  Of true notes of the true Church. 29
                  
                  Of the gouernement, & Eccleſiaſtical functions. 30
                  
                  Of the Election of Miniſters, Elders and Dea
                        •
                     ons, and of their authoritie. 31
                  
                  Of Eccleſiaſtical traditions. 32
                  
                  Of the Sacraments, and their number 33
                  
                  Of Baptiſme. 34
                  
                  Of the Supper of the Lord. 35
                  
                  Of Magiſtrates, and their office and power. 36
                  
                  Of the laſt Iudgement. 37
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARTICES OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               
                  Of God, and the perſons of the diuinitie. 1
                  
                  Of Original ſinne. 2
                  
                  Of the incarnation of the Sonne of God. 3
                  
                  Of Iuſtification. 4
                  
                  Of the Preaching of Repentance, and general Remiſſion. 5
                  
                  Of the righteouſnes of good wookes. 6
                  
                  Of the Church. 7
                  
                  Of the Sacraments which are adminiſtred by euil men. 8
                  
                  Of Baptiſme. 9
                  
                  Of the Lords Supper. 10
                  
                  Of Repentance. 11
                  
                  Of Confeſſion. 12
                  
                  Of the vſe of Sacraments. 13
                  
                  Of Eccleſiaſtical order, or degrees. 14
                  
                  Of Eccleſiaſtical ri
                        ••
                     s. 15
                  
                  Of ciuil ordinances. 16
                  
                  Of the la
                        ••
                      Iudgement. 17
                  
                  Of fr
                        ••
                      wil. 18
                  
                  Of the cauſe of ſinne. 19
                  
                  Of good workes. 20
                  
                  Of 
                        •
                     nuocation. 21
                  
               
            
            
               ARTICLES CONCERNING THE ABVSES VVHICH ARE changed in externall rites
               
                  Of the Maſſe. 1
                  
                  Of either kinde of the Sacrament. 2
                  
                  Of Confeſſion. 3
                  
                  
                     
Of the difference of mea
                        •
                     es, and ſuch like Popiſh traditions. 4
                  
                  Of the mariage of the Prieſtes. 5
                  
                  Of the vowes of Monkes. 6
                  
                  Of Eccleſiaſtical power. 7
                  
               
            
            
               THE CHIEFE POINTS OF THE CONFESSION of Saxonie.
               
                  Of Doctrine. 1
                  
                  Of Originall ſinne. 2
                  
                  Of the remiſſion of ſinnes, and of I
                        •
                     
                     ▪ſtification. 3
                  
                  Of freewill. 4
                  
                  Of new obedience, 5
                  
                  What workes are to be done. 6
                  
                  How good works maie be done. 7
                  
                  How new obedience doth pleaſe God. 8
                  
                  Of rewardes. 9
                  
                  Of the difference of ſinnes. 10
                  
                  Of the Church. 11
                  
                  Of the Sacramentes. 12
                  
                  Of Baptiſme. 13
                  
                  Of the Lords Supper. 14
                  
                  Of the vſe of the wholl Sacrament. 15
                  
                  Of repentance. 16
                  
                  Of Satisfaction. 17
                  
                  Of Wedlocke. 18
                  
                  Of Confirmation and anointing. 19
                  
                  Of Traditions or Eccleſiaſtical rites 20
                  
                  Of a Monaſticall life. 21
                  
                  Of the inuocating of godlie men departed out of this life. 22
                  
                  Of the ciuill Magiſtrate. 23
                  
               
            
            
               THE CHIEFE POINTES OF THE CONFESSION OF Wirtemberge.
               
                  Of God, and three perſons in one godhead. 1
                  
                  Of the Sonne of God. 2
                  
                  Of the holie Ghost. 3
                  
                  Of ſinne. 4
                  
                  Of Iuſtification. 5
                  
                  Of the law. 6
                  
                  Of good Workes. 7
                  
                  Of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt. 8
                  
                  Of the Sacraments. 9
                  
                  Of Baptiſme. 10
                  
                  Of Confirmation. 11
                  
                  Of Repentance. 12
                  
                  Of Contrition. 13
                  
                  Of Confeſſion. 14
                  
                  Of Satisfaction. 15
                  
                  Of Prair. 16
                  
                  Of Faſting. 17
                  
                  * Of Almes. 18
                  
                  Of the Euchariſt, that is, of the Sacrament of thankesgiuing. 19
                  
                  * Of the Maſſe. 20
                  
                  Of holie orders 21
                  
                  Of Mariage. 22
                  
                  * Of e
                        ••
                     reame Vnction. 23
                  
                  Of the inuocating of Saints. 24
                  
                  Of the remembrance of the dead. 25
                  
                  Of Purgatorie. 26
                  
                  * Of Monaſticall vowes. 27
                  
                  Of Canonicall houres. 28
                  
                  Of Faſting. 29
                  
                  Of the conſecrating of water, ſalt, wine, and other ſuch like things. 30
                  
                  Of the holie Scripture. 31
                  
                  * Of the Pope. 32
                  
                  Of the Church. 33
                  
                  Of Councels. 34
                  
                  Of the Teachers of the Church. 35
                  
                  Of Eccleſiaſtical Ceremonies. 36
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE CONTENTES OF THE BOOKE FOLLOWING, ACCORDING TO THE SECTIONS, WHICH are in number 19. and of how manie confeſſions ech Section doth conſiſt.
            
               THE 1. SECTION. pag. 1.
               
                  OF the holie Scripture▪ beeing the true word of God, and the interpretation thereof. This Section conſiſteth of 10. confeſſions: to wit, Of the former and latter confeſſions of Heluetia, of that of Baſil or Myllane, of Bohemia or the 
                     〈◊〉
                   the French, the Engliſh, that of Belgia, Saxonie, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.
            
            
               THE 2. SECTION. pag. 18.
               
                  OF God in eſſence one, in perſons three, and of his true worſhip. This Section 
                        〈…〉
                      of 11. confeſſions, to wit▪
                   Of the former 
                     〈…〉
                   confeſſion of Heluetia, that of Baſil, of 
                     〈…〉
                   or the Waldenſes, the French, the Engliſh, th
                     •
                  t of Belgia, Auſpurge, Saxonie, Wirtemberge, 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               THE 3. SECTION. pag▪ 53.
               OF the eternall prouidence of God, and the creation of the world. This Section doth conſiſt properly of foure Confeſſions onely, to wit, Of the latter confeſſion of Heluetia, Baſill, the French, and that of Belgia, which alone haue expreſſe titles of theſe chiefe points of doctrine. But theſe foure, to wit, the former confeſſion of Heluetia, the Engliſh, that of Auſpurge, and Wirtemberge, do by the waie make mention, both of the prouidence of God, and alſo of the creation of the world▪ in the article of God, as is to be ſeene in the 2. Section. And

the others, to wit, thoſe of Bohem. Saxonie, and Sueueland, haue altogether omitted this part of doctrine.
            
            
               THE 4. SECTION. pag. 59.
               
                  OF the fall of man, of ſinne, and of free will. This Section conſiſteth of 10. Confeſsions: to wit, Of the former and latter confeſſions of Heluetia, of that of Baſil, Bohemia or the Waldenſes, the French, Engliſh, that of Belg. Auſpurge, Saxony, and Wirtemb.
            
            
               THE 5. SECTION. pag. 84.
               
                  OF eternal Predeſtination. This Section conſiſteth of foure Confesſions onely, to wit, Of the l
                     •
                  tter Confeſſion of Heluetia, that of Baſil the French, and that of Belgia.
            
            
               THE 6. SECTION. pag. 88.
               OF the reparing or deliuerance of man from his fall by Ieſus Chriſt alone: Alſo, of his Perſon, names office and the workes of Redemption. This Section conſiſteth of 12. confesſions, to wit, Of the former and latter Confeſſions of Heluetia, that of Baſill, Bohemia, the French, the Engliſh, that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony▪ Wirtemberge, Sueueland.
               
            
            
               THE 7. SECTION. pag. 1
                     •
                  0.
               
                  OF the lawe and the Goſpell. This Section▪ conſiſteth of 7. confesſions onely, to wit, Of the former and latter confeſſions of Heluetia, that of Bohemia, the French, that of Belgia, Saxony, and Wirtemberge.
            
            
               THE 8. SECTION. pag. 212.
               OF Repentance, and the Conuerſion of man. Tihs Section conſiſteth of 6. Confesſions onely, to wit, Of the latter confeſſion of Heluetia, that of Bohem. Auſpurge, Saxony, Wirtemb. and Sueueland.
               
            
            
               THE 9. SECTION. pag. 242.
               
                  OF Iuſtification by faith, and of good works, and their rewards. This Section conſiſteth
                  
                  of 11. confesſions to wit of the former and latter confeſſions of Heluetia, that of Baſill, Bohemia, the French, the Engliſh, that of Belgia, Auſpurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.
            
            
               THE 10. SECTION. pag. 306.
               
                  OF the holie Catholique Church. This Section conſiſteth of 11. confesſions, to wit, of the former and latter confeſſions of Heluetia, that of Baſill, Bohemia, the French, the Engliſh, that of Belgia, Auſpurge, Saxonie, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.
            
            
               THE 11. SECTION pag. 337.
               
                  OF the Miniſters of the Church, and of their calling▪ and office. This Section conſiſteth of 9. confeſſions: to wit, Of the former and latter confeſſions of Heluet. that of Bohemia, the French, the Engliſh, that of Belgia, Auspurge▪ Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.
            
            
               THE 12. SECTION. pag. 377.
               
                  OF true and falſe Sacraments, in generall. This Section conſiſteth of 11. confesſions. Of the former confeſſion of Heluetia, and the declaration thereof, the latter confeſſ. of Heluet. that of Baſill, Bohemia, the French, the Engliſh, that of Belgia, Auſpurge, Saxonie, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.
            
            
               THE 13. SECTION pag. 395.
               
                  OF the Sacrament of holie Baptiſme. This Section conſiſteth of 10. confesſions, to wit, Of the former confeſſion of Heluetia, and the declaration thereof, of the latter con
                     •
                  es. of Heluet. that of Bohemia, the French, the Engliſh, that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxonie, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.
            
            
               THE 14. SECTION pag 411.
               
                  OF the holie Supper of the Lord. This Section conſiſteth of 11. confesſions: to wit, of the former confeſſion of Heluetia, and the declaration thereof, of the latter confes. of Heluet. that of Baſill,

Bohemia, the French, the Engliſh, that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxonie, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.
            
            
               THE 15. SECTION pag. 464.
               
                  OF Eccleſiaſticall Meetings. This Section conſiſteth of 8. confesſions: to wit, the former and latter confeſſions of Heluetia▪ that of Bohemia, the F e
                     •
                  ch, the Engliſh, that of Saxonie, Wirtemberg, and Sueueland.
            
            
               THE 16. SECTION pag. 47
                     •
                  .
               OF Holie daies, faſts and the choiſe of meats, and of the viſiting of the ſicke▪ and the care that is to be had for the dead. This Sect. conſiſteth of 9. Confeſſ to wit, of the latter confeſſion of Heluet. that of Baſill, Bohemia, the French, the Engliſh, that of Auſpurge, Saxonie, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.
               
            
            
               THE 17. SECTION. pag. 516.
               
                  OF Ceremonies, and rites, which are indifferent in general. This Section conſiſteth of 11. confeſſions▪ to wit, of the former and latter confeſſions of Heluetia, that of Baſill, Bohemia, the French, the Engliſh, that of Belgia, Auſpurge, Saxonie, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.
            
            
               THE 18. SECTION. pag. 540.
               
                  OF Wedlock, ſingle life, and Monaſticall Vowes. This Section conſiſteth of 8. confeſſions to wit, of the former and latter confeſſions of Heluetia, that of Bohemia, the French, the Engliſh, that of Auſpurge, and Sueueland.
            
            
               THE 19. SECTION. pag. 578.
               
                  OF the Ciuill Magiſtrate. This Section conſiſteth of 10▪ confeſſions: to wit, of the former and latter confeſſions of Heluetia, that of Baſill, Bohemia, the French, that of Belgia, Auſpurge, Saxonie, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.
            
         
         
            
            A GENERAL CONFESSION OF THE TRVE CHRISTIAN FAITH AND RELIGION, ACCORding to Gods word and actes of our Parliaments, ſubſcribed by the Kings Maieſtie and his houſehold, with ſun
               drie others. To the glory of God, and good example of all men. At Edinborough the 28. day of Ianuarie. The yeare of our Lord. 1581. And in the 14. yere of his Maieſties Raigne.
            
               WE all, and euerie one of vs vnder written proteſt, that after long & due examination of our owne conſciences, in matters of true and falſe Religion, are now throughlie reſolued in the truth by the word and spirit of God. And therefore we beleeue with our hartes, confeſſe with our mouthes, ſubſcribe with our handes, and conſtantlie affirme before God and the whole world, that this onelie is the true Christian faith and religion, pleaſing God, and bringing ſaluation to man, which is now by the mercie of God reuealed to the world by the preaching of the bleſſed Euangell, and is receaued, beleeued, and defended by manie and ſundrie notable Churches & realms▪ but chiefely by the Church of Scotland, the Kings Maiestie, & three Eſtates of this Realm, as Gods eternal trueth, & onely ground of our ſaluation, as more particularlie is expreſſed in the confeſſion of our Faith, establiſhed and publikelie confirmed by ſundrie actes of Parliaments, and now of a long time hath beene

openlie profeſſed by the Kinges Maieſtie, and wholl bodie of this Realme, both in burgh and land. To the which confeſſion and forme of Religion, we willinglie agree in our conſciences in all pointes, as vnto Gods vndoubted trueth and veritie, grounded onelie vpon his written word. And therefore we abhorre and deteſt all contrarie religion & doctrine, but chiefelie all kinde of Papiſtrie in generall, and particular heades, euen as they are now damned and confuted by the word of God & Church of Scotland, but eſpeciallie we deteſt andrefuſe the vſurped authority of that Romane Antichriſt vpon the Scriptures of God, vpon the Church, the ci
                  ••
               ll magiſtrate and conſcience of men: all his tyranous Lawes, made vpon indifferent things, againſt our Chriſtian libertie: his erronious doctrine againſt the ſufficien
                  ••
                of the written word, the perfection of the lawe, the office of Chriſt, and his bleſſed Euangell: his corrupted doctrine concerning original ſinne, our naturall inab
                  •
               l
                  •
               ti
                  •
                and rebellion to Gods law: our inſtification by faith onelie: our imperfect ſanctification and obedience to the lawe: the nature, number, and vſe of the holie Sacraments, his fine baſtard ſacraments, with all his rites▪ ceremonies, and falſe doctrine added to the adminiſtration of the true Sacraments, without the word of God: his cruell iudgement againſt Infants departing without the Sacrament, his abſolute neceſſitie
                  •
                Baptiſme, his blaſphemous opinion of tranſſubſt antiatio
                  •
                or reall preſence of Chriſtes bodie in the elements, and receiuing of the ſame by the wicked, or bodies of men: his diſpenſations with ſolemne othes, periuries, and degrees of mariage forbidden in the word, his crueltie againſt the Innocent diuorced, his deuiliſh Maſſe, his blaſphemous Prieſthood, his prophane ſacrifice for the ſinnes of the dead and the quick: his Canonization of men, calling

vpon Angells, or Saintes departed, worſhipping of Images, reliques, and croſſes, dedicating of Churches, Altars, Daies, Vowes to creatures: his Purgatorie, praiers for the dead, praying or ſpeaking in a ſtrange language, with his proceſſions and blaſphemous Letany, and multitude of Aduocates, or Mediatours: his manifolde orders, Auricular confeſſion, his diſperſed & vncertaine repentance, his generall and doubt ſome faith, his ſatisfactions of men for their ſinnnes, his iuſtification by workes, Opus Operatum, woorkes of ſupererogation, merites, pardons, peregrinations and ſtations, his holie water, Bapti
                  ••
               ng of Belles, Coniuring of ſpirites, Croſſing, Sa
                  •
               ing, Annointing, coniuring, Hallowing of Gods good Creatures, with the ſuperſtitious opinion ioyned therewith, his worldlie Monarchie, and wicked hierarch
                  •
               e, his three ſolemned vowes, with all his ſha
                  •
               eli
                  •
               gs of ſundrie ſortes: his erronious bloodie decrees made at Trent, with all the ſubſcribers and approouers of that cruell and bloody band coniured against the Church of God. And finallie 
                  •
               e deteſt all his vaine allegories, rites, ſignes, and traditions brought in the Church without, or againſt the worde of God and doctrine of this true reformed Church: to the which we toyne our ſelues willinglie, in doctrine, faith, religion, diſcipline, and vſe of the holie Sacraments, as liuelie members of the ſame in Chriſt our head, promiſing and ſwearing by the great name of the Lord our God, that we ſhall continue in the obedience of the doctrine and diſcipline of this Church, and ſhall defend the ſame according to our vocation and power, all the daies of our liues, vnder the paines contained in the law, and danger both of bodie and ſoule, in the date of Gods fearefull iudgement. And ſeeing that manie are ſtirred vp by Satan, and that Romane Antichriſt, to promiſe, ſ
                  ••
               are, ſubſ
                  •
               r
                  •••
               , and

for a time vſe the holy Sacraments in the Church deceitfully againſt their owne conſcience, minding hereby, firſt vnder the externall cloake of Religion, to corrupt and ſubuert ſecretlie Gods true Religion within the Church, and afterward when time maie ſerue, to become open enemies and perſequuters of the ſame, vnder vaine hope of the Popes diſpenſation deuiſed againſt the word of God, to his greater confuſion, and their double condemnation in the daie of the Lord Ieſus; We therefore willing to take away all ſuſpition of hypocriſie, and of ſuch double dealing with God and his Church, proteſt and call the ſ
                  •
               archer of all heartes for witnes, that our mindes and heartes do fully agree with this our confeſſion, promiſe, oth, and ſubſcription. So that we are not moo
                  •
               ed for anie worldlie reſpect, but are perſuaded onelie in our conſcience, through the knowledge and loue of Gods true religion, printed in our heartes by the holie spirit, as we ſhall anſwer to him in the daie, when the ſecrets of all heartes ſhall be diſcloſed. And becauſe we perceiue, that the quietnes and ſtabilitie of our religion and Church doth depend vpon the ſafetie and good behauio
                  •
               r of the Kings maieſtie, as vpon a comfortable Inſtrumen
                  •
                of Gods mercie, graunted to this countrie, for the manteining of his Church, and miniſtration of Iuſtice amongſt vs, we proteſt and promiſe with our heartes, vnder the ſame oth, hand writ, and paines, that we ſhall defend his perſon and authoritie with our goods, bodies, and liues, i
                  •
                the defence of Chriſtes Euangell, Libertie of our countrie, miniſtration of iuſtice, and puniſhment of iniquity, againſt all enemies within this realme or without, as we deſire our God to be a strong and mercifull defender to vs in the daie of our death, and comming of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. To whome with the father and the holy ſpirit, b
                  •
                all honour and glory eternallie.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE ESTATES OF SCOTLAND VVITH THE INHABITANTS OF THE SAME, PROfeſſing Chriſt Ieſus and his ho lie goſpell. To their naturall countrie men, and to all other Realmes and nations, profeſſing the ſame Chriſt Ieſus with them, wiſh grace, mercie, and peace, from God, the Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, with the ſpirit of righteous iudgement of ſaluation.
            
            
               LOng haue wee thirſted (deare brethren) to haue notified vnto the worlde the ſumme of that doctrine which wee profeſſe, and for the which we haue ſuſtained infamie and daunger. But ſuch hath beene the rage of Sathan agaiſt vs, and againſt Chriſt Ieſus his eternall veritie latelie borne amongeſt vs: that to this daie no time hath beene graunted vnto vs to cleare our conſciences, as moſte gladlie we would haue done. For how we haue beene toſſed at times heretofore, the moſte parte of Europe, as we ſuppoſe, doth vnderſtand. But ſeing that of the infinite goodnes of our God (who neuer ſuffereth his afflicted vtterlie to be confounded) aboue expectation we haue obtained ſome reſt and libertie, we would not but ſet forth this briefe and plaine confeſſion of ſuch doctrine as is proponed vnto vs, and as we beleeue and profeſſe: partlie for ſatisfaction of our brethren, whoſe hearts we doubt not haue beene (and yet are) wounded by the deſpitefull railing of ſuch as yet haue not learned to ſpeake well: and partlie for ſtopping of the mouthes of the impudent blaſphemers, who boldelie damne that which they haue neither heard nor yet vnderſtoode. Not that we iudge that the cankred malice of ſuch is able to be cured by this our ſimple confeſſion: No,

we knowe the ſweete ſauour of the Goſpell, is, and ſhall be death to the ſonnes of perdition, but we haue chiefe reſpect to our weake and infirme brethren, to whome we woulde communicate the bottome of our hearts, leſt that they be troubled or carried awaie by diuerſitie of rumours, which Satan ſpreads abroad againſt vs, to the defacing of this our moſte godlie enterpriſe: proteſting that if anie man ſhall note in this our confeſſion, anie article or ſentence repugning to Gods holie worde, and doe admoniſh vs of the ſame in writing, we by Gods grace doe promiſe vnto him ſatisfaction from the mouth of God, that is, from his holie Scriptures, or elſe reformation of that, which he ſhall prooue to be amiſſe.
            For God we take to record in our conſciences, that from our hearts we abhorre all ſectes of hereſie, and all teachers of erronious doctrine, and that with all humilitie wee imbrace the puritie of Chriſtes Goſpell, which is the onelie foode of our ſoules, and therefore ſo precious vnto vs, that we are determined to ſuffer the extremitie of worldlie daunger, rather then that we will ſuffer our ſelues to be defrauded of the ſame: for hereof we are moſte certainlie perſwaded, that whoſoeuer denieth Chriſt Ieſus, or is aſhamed of him in the preſence of men, ſhall be denied before the Father, and before his holie angels. And therefore by the aſſiſtance of the almightie, the ſame our Lorde Ieſus, we firmelie purpoſe to abide to the ende, in the confeſſion of this our faith, as by articles followeth.
            
               Of God.
               
                  Deut. 6. Iſa. 44. Deut. 4. WE confeſſe and acknowledge one onelie God, to whome onelie we muſt cleaue, whome onelie we muſt ſerue, whome onelie we muſt worſhippe, and in whom onelie we muſt put our truſt: who is eternall, infinite, vnmeaſurable, incomprehenſible, omnipotent, inuiſible, one Mat. 28. Gen. 1.in ſubſtance, and yet diſtinct in three perſons, the Father, the Sonne, and the holie Ghoſt. By whome we confeſſe and b
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  eue all things in heauen and earth, as well viſible, as inuiſible, to haue beene created, to be retained in their being, and to be ruled and guided by his inſcrutable prouidence,

to ſuch ende, as his eternall wiſdome, goodnes, and iuſtice, Pro. 16.hath appointed them, to the manifeſtation of his glorie.
            
            
               Of the creation of man.
               WE confeſſe and knowledge this our God to haue created man, to wit, our firſt father Adam, to his Gen. 1. 2▪
                  owne image and ſimilitude, to whome he gaue wiſedome, Lordſhip, iuſtice, free will, and cleare knowledge of himſelfe, ſo that in the wholl nature of man there could be noted no imperfection. From which honour and perfection, man and woman did both fall▪ the woman being deceiued by the ſerpent, and man obeying the voice of the woman, both Gen. 3.conſpiring againſt the Soueraigne Maieſtie of God, who in expreſſe wordes had before threatned death, if they preſumed to eate of the forbidden tree.
            
            
               Of Originall ſinne.
               BY which transgreſſion, commonlie called Originall ſinne, was the Image of God vtterlie defaced in man, Eph 3. Rom. 5. Ioh. 3. Rom. 5. 8.and he and his poſterity of nature became enimies to God, ſlaues to Satan, and ſeruants to ſinne. Inſomuch that death euerlaſting hath had, and ſhall haue power and dominion ouer all that haue not beene, are not, or ſhall not be regenerate from aboue, which regeneration is wrought by the power of the holie Ghoſt, working in the hearts of the elect of God, an aſſured faith in the promiſe of God, reuealed to vs in his word, by which faith, we apprehend Chriſt Ieſus, with the graces and benefits promiſed in him.
            
            
               Of the reuelation of the promiſe.
               FOr this we conſtantlie beleeue, that God after the fearefull and horrible defection of man from his obedience, did ſeeke Adam againe, call vpon him, rebuke his ſinne, conuict him of the ſame, and in the ende, made vnto him a moſte ioyfull promiſe, to wit, that the ſeede of the woman Gen. 3. Gen. 12. 15. Iſa. 7. 8.ſhould breake downe the ſerpents head, that is, he ſhould deſtroie the workes of the Deuill: which promiſe

as it was repeated, and made more cleare from time to time: ſo was it imbraced with ioy, and moſte conſtantlie receiued of all thoſe faithfull from Adam to Noe, from Noe to Abraham, from Abraham to Dauid, and ſo forth to the incarnation of Chriſt Ieſus, all (wee meane the faithfull Fathers vnder the lawe) did ſee the ioyfull daies of Chriſt Ieſus, and did reioyce.
            
            
               The continuance, increaſe, and preſeruation of the Church.
               
                  Ezec. 16. Gen. 12. 13. Exod. 1. 2. Ezod 20. WE moſte conſtantlie beleeue that God preſerued, inſtructed, multiplied, honoured, decored, and from death called to life his Church in all ages, from Adam til the comming of Chriſt in the fleſh. For Abraham he called from his Fathers countrie, him he inſtructed, his ſeed he multiplied, the ſame he maruelouſlie preſerued, and more maruelouſlie deliuered from the bondage and tyrannie of Pharao, to them he gaue his lawes, conſtitutions, and ceremonies, Ioſ
                        •
                     . 1. 25. 
                        •
                     . Reg. 17.them he poſſeſſed in the land of Chanaan, to them after Iudges and after Saul, he gaue Dauid to be King, to whome he made promiſe, that of the fruite of his loynes ſhould one ſit for euer vpon his regall ſeate. To this ſame people from time to time he ſent Prophets to reduce them to the right waie of their God: from the which oftentimes 2. Reg. 24 25 Deut. 28. Ier. 39. Eſdr. 1. Agge. 1. 
                        •
                      Zach. 3.they declined by Idolatrie. And albeit that for the ſtubborne contempt of iuſtice, he was compelled to giue them into the handes of their enemies, as before was threatned by the mouth of Moſes, in ſo much that the holie Citie was deſtroyed, the temple burnt with fire, and the wholl lande left deſolate the ſpace of 70. yeres, yet of mercie did he reduce them againe to Ieruſalem, where the Citie and Temple were reedified, and they againſt all temptations and aſſaultes of Satan, did abide till the Meſſias came according to the promiſe.
            
            
               Of the incarnation of Chriſt Ieſus.
               
                  Galat. 4. Luc. 1. 2. WHen the fulnes of time came, God ſent his ſonne his eternall wiſdome, the ſubſtance of his owne

glorie, into this worlde, who tooke the nature of manhood of the ſubſtance of a woman, to wit, of a Virgin, and that by operation of the holie Ghoſt.
               And ſo was borne the iuſt ſeed of Dauid, the angel of the great counſell of god, the verie Meſſias promiſed, whom we acknowledge and confeſſe Emmanuel, verie God, and verie man, two perfect natures vnited and ioyned in one perſon.
               By which our confeſſion, we condemne that damnable and peſtilent hereſies of Arrius, Marcion, Eutiches, Neſtorius, and ſuch others, as either did denie the eternitie of his Godhead, either the veritie of his humane nature, either confound them, either yet deuide them.
            
            
               Why it behooueth the Mediatour to be very God and verie man.
               WE acknowledge and confeſſe, that this moſte wondrous coniunction betwixt the Godhead and the manhood in Chriſt Ieſus, did proceede from the eternal and immutable decree of God, whence alſo, our ſaluation ſpringeth, and dependeth.
            
            
               Election.
               FOr that ſame eternall God and father, who of meere grace elected vs in Chriſt Ieſus his ſonne, before the foundation of the worlde was laid, appointed him to be our Eph. 1. Heb. 2.head, our brother, our Paſtour & great Biſhop of our ſoules. But becauſe that the enimitie betwixt the iuſtice of God & our ſinnes was ſuch, that no fleſh by it ſelfe could, or might Iohn. 20.haue atteined vnto God: it behoued, that the ſonne of God ſhould deſcend vnto vs, and take him ſelfe a bodie of our bodie, fleſh of our fleſh, and bone of our bones, and ſo become the perfect Mediatour betwixt God and man, giuing power to ſo manie as beleeue in him, to be the ſonnes of God, as himſelfe doth witnes, I paſſe vp to my Father, and vnto Iohn. 1. Iohn. 20.your God. By which moſte holie fraternitie, whatſoeuer we haue loſt in Adam, is reſtored to vs againe. And for this cauſe are we not afraide to call God our father, not ſo much becauſe he hath created vs (which we haue common with the reprobate) as for that that he hath giuen to vs his onlie ſonne to be our brother, and giuen vnto vs grace to acknowledge and embrace him for our Mediatour, as before is ſaid.

                  Iſa. 53. It behooued farther, the Meſſias and Redeemer to be verie God and verie man, becauſe he was to beare the puniſhment due for our tranſgreſſions, and to preſent him ſelfe in the preſence of his Fathers iudgement, as in our perſon, to ſuffer for our tranſgreſſion, and inobedience, by death to ouercome him that was author of death. But becauſe the onlie godhead could not ſuffer death, neither yet could the onlie manhood ouercome the ſame, he ioyned both together in one perſon, that the imbecillitie of the one ſhould ſuffer, and be ſubiect to death (which we had deſerued) and the infinite and inuincible power of the other, to wit, of the godhead, ſhould triumph and purchaſe to vs life, libertie, and perpetuall victorie, and ſo we confeſi
                     •
                   and moſte vndoubtedlie beleeue.
            
            
               Chriſtes death, Paſſion, and B
                     •
                  ri
                     •
                  ll.
               
                  Heb. 10. Eſa 53. THat our Lord Ieſus offered himſelfe a voluntarie ſacrifice vnto his Father for vs, that he ſuffered contradiction of ſinners, that he was wounded and plagued for our tranſgreſſions, that he being the cleane innocent lambe Deut. 21. Gal. 3.of God, was damned in the preſence of an earthlie iudge, that we ſhould be abſolued before the tribunall ſeate of our God, that he ſuffered, not onelie the cruell death of the Croſſe (which was accurſed by the ſentence of God) but alſo that he ſuffered for a ſeaſon the wrath of his Father, which ſinners had deſerued. But yet we auow that he remained Heb. 10. 1.the onelie welbeloued and bleſſed ſonne of the Father euen in the midſt of his anguiſh and torment, which he ſuffered in bodie and ſoule, to make the full ſatisfaction for the ſins of the people. After the which we confeſſe and auow, that there remaineth no other ſacrifice for ſinne, which if anie affirme, we nothing doubt to auow, that they are blaſphemous againſt Chriſtes death, and the euerlaſting purgation and ſatisfaction purchaſed to vs by the ſame.
            
            
               Reſurrection.
               
                  Act. 2. 3. Rom. 6. WE vndoubtedlie beleeue, that inſomuch as it was impoſſible that the dolours of death ſhould retaine in bondage the author of life, that our Lord Ieſus crucified,

dead and buried, who deſcended into hell, did riſe againe for our iuſtification, and deſtroying of him, whoe was the author of death, brought life againe to vs that were ſubiect to death and to the bondage of the ſame: we knowe that his reſurrection Math. 28. Mat 27. Ioh. 20. 21.was confirmed by the teſtimonie of his ver
                     •
                  e enimies, by the reſurrection of the dead, whoſe ſepulchers did open and they did ariſe, and appeered to manie, within the City of Ieruſalem. It was alſo confirmed by the teſtimonie of his Angells, and by the ſenſes and iudgements of his 
                     •
                  poſtles and others, who had conuerſation and did eate and drinke with him after his reſurrection.
            
            
               Aſcenſion.
               
                  Act. 1. Mat. 28▪
                   VVE nothing doubt, but the ſelfe ſame bodie, which was borne of the virgin, was crucified, dead, & buried, that it did riſe againe, and aſ
                     •
                  end into the heauens, for the accompliſhment of al things, where in our names, & for our comforte, he hath receiued all power in heauen and earth, where he ſitteth at the right hand of the Father, crowned in his kingdome, aduocate, and onelie Mediatour for vs. Which glorie, honour, and prerogatiue, he alone amongſt 1▪ Ioan. 2. 1. Tim. 2. Pſa. 110.the brethren ſhal poſſeſſe, till that all his enimies be made his footeſtole.
               As that we vndoubtedlie beleeue there ſhalbe a finall iudgement: to the execution wherof, we certainelie beleeue that the ſame our Lord Ieſus ſhall viſibly returne, euen as he was ſeene to aſcend. And then we firmelie beleue, that the time of refreſhing and reſtitution of all thinges ſhall come, in ſomuch that thoſe, that from the beginning haue ſuffered violence, iniurie, and wrong, for righteouſnes ſake, ſhall inherite Apoc. 2
                        •
                     . Eſa▪ 66.that bleſſed immortalitie, promiſed from the beginning: but contrariwiſe, the ſtubborne, inobedient, cruell oppreſſors, filthie perſons, Idolaters, and all ſortes of vnfaithfull, ſhalbe caſt into the dungeon of vtter darkenes, where their worme ſhall not die, neithet yet the fire ſhalbe extinguiſhed. The remembrance of which daie, and of the iudgement to be executed in the ſame, is not onelie to vs a bridle, wherby our carnall luſtes are refrained, but alſo ſuch ineſtimable comforte, that neither maie the threating of worldlie

princes, neither yet the feare of temporall death and preſent daunger, mooue vs to renounce and forſake the bleſſed ſocietie, which we the members haue, with our head & onelie mediatour Chriſt Ieſus. Whom we confeſſe and auow Eſa. 1. Col. 1. Heb. 9. 10.to be the Meſſias promiſed, the onelie head of his Church, our iuſt lawe giuer, our onelie high Prieſt, aduocate, and Mediatour. In which honours and office, if man or Angell preſume to intrude themſelues, we vtterly deteſt and abhor them, as blaſphemous to our ſoueraigne and ſupreame gouernuor Chriſt Ieſus.
            
            
               Faith in the holie Ghoſt.
               THis faith and the aſſurance of the ſame, proceedeth Mat. 16. Ioh. 1
                        •
                     . 15. 19.not from fleſh and bloode, that is to ſaie, from no naturall powers within vs, but is the inſpiration of the holie Ghoſt: whome we confeſſe, God, equall with the Father & with the ſonne, whoe ſanctifieth vs, and bringeth vs into all veritie by his owne operation, without whome we ſhould remaine for euer enimies to God, and ignorant of his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus. For of nature we are ſo dead, ſo blinde, & ſo peruerſe, that neither can we feele when we are pricked, ſee the light when it ſhineth, nor aſſent to the will of God when it is reuealed, vnleſſe the ſpirit of the Lord quicken that which is dead▪ remooue the darkenes from our mindes, and bowe our ſtubborne heartes, to the obedience of his bleſſed will. And ſo as we confeſſe that God the Father created vs, when we were not: as his ſonne our Lord Ieſus redeemed vs, when we were enimies to him: ſo alſo doe we confeſſe, that the holie Ghoſt doth ſanctifie and regenerate vs, without all reſpect of anie merit proceeding from vs: be it before, or be Rom. 5.it after our regeneration. To ſpeake this one thinge yet in more plaine wordes, as we willinglie ſpoile our ſelues of al
                     •
                   honour, and glorie of our owne creation, and redemption, ſo doe we alſo of our regeneration, and ſanctification: for of our ſelues we are not ſufficient to thinke one good thought, but he who hath begone the worke in vs, is onelie he that 
                     
                        •
                     . Cor▪ 3.continueth in vs the ſame, to the praiſe and glorie of his vndeſerued grace.
            
            
               
               The cauſe of good workes.
               
                  Ioh. 13. Epheſ. 2. SO that the cauſe of good workes we confeſſe to be not our free will, but the ſpirit of the Lord Ieſus, whoe dwelling in our harts by true faith, bringeth forth ſuch good workes, as God hath prepared for vs to walke in. For this we moſt boldlie affirme, that it is blaſphemie, to ſaie, that Chriſt abideth in the heartes of ſuch, as in whom there is no ſpirit of ſanctification. And therefore we feare no
                     •
                   to affirme, that murtherers, oppreſſers, cruell perſecuters, adulterers, whormongers, filthy perſons, Idolaters, dronkerds, the eues, and all workers of iniquitie, haue neither true faith, neither anie portion of the ſpirit of the Lord Ieſus, ſo long as obſtinatlie they continue in their wickednes. For how ſoone that euer the ſpirit of the Lord Ieſus (which Gods elect children receiue by true faith) taketh poſſeſſion in the heart of euerie man, ſo ſoone doth he regenerate and renue the ſame man, ſo that he beginneth to hate that which before he loued, and beginneth to loue that, which before he hated. And from thence cometh that continual ba
                     •
                  tel which is betwixt the fleſh and the ſpirit in Gods children: ſo that the Gal. 5.fleſh and naturall man, according to the owne corruption, luſteth for thinges pleaſing, and delectable vnto it ſelfe, grudgeth in aduerſitie, is lifted vp in proſperitie, and at euerie moment is prone and readie to offende the maieſtie of Rom. 3.God. But the ſpirit of God which giueth witneſſing to our ſpirit, that we are the ſonnes of God, maketh vs to reſiſt filthie pleaſures, and to grone in Gods preſence for deliuerance from this bondage of corruption. And finallie, ſo triumpheth ouer ſinne, that it raigneth not in mortall bodies. This battell haue not the carnall men, being deſtitute of Gods ſpirit, but doe follow and obeie ſinne with greedines, and without repentance, euen as the Deuill and their corrupt luſts do pricke them. But the Sonnes of god, as before is ſaide, doe fight againſt ſinne, doe ſobbe and mourne, when they perceiue themſelues tempted in iniquitie: and if they fall they riſe againe with vnfained repentance, and theſe things they do, not by their owne power, but by the power of Ioh. 15.the Lord Ieſus, without whome they were able to doe nothing.
            
            
               
               What workes are reputed good before God.
               WE confeſſe and acknowledge, that God hath giuen to man his holie law, in which not onlie are forbidden Ex
                        •
                     d. 20. Deut. 5.all ſuch workes as diſpleaſe and offend his godlie maieſtie, but alſo are commaunded, all ſuch as pleaſe him, and as he hath promiſed to reward. And theſe workes be of two ſortes. The one are done to the honour of God, the other t
                     •
                   the profit of our neighbours: and both haue the reuealed will of God, for their aſſurance. To haue one God, to worſhip and honoure him, to call vpon him in all our troubles, to reuerence his holie name, to heare his word, to beleue the ſame, to communicate with his holie Sacraments, are the workes of the firſt table. To honour father, mother, Princes, Rulers, and ſuperior powers, to loue them, to ſupport them, Epheſ. 6.yea to obey their charges (not repugning to the commaundement of God) to ſaue the liues of innocentes, to repre
                     •
                  
                  ▪ tyranny, to defend the oppreſſed, to keep our bodies clean
                     •
                   and holie, to 
                     •
                  ue in ſobernes and temperance, to deale i
                     •
                  
                  ſtlie with all men, both in word and deede: and finally to repres all appetite of our neighbours hurt, are the good works Ezech. 22. 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     . 22 Eſa. 50. 
                        •
                     . Theſſ 4. 
                        •
                     uc. 2.of the ſecond table, which are moſt pleaſing and acceptable to God, as thoſe workes that are commaunded by himſelfe The contrarie whereof, is ſinne moſt odious, which alwaies diſpleaſeth him and prouol
                     •
                  eth him to anger. As not to ca
                     •
                   vpon him alone, when we haue need, not to heare his wor
                     ••
                   with reuerence, to contemne and deſpiſe it, to haue, or
                     ••
                   worſhip Idolls, to mainteine and defend idolatrie, lightlie 
                     〈◊〉
                   eſteeme the r
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  nt name of God, to prophane, abuſe, o
                     •
                   contemne the Sacraments of Chriſt Ieſus, to diſobey or reſiſt Rom 11. Ezech. 22.any that God h
                     •
                  th placed in authoritie, (whileſt the
                     •
                   paſſe not ouer the 
                     •
                  o indes of their office) to murther, or
                     •
                  o conſent thereto, to be are hatred, or to ſuffer innocent bloo
                     •
                   to be ſhed, if we may withſtand it: and finallie, the tranſgreſſion of any other commaundement in the firſt or ſecond table, we confeſſe or affirme to be ſinne, by the which Gods hate and diſpleaſure is kindled againſt the proude vnthankfull world. So that good workes we affirme to be thoſe onelie, that are done in faith, and at Gods commaundement▪ who 
                     〈◊〉
                   his law hath expreſſed what the things be that pleaſe

him. And euill workes we affirme not onelie thoſe, that expreſſelie are done againſt Gods commaundement, but thoſe alſo that in matters of religion, and in worſhipping of God haue no other aſſurance, but the inuention and opinion Eſa. 26. Mat. 15.of man: which God from the beginning hath euer reiected, as by the Prophet Eſaie, and by our Maſter Chriſt Ieſus, we are taught in theſe wordes: In vaine doe they worſhip me, teaching the doctrines and precepts of men.
            
            
               The perfection of the law, and imperfection of man.
               THe law of God we confeſſe, and acknowledge moſte iuſt, moſt equall, moſt holie, and moſt perfect, commaunding thoſe things, which being wrought in perfection, were able to giue light, and able to bring man to eternall felicitie. Rom. 7. Pſal. 19. Deut. 5. Rom. 10. 1. Ioh. 1. Rom▪ 10. Gal. 3. Deut 26. Eph. 1. Rom. 4.But our nature is ſo corrupt, ſo weake, and ſo vnperfit, that we are neuer able to fullfil the workes of the law in perfection. Yea, if we ſaie we haue no ſinne, euen after we are regenerated, we deceiue our ſelues, and the verity of God is not in vs. And therefore it be houeth vs to apprehend Chriſt Ieſus with his iuſtice and ſatisfaction, who is the ende and accompliſhment of the law, by whome we are ſet at this libertie, that the curſſe and malediction of God fall not vpon vs, albeit we fulfil not the ſame in al points. For God the Father beholding vs, in the body of his ſon Chriſt Ieſus, accepteth our imperfit obedience, as it were perſit, and couereth our workes, which are defiled with many ſpottes, with the iuſtice of his Sonne we doe not meane, that we are ſo ſet at libertie, that we owe no obedience to the law (for that before we haue plainlie confeſſed) but this we affirme, that no man in earth (Chriſt Ieſus onelie excepted) hath giuen, giueth, or ſhall giue in worke that obedience to the law, which the law requireth. But when we haue done al things, we muſt fall downe and vnfein
                     •
                  dly confeſſe, that we are vnprofitable Luc. 16.ſeruantes. And therefore whoſoeuer boaſte themſelues of the merites of their owne workes, or put their truſt in the workes of ſupererogation, boaſt themſelues of that which is nought, and put their truſt in damnable Idolatrie.
            
            
               
               Of the Church.
               AS we beleeue in one God, Father, Sonne, and the Mat. 3. 8.holie Ghoſt, ſo doe we moſt conſtantlie beleeue that from the beginning there hath bene, and now is, and to the ende of the worlde ſhall be, one Church, that is to ſaie, a companie and multitude of men choſen of God, who rightly Epheſ. 1. Col 1. Epheſ. 5.worſhip and imbrace him by true faith in Chriſt Ieſus, who is the onelie head of the ſame Church, which alſo is the bodie and ſpouſe of Chriſt Ieſus, which Church is Catholike, that is vniuerſall, becauſe it conteineth the elect of all ages, of all realmes, nations, and tongues, be they of the Iewes, or Apoc. 7.be they of the Gentiles, who haue communion and ſocietie with god the father and with his Sonne Chriſt Ieſus, through the ſanctification of his holie ſpirit, and therefore it is called the communion, not of prophane perſons, but of Saints: who as Citizens of the heauenlie Ieruſalem, haue the fruition of the moſte ineſtimable benefites, to wit, of one God, one Eph. 2.Lord Ieſus, one faith, and of one Baptiſme, out of the which Church, there is neither life nor eternall felicitie. And therfore we vtterlie abhor the blaſphemie of thoſe that affirme, that men which liue according to equitie and iuſtice, ſhall Ioh. 5. 6.be ſaued, what religion ſo euer they haue profeſſed. For as without Chriſt Ieſus there is neither life nor ſaluation, ſo ſhal there none be participant thereof, but ſuch as the father hath giuen vnto his Sonne Chriſt Ieſus, and thoſe in time, to come vnto him, auow his doctrine, and beleeue in him (we apprehend the children with the faithful parents) This Church is inuiſible knowne onelie to God, who alone knoweth whome he hath choſen, and comprehendeth as well (as ſaid is) the elect that be departed, commonlie called the Church triumphant, as thoſe that yet liue and fight againſt ſinne and Satan, and ſhall liue hereafter.
            
            
               The immortalitie of the ſoules.
               THe elect departed are in peace and reſt from their labours: Apoc. 14. Apoc. 7.not that they ſleepe and come to a certaine obliuion, as ſome phantaſtikes doe affirme: but that they are deliuered from all feare and torment, and all temptation, to which we, and al Gods elect are ſubiect in this life, and therfore

doe beare the name of the Church militant, as contrariwiſe, the reprobate and vnfaithful departed, haue anguiſh, torment, and paine, that can not be expreſſed. So that neither are the one, nor the other in ſuch ſleepe, that they feele not their torment, as the parable of Chriſt Ieſus in the 16. Luc. 16.of Luke, his wordes to the theefe, and theſe wordes of the ſoules crying vnder the Altar (O Lorde thou art righteous and 
                  Apoc. 6.
                  i
                        •
                     ſt, how long ſhalt thou not reuenge our blood vpon theſe that dwell in the earth) doe teſtifie.
            
            
               Of the notes by the which the true Church is diſcerned from the falſe, and who ſhall be iudge of the doctrine.
               BEcauſe that Satan from the beginning hath laboured to decke his peſtilent ſinagogue with the title of the Church of God, and hath inflamed the heartes of cruell Gen. 4. 21. 27.murtherers, to perſecute, trouble & moleſt the true Church and members thereof, as Caine did Abell, Iſmaell Iſaak, Eſau Iacob, and the wholl prieſthoode of the Iewes Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe and his Apoſtles after him: It is a thing moſt requiſite, that the true Church be diſcerned from the filthie ſinagogues, by cleare & perfit notes, leſt we being deceiued, receiue and imbrace to our condemnation, the one for the Mat. 23. Ioh. 11. Act. 3.other. The notes, ſignes, and aſſured tokens, whereby the immaculate ſpouſe of Chriſt Ieſus, is knowne from the horrible harlot, the Church malignant, we affirme are neither antiquitie, title vſurped, lineall deſcent, place appointed, nor multitude of men, approouing an errour: for Caine in age and title was preferred to Abell and Seth, Ieruſalem had prerogatiue aboue al places of the earth, where alſo were the prieſts lineallie deſcended from Aaron, and greater number followed the Scribes, Phariſies and Prieſtes, then vnfainedlie beleeued and approoued Chriſt Ieſus and his doctrine: & yet, as we ſuppoſe, no man of ſound iudgement will graunt, that any of the forenamed were the Church of God. The notes therefore of the true Church of God, we beleeue, confeſſe, and auow to be, firſt, the true preaching of the worde of God, in the which God hath reuealed himſelfe vnto vs, Ioh. 1. 10.as the writings of the Prophets and Apoſtles doe declare.

                  Rom. 4. Secondlie the right adminiſtration of the Sacramentes of Chriſt Ieſus, which muſt be annexed vnto the worde and promiſe of God, to ſeale & confirme the ſame in our hearts▪ 
                  1. Cor. 5.Laſtlie, Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline vprightlie miniſtred, as Gods word preſcribeth, wherby vice is repreſſed, and vertue nouriſhed. Wherſoeuer then theſe former notes are ſeene, and of anie time continue (be the number ne
                     ••
                  r ſo fewe, aboue two or three) there without all doubt is the true Church of Chriſt, who, according to his promiſe, is in the midſt of them. Not in the vniuerſall, of which we haue before Act. 16. 18. 1. Cor▪ 2. Act. 20.ſpoken, but particular, ſuch as was in Corinthus, Gallacia, Epheſus, and other places, in which the miniſtery was planted by Paull, and were of himſelfe named the Churches of God: and ſuch Churches we the inhabitants of the Realme of Scotlande, profeſſours of Chriſt Ieſus, profeſſe our ſelues, 
                     •
                  o haue in our Cities, townes, and places reformed. For the doctrine taught in our Churches is contained in the written worde of God, to wit, in the bookes of the olde and new Teſtaments, in thoſe bookes we meane, which of the auncient haue beene reputed Canonicall. In the which we affirme that all thinges neceſſarie to be beleeued for the ſaluation of mankinde, are ſufficientlie expreſſed▪ The interpretation whereof, we confeſſe, neither appertaineth to priuate nor publike perſon, neither yet to anie church, for any preheminence, or prerogatiue perſonal or locall, which one hath aboue another, but appertaineth to the Spirit of God, by the which alſo the ſcripture was written. When controuetſie thē happeneth for the right vnderſtanding of any place or ſentence of ſcripture, or for the reformation of anie abuſe within the Church of God, we ought no
                     •
                   ſo much to looke what men before vs haue ſaide or done, as vnto that, which the holie ghoſt vniformlie ſpeaketh within the bodie of the ſcriptures, and vnto that which Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe did, and commaunded to be done. For this is one thing vniuerſally graunted, that the ſpirit of god, which 1. Cor. 12.is the ſpirit of vnitie, is in nothing contrarie to himſelfe. I
                     •
                   then the interpretation, determination, or ſentence of anie Doctor, Church, or Councell, repugne to the plaine worde of God, written in anie other place of the ſcripture, it is a thing moſte certaine that there is not the true vnderſtanding

and meaning of the holie ghoſt: although that councels, Realmes, and nations haue approoued and receiued the ſame. For we dare not receiue nor admit
                     •
                  te anie interpretation▪ which repugneth to anie principall point of our faith, or to anie other plaine texte of ſcripture, or yet vnto the rule of charitie.
            
            
               The authoritie of the Scriptures.
               
                  1. Tim. 3. AS we beleeue and confeſſe the ſcriptures of God ſufficientlie to inſtruct, and make the man of God perfect: ſo doe we affirme and auowe the authoritie of the ſame, to be of God, and neither to depende on men nor Angels. We affirme therefore, that ſuch as alledge the ſcripture to haue no other authoritie, but that which it hath receiued from the Church, are blaſphemous againſt God, and iniurious to the true Church, which alwaies heareth Iohn. 10.and obeyeth the voice of her owne ſpouſe and Paſtour, but taketh not vpon her to be maiſtreſſe ouer the ſame.
            
            
               Of the generall Councells, of their power, authoritie, and cauſes of their conuention.
               AS we doe not raſhlie damne that, which godlie men aſſembled together in generall Councel lawfully gathered haue proponed vnto vs: ſo without iuſt examination doe we not receiue whatſoeuer is obtruded vnto men vnder the name of a general councell: for plaine it is, as they were men, ſo haue ſome of them manifeſtlie erred, and that in matters of great weight and importance. So farre then as the Councel prooueth the determination and commaundement that it giueth, by the plaine worde of God, ſo ſoone doe we reuerence and embrace the ſame. But if men vnder the name of a Councel pretende to forge vnto vs newe Articles of our faith, or to make conſtitutions repugning to the worde of God, then vtterlie we muſt refuſe the ſame, as the doctrine of Deuils, which draweth our ſoules from the voice of our onelie God, to follow the doctrine and conſtitutions 1. Tim. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  of men. The cauſe then why that generall Councels came together, was neither to make anie perpetuall lawe, which

God before had not made, neither yet to forge new articles of our beliefe, neither to giue the word of God authoritie: much leſſe, to make that to be his word, or yet the true interpretation of the ſame, which was not before his holie will expreſſed in his word. But the cauſe of councels (we meane of ſuch as merit the name of Councels) was partlie for confutation of hereſies, for giuing publike confeſſion of their faith to the poſteritie following, which both they did, by the authoritie of Gods written word, and not by anie opinion of prerogatiue, that they could not erre, by reaſon of their generall aſſemblie. And this we iudge to haue beene the chiefe cauſe of general Councells The other was for good pollicie and order to be conſtitute, obſerued in the Church, wherein (as in the houſe of God) it becommeth all things to be done decentlie, and in order. Not that we thinke that one pollicie and one order in ceremonies can be appointed for all ages, times, and places: for as ceremonies, ſuch as men haue deuiſed, are but temporall, ſo maie and ought they to be changed, when they rather ſuffer ſuperſtition, then that they edifie the Church vſing the ſame.
            
            
               Of the Sacramentes.
               AS the fathers vnder the law beſides the veritie of the ſacrifices, had two cheefe Sacramentes, to wit, Circumciſion, and the Paſſeouer, the deſpiſers and contemners whereof, were not reputed for Gods people: ſo we acknowledge and confeſſe, that we now in the time of the Goſpell haue two chiefe Sacraments onelie, inſtituted by the Lord Ieſus, and commaunded to be vſed of all thoſe, that will be reputed members of his bodie, to wit, Baptiſme, and the Supper or table of the Lord Ieſus, called the communion of his bodie and his bloode. And theſe Sacramentes as well of the olde, as of the new Teſtament, now inſtituted of god, not onelie to make a viſible difference betwixt his people & thoſe that were without his league, but alſo to exerciſe the faith of his children, and by participation of the ſame Sacramentes to ſeale in their heartes the aſſurance of his promiſe, and of that moſt bleſſed coniunction, vnion, and ſocietie, which the elect haue with their heade Chriſt Ieſus. And thus we vtterlie damne the vanitie of thoſe, that affirme ſacramentes to be nothing elſe but naked and bare ſignes. No,

we aſſuredlie beleeue, that by baptiſme we are ingrafted in Chriſt Ieſus, to be made partakers of his iuſtice, by which our ſins are couered, and remitted. And alſo that in the Supper rightlie vſed, Chriſt Ieſus is ſo ioyned with vs, that he becommeth the verie nouriſhment & food of our ſoules. Not that we imagine any tranſ
                     •
                  ubſtantiation of the bread in Chriſts naturall bodie, and of wine in his naturall blood as the Papiſts haue perniciouſly taught▪ and damnablie beleeued: but this vnion and coniunction, which we haue with the bodie and blood of Chriſt Ieſus in the right vſe of the Sacramente, is wrought by operation of the holie Ghoſt, who by true faith carieth vs aboue all things that are viſible, carnal, and earthlie, and maketh vs to f
                     ••
                  de vpon the bodie and bloode of Chriſt Ieſus, which was once broken and ſhed for vs, which now is in heauen, and appeareth in the preſence of his father for vs: and notwithſtanding the farre diſtance of place, which is betwixt his bodie now glorified in the heauen, and vs now mortall in this earth▪ yet we muſt aſſuredlie beleeue, that the breade which we breake is the communion of Chriſts body, and the cup which we bleſſe, is the communion of his bloode, ſo that we confeſſe and vndoubtedlie beleeue, that the faithfull in the right vſe of the Lords table, doe ſo eate the bodie and drinke the bloode of the Lord Ieſus, that he remaineth in them, and they in him. Yea they are ſo made fleſh of his fleſh, and bone of his bones, that as the eternall Godheade giueth to the fleſh of Chriſt Ieſus (which of the owne condition and nature was mortall and corruptible) life and immortalitie, ſo doeth Chriſt Ieſus his his fleſh and bloode eaten and drunken by vs, giue vnto vs the ſame prerogatiues. Which albeit we confeſſe are neither giuen vnto vs at this time onelie, neither yet by the proper power and vertue of the Sacrament onelie, yet we affirme, that the faithfull, in the right vſe of the Lordes table, haue ſuch coniunction with Chriſt Ieſus, as the naturall man cannot apprehend: yea, and further we affirme, that albeit the faithfull oppreſſed by negligence, and manly infirmitie, doe not profit ſo much as they would, in the verie inſtant action of the Supper, yet ſhall it after bring fruite forth, as liuelie ſeede ſowne in good ground. For the holie ſpirit, which can neuer be deuided from the right inſtitution

of the Lord Ieſus, will not fruſtrate the faithfull of the fruite of that myſticall action: but all this we ſaie commeth of true faith which apprehendeth Chriſt Ieſus, who onelie maketh his Sacraments effectuall vnto vs. And therefore whoſoeuer ſlaundereth vs, as that we affirme or beleeue Sacraments to be onely naked and bare ſignes, doeth iniury vnto vs, and ſpeaketh againſt the manifeſt trueth. But this liberallie and frankelie we confeſſe, that we make diſtinction betwixt Chriſt Ieſus, in his eternal ſubſtance, and betwixt the elementes, in the ſacramentall ſignes. So that we will neither worſhip the ſignes, in place of that which is ſignified by them, neither yet do we deſpiſe, & interpret them as vnprofitable, and vaine, but doe vſe them with all reuerence, examining our ſelues diligentlie before that ſo we doe. Becauſe wee are aſſured by the mouth of the Apoſtle, that ſuch as eate of that bread, & drinke of that cup vnworthelie, are guiltie of the bodie and of the bloode of Chriſt Ieſus▪
               
            
            
               Of the right adminiſtration of the Sacramentes.
               THat ſacraments be rightlie miniſtred, we iudge two thinges requiſite: the one, that they be miniſtred by lawful miniſters, whome we affirme to be onely they, that are appointed to the preaching of the word, into whoſe mouthes, God hath put ſome ſermon of exhortation, they being men lawfullie choſen there to by ſome Church. The other that they be miniſtred in ſuch elements, and in ſuch ſort, as God hath appointed: elſe we affirme that they ceaſe to be right ſacraments of Chriſt Ieſus. And therefore it is that we fl
                     ••
                   the ſocietie with the papiſticall Church, in participation of their ſacraments, firſt, becauſe their miniſters are no miniſters of Chriſt Ieſus (yea, this is more horrible, they ſuffer women, whome the holie Ghoſt will not ſuffer to teach in the congregation, 
                     •
                  o baptize:) and ſecondlie, becauſe they haue ſo adulterated both the one ſacrament, and the other, with their owne inuentions, that no parte of Chriſtes action abideth in the originall puritie. For oile, ſalte, ſpattle, and ſuch like in baptiſme, are but mens inuentions: adoration, veneration, bearing through ſtreetes

and townes, & keeping of bread in boxes or boiſts, are prophanation of Chriſtes ſacraments, and no vſe of the ſame. For Chriſt Ieſus ſaide, Take eate, &c. Doe you this in rememberance of me. By which words and charge, he ſanctitied bread and wine to be the Sacrament of his holy body and bloode, to the end that the one ſhould be eaten, and that all ſhould drinke of the other, and not that they ſhould be kept, to be worſhipped and honoured as God, as the Papiſts haue done heretofore: who alſo haue committed ſacriledge, ſtealing from the people the one part of the ſacrament, to wit, the bleſſed cup. Moreouer that the ſacraments be rightlie vſed, it is required, that the end & cauſe for which ſacraments were inſtituted, be vnderſtanded, and obſerued, as well of the Miniſter, as by the receiuers. For if the opinion be changed in the receiuer, the right vſe ceaſeth, which is moſt euident, by the reiection of the ſacrifices: as alſo if the teacher plainlie teach falſe doctrine, which were odious and abhominable before God (albeit they were his own ordinance) becauſe the wicked men vſe them to another end, then God hath ordained. The ſame we affirme of the Sacraments in the Papiſtical Church, in which we affirme the wholl action of the Lord Ieſus to be adultered, as well in the externall forme, as in the end and opinion. What Chriſt Ieſus did, and commaunded to be done, is euident, by the Euangeliſts and by Saint Paul: what the Prieſt doth at his 
                     •
                  ul
                     ••
                  r, we neede not to rehearſe. The end and cauſe of Chriſtes inſtitution, and why the ſelfe ſame ſhould be vſed, is expreſſed in theſe wordes: Doe ye this in rememberance 
                        〈◊〉
                      me. As of
                        •
                     e as you ſhall eate this breade, and drinke of this 
                        •
                     uppe, you ſhall ſhew foorth, that is, extoll, preach, magnifie, and praiſe the Lordes death till he come. But to what ende and in what opinion the Prieſtes ſaie their maſſe, let the wordes of the ſame, their owne Doctours and writings 
                     〈◊〉
                   wit, that they, as mediatours betwixt Chriſt and his Church▪ do offer vnto God the father, a ſacrifice propitiatory for the ſinnes of the quick and the dead: which doctrine as blaſphemous to Chriſt Ieſus, and making derogation to the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of his onelie ſacrifice, once offered for purgation of all thoſe that ſhall be ſanctified, we vtterlie abhorre, deteſt, and renounce.
            
            
               
               To whome ſacraments appertaine.
               WE confeſſe and acknowledge, that baptiſme apperteineth as wel to the infants of the faithfull, as vnto them that be of age and diſcretion. And ſo we damne the error of the Anabaptiſtes, who denie baptiſme to apperteine to children, before they haue faith and vnderſtanding. But the ſupper of the Lord, we confeſſe to appertein to ſuch onelie, as be of the houſholde of ſaith, and can trie & examine themſelues, as well in their faith, as in their dutie towardes their neighbours. Such as eat and drink at that holie table without faith, or being at diſſention with their breethren, do eat vnworthelie: and therefore it is, that in our Church, our miniſters take publike and particular examination of the knowledge and conuerſation of ſuch, as are to be admitted to the table of the Lord Ieſus.
            
            
               Of the ciuill maigiſtrates.
               WE confeſſe and acknowledge Empires, kingdomes▪ dominions, and cities, to be diſtincted and ordained by God: the powers and authoritie in the ſame, be 
                     •
                  t of Emperours in their empires, of Kinges in their realmes, Dukes and Princes in their dominions, and of other magiſtrates in their cities, to be Gods holy ordinance, ordained for manifeſtation ofhis owne glorie, and for the ſingular profitte and commoditie of mankinde▪ ſo that whoſoeuer goeth about to take away, or to confound the whol ſtate of ciuill pollicies, now long eſtabliſhed, we affirme the ſame men, not onelie to be enimies to mankinde, but alſo wickedlie to fight againſt Gods expreſſed wil. We farther confeſſe & acknowledge, that ſuch perſons as are placed in authoritie, are to be beloued, honored, feared, and holden i
                     •
                   moſte reuerent eſtimation: becauſe they are the lieuete
                     •
                  an
                     •
                  es of God, in whoſe ſeates God himſelfe doth ſit and 
                     •••
                  ge, yea, euen the iudges and Princes themſelues, to whome by God is giuen the ſworde, to the praiſe and defence of good men, and to reuenge and puniſh all malefactours. Moreouer, to Kinges, Princes, Rulers, and Magiſtrates, we affi me that chiefelie and moſte principallie, the conſeruation and purgation of the Religion appertaineth, ſo that not onelie they are appointed for ciuill pollicie, but alſo for manteinance of

the true Religion, and for ſuppreſſing of idolatrie and ſuperſtition whatſoeuer. As in Dauid, Ioſaphat, Ezcehias, Ioſias, and others highlie commended for their zeale in that caſe, maie be eſpied. And therefore we confeſſe and auow▪ that ſuch as reſiſt the ſupreame power, doing that thing which appertaineth to his charge, do reſiſt gods ordinance, and therefore cannot be guiltles. And farther we affirme, that whoſoeuer denie vnto them their aide, counſell, and comforte, whileſt the Princes and rulers vigilantlie trauell in execution of their office, that the ſame men denie their helpe, ſupport, and counſell, to God, who by the preſence of his lieftenant doth craue it of them.
            
            
               The giftes freelie giuen to the Church.
               ALbeit that the word of God truelie preached, and the Sacraments rightlie miniſtered, and diſcipline executed according to the word of God, be the certaine and infallible ſignes of the true Church, yet we meane not that euery particuler perſon ioyned with ſuch company, is an elect member of Chriſt Ieſus. For we acknowledge and confeſſe that darnell, cockell, and chaffe maie be ſowen, grow: and in great aboundance lie in the middeſt of the wheat, that is, the reprobate maie be ioyned in the ſocietie of the elect, and maie externallie vſe with them the benefites of the word and ſacramentes. But ſuch being but temporall profeſſors in mouth, and not in heart, doe fall backe and continue not to the end. And therefore they haue no fruit of Chriſts death, reſurrection, nor aſcenſion: but ſuch as with heart vnfainedlie beleeue, and with mouth boldlie confeſſe the Lord Ieſus, as before we haue ſaid, ſhall moſte aſſuredlie receiue theſe giftes: Firſt, in this life, the remiſſion of ſinnes, and that by onelie faith in Chriſtes blood. In ſo much that albeit ſinne remaine and continuallie abide in theſe our mortall bodies, yet it is not imputed vnto vs, but is remitted and couered with Chriſtes iuſtice. Secondlie, in the generall iudgement, there ſhalbe giuen to euerie man and woman, reſurrection of the fleſh. For the ſea ſhal giue her dead: the earth thoſe that therein be incloſed, yea the eternall god ſhall ſtretch out his hand on the duſt, and the dead ſhall ariſe vncorruptible, and that in the ſubſtance of the ſame

fleſh that euerie m
                     •
                  n now beareth, to receiue according to their workes, glorie, or puniſhment. For ſuch as now delight in va
                     •
                  itie▪ crueltie, filthines, ſuperſtition, or idolatrie, ſhallbe adiudged to the fire vnquencheable: in which they ſhall be tormented for euer, as well in their owne bodies, as in their 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  les, which now they giue to ſerue the deuill inall abhomination. But ſuch as continue in well doing to the ende, b
                     •
                  ldlie profeſſing the Lord Ieſus, we conſtantlie beleene that they ſhall receiue glorie, honour, and immortalitie to raigne for euer in life euerlaſting, with Chriſt Ieſus, to whoſe glorified body all his elect ſhall be made like, when he ſhalll appeare againe in iudgement, and ſhall render vp the kingdome to God his Father, who then ſhalbe and euer ſhal remaine all in all things, God bleſſed for euer: to whome with the Sonne, and with the holie Ghoſt, be all honour and glorie, now and euer. So be it.
            
         
         
            THE KINGS MAIESTIES CHARGE TO ALL COMMISSIONERS AND MINISTERS within his Realme.
            
            SEeing that we and our houſhold haue ſubſcribed and giuen this publike confeſſion of our faith, to the good example of our Subiectes: we commaund and charge all Commiſſioners & Miniſters, to craue the ſame confeſſion of their pariſhioners, and proceede againſt the refuſers, according to our lawes and order of the Church, deliuerine their names and lawfull proceſſe tothe Miniſters of our houſe, with al haſte and diligence, vnder the paine of 40. pound, to be taken from their ſtipend that we with the aduiſe of our counſell 
                  •
               aie take order with ſuch proud contemners of God and ourlawes. Subſcribed with our hand At Hol
                  ••
               udhous 1581.) the 2. daie of March, the 14 yeare of our reigne.
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               I am to deſire the Godlie and Chriſtian Reader, for whoſe ſake onelie this worke was taken in hand, as to accept friendlie and brotherlie of theſe laboures, and to beare with ſome light faults which might eaſily eſcape in the tranſlating; ſo to pardon me a great ouerſight, committed eſpeciallie and onelie in the obſeruations, wherein is was verie requiſite to haue vſed greater diligence. This ou
                  •
               rſight is of two ſ
                  •
               r
                  •
               es, one in certain obſeru▪ ſet downe in the margent, but ye
                  •
                in latine: the other in ſuch as ſhould haue bin placed in the margent, and are cleane left out. Theſe things becauſe they be of ſome great weight and moment, I thought it good to admoniſh thee thereof, and to deſire thee before thou readeſt the booke, either to place euerie obſeruation in it proper page, or in reading 
                  •
               o haue recourſe to this place, leſt otherwiſe thou maiſt think hardly of ſome parts of doctrine, or other matter, ſet downe in this Booke.
         
         
            
               THE LATINE OBSERVATIONS are thus to be tranſlated.
               In the 12. page▪ againſt the 24 line, read the obſeruation in the margent thus: Looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this Confeſſion, both in this, and alſo in the ſecond Section.
               
               
                  Pag. 13. 1. Looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this Confeſſion.
               
                  Pag. 19 2. Looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 44. 21. Of the waſting of the gifts of the holie Ghoſt, looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this Confeſſ Sect. 4.
               
               
                  Pag. 45. 25. Looke the firſt obſeru. vpon the Confeſſion of Saxonie.
            
            
               
               THE OBSERVATIONS WHICH are cleane left out in the margent, are thus to be placed in their ſeuerall pages.
               
                  Pag. 7. againſt the 28. line read in the margent: Looke the firſt obſeruation vp in this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 20. 2. Looke the ſecond obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 23. 11. Looke the firſt obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 26. 1. Looke the firſt obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 27. 31. Looke the ſecond obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 27. 38. Looke the third obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 37. 16. Looke the first obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 43. 33. Looke the first obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 44. 21. Looke the ſecond obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 94. 23. Looke the firſt obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 103. 23. Looke the firſt obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 223. 32. Looke the firſt obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 223. 33. Looke the ſecond obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 232. 2. Looke the ſecond obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 223. 29. Looke the third obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 336. 27. Looke the fift obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               
                  Pag. 523. 28. Looke the firſt obſeruation vpon this Confeſſ.
               In the 105. page, put out in the margent, looke the 2. obſeru. &c.
               Now vnto the King euerlaſting, immortall, inuiſible, vnto God only wiſe, be honour and glorie for euer and euer, Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE CHIEFE POINTS OF CONFESSIONS BELONGING TO THIS FIRST SECTION OF the holy Scripture.
            
               
                  THE LATTER CONFESSION OF Heluetia touching the holie Scripture, being the true word of God.
               
                  CHAP. 1.
                  
                     WE beleeue and confeſſe the Canonicall ſcriptures of the holie Prophets and Apoſtles of both Teſtaments, to be the verie true worde of God, and to haue ſufficient authoritie of them ſelues, not of men. For God him ſelfe ſpake to the Fathers, Prophets, Apoſtles, and ſpeaketh yet vnto vs by the holie ſcriptures. And in this holie ſcripture the vniuerſall Church of Chriſt hath all things fully expounded, whatſoeuer belong both to a ſauing faith, and alſo to the framing of a life acceptable to God: in which reſpect it is expreſſelie commaunded of God, that nothing be either put to, or taken from the ſame. Wee iudge therefore that from theſe ſcriptures is to be taken true wiſdome and godlines, the reformation and gouernment of Churches, alſo the inſtruction in all duties of pietie: and to be ſhort,

the confirmation of opinions and the confutation of error▪ with all exhortations, according to that of the Apoſtle, 
                        •
                      
                     2. Tim 3.
                     ſcripture inſpired of God is profitable for doctrine, for reproofe, & 
                        •
                      Againe, Theſe thinges I write vnto thee (ſaith the Apoſtle 
                        •
                      
                     Timothie. 1. Chap. 3) that thou maiſt know how it behooueth 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     to be converſant in the houſe of God, &c. Againe, the ſelfe ſa
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 
                     2. Theſ. 2.Apoſtle to the Theſsalonians, When, ſaith he, yee receiued the word of vs, 
                           ••
                        receiued no
                           •
                         the worde of men, but, as it was indee
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      
                     Mat. 10.
                     the word of God, &c. For the Lord himſelfe hath ſaid in the goſpell, It is not ye that ſpeake, but the ſpirit of my father ſpeeketh 
                     Luc. 10.
                     in you: therefore he that heareth you, heareth me, and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Iohn. 13.
                     that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. Wherefore when this wor
                        •
                      of God is now preached in the Church by preachers la
                        •
                     
                     f
                        •
                     lli
                        •
                      called, we beleeue that the verie word of God is pre
                        •
                     
                     ched, and receiued of the faithfull, and that neither anie
                        •
                     
                     ther worde of God is to be fayned, or to be expected fro
                        •
                      heauen: and that now the worde it ſelfe which is preached is to be regarded, not the miniſter that preacheth: who although he be euill and a ſinner, neuertheleſſe the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of God abideth true and good. Neither doe we thinke th
                        ••
                      therefore the outward preaching is to be thought as fr
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     
                     leſſe, becauſe the inſtruction in true religion dependeth 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Ier. 12. 1. Cor. 3. Ioh. 6.the inward illumination of the ſpirit, becauſe it is writte
                        •
                      
                     No man ſhall teach his neighbour. For all men ſhall know me. And he that watreth, or he that planteth, is nothing, but God who 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     the increaſe. For albeit no man can come to Chriſt, vnleſse he
                           •
                         drawne by the heauenlie Father, and be inwardlie lightned 
                        〈◊〉
                      the holie Ghoſt, yet we know vndoubtedlie, that it is 
                        〈◊〉
                      will of God, that his worde ſhould be preached euen ou
                        •
                      wardlie. God could indeede by his holie ſpirite, or by th
                        •
                      miniſterie of an Angell, without the miniſterie of Saint 
                        〈◊〉
                      haue tought Cornelius in the Actes▪ but neuertheleſſe 
                        〈◊〉
                      referreth him to Peter: of whome the Angel ſpeaking ſai
                        ••
                      
                     
                        
                           •
                        e ſhall tell thee what thou muſt doe. For he that illuminate
                        •
                      in
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     dl
                        ••
                     , by giuing men the holie Ghoſt, the ſelfe ſame b
                        •
                      
                     Mar. 16. Act. 16.waie of commaundement ſaid vnto his diſciples, goe ye i
                           ••
                         the who
                           ••
                         world, and preach the goſpell to euerie creature. And 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Pa
                           ••
                        
                      preached the word outwardlie to Lydia a purple ſell
                        •
                      among the Philippians, but the Lord inwardlie opened th
                        •
                      womans heart. And the ſame Paul vpon an elegant g
                        ••
                     
                     dation

fitlie placed in the 10. to the Romanes, at laſt inferreth: therefore faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Wee knowe in the meane time that God can illuminate whome, and when he will, euen without the externall miniſterie, which is a thing appertaining to his power: but we ſpeake of the vſuall waie of inſtructing men, deliuered vnto vs of God both by commaundement and examples.
                  We therefore deteſt all the hereſies of Artemon, the Manichees, Valentinians, of Cerdon, and the Marcioni
                           ••
                        s, who denied that the ſcriptures proceeded from the holie Ghoſt, or elſe receiued not, or poliſhed and corrupted ſome of them. And yet we doe not denie that certaine bookes of the olde Teſtament were of the auncient authors called Apochry
                        
                           •
                        hall, and of others Eccleſiaſticall, to witte, ſuch as they would haue to be read in the Churches, but not alledged to auouch or confirme the authoritie of faith by them. As alſo Auſtine in his 18. Booke De 
                           •
                        iuit. Dei. C. 38. maketh mention▪ that in the bookes of the Kinges the names and bookes of certaine Prophets are reckoned: but he addeth, that they are not in the Canon; and that thoſe bookes which we haue, ſuffice vnto godlines.
                  
               
               
                  
                     OF INTERPRETING THE HOLIE SCRIPTVRES, and of Fathers, Councels, and Traditions. CHAP. 2.
                  
                     2. Pet. 1. THe Apoſtle Peter hath ſaid, that the holy ſcriptures are not of anie priuat interpretation, therefore we doe not alowe all expoſitions: whereupon we doe not acknowledge that which they call the meaning of the Church of home, for the true and naturall interpretation of the ſcriptures, which forſooth the defenders of the Romane Church doe ſtriue to force all men ſimplie to receiue: but we acknowledge that interpretation of Scriptures for authenticall and proper, which being taken from the ſcriptures themſelues (that is, from the phraſe of that tongue in which they were written, they being alſo waied according to the circumſtances, and expounded according to the proportion of places either like or vnlike, or of moe and plainer) accordeth with the rule of faith and charitie, and maketh notably for Gods

glorie and mans ſaluation. Wherefore we do not contemn
                        •
                      the holie treatiſes of the Fathers, agreeing with the ſcri
                        •
                     
                     tures, from whome notwithſtanding we doe modeſtlie d
                        •
                      ſent, as they are deprehended to ſet downe thinges meere
                        •
                      ſtraunge, or altogether contrarie to the ſame. Neither do
                        •
                      thinke that we doe them anie wrong in this matter, ſeein
                        •
                      that they all with one conſent will not haue their writing
                        •
                      matched with the canonicall ſcriptures, but bid vs allow
                        •
                      them ſo farre forth, as they either agree with them, or diſagree, and bid vs take thoſe things that agree, and leaue thoſe that diſagree: and according to this order we do account
                        •
                      the decrees or Canons of councells. Wherefore we ſuffer not o
                        ••
                      ſelues in controuerſies about Religion or matters of faith
                        •
                      be preſſed with the bare teſtimonies of fathers, or decrees o
                        •
                      Councells, much leſſe with receiued cuſtomes, or elſe with 
                           〈◊〉
                         of men being of one iudgement, or with preſcription of long ti
                           ••
                        
                        ▪
                      Therefore in controuerſies of religion or matters of faith we cannot adm
                        ••
                      anie other iudge then God himſelfe, pronouncing by the holie ſcriptures, what is true, what is fal
                        ••
                      what is to be followed, or what to be auoided. So we do 
                        〈◊〉
                      reſt but in the iudgements of ſpiritual men, drawen from the word of God. Certainely Ieremie & the other Prophets 
                        〈◊〉
                      vehemen
                        •
                     lie condemne the aſſemblies of Prieſts, gathere
                        •
                      againſt the law of God: & diligentlie forewarned vs, that 
                        •
                      
                     Ezec. 20. 18.ſhould not heare the fathers or tread in their path, who w
                        ••
                      king in their owne inuentions, ſwarued from the law of go
                        •
                      We doe likewiſe reiect humane traditions, which althou
                        •
                      they be ſet out with goodlie titles, as though they were d
                        •
                     
                     uine and Apoſtolical, by the liuelie voice of the Apoſtles▪ deliuered to the Church, as it were by the hands of Apoſtolicall men, by meane of Biſhops ſucceeding in their roome
                        •
                      yet being compared with the ſcriptures, diſagre from the
                        •
                      and by that their diſagreement bewraie them ſelues in 
                        〈◊〉
                      wiſe to be Apoſtolicall. For as the Apoſtles did not diſagree among themſelues in doctrine, ſo the Apoſtles ſch
                        •
                     
                     lers did not ſet forth thinges contrarie to the Apoſtle
                        •
                      Nay it were blaſphemous to auouch, that the Apoſtles 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     1. Cor. 4. 2. Cor. 1.liuely voice deliuered thinges contrarie to their writing
                        •
                      Paull affirmeth expreſſelie, that he taught the ſame thinge
                           •
                        
                        ▪ in all Churches. And againe. We, ſaith he, write no other thi
                           ••
                        
                     
                     
                     vnto you, then which ye read, or alſo acknowledge. Alſo in another place he witneſſeth, that he and his diſciples, to wit Apoſtolicall men, walked in the ſame waie, and ioyntlie by the ſame 
                     2. Cor. 12.
                     ſpirit did al thing
                           •
                        . The Iewes alſo in time paſt had their traditions of Elders, but theſe traditions were ſeuerelie confuted by the Lord, ſhewing that the keeping of them hindereth Gods lawe, and that God is in vaine worſhipped with 
                     Mat. 15. Mare. 7.
                     ſuch.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION of Heluetia.
               
                  Artic. 1. Scriptura. THe Canonical ſcripture, being the word of God, and deliuered by the holie Ghoſt, and publiſhed to the world by the Prophets and Apoſtles, being of all other the moſt perfect & ancient philoſophie, doth alone perfectlie conteine all pietie and good ordering of life. The interpretation Artic. 2. Interpretatio.herof is to be taken onely from herſelfe, that herſelfe maie be the interpreter of her ſelfe, the rule of charitie and faith being her guide. Which kinde of interpretation ſo far Artic. 3. Patras.forth as the holie Fathers haue followed, we doe not onelie receiue them as interpreters of the ſcripture, but reuerence them as the beloued inſtruments of God. But as for the Artic. 4. Tradit. h
                        •
                     
                     manae.traditions of men, although neuer ſo glorious and receiued, how many ſoeuer of them doe withdrawe or hinder vs, as of thinges vnprofitable and hurtfull, ſo we anſwere with that ſaying of the Lord, They worſhip me in vaine, teaching the doctrine of men. The drift of the Canonicall ſcripture is this: that God wiſheth well to mankinde: and by Chriſt the Lord his ſonne hath declared this good will, which is receiued by faith alone, and faith muſt be effectuall through loue, that it may be ſhewed forth by an innocent life.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASILL.
               Of things commaunded and not commaunded. Art. 10.
               WE confeſſe that as no man can commaund thoſe things which Chriſt hath not commaunded, ſo likewiſe no man can forbid thoſe things which he hath not forbidden. And in the margent. For it is written, heare him.
                  
Alſo ſection the 3. in the ſame place. And much leſſe can any man licenſe thoſe things, which God hath forbidden, &c. And in the marg. God ſaid, I am Iehoua your god, Leuit. 18. & by Moſes, Deut. 10. for Iehoua your god is God of Gods, a great god & terrible▪
                   Who therefore among his creatures can gra
                     ••
                   thoſe things, which he hath forbidden? In like ſorte Section 4. And againe, no man can forbid thoſe things, which God hath graunted, &c. The other things which are conteined in this article, becauſe they belong to other ſections, they are inſerted, euerie one in their places.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA O
                     •
                   THE WALDENSES. Of the holie ſcriptures. CHAP. I.
               FIrſt of all the miniſters of our Churches teach with one conſent, concerning the holy ſcripture of the ne
                     •
                   and olde Teſtament (which is commonlie called the Bible, and is lawfullie receiued and allowed of the fathers, which are of beſt and ſoundeſt iudgement) that it is true, certaine, and worthie to be beleeued, whereunto no other humane writings whatſoeuer, or of what ſort ſoeuer they be, may be compared, but that, as mans writings, they muſt giue place to the holie ſcripture: Firſt, becauſe it is inſpired an
                     •
                   taught of the holie Ghoſt, and vttered by the mouth of holie men, written by them, and confirmed by heauenlie and diuine reſtimonies: which ſpirit alſo himſelfe openeth & diſcloſeth the meaning how it ought to be vnderſtood, and the trueth of this ſcripture in the Church, in what manner ſeemeth him beſt: eſpeciallie by raiſing vp and giuing faithful miniſters, who are his choſen inſtruments. Of which ſpir
                     •
                   
                  2. Sam. 22. 2. Pet. 1.Dauid ſpeaketh, when he ſaieth, The ſpirit of the Lord ſpake by me, and his word was in my tongue: and Peter, For prophecie 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  2. Tim. 3. Rom. 15. Ioan. 5.
                  not molde time by the will of man, but holie men of God ſpakes they were mooued by the holie Ghoſt. and Paull▪ 
                  The wholl ſcripture giuen by inſpiration of God, is profitable, &c. beſides the Lord himſelfe ſaith, Search the ſcriptures. And againe, Ye are deceiued, 
                  Mat. 22. Luc. 24.
                  not knowing the ſcriptures, neither doe ye vnderſtand the power of God. And, He opened the mindes of his Diſciples, that they might vnderſtand the ſcriptures.
               
               Secondlie becauſe it is a true and ſure teſtimonie and a

cleare proofe of Gods fauourable good will, which he hath Heb. 11.reueiled concerning himſelfe, without which reuelation of ſcripture, there is no wholeſome knowledge, nor faith, nor acceſſe to God. For in this ſuch thinges as are neceſſarie to doctrine, to diſcipline & gouernement of the holie Church, for all and ſingular perſons in the ordinarie miniſterie of ſaluation (whence alſo ſpringeth true faith) in this I ſay, are all ſuch things fullie, abſolutelie, and ſo farre forth, as 
                     〈◊〉
                   requiſite, as in a moſte excellent and moſte exquiſite worke of the holie Ghoſt, comprehended and included, then which no Angell from heauen can bring any thing more certaine, and if he ſhould bring any other thing, he ought not to be beleeued.
               And this perſwaſion and beliefe concerning holie ſcripture, namely that it is taught and inſpired of God, is the beginning and ground of our Chriſtian profeſſion, which taketh beginning from the worde outwardlie preached, as from an ordinarie meane, orde
                     ••
                  ed of god for this purpoſe. Wherefore euerie one ought verie highly to eſ
                     •
                  e
                     ••
                  e of the diuine writings of the holie Prophets and Apoſtles, reſolutelie to beleeue them, and religiouſlie to yea
                     •
                  d vnto them in all things, diligentlie to reade them, to gather wholſome doctrine our of them, and according to them ought euerie man to frame and order himſelfe, but eſpeciallie they, who after an holie manner are ſet ouer the Church of God. For which cauſes in our Churches and meetings this holy ſcripture is rehearſed to the hearers in the common and mother tongue which all vnderſtand, and eſpeciallie (according to the auncient cuſtome of the Church) thoſe portions of the Goſpells in ſcripture, which are wont to be read on ſolemne holie daies out of the Euangeliſtes and Apoſtles writings, & are vſually called Goſpells & Epiſtles: out of which profitable and whollſome doctrines, and exhortations, and ſermons are made to the people, as at all times occaſion and neede requiteth. We likewiſe teach that the writings of holie Doctors, eſpeciallie of thoſe that are auncient, are alſo to be eſteemed for true and profitable▪ wherof there may be ſome vſe to inſtruct the people, yet onelie in thoſe thinges wheerin they agree with the holie ſcripture, or are not contrarie thereunto, and ſo farre forth as they giue teſtimonie

to the excellencie thereof, to the information and example of the Apoſtolike Church, and ſwarue not from the conſent, iudgement, and decrees, of the auncient Church (wherein ſhee hath continued vnſpotted in the trueth) after what ſort they themſelues alſo haue charged men to iudge and thinke of their writings, and haue giuen warning that heede ſhould be taken, leſt that they beeing but men, too much ſhould be aſcribed to them. Of which thing S. Auguſtine 
                  In pro. em. in 3. de ſanct. Trinit.ſpeaketh in this manner. Be not thou a ſeruant to my writings, as it were to the Canonical ſcriptures, but in the Canonical ſcriptures ſuch things as thou did
                        •
                     t not beleue, when thou haſt there found them, immediately beleue. But in my writings that which thou knowest not for a certaine trueth, vnleſse thou perceiue it to be certaine, hold it not reſolutelie. And elſe where he ſaith, Giue not as great credit to mine or Ambroſe his words, as to the Canonicall ſcriptures. This is the right rule to diſcerne writings by, which ſo greatlie liked the Papiſts that they haue cited it in their decretal▪ diſtinct. 9. Chap. Noli meis verbis, &c.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               THis one god hath reuealed himſelfe to be ſuch a one 
                     Artic. 2.vnto men, firſt in the creation, preſeruation & gouerning of his works: ſecondly fa
                     •
                  re more plainely in his word, which word in the beginning he reuealed to the fathers by certaine viſions and oracles, and then cauſed it to be written in theſe bookes which we cal Holie ſcripture.
               All this holie ſcripture is conteined in the Canonicall 
                     Artic. 3.bookes of the olde and new Teſtament. The Catalogue whereof is this. The fiue bookes of Moſes (namelie Geneſis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, Deuteronomine: Ioſue, Iudges, Ruth, two bookes of Samuell, two bookes of the Kings, two bookes of Chronicles, or Paralipomenon, one booke of Eſdras, Nehemiah, Eſter, Iob, the Pſalmes, Salomons Prouerbes, Eccleſiaſtes, The Song of ſonges, Eſaie, Ieremie, with the Lamentations, Ezechiell, Daniell, the 12. ſmall Prophets (namelie Oſe, Ioell, Amos, Abdiah, Ionah, Micheah, Nahum, Abacu
                        •
                     , Sophonie, Haggaie, Zacharie, Malachie) the holy Goſpel of Ieſu Chriſt according to Matthew, Marke, Luke, and Iohn, the Acts of the Apoſtles, Paulls Epiſtles (namelie one to the Romans, two to the Corinthians, one to the Galathians, one to the Epheſians, one to the

                  Philippians, one to the Colloſſians, two to the Theſsalonians, two to Timothie, one to Titus, one to Philemon, the Epiſtle to the Hebrews. The Epiſtle of Iames, two epiſtles of Peter, three epiſtles of Iohn, one epiſtle of I
                        •
                     de, Iohns Reuelation. 
                  
                     Artic. 4.
               
               We acknowledge theſe bookes to be Canonicall, that is, we account them as the rule and ſquare of our faith, and that not onelie for the common conſent of the Church, but alſo much more for the teſtimonie and inward perſwaſion of the holie ghoſt, by whoſe inſpiration we are taught to diſcearne them from other Eccleſiaſticall bookes▪ which howſoeuer they may be profitable, yet are they not ſuch, that any one article of faith may be builded vpon them.
               
                  
                     Ar
                           •
                        ic. 5. We beleeeue that the worde conteined in theſe bookes, came from one god, of whome alone, and not of men, the authoritie thereof dependeth. And ſeeing this is the ſumme of al trueth, conteining whatſoeuer is required for the worſhip of God and our ſaluation, we holde it not lawfull for men, no not for the Angles themſelues, to adde or detract any thing from that word, or to alter any whitte a
                     •
                   al in the ſame. And hereupon it followeth, that it is not lawfull to oppoſe either antiquitie, cuſtome, multitude, mans wiſedome▪ and iudgement, edicts, or any decrees, or Councells, or viſions, or miracles, vnto this holie ſcripture, but rather that al things ought to be examined, and tried by the rule and ſquare thereof. Wherefore we doe for this cauſe alſo allow thoſe three Creedes▪ namelie the Apoſtles, the Nicen, and Athanaſius his Creede, becauſe they be agreeable to the written word of God.
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               
                  
                     Artic. 10. WE receiue and embrace all the Canonicall ſcriptures, both of the olde and new teſtament, giuing thanks to our God, who hath raiſed vp vnto vs that light, which we might euer haue before our eies: leſt either by the ſubteltie of man, or by the ſnares of the deuil, we ſhould be caried awaie to errors, and lies. Alſo we profeſſe that theſe be the heauenlie voices, whereby God hath opened vnto vs his will: and that onelie in them mannes heart can haue ſetled reſt: that in them be aboundantlie,

and fullie comprehended al things, whatſoeuer be needful for our helpe, as Origen, Auguſtine, Chryſoſtome, and Cyrillus, haue taught: That they be the verie might and ſtrength to attaine to ſaluation: that they be the fundations of the Prophets and Apoſtles, VVhereupon is built the Church of God: that they be the verie ſure and infallible rule, whereby may be tried, whether the Churh doe ſwarue, or erre, and whereunto all Eccleſiaſticall doctrine ought to be called to account: and, that againſt theſe ſcripturs neither law, nor ordinance, nor anie cuſtome, ought to be heard: no though Paull him ſelfe, or an angel from heauen ſhould come & teach the contrary.
            
            
               
                  Artic. 2. Sub 
                        •
                     inem. OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               HE hath reuealed himſelfe much more plainly in his holy worde, ſo farre forth as it is expedient for his owne 
                     Artic. 3.glorie, and the ſaluation of his in this life.
               We confeſſe that this worde of God was not brought or deliuered by any will of man: but that holy men of God inſpired by Gods ſpirit ſpake it, as S. Peter witneſſeth▪ but afterward God himſelfe for that exceeding tender carefullnes which he hath of his, & of their ſaluation, gaue in commiſſion to his ſeruants the Apoſtles & Prophets, that they ſhould put thoſe his oracles in writing: and he himſelfe alſo wrote the two tables of the law with his owne finger: which is the cauſe whie we call ſuch writinges ſacred & diuine ſcripture.
               And we comprehend the holy ſcripture in thoſe two books 
                     Artic. 4.of the olde and new Teſtament, which are called the canonicall bookes▪ about which there was neuer anie ado. And of them this is the number and alſo the order, receiued of the Church of God. The fiue bookes of Moſes, the booke of Ioſua, of the Iudges, of Ruth, two books of Samuell, two of the Kinges, two of the Chronicles, which are called Paralipomena, the firſt of Eſdras: Nehemias, Eſter, lob: alſo Dauides Pſalmes, three bookes of Salomon, namely the Prouerbes, Eccleſiaſtes, and the ſong of ſongs: the foure great Prophets, Eſay, Ieremie, Ezechiell, and Daniell: and furthermore alſo the 12▪ ſmall Prophets: moreouer the Canonical bookes of the new teſtament are, the foure Euangeliſtes, namelie Saint Matthew, Marke, Luke, and Iohn, the Actes of the Apoſtles, the 14. Epiſtles of Saint Paull, and ſeuen of

the othet Apoſtles, the Reuelation of S. Iohn the Apoſtle. Theſe bookes alone doe we receiue as ſacred and canonicall, 
                     Artic. 5.whereupon our faith maie reſt, be confirmed and eſtabliſhed: therefore without any doubt we beleeue alſo thoſe thinges, which are conteined in them, and that not ſo much becauſe the Church receiueth & alloweth them for Canonical, as for that the holy ghoſt beareth witnes to our conſciences that they came from god, & moſt of all for that they alſo teſtifie & iuſtifie by them ſelues this their owne ſacred authority, & ſanctity, ſeing that euen the blinde may cleerely beholde, & as it were feele the 
                     •
                  ulfilling and accompliſhment of all things which were foretolde in theſe writinges.
               
                  
                     Artic. 6. We furthermore make a difference betweene the holie bookes, and thoſe which they cal Apocriphall▪ for ſo much as the Apocriphall maie be read in the Church, and it is lawfull alſo ſo fa
                     •
                  re to gather inſtructions out of them, as they agree with the Canonicall bookes, but their authority, and certaintie is not ſuch, as that anie doctrine touching faith or Chriſtian Religion, maie ſafelie be built upon their teſtimonie: ſo farre of is it, that they can diſanull or impaire the authoritie of the other. 
                     Artic. 7.
               
               We beleeue alſo that this holie ſcripture doth moſt perfectlie conteine all the will of God, and that in it all things are aboundantlie taught whatſoeuer is neceſſarie to be beleeued of man to attaine ſaluation. Therefore ſeeing the wholl manner of worſhipping God, with God requireth at the handes of the faithfull, is there moſt exquiſitelie and at large ſet downe
                     •
                  , it is lawfull for no man, although he haue the authoritie of an Apoſtle, no no
                     •
                   for anie Angell ſent from heauen, as Saint Paul ſpeaketh, to teach otherwiſe then we haue long ſince beene taught in the holie ſcriptures. For ſeeing it is forbidden that anie one ſhould adde or detract any thing from the word of God, thereby it is 
                     •
                  uident enough that this holie doctrine is perfect and abſolute in all pointes and parcells thereof: and therefore no other writings of men, although neuer ſo holie, no cuſtome, no multitude, no antiquitie, nor preſcription of times, nor perſonall ſucceſſion, nor anie councells, and to conclude, no decrees or ordinances of men are to be marched or compared with theſe deuine ſcriptures and bare trueth of God,

for ſo much as Gods trueth excelleth al things. For all men of their owne nature are lyers, and lighter then vanitie it ſelfe: therefore we do vtterlie refuſe whatſoeuer things agree not with this moſte certaine rule, as we haue beene taught by the Apoſtles, when they ſaie: Trie the ſpirites whether they be of God. And, If anie come vnto you, and bring not this doctrine, receiue him not to houſe, &c.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE SAXONS CONFESSION.
               Of Doctrine.
               Seeing it is moſt vndoubtedlie true, that God out of mankinde doth gather together vnto him▪ſelfe a Church vnto eternal life for & by his ſonne, thorugh preaching of that doctrine which is written in the bookes of the Prophets and Apoſtles, we plainlie auoutch before God and the wholl Church in heauen and in earth, that we do with a true faith embrace all the writings of the Prophets and Apoſtles, and that in that verie naturall meaning, which is ſet downe in the Creedes of the Apoſtles, of Nice, and of Athanaſius. And theſe ſelfe ſame Creedes, and the naturall meaning of them we haue alwaies conſtantlie embraced without corruption, and will by Gods helpe alwaies embrace: and in this faith do we call vpon the true God, who ſending his ſonne, and geuing cleare teſtimonies, hath Vide obſeru. 1. adhanc confeſſ. tum in hac ſect. tum in ſect. ſecund
                        •
                     .reuealed himſelfe in his Church: ioyning our praier with all Saints in heauen and in earth: and our declarations vpon the Creedes are abroade, conteining the wholl bodie and ground of doctrine, which ſhew that this our proteſtation is moſt true. We do alſo verie reſolutelie condemne all brainſick fantaſies, which are againſt the Creedes: as are the monſtrous opinions of heathen men, of the Iewes, of the Mahometiſtes, of Marcion, the Manichees, of Samoſatenus, Seruetus, Arrius, and thoſe that denie the perſon of the holie Ghoſt, and other opinions condemned by the true iudgements of the Church.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE Of the holie ſcipture.
               
               
                  CHAP. 30.
                  
                     
                     Vide obſeru. 1. in hanc Confeſſ. THe holie ſcripture we call thoſe Canonicall bookes of the olde and new teſtament, of whoſe authoritie there was neuer doubt made in the Church. This ſcripture we beleeue and confeſſe to be the oracle of the holie Ghoſt, ſo confirmed by heauenlie teſtimonies, that If an Angell from heauen preach anie other thing, let him be accurſed. Wherefore we deteſt all doctrine, worſhip, and religion contrarie to this ſcripture. But whereas ſome men thinke, that all doctrine neceſſarie to be knowne of vs to true and euerlaſting ſaluation is not conteined in this ſcripture, and that the right of expounding this ſcripture lyeth ſo in the power of chiefe Biſhops, that what they according to their owne wil giue out, is to be embraced for the meaning of the holie Ghoſt, it is more eaſelie ſaid then prooued. The wholl 
                     2. Tim. 3.
                     ſcripture is giuen by inſpiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to inſtruct in righteouſnes, that the man of God may be perfect, being thoroughlie prepared to euery good worke. and Iohn. 15. I haue called you friendes, for all things that I haue heard of my father, haue I made knowne to you▪
                      and thoſe things which the Apoſtles receiued of Chriſt, thoſe ha
                        •
                     e they by their preaching publiſhed in the wholl world, and by their writings deliuered them to poſterity. It is a plaine caſe therfore that all things which are needefull to be knowen to ſaluation, are conteined in the Prophets & Apoſtles writings. He hath reueiled his owne word in due ſeaſon by preaching, which is all 
                     Chryſoſt. ad Titum, hom. 1.
                     
                     committed to me: this is the preaching. For the Goſpell con
                           •
                        einedth things, both things preſent, and things to come, as honour, pietie, and faith, yea and all things he ha
                           •
                        h ioyn
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        e compriſed in this one 
                     Ierome ad Tit. Cap. 1. Auguſt. ſuper Ioan. C
                           •
                        . 11. Tract. 40.
                     
                     word preaching. Againe, Without authoritie of the ſcriptures, babling hath no credit. For ſeeing the Lord Ieſus did many things, al are not written, as the ſame holie Euangeliſt himſelfe witneſseth, that the Lord Chriſt both ſaid and did many things which are not written. But thoſe things were ſelected to be written, which ſeemed to ſuffice for the ſaluation of thoſe that beleeue. For whereas they ſaie that the right of expounding the ſcripture lieth in the power of chiefe Biſhoppes, it is euident, that the gift of expounding the ſcripture is not of mans wiſedome, but of the holie ghoſt. To euerie man, ſaith Paull, is giuen the manifeſtation of the ſpirite to profit withall: for to one is giuen by the ſpirit the word of wiſedome, &c. But the holie ghoſt is altogether at libertie,

and is not tyed to a certaine ſort of men, but giueth Num. 11.giftes to men according to his owne good pleaſure. Oh that all the people had power to prophecie, and that the Lord would 
                     Iud. 4.
                     put his ſpirit vpon them. Debora a woman the wife of Lapidoth is 
                     Amos. 7.
                     raiſed vp to be a propheteſſe. Againe, I am no Prophet, nor Proprophets ſonne, but I am a heardman, and a gatherer of wilde figges. And yet Amos receiued the holie ghoſt, and was made a-Prophet. 1. Cor. 12.
                     All theſe things worketh one and the ſame ſpirit diſtributing to euerie man as he will. Manie examples alſo do witnes that chiefe Biſhops haue beene often and verie foulie deceiued. whereſore the gift of expounding the ſcripture is not ſo tied to the Popes, that whoſoeuer ſhall be Pope, muſt needs rightly expound the ſcripture: but the true meaning of the ſcripture is to be ſought in the ſcripture it ſelfe, and among thoſe, that being raiſed vp by the ſpirit of God, expound ſcripture by ſcripture.
               
               
                  OF COVNCELLS. CHAP. 34.
                  WE confeſſe that Councells ought to haue their iudgements in the Church concerning the holy doctrine of Religion, and that the authoritie of lawfull councells is great: but the authoritie of Gods worde muſt needes be the greateſt. For although the Church haue a ſure promiſe of Chriſts continuall preſenſe, and be gouerned by the holie Ghoſt, yet not euerie aſſemblie of men maie be taken for the true Church: and albert neuer ſo manie ſee me often times to come together in the name of Chriſt, yet few are choſen, and all haue not faith. And as it is wont to fall out in ciuill meetinges, ſo doth it alſo in meetings of the Church, that for the moſte part the greater ſide ouercommeth the better. Hether to may be added, that the holy Ghoſt doeth not make men in this life not ſubiect to ſinne, but leaueth in them manie and ſundrie infirmities. Examples alſo witne, that not onelie the Popes, but alſo Councels haue bene deceiued. Wherefore ſeing that the doctrine of the Apoſtles and Prophets is confirmed of god, the ſentence of no one mā, nor of anie aſſembly of men, is to be receiued ſimplie without trial, for the oracle of the holie

ghoſt: but it is to be laid to the rule of the Prophets & Apoſtles doctrine, that that which agreeth therewith may be acknowledged, and that which is contrarie thereunto maie be confuted. If we or an Angell from heauen preach vnto you a goſpell 
                     Gal. 1.
                     beſide that, which we haue preached vnto you, let him be accurſed. 
                     1. Ioh. 4.And, beleeue ye not euerie ſpirit, but trie the ſpirits whether they be of God. Againe, Trie all thinges, and keepe that which is good. 
                     1. Theſſ. 5.Auguſtine againſt Maxim
                        •
                     us a Biſhop of the Arrians in his 3. booke. Chap. 14. ſaith. But now an I neyther to cite the councell of Nice, nor you the councell of Arimine, as it were to preiudice the matter, neither am I bound by the authoritie of the one, nor you by the authoritie of the other: with authorities of ſcripture, which are witneſſes not proper to anie one, but common to vs both, let matter with matter, Cauſe with cauſe, Reaſon with reaſon, &c. And Panormitane in the Chapter ſignificasti. Extr. de electio. In things concerning faith, euen the verdite of one priuat man were to be preferred before the Popes, if he were leadwith better warrants of the old & new Teſtament then the Pope. And Gerſon in the firſt part about triall of doctrines. The firſt truth ſhoud ſtand, that if there were a plaine priuate mā ſufficiently inſtructed in holie ſcripture, more credit were to be giuen in a caſe of doctrine to his aſſertion, then to the Popes definitiue ſentence. For it is plaine, that the goſpell is more to be beleeued then the Pope. If then a man ſo learned teach anie trueth to be contained in the Goſpell, where the Pope were either ignorant, or willingly deceiued, it is cleare whoſe udgement were to be preferred. And a little after. Such a learned man ought in that caſe, while a generall councell were holden, at which he him ſelfe were preſent, to ſet him ſelfe againſt it, if he ſhoulde perceiue the greater part of malice or ignorance to incline to that which is contrarie to the Goſpell.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Of Eccleſiaſticall writers. CHAP. 34.
                  
                     RIſe vp before an hoare head, ſaith the ſcripture, and reueuerence the perſon of an old man. We do therefore reuerence the graie heares of our ancetours, who euen ſince the Goſpell beganne to be reuealed and publiſhed haue in the world taken vpon them the t a
                        •
                     el of furthering the Church, not only by preaching, but alſo by publike writings that the poſteritie might from the Apoſtles, euen vnto this time,

haue manifeſt and certaine teſtimonies of the holie Doctrine. And we ſo embrace their writings, as both the holie ſcripture alloweth vs to vſe mans authoritie, and as themſelueswould haue their writinges acknowledged. Iob. 12. 
                     (You my friends ſay) that in the auncient is wiſdome, & in the length of daies is vnderſtanding (but I ſaie vnto you) that with him to wit with the Lord our God is wiſdome & ſtrength he hath councell & vnderſtanding.   And 1. Corinth. 4. Let the Prophets ſpeake two or three, and let the reſt iudge. And, Trie all thinges, and keepe that which is good. 1. Theſſ. 5. It is not lawfull for vs to bring in any thing of our owne 
                     Turtl. Lib. de ſcrip. haeret.
                     head, no not ſo much as to take that which any man hath brought in of his owne head. We haue the Apoſtles of the Lord for authors, who choſe nothing of their owne heads which they might bring in: but the diſcipline which they receiued of Chriſt, they faithfullie deliuered to all nations. And Auguſtine ſaith. Neither ought we to eſteem of the 
                     Epiſt. ad Fortunat. Diſt. 8.
                     
                     writings of any men, although they be Catholike & commendable perſons, as of the Canonical ſcriptures, as though it were not lawful (yealding thē that reuerence which is due vnto ſuch men) to diſallow & refuſe ſomething in their writings, if perchance we finde that they haue thought otherwiſe then the trueth is vnderſtoode either of others, or 
                     
                        
                           •
                        a Proe. in Lib 3. de Trinit.
                     of our ſelues, thorough the gift of God. Such am I in other mens writings, as I would haue them conſtruers of mine. Againe, Be thou not tied to my writings as it were to the Canonicall ſcriptures: but in the Canonicall ſcriptures, that which thou didſt not beleeue, when thou haſt found it, beleeue it incontinentlie: but in myne that which thou thoughteſt to be vndoubtedlie true, vnleſſe thou perceiue it to be true indeede, hold it not reſolutelie. And againe, I neither can nor ought 
                     Ad Vincent. Lib. 2.
                     
                     to denie that as in thoſe who haue gone before, ſo alſo in ſo many ſlender workes of mine there are many things, which may with vpright 
                     
                        
                           •
                        a epiſt. ad Ierom.
                     iudgement and no ra
                           •
                        hnes be blamed. And againe, I haue learned to giue this reuerence to theſe writers alone, which are now called Canonicall. Againe, But I ſo read others, that be they neuer ſo holie, or neuer ſo learned, I doe not therefore thinke it true, becauſe they haue ſo thought, but becauſe they could perſwade me by other authors, 
                     De vnico 
                           •••
                        timo in E
                           ••
                        ſt. ad Vincent.
                     or by Canonicall, or at leaſt by probable reaſons, which diſagree not from the truth And in another place, Who knoweth not that holie ſcripture, &c. And, Doe not brot
                           •••
                         againſt ſo many diuine, &c. For theſe places are knowen euen out of the Popes own decrese.
               
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               Art. 1. ſſ. 1. Whence ſermons are to be taken.
               FIrſt, a controuerſie being raiſed amongſt the learned about certaine articles of Chriſtian doctrine, when as the people with vs were daungerouſlie deuided by reaſon of contrarie preachings, we charged our preachers, that they ſhould henceforth broach no thing to the people in anie ſermon, which either is not taught in the ſcriptures of God, or hath not ſure ground thereout: as it was openlie decreed in the aſſemblie holden at Norimberge in the 22. yeare after the ſmaller account: which moreouer is alſo the opinion of all the holie fathers. For ſeeing S. Paull writeth, That the ſcripture giuen by inſpiration of God is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to inſtruct, that the man of God maie be abſolute, being made perfect to euerie good worke, wee could not determine anie otherwiſe, but that it was meete, that we alſo being in daunger of ſchiſme ſhoulde flie to that holie ſcripture, to which in times paſt not onelie the holie fathers, Biſhops, and Princes, but alſo the children of God euery where in ſuch extremitie haue alwaies reſorted. For S. Luke witneſſeth, not without ſingular commendation of the Theſſalonians, that they compared the Goſpel they had heard of the Apoſtle with the ſcripture, and tried it. Paul alſo warneth his ſcholler Timothie, that he exerciſe himſelfe very diligentlie in the ſcriptures. and this holie ſcripture was had in ſo high reputation of all holie Biſhops and Doctours, that neither anie Biſhop deſired to haue his ordinances obeyed, nor anie Doctor his writings beleeued, except he had thereout approoued them. And ſurelie ſeing Saint Paull doeth plainelie teſtifie, that by the holie ſcripture the man of God is made abſolute and perfect to euerie good worke, no part of Chriſtian truth and ſound doctrine can be wanting to him who with al his mihgt laboureth to follow and embrace the ſcripture of God.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND SECTION, OF GOD, IN ESSENCE ONE, IN perſons three, and of his true worſhip.
            
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of God, his vnitie, and the Trinitie. CHAP. 3.
                  
                     
                        WE beleeue & teach, that God is one in eſſence or nature, ſubſiſting by himſelfe, all ſufficient in himſelfe, inuiſible, without a bodie, infinite, eternal, the creator of all things both viſible & inuiſible, the chiefeſt, good, liuing, quickning and preſeruing all things, almightie, and exceeding wiſe, 
                     Deut. 6. Exod. 20.
                     gentle or mercifull, iuſt and true. And we deteſt the multitude of Gods, becauſe it is expreſſie written. The Lorde thy God is one God. I am the Lord thy God, thou ſhalt Iſa. 54.haue no ſtraunge Gods before my face. I am the Lord, and there is none other, beſide me there is no God. Am not I the Lorde, and there is none other beſide me alone? a iust God, and a Sauiour, there is none beſide me. I the Lord, Iehoua, the mercifull God, gracious, & long ſuffering, and aboundant in goodnes and truth, &c. Exod. 34.
                  
                  We neuertheles beleeue and teach, that the ſame infinite, one, and indiuiſible God is in perſons inſeparablie and without confuſion diſtinguiſhed into the Father, the Sonne and the holie Ghoſt, ſo as the Father hath begotten the Sonne from euerlaſting, the Sonne is begotten by an vnſpeakeable manner, and the holie Ghoſt proceedeth from them both, and that from euerlaſting, and is to be worſhipped with them both. So that there be not three Gods, but three perſons, conſubſtantiall, coeternall, and coequall, diſtinct, as touching their perſons, and in order one

going before another, yet without anie inequalitie. For as touching their nature or eſſence they are ſo vide obſer
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        . 
                           〈…〉
                         confeſſ.ioyned together, that they are but one God, and the diuine eſſence is common to the Father, the ſonne, and the holy Ghoſt. For the ſcripture hath deliuered vnto vs a manifeſt diſtinction of perſons, the Angell among other thinges ſaying thus to the bleſſed Virgine: The holie Ghost ſhall come vpon thee, and 
                     Luc. 
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     the power of the higheſt ſhall ouerſhadow thee, and that holie thing which ſhalbe borne, ſhalbe called the ſonne of God. Alſo in the baptiſme of Chriſt a voice was heard from heauen, Math. 3. Ioh. 
                           •
                        .ſaying, This is my beloued Sonne. The holie Ghoſt alſo appeared in the likenes of a doue. And when the Lord himſelfe commaunded to baptize, he commaunded To baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holie 
                     Math. 28.
                     Ghoſt. In like ſort elſe where in the Goſpell he ſaide, The Father will ſend the holie Ghost in my name. Againe he ſaith, Ioh. 14. 15.
                     When the comforter ſhall come, whome I will ſend vnto you from the Father, the ſpirit of trueth, who proceedeth from the Father, he ſhall beare witnes of me, &c. To be ſhort, we receiue the Apoſtles Creede, becauſe it deliuereth vnto vs the true faith.
                  We therefore condemne the Iewes and the Mahometiſtes, and all thoſe that blaſpheme this Trinitie, that is ſacred, and onelie to be adored. VVe alſo condemne all hereſies and heretiks, which teach that the ſonne and the holie Ghoſt are God onelie in name, alſo that there is in the Trinitie ſome thing created, & that ſerueth and miniſtreth vnto an other: finally that there is in it ſome thing vnequal, greater or leſſe, corporall, or corporally faſhioned, in manners or in will diuers, either confounded, or ſole by it ſelfe: as if the ſonne and holie Ghoſt were the affections & proprieties of one God the Father, as the Monarchiſtes, the Nouatians, Praxeas, the Patripaſſians, Sabellius, Samoſatenus, Aëtius, Macedonius, Arrius, and ſuch like haue thought.
               
               
                  Of Idolls or Images of God, of Chriſt, and of Saints. CHAP. 4.
                  ANd becauſe god is an inuiſible ſpirit, & an incomprehenſible eſſence, he can not therefore by anie arte or

image be expreſſed. For which cauſe we feare not with the ſcripture to tearme the Images of God meere lies. VVe doe therefore reiect not onelie the Idols of the Gentles, but alſo the images of Chriſtians. For although Chriſt tooke vppon him mans nature, yet he did not therefore take it, that he might ſet forth a patterne for caruers and painters. He Math. 5.denied that he came To deſtroie the law and the Prophets: But images are forbidden in the lawe & the Prophets. He denied Deut. 4. Iſa. 40. Ioh. 16. 2. Cor. 5.that his Bodelie preſenſe ſhould anie whit profit the Church. He promiſed that He would by his ſpirit be preſent with vs for euer: who would then beleeue that the ſhadow or picture of his bodie doth anie whit benifit the godlie? & ſeeing that he 1 Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 6.abideth in vs by his ſpirit, We are therefore the Temples of God. But what agreement hath the temple of God which images▪
                      And ſeeing that the bleſſed ſpirites, and ſaints in heauen, Act. 3. & 14.while they liued here, abhorred all worſhip donne vnto themſelues, and ſpake againſt images, who can thinke it likely, that the ſaints in heauen, and the Angell, are delighted with their owne Images, whereunto men doe bow their knees, vncouer their heades, and giue ſuch other like honour? But that men might be inſtructed in Religion, & put in minde of heauenlie things, and of their owne Mar. 16.ſaluation, the Lord commaunded To preach the Goſpell, not to paint, and inſtruct the laytie by pictures: he alſo inſtituted Sacraments, but he no where appointed Images. Furthermore, in euerie place, which waie ſoeuer we turne our eies, we maie ſee the liuelie and true creatures of God, which if they be marked, as is meete, they do much more effectuallie mooue the beholder, then all the Images, or vaine, vnmooueable, rotten, and dead pictures of all men whatſoeuer, of which the Prophet ſpake truelie, They 
                     Pſal. 115.
                     haue eies & ſee not, &c. Therfore we approoue the iudgement of Lactantius an auncient writer, who ſaith, Vndoubtedly there is no religion, whereſoeuer there is a picture. And we affirme that the bleſſed Biſhop Epiphanius did wel, who finding on the church dores a vaile, that had painted in it the picture as it might be of Chriſt, or of ſome other Saint, he cut and tooke it awaie: For that contrarie to the authoritie of the ſcriptures he had ſeene the picture of a man to hang in the Church of Chriſt: and therefore he charged that from thence forth no ſuch vailes, which were contrarie to ou
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                     religiō, ſhould be hanged vp in the Church of Chriſt, but that rather ſuch ſcruple ſhould be taken awaie, which was vnworthie the Church of Chriſt, and all faithful people. Moreouer we approoue this ſentence of S. Auguſtine, Cap. 55. de vera relig. Let not the worſhip of mens works be a religion vnto vs. For the workmen them▪ſelues that make ſuch things are better, whome yet we ought not to worſhip.
                  
               
               
                  Of the adoring, worſhipping, and inuocating of God, through the onelie Mediator Ieſus Chriſt. CHAP. 5.
                  WE teach men to adore and worſhip the true God alone: this honour we impart to none, according to the commaundement of the Lorde, thou ſhalt adore the Lorde 
                     Math. 4.
                     thy God, and him alone ſhalt thou worſhip, or, him onelie ſhalt thou ſerue. Surelie all the Prophets inueighed earneſtlie againſt the people of Iſraell; whenſoeuer they did adore and worſhip ſtraunge Gods, and not the one onelie true God. But we teach that God is to be adored and worſhipped, as himſelfe hath taught vs to worſhip him, to weere in ſpirite and true
                           •
                        h, not Ioh. 4.with any ſuperſtition, but with ſinceritie, according to his worde, leſt at any time he alſo ſaie vnto vs, who hath required theſe thinges at your handes? For Paull alſo ſaith, God is not worſhipped 
                     Iſa. 66. Iere. 7. Acts. 17.
                     with mans hands, as though he needed any thing, &c. We in all daungers, and caſualties of our life, call on him alone, and that by the mediation of the onelie Mediatour, and our interceſſour Ieſus Chriſt. For it is expreſſely commaunded vs, Call vpon me in the daie of trouble, and I will deliuer thee, 
                     Pſal. 50.
                     and thou ſhalt glorifie me. Moreouer the Lord hath made a moſte large promiſe, ſaying, whatſoeuer ye ſhal aske of my father, 
                     Ioh. 16.
                     he ſhall giue it you. And againe, Come vnto me all ye that 
                     Math. 11.
                     labour and are heauie loaden, and I will refreſh you. And ſeeing it is written, How ſhall they call vpon him, in whome they haue not beleeued? and we doe beleeue in God alone, therefore we Rom. 10.call vpon him onelie, and that thorough Chriſt. For there is one God (ſaith the Apoſtle) and one Mediatour, betweene 
                     1. Tim. 2. 1. Ioh. 2.
                     God and men, Chriſt Ieſus. Againe, If anie man ſinne, we haue an aduocate with the Father Ieſus Chriſt the righteous, &c. Therefore we doe neither adore, worſhippe, nor praie vnto the Saints in heauen, or to other Gods: neither do we acknowledge them for our interceſſours or Mediatours, before

the father in heauen. For God and the Mediatour Chriſt do ſuffice vs, neither do we imparte vnto others the honour Iſa. 42:due to God alone and to his ſonne, becauſe he hath plainlie ſaid, I wil not giue my glorie to another: and becauſe Peter hath Act. 4.ſaid, There is no other name giuen vnto men, whereby they muſte be ſaued, but the name of Chriſt. In which doubtles they that reſt by faith, doe nor ſeeke aniething without Chriſt.
                  Yet 
                        〈◊〉
                      all that we doe neither deſpiſe the Saints, nor th
                        •
                     nke baſ
                        •
                     lie of them. For we acknowledge them to be the 
                        〈◊〉
                      members of Chriſt, the friends of god, who haue glor
                        •
                     ouſlie ouercome the fleſh and the world. We therfore loue them as 
                        •••
                     th
                        •
                     en, and honour them alſo, yet not with any wo
                        •
                     ſh
                        •
                     , 
                        〈…〉
                      an honourable opinion of them, and to conclude, 
                        〈◊〉
                      their iuſt praiſes. We alſo doe imitate them. For we deſire w
                        ••
                     h moſt ea
                        •
                     neſt affections and praiers to be followers of their faith & vertues, to be▪ partakers alſo with them of euerlaſting ſiluation, to dwell together with them euerlaſtinglie with God, & to reioyſe with them in Chriſt. And in this point we approoue that ſaying of Saint Auguſtine, in his booke De vera relig. Let not the worſhip of men departed be any religion vnto vs. For if they haue liued holily, they are not ſo to be eſteemed, as that they ſeek ſuch honours, but they wil haue vs to worſhip him, by whoſe ill
                           •
                        minatiō, they reioice that we are fellow ſeruant
                           •
                        , 
                           •
                        s touching the reward. They are therefore to be honoured for imitation, not to be worſhipped for religions ſake▪ &c. And, we muchleſſe beleeue that the reliques of Saints are to be adored or worſhiped. Thoſe auncient holie men ſeemed ſufficientlie to haue honoured their deade, if they had honeſtlie committed their bodies to the earth, after that the ſoule was gone vp into heauen: and they thought that the moſte noble reliques of their ancetours were, their vertues, doctrine, & faith▪ which as they commended with the praiſe of the dead, ſo they did endeuour to expreſſe the ſame ſo long as they liued vpon earth. Thoſe auncient men did not ſwear b
                        •
                     t by the name of the only Iehoua, as is it commaunded in the lawe of God. Therefore as we are forbidden Deut. 10. Exod. 23▪
                     
                     To ſweare by the names of ſtrange Gods, ſo we do not ſweare by Saints, although we be requeſted thereunto. We therefore in all theſe things doe reiect that doctrine which giueth too much vnto the Saintes in heauen.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     Arti
                           •
                        . 
                     
                        •
                     . OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               WE thus thinke of God, that he is one in ſubſtance, three in perſons, and almightie. Who as he hath by the worde, that is, his ſonne, made all thinges of nothing, ſo by his ſpirite and prouidence, he doth iuſtl
                     ••
                  , truely, and moſ
                     •
                  e wiſelie gouerne, preſerue, and cheriſh all things. 
                     Artic. 1
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               Who as he is the onelie Mediatour, interceſſour, and ſacrifice▪ alſo our high prieſt, Lord, and King, ſo we acknowledge, and with the wholl heart beleeue, that he alone is our attonement, redemption, ſatisfaction, expiation, wiſedome, protection, and deliuerance, ſimplie reiecting herein all meanes of life and ſaluation, beſides this Chriſt alone.
            
            
               
                  
                     Artic. 
                     
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASILL.
               WE beleeue in God the father, in God the ſonne, in God the holie Ghoſt, the holie diuine Trinitie: three perſons, and one eternall, almighte God, in eſſence and ſubſtance, and not three Gods. And in the marginall note is added. This is prooued by manie places of the 
                     Artic. 10▪
                  wholl ſcripture of the olde and new teſtament. Therefore we miſlike the worſhip and inuocation of dead men: the worſhipping of Saintes, and ſetting vp of Images, with ſuch like thinges. And in the ſame place in the marginall note vpon the worde Saints. Neuertheleſſe we confeſſe that they ſerue in Gods preſence, and that they reigne with Chriſt euerlaſtinglie, becauſe they acknowledged Chriſt, and both in deede & word confeſſed him to be their ſauiour, redemption, and righteouſnes, without any addition of mans merit▪ For this cauſe doe we praiſe and commend them, as thoſe who haue obteined grace at Gods hand, and are now made heites of the euerlaſting kingdome: Yet doe we aſcribe all this to the glorie of God and of Chriſt. 
                     Artic. 11.
               
               We plainlie proteſt that we condemne and renounce, al ſtraunge and erronious doctrines, which the ſpirits of errours bring forth, &c. And ſſ. 2. of the ſelfe ſame article: We condemne that doctrine which ſaith, that we may in no caſe ſweare, although Gods glorie and the loue of our neighbour require it. And in the marginall note vpon the worde ſweare. It is lawfull to vſe an oath in due time. For God

hath commaunded this in the olde teſtament, and Chriſt hath not forbidden it in the new: yea Chriſt and the Apoſtles did ſweare.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA O
                     •
                   THE WALDENSES.
               
                  Of the vnitie of the diuine eſſence, and of the three perſons. CHAP. 3.
                  OVt of this fountaine of holie ſcripture, and Chriſtian inſtruction, according to the true and ſound vnderſtanding and meaning of the holie ghoſt, our men teach by faith to acknowledge, & with the mouth to confeſſe, that the holie Trinitie, to wit, god the father, the ſonne, and the holie ghoſt, are three diſtinct perſons: but in eſſence one onelie, true, alone, eternall, almightie, and incomprehenſible Rom. 11. Exod. 20.God: of one equall indiuiſible diuine eſſence, Of who
                           ••
                        , thorough whome, and in whome are all things: who loueth and rewardeth righteouſnes and vertue, but hateth and puniſheth all iniquitie and ſinne. According to this faith men are taught, to acknowledge the wonderfull workes of god, and thoſe properties which are peculiar to each perſon o
                        •
                      the holie Trinitie, and of the diuine vnitie, and to acknowledge the ſoueraigne and infinite power, wiſedome, and goodnes of the one onelie God: out of which alſo ariſeth & proceedeth the ſauing knowledge as wel of the eſſence, as of the wil of god. One kinde of works or properties of the three perſons of the godhead (by which they are diſcerned one from the other) are the inward, eternall, and hypoſtaticall proprieties, which alwaies remaine immutable, and are onelie apprehended by the eies of faith, and are theſe.
                  That the father, as the fountaine & welſpring of the godheade, from al eternity begetteth the ſon, equal to himſelfe, and that himſelfe remaineth not begotten, neither yet is he the perſon of the ſonne, ſeeing he is a perſon begitting not begotten. The ſo
                        •
                     ne is begotten of the eternall father from all eter
                        •
                     itie 
                        ••
                     ue god of god: and as he is a perſon, he is not the father, but the ſonne begotten of the eſſence o
                        •
                      nature of the father, and conſubſtantiall with him: which ſonne in the fulnes of time, which he had before appointed

for this purpoſe, himſelfe alone (as he is the ſonne) tooke vnto him our nature of the bleſſed Virgine Marie, & vnited it into one perſon with the godheade, whereof we ſhall ſpeak afterward. But the holie Ghoſt proceedeth from the father and the ſonne, & ſo he is neither the father, nor the ſonne, but a perſon diſtinct from them, eternal▪ and the ſubſtantiall loue of the father and of the ſonne, ſurpaſſing all admiration: theſe three perſons are one true God, as is a foreſaid.
                  The other kinde of works in theſe perſons, & in the vnitie of the godhead iſ
                        •
                     ueth as it were into opē ſight out of the diuine eſſēce & the perſōs therof, in which being diſtinct they haue manifeſted themſelues: & theſe are three. The firſt is the wonderfull worke of creation, which the Creedes doe attribute to the father. The ſecond is the work of redemption, which is proper to Chriſt. The third is the worke of ſanctification, which is aſcribed to the holie Ghoſt, for which cauſe he in the Apoſtles Creede is peculiarlie called holie. And yet all theſe are the proper workes of one true God, & that of him alone, & none other: to wit, the father, the ſonne and the holie Ghoſt. This true and abſolute faith, and difficulte knowledge of God, as well concerning 
                        ••
                     s nature, as his will, is comprehended, and con
                        •
                     eyned in the aforenamed Catholike and Apoſtolike Creede, and in the decree of the Nicene Councell, agreeing therewith, and in manie other ſound decrees, and alſo in Athanaſius his confeſſion. All which we iudge and profeſſe to be true. But it hath euerlaſting & ſure groundes on which it rel
                        ••
                     th, and moſte waightie reaſons, by which it is out of the holy ſcripture conuinced to be true: as by that manifeſtation wherein the whol Trinitie ſhewed it ſelfe, when Chriſt the Lord was Math 3. Math. 28.baptized in lordane▪ by the commaundement of Chriſt, becauſe in the name of the perſons of the ſame holie Trinitie al people muſt be baptized and inſtructed in the faith. Alſo Ioh. 14.by Chriſtes words, when he ſaith, the holy ghoſt the comforter whome the father will ſende in my name, ſhall teach you all theſe thinges: and before theſe wordes he ſaith: I w
                           •
                        l pray the father, and he will giue you an other comforter, who ſhallbe with you for euer, euen the ſpirit of trueth. Beſides we teach, that this onelie true God, one in eſſence and in diuine nature, and

three in perſons, is aboue all to be honoured with high worſhip, as chiefe Lord and King, who ruleth and raigneth alwaies and for euer, and eſpeciallie after this ſorte, that we looke vnto him aboue al, and put all our confidence in him alone, and offering vnto him all ſubiection, obedience, feare, 
                        •
                     l faith, loue, and generallie the ſeruice of the wholl inward and outward diuine worſhip, do indeed ſacrifice and performe it, vnder paine of looſing euerlaſting ſaluation: as Deut. 6. Deut. 6. Math. 22. M
                           •
                        r. 12. Luc. 10.it is written Thou ſhalt worſhip the lord thy god, & him onely ſhal
                           •
                         thou ſerue: and againe, thou ſhalt loue the lord thy god with all thy heart, with all thy ſoule, with all thy minde, & to be ſhort▪ 
                     with a
                           •
                         thy might, as well of the inward as outward powers, to whom be glorie from this time forth for euermore.
                  Amen.
               
            
            
               Of holy men and their worſhippe.
               Chap. 17.
               AS touching holie men, it is taught, firſt, that no ma
                     •
                   from the beginning of the world vnto this time, either was, is, or can be henceforth vnto the end ſanctified by his workes or holie actions: according to the ſaying of Moſes, the faithfull ſeruant of the Lord, when he cried out vnto Exod. 34.the Lord, O Lord in thy ſight no man is innocent, that is, perfectlie holie. And in the book of Iob it is written, what is man▪
                   
                  Iob. 15.
                  that he ſhould be vndefiled, and he that is borne of a woman, that 
                        •
                     e ſhould appeare iuſt? (to wit, before God.) Beholde among his Saints, none is immutable, and the heauens are not cleane in his ſight: how much more abhominable and vnprofitable man, who drinketh in iniquitie as water? And the holie ſcripture plainelie witneſſeth throughout all the bookes thereof, that all men 
                     
                        •
                     ph. 
                        •
                     . 
                        ••
                     al. 14.euen from their buth are by nature ſinners, and that there neither is, nor hath bene anie one, who of himſelfe and by himſelfe was righteous and holie, but all haue gone aſide free 
                  Rom. 3.
                  God, and are become vnprofitable, and of no account at all. And whereas ſome are made holie and acceptable vnto God, that is purchaſed vnto them without anie worthines or merit of theirs, by him, who alone is holie. God himſelfe, of the meere grace, and vnſpeakeable riches of his goodnes hath ordained, and brought them to that ſtate, that they be bleſſed, and called redeemed by Chriſt, clenſed and conſecrated by his blood, annointed of the holie Ghoſt, made

righteous and holie by faith in Chriſt, and adorned with commendable vertues and good deedes or workes, which beſeeme a Chriſtian profeſſion: Of whome manic hauing finiſhed their life and courſe in ſuch workes, haue now receiued and doe enioy by grace eternall felicitie in heauen, where God crowneth thoſe that be his. Some of them alſo God hath indued with a certaine peculiar grace of his, and with diuine giftes, vnto the miniſterie, and to the publike and common good of the Church, ſuch as were the Patriarches, Prophets, and other holie fathers, alſo Apoſtles, Euangeliſts, Biſhops, and manie Doctors and Paſtors: and alſo other famous men, and of rare excellencie, and verie well furniſhed with the ſpirite, whoſe memorie, monuments of their labours, and the good thinges which they did, are extant and continue euen vntill this daie in the holie ſcriptures and in the Church.
               But eſpeciallie it is both beleeued, and by open confeſſion made knowne, as touching the holie Virgin Marie, that ſhe was a daughter of the blood royall, of the houſe and familie of Dauid that deare ſeruant and friend of God: and that ſhe was choſen & bleſſed of God the Father, conſecrared by the holie Ghoſt, viſited, and ſanctified aboue other of her ſexe: and alſo repleniſhed with wonderfull grace and power of God to this ende, that ſhe might become the true mother of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God: of whom he vouchſaſed to take our nature: and that ſhee was at all times, before her birth, in the ſame, and after it, a true, chaſte, & pure Virgin: & that by her beſt beloued ſonne, the ſonne alſo of the liuing God, through the price of his death, and the effuſion of his moſte holie blood, ſhe was dearelie redeemed and ſanctified, as alſo made one of the deare partakers of Chriſt by the holie Ghoſt through faith, being adorned with excellent giftes, noble vertues, and fruites of good workes, renowned as happie before all others, and made moſte aſſuredlie a ioynt heire of euerlaſting life. And a litle after. Furthermore, it is taught in the church, that no man ought ſo to reuerence holy men as we are to worſhip God, much leſſe their Images, or to reuerence them with that worſhip and affection of minde which onelie are due to god alone. And, to be ſhort, by no

meanes to honour them with deuine worſhip, or to giue it▪ vnto them. For god ſa
                     •
                  eth by the Prophet Eſaie, I am 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  Eſa. 42. 48.
                  Lord thy God, this is my name, I wil not giue mine honour to anothe
                        •
                      nor my glorie to Images. Againe a litle after. But euen as t
                     ••
                   thing is gaineſaid, that the honour due to God ſhould be g
                     •
                  
                  uen to Saints, ſo it is by no means to be ſuffered, that the honour of the Lambe Chriſt our Lord, and things belonging to him, and due to him alone, and apperteining to the proper and true Prieſthoode of his nature, ſhould be transfe
                     •
                  
                  red to them: that is, leſt of them, and thoſe torments which they ſuffered, we ſhould make redeemers or merites in the life, or els aduocates, interceſſours, and Mediatours in heauen, or that we ſhould inuocate them, and not them onel
                     •
                  , but not ſo much as the holie Angells, ſeeing they are n
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 
                  1. Tim. 2. Heb. 9. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Ioh. 2.God. For there is one onelie redeemer, who being once deliuered to death, ſacrificed himſelfe both in his bodie and 
                     〈◊〉
                   his bloode: there is alſo one onely aduocate, the moſt merciful Lord of vs all.
               And they are not onelie to be reputed & taken for ſai
                     ••
                   who are gone before vs, and are fallen a ſleepe in the Lord and dwell now in ioyes, but alſo they, who (as there haue 
                     •
                  lwaies bene ſome vpon earth) ſo doe likewiſe liue now on the earth: ſuch are all true & godlie Chriſtians, in what place o
                     •
                   countrie ſoeuer, here or there, and among what people ſoeuer they lead their life: who by beeing baptized in the name of the Lord may be ſanctified, and beeing indued with true faith in the ſonne of God, and ſet on fire, are mutuallie enflamed with affection of diuine charitie and loue: who alſo acknowledging the iuſtification of Chriſt, doe vſe both it and abſolution from their ſinnes, and the communion of the ſacrament of the bodie and bloode of Chriſt, and diligentlie applie themſelues to all holie exerciſes of pietie beſeeming a Chriſtian profeſſion: as alſo the Apoſtles cal ſuch beleeuers in Chriſt (which as yet like ſtrangers are conuerſant heere on earth according to the ſtate of mortall men) Saints. As for example, Ye are a choſen generation, a royal prieſthoode, 
                  1. Pet. 2. 2. Cor. 13. Heb. 13.
                  an holie nation, a peculiar people. Againe, al the Saints grees you. In like manner, Salute all thoſe that haue the ouerſight of you and al the Saints, that is, all faithfull Chriſtians.
               For this cauſe it is taught that we ought, with intire loue

and fauour of the heart to embrace all Chriſtians, before all other people, and when neede is, from the ſame affection of loue to afforde vnto them our ſeruice and to helpe them▪ further, that we ought to mantaine the ſocietie of holie friendſhip with thoſe that loue and follow the trueth of Chriſt, with all good affection to conceiue well of them, to Rom. 1
                        •
                     . Gal. 6. 1. Cor. 12.haue them in honour for Chriſtes ſake, to giue vnto them due reuerence from the affection of Chriſtian loue, and to ſtudie in procuring all good by our duetie & ſeruice to pleaſure them, and finallie to deſire their praiers for vs. And that Chriſtians going aſtraie, and entangled with ſinnes, are louinglie and gentlie to be brought to amendment: that compaſſion is to be had on them, that they are with a quiet minde in loue, ſo as becommeth, to be borne withall, that praier is to be made vnto God for them, that he would bring them againe into the waie of ſaluation, to the ende that the holie Goſpell maie be ſpread farther abroad, and Chriſtes glorie maie be made knowne and enlarged among all men.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               WE beleeue and acknowledge one onelie God, who is one onelie and ſimple eſſence, ſpirituall, eternall, inuiſible, immutable, infinite, incomprehenſible, vnſpeakeable, almightie, moſte wiſe, good, iuſt, and mercifull.
               The holie ſcripture teacheth vs that in that one and ſimple diuine eſſence, there be three perſons ſubſiſting, the father, the ſonne, and the holie Ghoſt. The father, to wit, the firſt cauſe in order, & the beginning of all thinges: the ſonne, his wiſdome and euerlaſting word▪ the holie ghoſt, his vertue, power, & efficacie: the ſonne begotten of the father from euerlaſting, the holie Ghoſt from euerlaſting proceeding from the father and the ſonne: which three perſons are not confounded, but diſtinct, & yet not deuided, but coeſſentiall, coeternall, & coequal. And to conclude, in this myſterie we alow of that which thoſe foure auncient Councells haue decreed: and we deteſt all ſec
                     •
                  es condemned by thoſe holie auncient doctors, Athanaſius, Hylarie, Cyrill, Ambroſe, and ſuch as are condemned by others agereeablie

to Gods word. Hetherto alſo belongeth the 2. Art.
               
                  
                     Artic. 2. This one God hath reuealed himſelfe vnto men to be ſuch a one, firſt by the creation, preſeruation, & gouernment of his workes, then much more clearlie in his worde, &c Seek the reſt in the 3. diuiſion.
               We beleeue, that we by this one meanes obtaine libertie 
                     Art. 19.of praying to god with a ſure confidence, & that it wil come to paſſe that he will ſhew him ſelfe a Father vnto vs. For we haue no entrance to the Father, but by this Mediatour.
               
                  
                     Art. 24. We beleeue becauſe Ieſus Chriſt is the onelie aduocate giuen vnto vs, who alſo commaundeth vs to come boldelie vnto the Father in his name, that it is not lawfull for vs to make our praiers in anie other forme, but in that which god hath ſet vs downe in his worde: and that whatſoeuer men haue forged of the interceſſion of Saints departed, is nothing but the deceites & ſleightes of Sathan, that he might withdrawe men from the right manner of praying. We alſo reiect all other meanes whatſoeuer men haue deuiſed to exempt them ſelues from the wrath of God. So much as i
                     •
                   giuen vnto them, ſo much is derogated from the ſacrifice 
                     •
                   death of Chriſt.
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               
                  
                     Art. 1. WE beleeue, that there is one certaine nature and diuine power, which we call God: and that the ſame is diuided into three equall perſons, into the father, into the ſonne, and into the holie ghoſt: and that they all be of one power, of one maieſtie, of one eternitie, of one Godhead, and one ſubſtance. And although theſe three perſons be ſo deuided, that neither the Father is the ſonne, nor the ſonne is the holie ghoſt, or the father, yet neuertheleſſe we beleeue, that there is but one verie God: And that the ſame one god hath created heauen, and earth, and all things conteined vnder heauen.
               
                  
                     Art. 2. 
                  We beleeue, that Ieſus Chriſt the onelie ſonne of the eternall father, &c. The reſt of this article you ſhall finde in the 6. ſection, whereunto thoſe thinges doe properlie pertaine, which art conteined in this ſecond article, of the Perſon and office of Chriſt.
               
                  
                     Art. 3. We beleeue that the holie Ghoſt, who is the third perſon in the Trinitie, is verie God, not made, not created, not begotten,

but proceeding both from the Father, & the Sonne, by a certaine mean vnknowen vnto man, and vnſpeakeable: and that it is his verie propertie to mollifie and ſoften the hardnes of mans heart, when he is once receiued into the hearts of men, either by the holeſome preaching of the Goſpel, or by any other waie: that he doth giue other men light, and guide them vnto the knowledge of God, to all way of truth, to newnes of life, and to euerlaſting hope of ſaluation.
               
                  
                     Art. 3. Neither haue we anie other Mediatour, and Interceſſor, by whome we may haue acceſſe to God the father, then Ieſus Chriſt, in whoſe onlie name al things are ob
                     •
                  eined at his fathers hande. But it is a ſhameful part, & ful of infid
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  tie, that we ſee euery where vſed in the Churches of our aduerſaries, not onelie in that they will haue innumerable ſortes of Mediatours, & that vtterlie without the authoritie of Gods word (ſo that, as Ieremie ſaith, the Sainctes be now as manie in number, or rather aboue the number of the Cities: And poore men cannot tell, to which ſaint it were beſt to turne them firſt: and though there be ſo manie, as they cannot be tolde, yet euerie of them hath his peculiare dutie and office aſſigned vnto him by theſe folkes, what to giue, and what to bring to paſſe) But beſides this alſo, in that they doe not onelie wickedlie, but alſo ſhamefullie call vpon the Bleſſed Virgine Chriſtes Mother, to haue her remember, that ſhee is the Mother, And to Commaund her Sonne, and to vſe a Mothers authoritie ouer him.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               
                  
                     Art. 1. WE beleeue in heart, and confeſſe with the mouth, that there is one onely and ſimple ſpiritual eſſence which we call God, eternall, incomprehenſible, inuiſible, immutable, infinite, who is whollie wiſe, and a moſt 
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  ntifull wellſpring of all good thinges.
               
                  
                     Art. 2. We know God by two meanes: firſt by the creation, and preſeruation and gouernment of the wholl world. For it is vnto our eies as a moſt
                     •
                   excellent booke, wherein all creatures from the leaſt to the greateſt as it were certaine charecters and letters are written, By which the inuiſible thinges of God may be ſeene and know
                        •
                     n vnto vs, Namelie his euerlaſting power and Godhead, as Paull the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, Rom.

Chaper 1. 20. which knowledge ſufficeth to conuince all men and make them without excuſe But much more clearlie and plainlie he afterward reuealed him-ſelfe vnto 
                     〈◊〉
                   in his holie and heauenlie word, ſo farre forth as it is expedient for his owne glorie, and the ſaluation of his in this life.
               According to this truth and word of god we beleeue in one only god (who is one eſſence, truelie diſtinguiſhed into three perſons from euerlaſting by meane of the incommunicable properties) to wit, in the father, in the ſonne, and in the hol
                     •
                  e ghoſt. For the father is the cauſe, fountaine, and beginning of all things viſible, and inuiſible▪ the ſonne is the word, wiſedome, and Image of the father, the holie ghoſt is the might and power which proceedeth from the father and the ſonne. Yet ſo, that this diſtinction doth not make god as it were deuided into three parts: ſeeing the ſcripture teacheth, that the father, & the ſonne, & the holie ghoſt, haue a diſtinct perſon or ſubſiſting in their properties, yet ſo, that theſe three perſons be one onelie god. Therefore it is certaine, that neither the father is the ſonne, nor the ſonne the father, nor the holie ghoſt either the father, or the ſonne. Neuertheleſſe theſe perſons thus diſtinguiſhed, are neither deuided, nor confounded, nor mingled. For neither the father nor the holie ghoſt haue taken vnto them mans nature, but the ſonne alone. The father was neuer without his ſoone, nor without his holie Ghoſt, becauſe euerie one in one and the ſame eſſence is of the ſame eternitie. For none of theſe is either firſt or laſt, becauſe al three are one, both in trueth and power, and alſo in goodnes and mercie.
               And all theſe thinges we know as well by the teſtimonies of holie ſcripture, as by the effects: and chiefelie thoſe which we feele in our owne ſelues, and the teſtimonies of holie ſcripture, which teach vs to beleeue this holy Trinitie▪ are ve
                     •
                  ie common in the olde teſtament: which are not ſo much to be reckoned vp, as with ſound iudgement to be ſelected, ſuch as are theſe: in the firſt of Geneſis God ſaith. Let vs make man according to our Image and likenes, &c. and ſtraight after: Therefore God made man according to his owne Image and likenes, male, I ſaie, and female created he them. Againe, Beholde the man is become as one of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  
For by that which is ſaid, Let vs make man after our owne likenes, it appeareth that there are more perſons in the godhead. But when it is ſaide, God created, &c. the vnitie of the godhead is ſignified. For although it be not here expreſſelie ſet downe how many perſons there are, yet that which was obſcurely deliuered in the old Teſtament, in the new is made clearer vnto vs then the none daie. For when our Lord Ieſus Chriſt was baptized in Iordane, the voice of the father was heard ſaying, This is my beloued Sonne: and the ſonne himſelfe was ſeene in the waters, and the holie ghoſt appeared in the likenes of a doue. Therefore are we alſo commaunded in the common baptiſme of al the faithful to vſe this forme, Baptize ye all nations in the name of the father, and the ſonne, and the holie Ghoſt. So alſo in Luke, the Angell Gabriell ſpeaketh to Marie the mother of our Lord. The holie Ghoſt ſhall come vpon thee, and the power of the higheſt ſhall ouerſhadow thee, therefore that holie thing which ſhall be borne of thee, ſhall be called the Sonne of God. In like manner, The grace of our Lord Ieſus Christe, and the loue of God, and the fellowſhip of the holie Ghoſt be with you. Againe, There are three that beare wi
                        •
                     nes in heauen, the father, the wo
                        •
                     de, and the holie Ghoſt, whiſh three are one. By all which places we are fullie taught, that in one onelie God there are three perſons. And although this doctrine paſſe al the reach of mans wit, yet we now ſtedfaſtlie beleeue it out of the word of God, looking when we ſhall enioy the full knowledge thereof in heauen. The offices alſo & effects of theſe three perſons, which euerie of them ſheweth towards vs, are to be marked. For the father by reaſon of his power is called our Creator: the ſonne our Sauiour and redeemer, becauſe he hath redeemed vs by his bloode: the holie Ghoſt is called our Sanctifier, becauſe he dwelleth in our heartes. And the true Church hath allwaies euen from the Apoſtles age vntill theſe times kept this holie doctrine of the bleſſed Trinitie, and manteineth it againſt Iewes, Mahometanes, and other falſe Chriſtians, and heretikes, ſuch as were Marcion, Manes, Praxeas, Sabellius, Samoſatenus, and the like: all which were worthelie condemned by the fathers of moſt ſound Iudgement. Therefore we do here willinglie admit thoſe three Creedes: namelie that of the

Apoſtles, of Nice, and of Athanaſius, and whatſoeuer things they, according to the meaning of thoſe Creeds, haue ſet downe, concerning this point of doctrine.
               
                  
                     Artic. 10. We beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt in reſpect of his diuine nature is the onelie ſonne of God, begotten from euerlaſting, not made or created (for then he ſhould be a creature) but of the ſame eſſence with the father, and coeternall with him: who alſo is the true Image of the fathers ſubſtance, and the brightnes of his glorie, in all things equall vnto him. But he is the ſonne of god, not onely ſince the time he tooke vpon him our nature, but from euerlaſting, as theſe teſtimonies being laid together teach vs. Moſes ſaith, that God created the worlde: but Saint Iohn ſaith, That all thinges w
                        ••
                     e made by the worde, which he calleth God: ſo the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes auoutcheth, that God made all thinges by his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt. It followeth therefore, that he who is called both God, and the word, and the Sonne, and Ieſus Chriſt, had his being euen then, when all thinges were made by him. Therefore Micheah the Prophet ſaith, 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  goeing out hath beene from the beginning, from the daies of eternitie: againe, He is without beginning of daies, and without end of life. He is therefore that true God, eternall, almightie, whome we praie vnto, worſhip, and ſerue.
               
                  
                     Artic. 11. We beleue alſo and confeſſe, that the holie Ghoſt proceedeth from the father & the ſonne from euerlaſting, & that therfore he was neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but onelie proceeding from them both, who is in order the third perſon of the Trinitie, of the ſame eſſence, glory & maieſty with the father and the ſonne, and therefore he alſo is true and euerlaſting God, as the holie ſcriptures teach vs.
               We alſo beleeue that we haue no acceſſe to God, but by 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     6.that one onelie Mediatour and Aduocate Ieſus Chriſt the righteous, who was therefore made man (vniting the humanitie to the diuine nature) that there might be an entrance made for vs miſerable men to the maieſtie of God▪ which had otherwiſe beene ſhut vp againſt vs for euer. Yet the maieſtie and power of this Mediatour (whome the father hath ſet betweene himſelfe and vs) ought in no caſe ſo much to fray vs, that we ſhould therefore thinke another is to be ſought at our owne pleaſure. For there is none either

among the heauenlie or earthlie creatures, who doth more entirelie loue vs then Chriſt himſelfe, who when he was in the ſhape of God, humbled himſelfe by taking vpon him the ſhape of a ſeruant, and for our ſakes became like vnto his brethren in all points▪ and if we were to ſeeke an other Mediatour, who would vouchſafe vs ſome good will, whome I praie you, could we finde, that would loue vs more earneſtlie then he, who willinglie laid his life downe for vs, when as yet we were his enemies? If moreouer we were to ſeeke another that excelleth both in ſoueraigne authority & alſo power, who euer obteined ſo great power, as he himſelfe, who ſitteth at the right hand of God the father, & to whome all power is giuen in heauen & in earth? To conclude, who was more likelie to be heard of God, then that onely begotten and dearelie beloued ſonne of God? therefore nothing but diſtruſt brought in this cuſtome, wherby we rather diſhonor the Saints (whome we thinke to honour) in doeing theſe things, which they in their life time were euer ſo farre from doeing, that they rather conſtantlie and according to their dutie abhorred them, as their owne writings beare witnes. Neither is our owne vnworthines here to be alledged for excuſe of ſo great vngodlines. For we at no hand offer vp our praiers truſting to our owne worthines, but reſting vpon the only worthines & excellency of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, whoſe righteouſnes is ours by faith, whereupon the Apoſtle for good cauſe to exempt vs from this vaine feare (or rather diſtruſt) ſaith, that Chriſt was in all things made like vnto his brethren, that he might be a mercifull and faithfull high prieſt in thoſe things that were to be done with God for the clenſing of the peoples ſinnes. For in as much as he beeing tempted hath ſuffered, he is alſo able to helpe thoſe that are tempted. And that he might encourage vs to come the more boldlie to this high Prieſt, the ſame Apoſtle addeth, Hauing therefore a great high prieſt, who hath entred the heauens, euen Ieſus the ſon of god, let us hol
                        •
                      faſt this profeſſiō. For we haue not an high prieſt that cānot be touched▪ with the feling of our infirmities, but he was in al things tēpted in like ſort, yet without ſin. Let vs therefore with boldnes approch vnto the throne of grace, that we may obteine mercie & finde grace to help in time of need. The ſame Apoſtle ſaith, that we haue liberty to enter into the holy place thorough the blood of Ieſus. Let vs therfore
                  
                  draw neare with a conſtant perſwaſion of faith, &c. And againe▪ 
                  Chriſt hath an euerlaſting prieſthood. Wherefore he is able 
                        〈◊〉
                      to ſave them, that come vnto God by him, ſeeing he euer liueth, 
                        〈◊〉
                      make interceſſion for them. What need manie wordes? when as Chriſt himſelfe ſaith, I am the way, the trueth, and the life. N
                        •
                      man commeth to the father but by me. VVhy ſhould we ſeeke vnto our ſelues any other Aduocate? eſpeciallie ſeeing it hath pleaſed God himſelfe to giue vs his owne ſonne for our Aduocate, there is no cauſe why forſaking him we ſhould ſee
                     •
                  e another, leſt by continuall ſeeking we neuer finde any other. For God vndoubtedlie knew, when he gaue him 
                     〈◊〉
                   vs, that we were miſerable ſinners. VVhereupon it is, that a▪cording to Chriſtes owne commaundement, we onelie ca
                     •
                   vpon the heauenlie father by the ſelfe ſame Ieſus Chriſt ou
                     •
                   onelie Mediatour, euen as he himſelfe alſo hath taught vs in the Lords praier. For we are ſure that we ſhall obteine a
                     ••
                   thoſe things, which we aske of the father in his name.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               CHAP. 3.
               THE Churches with common conſent among vs doe 
                     Artic. 1.teach, that the decree of the Nicene Councell, concerning the vnitie of the diuine eſſence, and of the three perſons, is true, and without all doubt to be beleeued: T
                     •
                   wit, that there is one diuine eſſence, which is called, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   God, eternall, without bodie, indiuiſible, of infinite powe
                     •
                   wiſdome, goo
                     •
                  nes, the creator and preſeruer of all thinges viſible and inuiſible: and that there be three perſons, of the ſame eſſence, & power, which alſo are coeternal the father the Sonne, and the holie Ghoſt. And they vſe the name 
                     〈◊〉
                   perſon in that ſignification, in which the Eccleſiaſtical writers haue vſed it in this cauſe to ſignify not a part or qu
                     •
                  
                  litie in another, but that which properlie ſubſiſteth.
               They condemne all hereſies ſprong vp againſt this a
                     •
                  
                  cle, as the Manichees, who ſet downe two beginnings, Go
                     •
                   and Eu
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  
                  ▪ they doe in like ſort condemne the Valentinia
                     •
                   Arrians, F
                     •
                  nomians, Mahometiſtes, and all ſuch like. The condemne alſo the Samoſatenes, olde and new, who wh
                     ••
                   they earneſtlie defend that there is but one perſon, doe cr
                     ••
                  
                  tilie and wickedlie dallie after the manner of Rhetoricians

about the Word and the holie Ghoſt, that they are not diſtinct perſons, but that the worde ſignifieth a vocall word, and the ſpirit a motion created in things.
            
            
               
                  Artic. 21.
               We haue found this 21. Article ſet forth three diuers waies.
               
                  The firſt edition 1559. goeth thus.
                  INuocation is an honour, which is to be giuen onelie to God almightie, that is, to the eternall father, and to his ſonne our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and to the holie Ghoſt. And God hath propoſed his ſo
                        •
                     ne Ieſus Chriſt for a Mediatour, and high Prieſt that maketh in
                        •
                     erceſſion for vs. He teſtifieth, that for him alone our prai
                        •
                     rs are heard & accep
                        ••
                     d, according to that ſaying, whatſoeuer you aske the fath
                           ••
                         in my name, he ſhall giue it to you. Againe, There is one Mediatour betweene God and men. Therefore let them that call vpon God offer vp their prayers by the ſonne of God, as in the end of prayers it is accuſtomed to be ſaid in the Church, through Ieſus Chriſt, &c. Theſe thinges are needfull to be taught concerning Inuocation, as our men haue elſewhere more at large written of Inuocation. But contrariwiſe the cuſtome of inuocating Saintes that are departed out of this life is to be reprooued and quite throwne out of the Ch
                        •
                     rch, becauſe this cuſtome transferreth the glorie due to God alone vnto men, it aſcribeth vnto the dead an omnipotencie, in that ſaints ſhould ſee the motions of mens hearts, yea it aſcribeth vnto the dead the office of Chriſt the Mediatour, and without al doubt obſcureth the glory of Chriſt. Therfore we condemne the wholl cuſtome of inuocating Saints departed, & thinke it is to be auoided. Notwithſtanding it profiteth to recite the true hiſtories of holie men, becauſe their examples doe profitablie inſtruct, if they be rightly propounded. When we heare that Dauids fall was forgiuen him, faith is confirmed in vs alſo. The conſtancie of the auncient Martyrs doth now likewiſe ſtrengthen the mindes of the godlie. For this vſe it is profitable to recite the hiſtories. But yet there had neede be diſcretion in applying examples.
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond edition is thus.
                  
                     Artic. 21.
                  COncerning the worſhip of Saints they teach, th
                        •
                      it is profitable to propoſe the memory of Saints, tha
                        •
                      by their examples we may ſtrengthen our faith, and that we may follow their faith and good works, ſo far as euery man▪ calling requireth, as the Emperour may follow Dauids example in making warre to beat backe the Turkes, for either of them is a King: we ought alſo to giue God thankes, that he hath propounded ſo many & glorious examples of his mercie in the Saints of his Church, & that he hath adorned hi
                        •
                      Church with moſte excellent giftes and vertues of holie men. The Saints themſelues alſo are to be commended, who haue holilie vſed thoſe giftes which they employed to the beautifying of the Church: But the ſcripture teacheth not to inuocate Saints, or to aske helpe of Saints, but layeth onelie Chriſt before vs for a Mediatour, propitiatour, high prieſt and interceſſour. Concerning him we haue commaundements & promiſes, that we inuocate him, & ſhould be reſolued that our praiers are heard, when we flie to this high prieſt and interceſſour, as Iohn ſaith, Chap. 16. Whatſoeuer ye ſhall aſke the Father in my name, he wil giue it you, &c. and Ioh. 14. Whatſoeuer ye ſhall aske in my name, that I will doe, Theſe teſtimonies bid vs flie vnto Chriſt, they commaund vs to beleeue that Chriſt is the interceſſour and peace maker, they bid vs truſt aſſuredlie that we are heard of the father for Chriſts ſake. But as touching the Saints, there are neither commaundements, nor promiſes, nor examples for this purpoſe in the ſcriptures. And Chriſtes office and honour is obſcured, when men flie to Saints, and take them for Mediatours, and inuocate them, and frame vnto themſelues an opinion, that the Saints are more gracious and ſo transferre the confidence due to Chriſt vnto Saints. But Paull ſaith, There is one Mediatour betweene God and men▪
                      Therefore Chriſt eſpeciallie requireth this worſhip, that we ſhould beleeue that he is to be ſought vnto, that he is the interceſſour, for whoſe ſake we are ſure to be heard, &c.
               
               
                  
                  In the third edition theſe things are thus found.
                  
                     Artic. 21.
                  TOuching the worſhip of Saints they teach, that the memorie of Saints maie be ſet before vs, that we may follow their faith and good workes according to our calling as the Emperor maie followe Dauids example in making warre to driue awaie the Turkes from his countrie: for either of them is a King. But the ſcripture teacheth not to inuocate Saints, or to aske helpe of Saints, becauſe it propoundeth vnto vs one Chriſt the Mediator, propitiatour, high Prieſt, and interceſſour. This Chriſt is to be inuocated, and he hath promiſed that he wil heare our praiers, and liketh this worſhippe eſpeciallie, to wit, that he be inuocated in all afflictions. 1. Ioh. 2. If anie man ſinne, we haue an aduocate with God, &c.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
               Of Inuocating godly men that are departed out of this life. Artic. 22.
               
               IN the 42. Chapter of Eſaie it is written, I am the Lorde, this is my name, I will not giue my glorie to another: Inuocation is a glorie moſte properlie belonging to God, as the Lord ſaith Math. 4. Thou ſhalt worſhip the Lord thy God, and him onlie ſhalt thou ſerue. And it is an immooueable & eternal decree of the firſt commaundement, Thou ſhalt haue no ſtrange Gods. It is neceſſary therfore that the doctrine touching Inuocation ſhould be moſt purely vpholden in the Church, for the corrupting of which the Deuill, euen ſince the beginning of mankinde, hath and will diuers waies ſcatter ſeedes. Wherfore we ought to be the more watchefull, and with greater care to reteine the manner of inuocation or adoration ſet downe in Gods word, according to that ſaying, whatſoeuer yee ſhall aſke the father in my name, he will doe it. In theſe words there is an order eſtabliſhed, which we ought moſt cōſtantly to mainteine, not to mingle therewith other 
                     〈◊〉
                   contrarie to gods word, or which are warranted by no example approoued in the ſcriptures. There is no greater vertue, no comfort more effectuall, then true inuocation▪ They therefore

muſt needs be reprooued, who either neglect true inuocation or corrupt it, as there be diuers corruptions. Manie doe not diſcerne their owne inuocation from that which is heatheniſh, neither indeede conſider what it is which they ſpeake vnto. Of theſe the Lord ſaith, Iohn Chapter 4. Ye
                        •
                      worſhip yee know not what. He will haue the Church to conſider whereto it ſpeaketh, ſaying, We worſhip that we know. Manie conſider not whether or wherefore they ſhall be heard▪ They recite praiers, and yet they doubt, although it be written, Let him aske in faith without wauering. Of theſe matters we will ſpeake elſe where. In this place we reprooue this heatheniſh corruption, whereby the cuſtome of thoſe that call vpon men departed out of this life, is defended, and helpe or interceſſon is ſought for at their handes. Such inuocatino ſwarueth from God, and giueth vnto creatures vertue, helpe, or interceſſion. For they that ſpeake ſomwhat modeſtlie, ſpeake of interceſſion alone. But humane ſuperſtition goeth on farther, and giueth vertue to them, as manie publike ſonges declare. O Marie Mother of grace, defend th
                        •
                      vs from the enimie, & receiue vs in the houre of death. Theſe ſhore verſes haue we heard a Monke of their diuinitie ſaie before one thatlaie a dying▪ and often repeating them, whereas he made no mention of Chriſt: and manie ſuch examples might be rehearſed.
               There are yet alſo other brainſick opinions. Some are thought to be more gracious with ſuch or ſuch images: theſe fra
                     •
                  tike imaginations ſeeing they are at the firſt ſight like heathniſh conceipts, do vndoubledlie both greatlie prouoke the wrath of God, and are to be reprooued by the teachers, and ſharpelie to be puniſhed by Godlie magiſtrates, which reproofe conteineth theſe three manifeſt reaſons: To aſcribe vnto creatures omnipotencie, is impietie▪ Inuocation of a creature, which is departed from the ſocietie of this life, aſcribeth vnto it omnipotencie, becauſe it is a confeſſion, that it beholdeth all mens hearts, and diſcerneth the true ſighes thereoffrom feined and hypocriticall. Theſe are onelie to be giuen to the eternall father, to his ſone our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and to the holie Ghoſt. Inuocation therefore is not to be made to men that are departed out of this life. It is to be lamented that theſe

euils are not perceiued: but looke to thy ſelfe, and weigh what thou doeſt: in this inuocation thou forſakeſt God, and doeſt not conſider what thou doeſt inuocate, and thou know eſt that thoſe patrones which thou ſeekeſt, as Anne and George, ſee not the motions of thy heart, who if they knew themſelues to be inuocated, they would euen tremble, and would not haue this honour, due to God, giuen to an
                     •
                  e 
                     〈◊〉
                   But what kinde of inuocation is there of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Albeit we know what anſwer the Aduerſaries make (for 
                     •
                  h
                     •
                  y haue coyned cauills to delude the trueth) yet Gods 
                     ••
                  ſt
                     •
                  
                  monies are wanting to their anſwere, and praier which 
                     •
                  s without faith (that is, when thou canſt not be reſolued whether God allow and admit ſuch kinde of praying) is in vaine.
               We remember that Luther often ſaid, that in the olde teſtament it is a cleere teſtimonie of the Meſſiah his Godhead, which affirmeth that he is to be inuocated, & by this propertie is the Meſſias there diſtinguiſhed from other Prophets: he complained that that moſt weightie teſtimonie was obſcured and weakened by transferring praier to other men. And for this onelie cauſe he ſaid, that the cuſtome of praying to other was to be miſliked.
               The ſecond reaſon is, Inuocation is vaine without faith, & no worſhip is to be brought into the church without gods commaundement: but there is no one ſentence to be ſeene, which ſheweth that this praier made to mē, which they man teine, pleaſeth God, and is effectuall: the praier therefore is vaine. For waht kinde of praying is it, in this ſort to come vnto Anne or George? I praie vnto the, but I doubt whether thy interceſſion do me good, I doubt whether thou heareſt me, or healpeſt▪ me, If men vnderſtood theſe hidde ſinnes, they would curſſe ſuch kinde of praiers, as they are indeede to be curſed, and are heatheniſh. Afterward of ſuch faultes what outrages enſue? flocking and praying to particular images, crauing certaine benefits of euerie one, of Anne riches are begged, as of Iuno, of George conqueſts, as of Mars, of Sebaſtian & Paul freedome from the plague, of Anthonie ſauegard for ſwine, although the aduerſaries ſaie they like not theſe things, yet they keepe them ſtill for gaine ſake, as plainelie appeareth.
               
                  
Now let vs adde the third reaſon: it is expreſſelie writte
                     •
                  , there is one Mediator betweene God and men the man Christ Ieſus, on him ought we in all praier to caſt our eies, and to know the doctrine of the Goſpell concerning him, that no man can come vnto God but by confidence in the Mediator, who together maketh requeſt for vs, as himſelfe ſaith. No 
                        〈◊〉
                      commeth to the father, but by the ſonne. And he biddeth vs fl
                     •
                  e vnto him-ſelfe, ſaying. Come vnto mee all ye that labour and are heauie loaden, and I will refreſh you: and he him▪ſelfe teacheth the manner of Inuocation, when he ſaith. Whatſoeuer ye ſhall aske the father in my name, he will giue it you. He nameth the father, that thou maieſt diſtinguiſh thy inuocation from heatheniſh, and conſider what thou ſpeakeſt vnto: that thou maiſt conſider him to be the true God, who by ſending his ſonne, hath reuealed himſelfe, that thy minde maie not wander, as the heatheniſh woman in the tragedie ſpeaketh, I praie vnto thee O God, whatſoeuer thou art, &▪ But that thou maieſt knowe him to be the true God, whoe by the ſending, crucifying, and raiſing vp againe of his ſonne hath reuealed himſelfe, and maieſt knowe him to be ſuch a one as he hath reuealed himſelfe. Secondlie that thou maieſt knowe, that he doth ſo for a certaintie receiue and heare vs, making our praiers when we fly to his ſonne the mediator, crucified and raiſed vp againe fo
                     •
                   vs, and deſire that for his ſake we maie be receaued, heard, helped, and ſaued, neither is anie man, receiued or hear
                     •
                   of God by anie other meanes. Neither is this praying vncertaine, but he biddeth thoſe that praie on this ſort to be reſolued through a ſtrong faith, that this worſhip pleaſeth God, and that they who praie on this manner are aſſured▪lie receiued and heard: therefore he ſaith, Whatſoeuer ye ſhall aske in my name, that is, acknowledging, and naming o
                     •
                   calling vpon me as the redeemer, high Prieſt, and interceſſor: this high Prieſt alone goeth into the holieſt place, that is, into the ſecret counſell of the deitie, and ſeeth the minde of the eternal father, and maketh requeſt for vs, and ſearching our hearts preſenteth our ſorrowes, ſighes, and praiers vnto him.
               It is plaine that this doctrine of the Mediatour was obſcured and corrupted, when men went to the mother Virgine,

as more mercifull, and others ſought other Mediators. And it is plaine that there is no example to be ſeene in the Prophets or Apoſtles, where prayer is made vnto men, heare me Abraham, or heare me O God for Abrahams ſake: but prayer is made vnto God, who hath reuealed himſelfe, to wit, to the eternall father, to the ſonne our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, and to the holie Ghoſt, that he would receiue, heare and ſaue vs for the ſonnes ſake. It is alſo expreſſelie made to the ſonne, as 2. Theſſ. 2. Our Lord Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe, and God and our father who hath loued vs, ſtrengthen you, &c. and Gen. 48. Iacob nameth God, and the ſonne the Mediator, when he ſaith. God before whome my fathers walked, and the Angell that deliuered me out of all troubles (that is the promiſed Sauiour) bleſſe theſe children. Therefore we vſe theſe formes of inuocation. I call vpon the O Almightie God, eternall father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, maker of heauen & earth, together with thy ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and thy holie ſpirite, O wiſe, true, good, righteous, moſte free, chaſte, and mercifull God, haue mercie vpon me, and for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, thy ſonne, crucified for vs, and raiſed vp againe, heare and ſanctifie me with thy holie ſpirit. I call vpon the O Ieſus Chriſt, the ſonne of God, crucified for vs, and raiſed vp againe: haue mercie on me, pray for me vnto the euerlaſting father, and ſanctifie me with thy holie ſpirite. In theſe forme; we know what we praie vnto. And ſeing there are teſtimonies of Gods word to be ſeene, which ſhewe that this praying pleaſeth God, and is heard, ſuch praying maie be made in faith. Theſe thinges are not to be found in that inuocation which is made vnto men. Some gather teſtimonies out of Auguſtine and others, to ſhewe that the Saintes in heauen haue care of humane affaires. This may more plainlie be ſhewed by Moſes and Elias talking with Chriſt. And there is no doubt but that ſuch as are in happines praie for the Church, but yet it followeth not thereupon that they are to be praied vnto.
               And albeit we teach that men are not to be praied vnto, yet we propound the hiſtories of thoſe that are in bleſſed ſtate vnto the people. Becauſe it is neceſſary that the hiſtory of the Church be by ſome meanes knowne vnto all, by what teſtimonies the Church is called together & founded, and

how it is preſerued, and what kinde of doctrine hath ben
                     •
                   publiſhed by the fathers, Prophets, Apoſtles, and Martyrs▪ In theſe hiſtories we commaund all to giue thankes vnto God, for that he hath reuealed himſelfe, that he hath gathered togither his Church by his ſon, that he hath deliuered his doctrine vnto vs, and hath ſent teachers, and hath ſhewed in them the witneſſes of him ſelfe: we commaund al to conſider of their doctrine, & to ſtrengthè their faith by thoſe teſtimonies, which God hath ſhewed in them. That they likewiſe conſider the examples of iudgement and puniſhments, that the feare of God may be ſtirred vp in them we commaund them to follow their faith, patience, and other vertues, that they learne that in God is no reſpect of perſons, and deſire to haue themſelues alſo receiued, heard, gouerned, ſaued, and helped, as God receiued Dauid, Manaſſes, Magdalene, the theefe on the Croſſe. We alſo teach how theſe examples are to be followed of euerie ma
                     •
                   in his vocation: becauſe error in imitation, and prepoſterous zeale is oft times the cauſe of great euills. We alſo commend the diligence of the Saintes themſelues, who tooke heede of De effuſione Sp▪ ſancti, vide obſeruat 1. ad hanc Confeſſ. Sect. 4.
                  waſting Gods giftes in vaine. And to conclude, they that are moſte fooles maie gather great ſtored doctrine out of theſe hiſtories, which doctrine is profitable to be publiſhed to the people, ſo that ſuperſtition be 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   aſide.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WITTEMBERG
                     •
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. 1.
                  WE beleeue and confeſſe that there is one onel
                        •
                      God, true, eternall, and infinite, almightie, ma
                        ••
                      of all thinges viſible and inuiſible, and that in this one 
                        〈◊〉
                      eternall godhead there are three properties or perſons of them ſelues ſubſiſting, the Father, the ſonne, and th
                        •
                      holie Ghoſt. As the Prophetical and Apoſtolicall ſcriptures teach, and the Creedes of the Apoſtles of Nice and of Athanaſius declare.
               
               
                  Of the ſonne of God.
                  CHAP. 2.
                  
                     
VVE beleeue and confeſſe that the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, was begotten of his father from euerlaſting, true and euerlaſting God, conſubſtantiall with his Father, &c. Looke the reſt in the 6. diuiſion.
                  
               
               
                  Of the holie Ghoſt.
                  CHAP. 3.
                  VVE beleeue and confeſſe that the holie Ghoſt proceedeth from God the Father, from euerlaſting, that he is true and eternal God, of the ſame eſſence, & maieſtie, & glorie with the Father, and the ſonne, as the holie Fathers, by authoritie of the holie ſcripture, wel declared in the Councel of Conſtantinople againſt Macedonius.
               
               
                  Of Inuocation of Saints.
                  CHAP. 23.
                  THere is no doubt but the memorie of thoſe Saintes, who when they were in this bodelie life furthered the Church either by doctrine, or writings, or by miracles, or by examples, and haue either witneſſed the trueth of the goſpell by Martyrdome, or by a quiet kinde of death fallen on ſleep in Chriſt, ought to be ſacred with al the Godlie: and they are to be commended to the Church, that by their doctrine and examples, we maie be ſtrengthned in true faith, and inflamed to follow true godlines.
                  We confeſſe alſo, that the Saintes in heauen doe after their certaine manner pray for vs before God, as the Angels *Ʋide obſeru. 1. ad confeſſ. Saxon. ſect. 1.
                     alſo are carefull for vs, and all the creatures doe after a certaine heauenlie manner groane for our ſaluation, and trauell togither with vs, as Paull ſpeaketh. But as the worſhip of inuocation of creatures is not to be inſtituted vpon their gronings, ſo vpon the praier of Saints in heauen, we may not alow the inuocation of ſaints. For touching the inuocating of them, there is no commaundement, nor example in the holy ſcriptures. For ſeeing al hope of our ſaluation is to be put, not in the ſaints, but in our Lord god alone, through his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, it is cleere, that not the Saints, but God alone is to be praied vnto. How ſhall they call one him, ſaith Paul, in whome they beleeue no t? but we muſt not beleeue in the ſaints: how then ſhal we pr ay

vnto them? And ſeeing it muſt needes be, that he who i
                        •
                      praied vnto be a ſearcher of the heart, the Saints ought not to be praied vnto, becauſe they are no ſearchers of the heart.
                  
                     Cont
                           •
                        a Colly ridianos. Epiphanius ſaith, Maries bodie was holy indeed▪ but yet not god▪ ſhee was indeed a Virgin, & honorable, but ſhee was not propounded for adoration, but her ſelfe worſhipped him, who as cōcerning his fleſh De vera relih. cap. vlt.was borne of her. Auſtine ſaith. Let not the worſhip of dead men b
                        •
                      any religion vnto vs, becauſe if they haue liued holily, they are not ſ
                        •
                      to be accounted of, as that they ſhould ſeeke ſuch honour, but rather they will haue him to be worſhipped of vs, by whom themſelues being Ibidem.illuminated reioyce, that we ſhould be fellowe ſeruantes of their reward. They are therefore to be honoured for imitation, not to be worſhipped for Religion ſake. And againe in the ſame place▪
                      We honour them with loue, not with ſeruice. Neither doe we erect temples vnto them, for they will not haue themſelues ſo to be honoured of vs, becauſe they know that we our ſelues being good, are the temple Deciuit. D
                           ••
                         l. 8. eap. 27.
                     of the high God. And againe, Neither doe we conſecrate temple
                        •
                     
                     ▪ Priesthoodes, holie rites, ceremonies, and ſacrifices vnto the ſame Martyrs, ſeeing not they, but their God, is our God, &c. We neither ordaine Prieſtes for our Martyrs, nor offer ſacrifices. Ambroſe vpon the Romans, Chap. 1. They are wont to vſe a miſerable excuſe ſaying, that by theſe men maie haue acceſse vnto God, 
                        〈◊〉
                      to a king by Earles. Goeto: is anie man ſo madde, I praie you, that being forgetfull of his owne ſaluation, he will challenge, as fit for 
                        〈◊〉
                      Earle, the roialtie of a King? And ſtreight after. Theſe me
                        •
                      thinke them not guiltie, that giue the honour of Gods name to a creature, and leauing the Lord worſhippe their fellow ſeruants.
                  But we, ſaie they, worſhippe not the ſaints, but onely deſire to be holpen afore God by their praiers. But ſo to deſire, as the ſeruice of Letanies ſheweth, and is commonlie vſed, is nothing elſe but to call vpon and worſhippe ſaintes▪ for ſuch deſiring requireth, that he whoe is deſired, be euerie where preſent and heare the petition. But this Maieſtie agreeth to god alone, and if it be giuen to the creature, the creature is worſhipped.
                  Some men faine that the Saints ſee in Gods word, what thinges God promiſeth, and what things ſeeme profitable for vs: which thing although it be not impoſſible to the maieſtie of God, yet Eſai plainlie auou
                        •
                     cheth, That Abraham
                     
                     knoweth vs not, and Iſraell is ignorant of vs: where the ordinarie gloſſe citeth Auguſtine ſaying, that the dead, euen ſaints, know not what the liuing do, &c.
                  
                  For that the auncient writers often times in their praiers turne themſelues to Saints, they either ſimplie without exact iudgement followed the errour of the common people, or vſed ſuch manner of ſpeaking, not as diuine honour, bur as a figure of Grammar, which they call Proſopopaeia: VVherby godlie and learned men doe not meane that they worſhip and praie to Saints, but doe ſet out the vnſpeakeable groaning of the Saints, and of al creatures, for our ſaluation: and ſignifie that the godlie praiers, whichi Saints thorough the holie ghoſt powred out in this world before God, doe as yet ring in gods eares, as alſo the bloode of Abell after his death ſtill cried before god: and in the Reuelation the ſoules of the Saints that were killed cry, that their bloode may be reuenged: not that they now reſting in the Lord, are deſirous of reuenge, after the manner of men, but becauſe the Lord euen after their death, is mindefull of the praiers, which while they yet liued on earth, they powred out for their owne and the wholl Churches deliuerance.
                  Epiphanius himſelfe againſt Aerius, doth alſo ſomewhat ſticke in the common error, yet he teacheth plainelie, that the ſaints are mentioned in the church, not that they ſhould be praied vnto, but rather that they ſhould not be praied vnto, nor matched in honour with Chriſt. We, ſaith he, make mention of the righteous Fathers, Patriarches, Prophets, Apoſtles, Euangeliſts, Martyrs, Confeſsours, Biſhops, Anachoretes, and the wholl companie, that we may ſingle out the Lord Ieſus Christe from that companie of men, by the honour which we giue vnto him, and that we may giue him ſuch worſhip, as by which we may ſignifie that we thinke, that the Lord is not to be made equall with any among men, although euerie of them were a thouſand times, and aboue, more righteous then they are.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               
                  Artic. 1. ſſ. 2.
                  SInce ſermons began with vs to be taken out of the holie ſcriptures of God, and thoſe deadlie contentions ceaſed, ſo manie as were led with anie deſire of true Godlines,

haue obteined a farre more certaine knowledge of Chriſtes doctrine, and farre more feruentlie expreſſed it in the conuerſation of their life. And euen as they declined from thoſe thinges, which had peruerſelie crept into the doctrine of Chriſt: ſo they were more and more confirmed in thoſe thinges, which are altogether agreeable thereunto: Of which ſort are the Articles, which the Chriſtian Church hath hetherto ſtedfaſtlie beleeued touching the holie Trinitie: to wit, that God the father, the ſonne, and the holie ghoſt are one eſſence and three perſons, and admit no other diuiſion or difference, then the diſtinction of perſons.
               
               
                  
                     Artic. II.
                  Of Inuocating and worſhipping of Saints.
                  MOreouer, that abuſe alſo was reprooued and con
                        ••
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     ed, by which ſome thinke they can ſo, by faſtings and praiers, winne and binde vnto themſelues both the bleſſed Virgine Marie that bare God, and other Saints, that they hope by their interceſſion and merites they may be deliuered from all aduerſities, as well of ſoule as of bodie, and be enr
                        •••
                     hed with all kinde of good thinges. For our Preachers haue taught by the commaundement of Chriſt the ſauiour, that that heauenly father alone is by the ſame Chriſt in the holy ſpirite to be praied vnto, as he who hath promiſed that he will neuer denie vs any of thoſe thinges, which we by a true faith aske of him thorough his ſonne. And ſeeing the ſcripture it ſelfe ſetteth before vs one onelie Mediatour betweene God and men, to wit, the man Ieſus Chriſt, 1. Tim. 2. who both loueth vs moreentirelie, and can by authoritie doe more with the father then any other, they rightlie thinke, that this onelie interceſſour and aduocate ought to ſuffice vs. Yet they do therewithall teach, that the moſt holie mother of God and Virgine Marie, and other beloued Saints, are with great diligence to be honoured. But that that thing can not otherwiſe be done, then if we ſtudie to be conuerſant in thoſe things, to which they eſpeciallie gaue themſelues (namelie, to innocencie and ſanctification,) and of which they ſet before vs ſo worthie examples. For ſith they with all their heart & ſoule, & with al their ſtrength doe loue God, we can in nothing pleaſe them better, then if we alſo with them loue God from the heart, and by all

meanes poſſible to make our ſelues conformable to him, ſo farre of are they from aſcribing their owne ſaluation to their merites: how therefore ſhould they preſume to helpe anie other with their merits? Nay rather euerie one of them while they liued here ſaid with Paull, the life which I now liue in the fleſh I liue by the faith of the ſonne of God, who loued me, and gaue himſelfe for me. For I deſpiſe not the grace of God. ſeeing therfore they them ſelues attribute whatſoeuer they either be or haue to the goodnes of god and to the redemption of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, we can pleaſe them no way better, then if we alſo wholly reſt in the ſame things alone: which very thing Saint Auguſtine alſo teacheth toward the ende of his booke, De vera religione.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. 22. Of Images.
                  AS touching Images, our preachers reprooued this eſpeciallie out of the holie ſcriptures, that adoring and inuocating of them is ſo openlie graunted to the ſimple people againſt the expreſſe commaundement of God. Secondly that ſo great coſte is beſtowed for their worſhip & ornament: by which rather the hungry, thirſty, naked, fatherles, ſicke, and thoſe that are in bonds for Chriſt, ought to haue beene relieued. Laſtlie becauſe the moſte part are ſo perſwaded, that with ſuch worſhip and coſt beſtowed vpon Images, (both which things God abhorreth) they deſerue much at gods hand, & that they obteine ſpecial help by this meanes. Contrariewiſe the ſame men doe teach, that the auncient writers (ſo long as chriſtian faith remained ſomewhat pure) vnderſtood the ſcriptures, which forbid worſhiping & praying to Images, in this ſenſe, that they thought it an abhominable thing to admit any Images, either grauen or painted, in the Church, although they were not otherwiſe ignorant, what our libertie is, as in all externall things, ſo likewiſe in Images. For they nothing douted but that it was flat contrarie both to the commaundements of ſcripture, & alſo to the holie religion. Which may eſpeciallie be prooued euen by thoſe things which bleſſed Epiphanius in times paſt Biſhop of Salaminium in Cyprus, writeth of himſelf in an epiſtle to Iohn Biſhop of Ieruſalem, which alſo S. Ierome turned out of Greeke into Latine, becauſe he thought it both Chriſtian,

& profitable to be read, & theſe are Epiph. his own words.
                  When we went together to the holy place which is called Beth
                        •
                     
                     ▪ that there I might make a collectiō with thee, after the cuſtome of the Church, and was come to the village which is called Anablotha, and paſſing by ſawe there a lampe burning, and had asked what place i
                        •
                      was, and had learned that it was a Church, and was gone in to praie, I found there a vaile hanging at the ent y of the ſame Church, ſtained and painted and hauing the image as it might be of Christ or ſome ſaint (for I doe not well remember whoſe picture it was) when therefore I had ſeene this in Chriſts Church contrary to the commaundement of the ſcriptures, that there hong a mans picture, I 
                        〈◊〉
                      it▪ 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      ou
                        •
                     r I counſeled the keepers of that place that they ſho
                        •••
                      
                     
                        •
                     in
                        ••
                      and 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſome poore bodie in it. And a l
                           •
                        le after, when 
                           〈◊〉
                         had brought an excuſe for his delaie in ſending another vaile that he had promiſed, he addeth, And now I have ſent that I could finde, and I praie thee bed the Elders of the ſame place tak
                        •
                      the vaile, that we haue ſent, of the bearer, and bid that henceforth ſuch vailes as be contrarie to our religion be 
                        〈◊〉
                      hanged vp in th
                        •
                      Church of Christ. Loe this godlie Biſhope writeth, that it is againſt th
                           •
                         holy ſcriptures, & Chriſtian religion to haue euen Chriſts owne picture in the Church: and 
                           •
                        h
                           •
                        t in ſo plaine words, that it may appeare to them, that as well the biſhop of Ieruſalem himſelfe▪ & Ierome, as al other m
                           •
                        n of that age thought the ſ
                           •
                        me, & that th
                           •
                        t faith & cuſtome of 
                           〈◊〉
                         images hath beene alwaies of olde in the Church of Chriſt, & brought in by the Apoſtles themſelues.
                  
                  Whereas ſome ſay further, that Images be profitable for the inſtruction of the Lay people, it appeareth firſt of all▪ that almoſt all Images were ſet vp for pompe and ſuperſtition rather then for any other vſe. Secondlie neither is that reaſon very ſound. For although the Lord would inſtruct and bring to the knowledge of his goodnes the Iewes (farre more dull then becommeth Chriſtians to be) by diuerſe outward ceremonies & p
                        •
                     dagogies, yet he was ſo farre from thinking that the vſe of Images, was fitte and conuenient for that purpoſe, that he did euen by name forbid it vnto them. For whoeſouer is not inſtructed & ſtirred vp to the worſhip of God by the word of God▪ and by ſo excellent works of his (which he la
                        •
                     eth before vs both in heauen and earth, and which are continuallie before our eies and at hand, and

which to conclude we ſo plentifullie enioy) ſurely the forme of Gods creatures altered by mans cunning, and ſo ſhapen, that ſtones, trees, mettalls, and other like matter doe no longer retaine their owne ſhape ſuch as they receiued it of God, but carie the countenance either of men or of beaſtes, or of other thinges, will doe him no good. Yea it is certaine, that by the workemanſhip of ſuch Images men are more withdrawne from the view of Gods workes to their owne workes, or to mens inuentions: ſo that they doe not euerie where thinke alike of God, but keepe in religious cogitations vntill ſuch time as they light vpon ſome Image. But ſurelie if a man marke it well, the heauen and the earth, and whatſoeuer is conteined in them, are excellent and worthie Images of God.
                  The heathens alſo vſed a pretence of inſtruction & teaching, to mainteine their Idolls, but the holie fathers reſted not in ſuch excuſes (Of which matter Lactantius treateth at large in his ſecond booke of Inſtitut.) neither could the heathens better abide to be vpbraided for that they worſhipped ſtones, and ſtockes, then can the men of our age, as they which oftentimes confidentlie affirmed, that they tooke the Images to be nothing els but Images: and that they ſought nothing els, but to be inſtructed and admoniſhed by them.
                  And theſe thinges doth Athanaſius controll in theſe words: Go to, let them tell me how God is knowne by Images, that is whether it be for the matter whereof they conſiſt, or for the forme imprinted in that matter. If the matter ſerue the turne, what neede is there I praie you of the forme? For God himſelfe ſhineth forth euen in the matter, before that anie thing be framed thereof by mans handes for all things ſhew forth gods glorie. But if the forme is ſelfe, which is fitted to the matter, giueth occaſion to knowe God, what neede ſuch Images? might not God be knowne farre more excellentlie by the things themſelues, whereof Images be made? ſurelie the glorie of God might much more viſiblie be ſeene, by the liuing creatures themſelues, either reaſonable, or vnreaſonable, ſet before our eies, then by dead Images which can not m
                           •
                        oue. And if anie man ſhall ſaie, theſe things might well be brought againſt Images, by which men thinke they maie come to the knowledge of God, but we are to thinke otherwiſe of the Images

of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and other Saints. Let him in like ſort thinke that God did manie externall workes in Iſraell, of which he commaundeth them to be mindeful for euer: & that he raiſed vp vnto them not a few famous & holie men, whoſe faith he woulde neuer haue them to forget. Yet he neuer eſtabliſhed the memorial of them by ſuch Images: that he might giue no occaſion of backſliding or Apoſtaſie, which is wont to follow the worſhipping of Images. Wherfore in the purer primitiue church it was abhomination to haue euen the Image of Chriſt, as hath bene afore ſhewed. To be ſhort our Preachers confes that Images of themſelues are indifferent, ſo that no worſhip or adoration be done vnto them. But it is not inough for a chriſtian man to haue a thing free, but he ought alwaies to haue a diligent reſpect hereunto, whether the ſame be profitable for edification▪ 1. Cor. 10. for nothing is to be ſuffred or aſſayed in the Church, which hath not in it ſome certaine vſe of edifying. Seing then it plainelie appeareth what greeuous offences Images in times paſt brought forth, and doe as yet bring forth▪ and ſeing it cannot be ſhewed, wh
                        ••
                      profite can be hoped for thereof (vnles peraduenture we will be counted quicker ſighted then God himſelfe, and the auncient chriſtians that were truelie Godlie, who were ſo farre from taking anie profite thereby, that they euen abhorred Images in Churches) all Images and Idolls are worthelie to be abhorred in the Church. Neither can the workemanſhip of the Cherubins vpon the a
                        •
                     ke of the couenant or other Ornaments of the Temple, which the Patrones of Images are wont to obiect vnto vs, hinder this truth among Chriſtians. For God had expreſſelie commaunded the Cherubins to be made, but he would not haue them ſeene of the people. And al the other things were ordeined rather for the beautie of 
                        •
                     he Temple, then to learne anie knowledge of God thereby although from them (as from all the reſt of Gods work
                        •
                     s) they which were ſpirituall, might take occaſion to meditate vpon the goodnes of god. But it is requiſite alſo to call this to minde, that we are much more bound to worſhip God in ſpirit and truth then they of olde time were: for that we are more plentifullie inriched with Chriſtes ſpirit, if we trulie beleeue in him.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD SECTION. OF THE ETERNALL PROVIDENCE OF God, and the creation of the world.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of the prouidence of God. CHAP. 6.
                  
                     
                        WE beleeue that all things, both in heauen and in earth, and in al creatures are ſuſteined and gouerned by the prouidence of this wiſe, eternall, and omnipotent God. For Dauid witneſſeth, and ſaith, The Lord is high aboue all nations, and his glorie aboue the heauens. VVho is as our God who dwelleth on high and yet humbleth him ſelfe, to beholde the thinges that are in heauen and earth? Againe he ſaith, Thou haſt foreſeene all my Pſal. 139. 3.waies. For there is not a worde in my tongue, which thou knowest not whollie, O Lord, &c. Paul alſo witneſleth and ſaith, By him we Acts. 17. 28. Rom. 11. 36.liue, mooue, and haue our being. And, of him, and through him, and for him, are all thinges. Therefore Auguſtine both truelie and according to the ſcripture ſaide in his booke de agone Chriſti, cap. 8. The Lord ſaid, Are not two ſparrowes ſolde for a farthing, and one of them ſhall not fall on the ground without the will of your father? By ſpeaking thus he woulde giue vs to vnderſtand that whatſoeuer men count moſt vile, that alſo is gouerned by the almightie power of God. For the trueth which ſaide, that all the haires of our heads are numbred, ſaith alſo that the birdes of the aire

are fed by him, and the lilies of the fielde are clothed by him.
                  We therfore condemne the Epicures who denie the prouidence of God, and all thoſe, who blaſphemouſlie affirme, that god is occupied about the poles of heauen, and tha
                        •
                      he neither ſeth nor regardeth vs or our affaires. The princelie prophet Dauid alſo condemned theſe men, when as 
                        •
                     e Pſal. 94.ſaid, O Lord, How long, how long ſhall the wicked triumph, they 
                           〈◊〉
                         the Lord doth not ſee, neither doth the God of Iacob regarde it. Vnderſtand ye vnwiſe among the people, and ye fooles when will yea wiſe. He that hath planted the eare, ſhall he not heare, and he th
                           •
                         hath formed the cie, how ſhould he not ſee? Notwithſtanding 
                        〈◊〉
                      doe not contemne the meanes whereby the prouidenced God worketh, as though they were vnprofitable, but w
                        •
                      reach, that we muſt applie our ſelues vnto them, ſo farre as they are commended to vs in the word of God. VVhetfore we miſlike the raſh ſpeeches of ſuch as ſaie, that if by the prouidence of God all thinges are gouerned, then all o
                        •
                      ſtudies and endeuours are vnprofitable. It ſhall be ſufficient, if we leaue or permit all things to be gouerned by th
                        •
                      prouidence of God, & we ſhal not need herafter to be careful or to be taught i
                        •
                      any matter. For though Paul did confes that he did ſaile by the prouidence of god, who had ſaid Acts. 23. 11.to him, Thou muſt teſtifie of me alſo at Rome, who moreouer promiſed & ſaid, There ſhal not ſo much as one ſoule periſh. Neith
                           •
                         ſhal an haire fal from your heads. Yet the mariners deuiſing how they might finde a waie to eſcape, the ſame Paul ſait
                        •
                      
                     Acts. 27. 34.to the Centurion, & to the ſouldiers, Vnleſse theſe remaine i
                           •
                         the ſhip, ye can not be ſafe. For God who hath appointed euerthing his end, he alſo hath ordained the beginning and th
                        •
                      meanes by which we muſt attaine vnto the end. The heathens aſcribe thinges to blinde fortune and vncertain
                        •
                      
                     Iames. 4.chaunce, but Saint Iames would not haue vs ſaie, To dai
                           ••
                         to morrow we will go into ſuch a Citie, and there buie and ſell: but he addeth, for that which you ſhould ſaie, if the Lord wil, and if we liue, we will doe this or that. And Auguſtine ſaith, All thoſe thinges which ſeeme to 
                           •
                        aine men to be done vnaduiſedlie in the world, they doe but accompliſh his word, becauſe they are not do
                           ••
                        
                        ▪ but by his commaundement. And in his expoſition on the 148. Pſal. It ſeemed to be done by chaunce, that Saull ſeeking his fathers Aſses ſhould light on the Prophet Samuell: but the Lord
                     
                     had before ſaid to the Prophet, to morrowe I will ſend vnto the a man of the Tribe of Beniamin, &c.
                  
               
               
                  Of the creation of all thinges, of the Angells, the Deuill, and man. CHAP. 7.
                  THis good and almightie God created all things both viſible and inuiſible by his eternall word, and preſerueth the ſame alſo by his eternal ſpirit: as Dauid witneſſeth, ſaying: By the word of the Lorde were the heauens made, and all the 
                     Pſal. 33. 6.
                     host of them by the breath of his mouth. And (as the ſcripture ſaith) All thinges that the Lord created were verie good, And made for the vſe and profit of man. Now we ſaie, that all thoſe thinges doe proceed from one beginning: and therefore we deteſt the Manichees & Ma
                        •
                     cionites, who did wickedly imagine two ſubſtances and natures, the one of good, the other of euill; and alſo two beginnings, and two gods, one contrarie to the other, a good, and an euill.
                  Amongeſt al the creatures, the Angels and men are moſt excellent. Touching Angells the holie ſcripture ſaith, Who 
                     Pſal. 104. 4. Heb. 5. 14.
                     maketh his Angells ſpirites, and his miniſters a flame of fire. Alſo, Are they not miniſtering ſpirites ſent forth to miniſter for their ſakes, which ſhalbe the heires of ſaluation? And, the Lord Ieſus him ſelfe teſtifieth of the Deuill ſaying, He hath bene a murtherer from the beginning, and abode not in the trueth, becauſe the
                           •
                        e is no trueth in him. When he ſpeaketh a lie, he ſpeaketh of his owne
                           •
                         for he is a lier, and the Father thereof. We teach therefore that ſome Angels perſiſted in obedience, & were appo
                        •
                     nted vnto the faithfull ſeruice of god & men, and that other ſome fell of their owne accord, and ranne headlong into deſtruction, & ſo became enimies to all good, & to all the faithfull, &c.
                  Now touching man, the ſpirit ſaieth, that in th
                        •
                      beginning he was created good according to the image, and likenes of God, that god placed him in paradiſe and made all thinges ſubiect vnto him▪ which Dauid doth moſt noblie ſet forth in the 8 Pſal. Moreouer God gaue vnto him a wife, and bleſſed them. VVee ſai
                        •
                      alſo, that man doth conſiſt of two and thoſe diuers ſubſtances in one perſon, of a ſoule immortall (as that which being ſeparated from the bodie, doth neither ſleepe, nor die) and a bodie mortal, which notwithſtanding at the laſt iudgement ſhall be raiſed againe from the

dead that from thenceforth the wholl man maie continue for euer, in life or in death. VVe condemne all thoſe, which mocke at, or by ſubtill diſputations call into doubt the immortality of the ſoules, or ſay that the ſoule ſleepeth, or that it is a part of God. To be ſhort, we condemne all opinions of al men whatſoeuer, which thinke otherwiſe of the creation of Angels, deuils, and men, then is deliuered vnto vs by the ſcriptures in the Apoſtolike Church of Chriſt.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Artic. 1. OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASILL.
               WE alſo beleeue, that God made all thinges by hi
                     •
                   euerlaſting word: that is, by his onelie begotten ſonne
                     •
                   and that he vpholdeth and worketh all thinges by his ſpirit, that is, by his owne power. And therefore that God, as he hath created, ſo he foreſeeth and gouerneth all 
                     Art. 3.thinges. And albeit man by the ſame fall became ſubiect to damnation, & ſo was made an enimie to god, yet that God neuer laid aſide the care of mankinde. The Patriarks, the promiſes before and after the flood, likewiſe the law of God giuen by Moſes & the holie Prophets, do witnes this thing.
            
            
               
                  
                     Artic. 2. OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               THis one onelie God hath reuealed himſelfe vnto men: firſt, both in the creation, and alſo in the preſeruation, and gouernement of his workes, &c. Looke the reſt in the firſt Section, of the ſcripture, and the ſecond Section, of God.
               
                  
                     Arti
                           •
                        . 7. WE beleeue that God, the three perſons working together, by his vertue, wiſdome, and incomprehenſible goodnes hath made all thinges, that is, not onelie heauen and earth, and all thinges therein contained, but alſo the inuiſible ſpirits, of which ſome fell head long into deſtruction, and ſome continued in obedience. Therefore we ſaie that they, as they are through their owne malice corrupted, are perpetuall enimies to all good, and therfore to the whol Church▪ but that theſe, preſerued by the meere grace of God, are miniſters for his glorie, and for the ſaluation of the Elect.
               We beleeue that God hath not onlie made al things, but 
                     Art. 8.alſo ruleth and gouerneth them, as he who according to hi
                     •
                  
                  
will diſpoſeth and ordereth whatſoeuer happeneth in the world. Yet we denie that he is the author of euill, or that anie blame of thinges done amiſſe, can be laid vpon him, ſeing his will is the ſoueraigne and moſte certaine rule of all righteouſnes, but he hath wonderfull rather then explicable meanes, by which he ſo vſeth al the deuiles and ſinnefull men as inſtruments, that whatſoeuer they doe euillie, that he as he hath iuſtlie ordeined, ſo he alſo turneth it to good. Therfore while we confes that nothing at all is 
                     •
                  o be done, but by the meanes of his prouidence and appointment, we doe in al humility adore his ſecrets that are hid fr
                     ••
                   vs, neither doe we ſearch into thoſe thinges which be without the reach of our capacitie. Nay rather we applie to our owne vſe that which the ſcripture teacheth for our qui
                     ••
                  nes 
                     •
                  nd 
                     •
                  ontentation ſake, to wit, that God, to whome all thing
                     •
                   are ſubiect, with a Fatherlie care watcheth for vs, ſo that 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  o much as a haire of our head f
                     •
                  lleth to the ground, 
                     〈◊〉
                   out his will. and that he hath Satan and all ou
                     •
                   aduerſarie ſo faſt bound, that vnles leaue be giuen them, they cannot do vs anie litle harme.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               
                  
                     
                        Art. 2. WE know God by two manner of wa
                        •••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      by the making, preſeruing, and gouerning 
                        〈…〉
                      worlde. For that to our eies is as a moſte excellent b
                        •
                     oke, in which al creatures from the leaſt to the greateſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      grauen, as it were characters, and certaine l
                        ••
                     ters▪ by which the inuiſible things of God may be ſeene and k
                        ••
                     w
                        •
                     e of v
                        •
                     : namelie his euerlaſting power and godheade, as Paull 
                        •
                     he Apoſtle ſpeaketh, Rom. 1. Chap. 10. 
                        〈…〉
                      ſufficeth to conuince and make all men without 
                        〈…〉
                      &c. Looke for the reſt in the firſt Section, of the ſcripture, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         in the ſecond Section, of God.
               
               
                  Artic. 12.
                  WE beleeue that the father by his worde, that is, by the ſonne, made heauen, 
                        〈◊〉
                      and al other creatures of nothing, when he ſaw it 
                        〈◊〉
                      and conuenient, and gaue to euerie one his beeing, for
                        ••
                      and diuers offices, that they might ſerue their creator, & that he doth now cheriſh,

vpholde, and gouerne them al, according to his euerlaſting prouidence and infinite power▪ and that to this ende, that they might ſerue man, and man might ſerue his God. He alſo made the Angels, all good by nature, that they might be his miniſters, and might alſo attend vpon the elect: of which notwithſtanding ſome fel from that excellent nature in which God had created them, into euerlaſting deſtruction: but ſome by the ſingular grace of God abode in the firſt ſtate of theirs▪ but the Deuills, and thoſe wicked ſpirits, are ſo corrupted and defiled, that they be ſworne enemies to good & all goodnes, which as theeues out of a watch towe▪ lie in waite for the Church and al the members thereof, that by their iuglings and deceits they may deſtroie and la
                        •
                     e waſte all things. Therefore beeing through their owne malice addicted to euerlaſting condemnation, they looke euerie daie for the dreadful puniſhments of their miſcheifes. We therefore in this place reiect the errour of the Saduce
                        •
                     , who denied that there were any ſpirits or Angels, as alſo the errour of the Manichees, who holde that the Deuills haue their beginning of themſelues, and are of their owne nature euill, and not corrupted by willfull diſobedience.
                  We beleeue that this moſte gracious and mightie God, after he had made al things, left them not to be ruled after the will of chaunce or fortune, but himſelfe doth ſo continuallie rule and gouerne them, according to the preſcri
                        ••
                      rule of his holie will, that nothing can happen in this world without his decree and ordinance, and yet God cannot be ſaid to be either the author, or guilty of the euils that happen in this world. For both his infinite and incomprehenſible power and goodnes ſtreatcheth ſo farre, that euen the
                        •
                      he decreeth and executeth his workes and deedes iuſtlie and holily, when as both the deuil and the wicked doe vn
                        •
                     uſ
                        ••
                     ie. And whatſoeuer things he doth paſſing the reach of mans capacitie, we will not curiouſlie and aboue our capacitie inquire into them: Nay, rather we humblie and reuerentlie adore the ſecret, yet iuſt iudgements of God. For i
                        •
                      ſufficeth vs (as being Chriſts diſciples) to learne onely thoſe things which he himſelfe teachth in his word, neither do
                        ••
                      thinke it lawful to paſſe theſe boundes. And this doctrine afordeth vs exceeding great comforte. For by it we know that

nothing befalleth vs by chaunce, but all by the will of our heauenlie father, who watcheth ouer vs with a fatherly care in deede, hauing all things in ſubiection to him ſelfe, ſo that not a haire of our heade (which are euerie one numbred) can be plucked awaie, nor the leaſt ſparrow light on the ground, without the will of our father. In theſe things therefore doe we wholly reſt, acknowledging that God holdeth the Deuills and all our enemies ſo bridled as it were with ſnaffles, that without his will and good leaue they are not able to hurt any of vs: and in this place we reiect the deteſtable opinion of the Epicures, who fained God to be idle, to do nothing, and to commit all things to chaunce.
               
            
         
         
            THE FOVRTH SECTION. OF MANS FALL, SINNE, AND FREE WILL.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of mans fall, ſinne, and the cauſe of ſinne. CHAP. 8.
                  
                     MAN was from the beginning created of God afer the Image of God, 
                        •
                     n righteouſnes and true holines, good, and vpright: but by the inſtinct of the ſerpent and his owne fault, falling from goodnes and vprightnes, become ſubiect to ſinne, death, and diuers calamities, and ſuch an one as he became by his fall, ſuch are all his ofſpring, euen ſubiect to ſinne, death, and ſundrie calamities. And we

take ſinne to be that naturall corruption of man, deriued
                        •
                      ſpread from thoſe our firſt parents vnto vs al, through wh
                        •••
                      we being dorwned in euil concupiſcenſes, and cleene turn
                        •
                      awaie from God, but prone to all euill, full of all wickednes, diſtruſt, contempt, & hatred of God, can do no good
                        •
                      our ſelues, no not ſo much as thinke of any. And th at m
                        ••
                      
                     Math. 12.is, euen as we do grow in yeares, ſo by wicked thoughts wordes, and deedes committed againſt the law of God, we bring forth corrupt fruites, worthie of an euill tree: in 
                        〈◊〉
                      reſpect, we through our owne deſert, being ſubiect to th
                        •
                      wrath of God arein daunger of iuſt puniſhments: ſo th
                        •
                      we had all beene caſt awaie from God, had not Chriſt the deliuerer brought vs backe againe.
                  
                     By death therfore, we vnderſtand not onlie bodily death, which is once to be ſuffered of all vs for ſinnes, but alſo euerlaſting puniſhmentes due to our corruption and to 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſinnes. For the Apoſtle ſaith, we were dead in treſpaſses & 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Eph. 2.and were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others. 
                        〈◊〉
                      God which is 
                        •
                     itch in mercie, euen when we were dead by ſinn
                        •
                     , Rom. 5.quickened vs together in Chriſt. Againe, As by one man ſinne
                        •
                     
                     tred into the world, and by ſinne death, and ſo death went 
                        〈◊〉
                      men, for as much as all men haue ſinned, &c.
                  We therefore acknowledge that originall ſinne is in all men: we acknowledge, that all other ſinnes, which ſpring hereout, are both called, and are in deede ſinnes, by wh
                        ••
                      name ſoeuer they be termed, whether mortall or veniall, 
                        〈◊〉
                      alſo that which is called ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt, whi
                        ••
                      is neuer forgiuen: we alſo confes that ſinnes are not equall, Mar. 3. 1. Ioh. 5. Math. 10. 
                           •
                        1.although they ſpring from the ſame fountaine of coruptio
                        •
                      and vnbeliefe, but that ſome are more greeuous then other, euen as the Lord hath ſaid, that It ſhall be eaſier for Sodo
                           ••
                        
                      then for the Citie that deſpiſeth the word of the Goſpell we therefore condemne all thoſe that haue taught thinges contrarie to theſe, but eſpeciallie Pelagius and all the Pelagians, together with the Iouinianiſtes, who with the Stoikes count all ſinnes equall▪ we in this matter agree fullie with 
                        •
                      
                     Auguſtine, who produced and mainteined his ſayings out of the holie ſcriptures. Moreouer we condemne Florinus and Blaſtus (againſt whome alſo Iraeneus wrote) and al thoſe that make god the author of ſinne: ſeeing it is expreſſely written,

                     Thou art not a god that loueth wickednes, thou hateſt all them that worke iniquitie, and wilt deſtroy all that ſpeak lies. And againe, when the Deuill ſpeaketh a lie, he ſpeaketh of his owne, becauſe he is a 
                     Pſa 8. 44. Ioh. 8. 44.
                     lier, & the father of lying. Yea there is euen in our ſelues ſin & corruption enough, ſo that there is no need that god ſhould infuſe into vs eyther a new or greater meaſure of wickednes. Therefore when God is ſaied in the ſcripture, to harden, to blinde, and to deliuer vp into a reprobate ſenſe, it is to be vnderſtoode, that God doth it by iuſt iudgement, as a iuſt iudge & reuenger. To conclude, as often as god in the ſcripture is ſaide and ſeemeth to doe ſome euill, it is not thereby meant, that man doth not commit euill, but that god doth ſuffer it to be done, and doth not hinder it, and that by his iuſt iudgement, who could hinder it, if he would: or becauſe he maketh good vſe of the euill of men, as he did in the ſinnes of Ioſephes brethren: or becauſe himſelfe ruleth ſinnes, that they breake not out and rage more violentlie then is meete. Saint Auguſtine in his Enchiridion ſaith, After a wonderfull and vnſpeakeable manner that is not done beſide his wil, which is done contrarie to his wil▪ becauſe it could not be done, if he ſhould not ſuffer it to be done, and yet he doth not ſuffer it to be done vnwillinglie, but willinglie: neither would he being God ſuffer any euil to be done, vnles being alſo almightie he could make good of euill. Thus farre Auguſtine. Other queſtions, as, whether god would haue Adam fall, or whether he forced him to fall, or why he did not hinder his fall, and ſuch like, we account amongſt curious queſtions▪ (vnleſſe perchance the frowardnes of heretikes, or of men otherwiſe importunate, doe compell vs to open theſe points alſo out of the word of God, as the godly Doctours of the Church haue often times done) knowing that the Lord did forbid that man ſhould not eate of the forbidden fruite, and puniſhed his transgreſſion: and alſo that the things done are not euill in reſpect of the prouidence, will, and power of God, but in reſpect of Sathan, and our will reſiſting the will of God.
               
               
                  Of free will, and ſo of mans power and abilitie. CHAP. 9.
                  WE teach in this matter, which at all times hath bin the cauſe of many conflicts in the Curch▪ that

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
there is a triple condition or eſtate of man to be conſidered. Firſt what man was before his fall, to wit, vpright and free, who might both continue in goodnes, and decline to euil▪ but he declined to euil, & hath wrapped both himſelfe & al mankind in ſinne and death, as hath bin ſhewed before▪ Secondlie, we are to conſider, what man was after his fall. His vnderſtanding indeed was not taken from him, neither was he depriued of will, and altogether chaunged into a ſtone or ſtocke. Neuettheles theſe thinges are ſo altered in man, that they are not able to doe that now, which they could doe before his fall. For his vnderſtanding is darkned, and his will which before was free, is now become a ſeruile wil for it ſerueth ſinne, not nilling, but willing: for it is called a wil, and not a nilling. Therfore as touching euil or ſin, man doth euil, not compelled either by god or the deuil, but of his owne accord: and in this reſpect he hath a moſte free wil
                        •
                      but whereas we ſee, that often times the moſte euill deedes and counſells of man are hindered by god, that they cannot attaine to their end, this doth not take from man libertie in euill, but God by his power doth preuent that, which man otherwiſe purpoſed freelie: as, Ioſephes brethren did freelie purpoſe to ſleie Ioſephe: but they were not able to doe it, becauſe it ſeemed otherwiſe good to God in his ſecret counſell. But as touching goodnes and vertues, mans vnderſtanding doth not of it ſelfe iudge aright of heauenlie thinges. For the Euangelicall and Apoſtolike ſcripture requireth regeneration of euerie one of vs that w
                        •
                      be ſaued. Wherefore our firſt birth by Adame doth nothing 1. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. 3.profit vs to ſaluation. Paull ſaith, The naturall man perceiueth not the thinges which are of the ſpirit, &c. The ſame Paull elſe were denieth, That we are fit of our ſelues, to thinke anie good. Now it is euident, that the minde or vnderſtanding, is the guide of the will: and ſeeing the guide is blinde, it is eaſie to be ſeene how farre the will can reach. Therefore man not as yet regenerate hath no free will to good, no ſtrength to performe that which is good. The Lord ſaieth in the Ioh. 8.Goſpell, Verilie, verilie I ſay vnto you, that euerie one that committeth ſinne, is the ſeruant of ſinne. And Paule the Apoſtle Rom. 8.faith, The wiſdome of the fleſh is enmitie againſt God. For i
                           •
                         is not ſubiect to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Further more

there is ſome vnderſtanding of earthlie thinges remaining in man after his fall. For God hath of mercie left him wit, though much differing from that which was in him before his fall▪ god commaundeth vs to garniſh our wit, and theirwithal he giueth gifts & alſo the increaſe thereof. And it is a cleare caſe, that we can profit verie litle in al artes without the bleſſing of God. The ſcripture doubtles referreth all artes to God. Yea and the Ethnikes alſo did aſcribe the beginninges of artes to the Gods, as to the authors thereof.
                  Laſtlie we are to conſider, whether the regenerate haue free will, and how farre forth they haue it. In regeneration the vnderſtanding is illuminated by the holie Ghoſt, that it maie vnderſtand both the myſteries and will of God. And the will it ſelfe is not onelie chaunged by the ſpirit, but is alſo endued with faculties, that of it owne accord it may both will & do good. Vnles we graunt this, we ſhall denie chriſtian libertie, and bring in the bondage of the law. Beſides, Iere. 31. Ezech 36.the Propher bringeth in god ſpeaking thus, I wil put my lawes in their mindes, and write them in their heartes. The Lord alſo ſaieth in the goſpell. If the ſonne make you free, then are you 
                     Ioh. 7.
                     free indeede Paull al
                        •
                     o to the Phillip. Vnto you it is giuen, for Chriſt not onely to beleeue in him, but alſo to ſuffer for his ſake. And Phil. 1. Phil. 2.againe, I am perſwaded that he that began this good worke in you, will preforme it vntill the daie of the Lord Ieſus: Alſo, It is God that worketh in you the will and the deede. Where neuertheleſſe we teach, that there are two thinges to be obſerued: Firſt, that the regenerate, in the choice & working of that which is good, do not onelie work paſſiuilie, but actiuely. For they are mooued of God, that themſelues maie doe that which they doe. And Auguſtine doth trulie alledge that ſaying, that God is ſaid to be our helper: For no man can be helped, but he, that doth ſomewhat. The Manichees did bereeue man of all action, and made him like a ſtone and a blocke.
                  Secondlie, that in the regenerate there remaineth infirmitie. For ſeeing that ſinne dwelleth in vs, and that fleſh in the regenerate ſtriueth againſt the ſpirit, euen to our liues end, they do not red
                        •
                     lie performe in euery point that which they had purpoſed. Theſe things are confirmed by the Apoſtle, Rom. 7. Gal. 5. Therfore, our free wil is weak, by reaſon of the reliques of the old Adā remaining in vs ſo long as we liue,

& of the humane corruption, which ſo neerely cleaueth to them. In the meane while becauſe that the ſtrength of the fleſh and reliques of the olde man are not of ſuch great force that they can whollie quench the worke of the ſpirit, therefore the forthfull are called free, yet ſo, that they do acknowledge their infirmitie, & glorie no whit at al of their free wil▪ For that which Saint Auguſtine doth repeate ſo often out of the Apoſtle, ought alwaies to be kept in minde by the ſaithfull: What haſt thou, that thou haſt not receiued? and if th
                           •
                         hast receiued it, why doeſt thou boaſt, as though thou hadeſt not receiued it? Hetherto may be added, that that commeth no
                        •
                      ſtraight way to paſſe, which we haue purpoſed. For the euents of things are in the hand of god▪ For which cauſe Paul▪ 
                     Rom. 1. 19.
                     beſought the Lord that he would proſper his iournie. Wherfore i
                        •
                      this reſpect alſo free wil is very weak. But in outward things no man denieth but that both the regenerate and vnregenerate haue their free will. For man hath this conſtitution common with other creatures (to whome he is not inferiour) to wil ſome things, and to nill other things. So he may ſpeake, or keepe ſcilence, go out of his houſe or abide within. Although herein alſo Gods power is euermore to be marked, which brought to paſſe that Balaam could not Numb. 24. Luc. 
                           •
                        .go
                        •
                      ſo farre as he would, and that Zacharias comming out of the Temple, could not ſpeake as he would haue done. In this matter we condemne the Manichees whoe denie, that the beginning of euill vnto man, beeing good, came from his free will. We condemne alſo the Pelagians, who affirme that an euill man hath free will ſufficientlie to performe a good pre
                        •
                     ept. Both theſe are confuted by the ſcripture, which ſa
                        •••
                     h to the former, God made man v
                           •
                        
                        right, and to the latter, If the ſonne make you free, then are y
                           ••
                         free indeede.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA
               MA
                     •
                   being the moſte perfect Image of God in earth and hauing the chiefdome of all viſible creatures, conſiſting of ſoule and bodie, whereof this is mortall, that immortall, after he was made holie of the Lorde, he by his owne fault falling into ſinne, drue wholl mankinde with him into the ſame fall, and made him ſubiect to the ſame calamitie.
               
                  
                  
                     Artic. 8. And this infection, which men tearme Originall, hath ſo inuaded the wholl ſtocke, that the childe of wrath and the enemie of God, can by none other, then by the diuine help of Chriſt, be cured. For if there be anie ſparke of good fruit remaining here, it being weakned dailie by our ſinnes, declineth tothe worſſe. For the force of euil doth get the vpper hand, neither doth it ſuffer reaſon to beare the ſway, nor the moſt deuine faculty of the minde to haue the prehemin
                     •
                  ce.
               
                  
                     Artic. 9. Whereupon we doe ſo at
                     •
                  ribute free will to man, as that knowing and hauing a will to doe good and euill, we finde notwithſtanding by experience, that of our owne accord Gen. 1.we maie doe euill, but we can neither imbrace nor follow anie good thing, except, being illuminated by the grace of Chriſt, we be ſtirred vp and effectually mooued thereunto. For God is he which worketh in vs both 
                  Eph. 
                        •
                     .
                  to will, and to bring to paſſe, according to his good will. And, Saluation is of the Lord, deſtruction of our ſelues.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
               Art. 2. Of man.
               
               WE confeſſe that in the beginning man was made of god, in righteouſnes and true holines, after the true Image of God: but he fel into ſinne of his owne accord, Gen. 3. & 
                        •
                     . Rom. 5. 1. Cor. 15. Eph. 2. Gen. 6. & 
                        •
                     . Ioh. 3. Rom. 3. Pſal. 143. Epheſ. 2.by the which fall wholl mankinde is made corrupt and ſubiect vnto damnation. Hence is it that our nature is defiled, and become ſo prone vnto ſinne, that except it be renued by the holie Ghoſt, man of himſelfe can neither doe, nor will anie good.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA, OR THE WALDENSES.
               Of the knowledge of a mans ſelfe. Alſo, of ſinne, the cauſes and fruites thereof, and of the promiſe of God. CHAP. 4.
               FOurthlie touching the knowledge of himſelfe, man is taught, and that after two ſortes. Firſt the knowledge Gen. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  of his eſtate, yet being in his innocencie, or voide of all fault, that is, of his nature being perfect, from

whence he fell: Secondlie the knowledge of his ſinne and mortalitie, into which he fell. The eſtate and condition of his innocencie and righteouſnes conſiſteth in theſe points that the Lorde in the beginning made man after his ow
                     ••
                   Image and likenes, and adorned him with the giftes of his grace or bountie: that he engraffed in him righteouſnes and his ſpirit, a ſoule and a bodie, togither with all the faculties and powers thereof, and ſo made him holie, iuſt, wiſe, immortall, and a moſte pleaſant temple for his heauenlie ſpirit, in the minde, will, memorie, and iudgement, and beſtowed vpon him cleare light of vnderſtanding, integritie, and a verie ordinate or lawfull loue towardes God and all his creatures: alſo a full and abſolute obedience, or habilitie to obey God, the true feare Eccleſ. 17. Epheſ. 1.of God, and a ſincere heart and nature, that man might be his owne poſſeſſion, and his proper and peculiar workemanſhip, created vnto the praiſe of his glorious grace. Man being placed in this eſtate had left vnto him free will, ſo that if he would, he was able to fulfill that commandement which god gaue him, and thereby to retaine righteouſnes both for himſelfe and for all his poſteritie after hi
                     •
                  
                  ▪ and euerie waie to enioy a ſpirit, ſoule, bodie, and an eſtat
                     •
                   
                  Eccleſ. 15.moſte bleſſed; and further alſo to make a waie vnto a fa
                     •
                  re more excellent glorie, by conſidering that fire and water, life and death, were ſet before him: which if he would not conſider, nor doe his endeuour therein, by chooſing of euill, he might looſe all thoſe good giftes.
               The ſecond part of the knowledge of a mans ſelfs (namelie before iuſtification) ſtandeth in this, that a man acknowledge aright the ſtate of his fal, ſinne, and mor
                     •
                  a
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ For that free liberty of choice which God permitted to the wil of man, he abuſed, and kept not the lawe of his iuſtice, but ſwarued therefrom, and therein tranſgreſſed the commaundement of God▪ inſomuch as he obeyed the deuill
                     •
                   thoſe lying ſpeaches of his, and gaue credit vnto them, and performed to the deuill ſuch faith and obedience as was d
                     ••
                   to God alone: whereby he ſtripped and bereaued himſelfe and his poſteritie of the ſtate of perfection and goodnes of nature: and the grace of God, and thoſe good giftes of iuſtice, and the Image of God, which in his creation were

engreffed in him, he partlie loſt them, and partlie, corrupted & defiled them, as if with horrible poyſon one ſhould corrupt pure wine, and by this meanes he caſt headlong both himſelfe and all his ofſpring into ſinne, death, and all kinde of miſeries in this life, and into puniſhments eternall after this life.
               Wherefore the ſpring and principall author of all euill is that cruell and deteſtable deuill, the tempter, lyer, and manſlayer: and next the free will of man, which notwithſtanding being conuerted to euil, through luſte and naughtie deſires and by peruerſe concupiſcenſe, chooſeth that which is euill.
               Hereby ſinnes according to theſe degrees and after this order maie be conſidered & iudged of. The firſt and weightieſt or moſte greiuous ſinne of all was without doubt that ſinne of Adam, which the Apoſtle calleth Diſobedience, for the which death reigneth ouer al, euen ouer thoſe alſo, which Rom. 5.haue not ſinned with like trangreſſion as did Adam. A ſecond kinde is originall ſinne, naturallie ingendered in vs and hereditarie, wherein we are all conceiued and borne Pſal. 51. Epheſ. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  into this world. Behold, ſaith Dauid, I was borne in iniquitie, and in ſinne hath my mother conceiued me. And Paull, We are by nature the children of wrath. Let the force of this hereditarie deſtruction be acknowledged and iudged of by the guilt and fault, by our prones and declination, by our euill nature, and by the puniſhment which is laide vpon it. The third kinde of ſinnes are thoſe which are called Actuall, which are the fruites of originall ſinne, and doe burſte out within, without, priuilie and openlie, by the powers of man, that is, by all that euer man is able to doe, and by his members, trangreſſing all thoſe thinges which God commaundeth and forbiddeth, and alſo running into blindnes and errors worthie to be puniſhed with all kinde of damnation. This doctrine of the true knowlede of ſinne, is of our men diligentlie handled and vrged: and to this end were the firſt and ſecond tables of the law deliuered to Moſes of God, that men eſpeciallie might knowe themſelues, that they are conceiued and borne in ſinne, and that forthwith, euen from their birth, and by nature, they are ſinners, full of luſtes, and euill inclinations.
               
                  
For hereof it commeth, that ſtraight euen from the beginning of our age, & ſo forth in the wholl courſe of our life, being ſtained & ouercome with manie ſins, men doe in heart, thoughtes, and euil deedes breake and transgreſſe the commandements of God, as it is written, The Lorde looked downe 
                  Pſa. 14. Rom. 3.
                  from heauen to behold the children of men, to ſee if there were a
                        ••
                      that would vnderſtand, and ſeeke God: all are gone out of the way▪ they haue bene made altogether vnprofitable, there is none that 
                  Gen. 6.
                  doth good, no not one. And againe, When the Lorde ſaw that the wickednes of man was great in the earth, and all the cogitations of his heart were onelie euill continuallie. And againe, The 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  Gen. 8.
                  ſaide, the imagination of mans heart is euill euen from his youth▪
                   
                  Epheſ. 2.And Saint Paull ſaith. VVe were by nature the children of wrath as well as others.
               
               Herewithall this is alſo taught, that by reaſon of that corruption and deprauation common to all mankinde, and for the ſinne, tranſgreſſions, and iniuſtice, which enſued thereof, all men ought to acknowledge, according to the holie ſcripture, their owne iuſt condemnation, and the horrible & ſeuere vengeance of God, and conſequentlie the moſt deſerued puniſhment of death, and eternall torments in he
                     •
                   whereof Paull teacheth vs, when he ſaith, The wages of ſinne is 
                  Rom. 6. Ioh. 5.
                  death: And our Lord Chriſt, They which haue done euill, ſhal g
                        ••
                      into the reſurrection of condemnation, that is, into paines eternall, Where ſhal be wailing and gnaſhing of teeth.
               
               They teach alſo that we muſt acknowledge Looke the 
                        •
                     . obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.our weakenes, and that great myſerie which is ingendered in vs, as alſo thoſe difficulties from which no man can euer deliuer or ridde himſelfe by any meanes, or iuſtifie himſelfe (that is, procure or get righteouſnes to himſelfe) by any kinde of works, deeds, or exerciſes, ſeeme they neuer ſo glorious. For that wil of man which before was free, is now ſo corrupted, troubled, and weakened, that now from hence forth of it felfe, and without the grace of God, it cannot chuſe, iudge, or wiſh fullie, nay it hath no deſire, nor inclination, much leſſe any ability, to chuſe that good wherewith God is pleaſed. For albeit it fell willinglie and of it owne accord, yet by it ſelfe, and by it owne ſtrength it could not Looke the 
                        •
                      obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.riſe againe, or recouer that fall, neither to this daie, without the mercifull helpe of God, is it able to doe any thing at all. And a lit
                        ••
                     
                  
                  
                  after. Neither can he which is man onelie, and hath nothing aboue the reach of this our nature, helpe an other in this point. For ſince that originall ſinne proceeding by inheritance poſſeſſeth the wholl nature, and doth furiouſlie rage Rom. 3. Eſa. 43.therein, and ſeeing that all men are ſinners, and doe want the grace and iuſtice of God, therefore ſaith God by the mouth of the Prophet Eſaias, Put me in remembrance, Let vs be iudged together, count thou if thou haue any thing that thou may eſt be iuſtified: thy firſt father hath ſinned, and thy interpreters (that is, they which teach thee iuſtice) haue tranſgreſsed againſt me. & a litle before, ſpeaking of works in the ſeruice of god after the inuention of man, he ſaith: Thou haſt not offered vnto me the Ramme of the burnt offrings, neither haſt thou honoured me with thy ſacrifices: I haue not cauſed thee to ſerue with an offering, nor wearied thee with incenſe. And vnto the Hebrewes it is written: Sacrifice, & offering, and burnt offerings, and ſinne offerings thou wouldeſt not 
                  Heb. 10.
                  haue, Neither dideſt thou approoue thoſe things, which were offered according to the law.
               This alſo muſt we know that the Lord God for ſinne doth permit and bring all kindes of afflictions, miſeries, and vexations of minde in this life, vpon all men, ſuch as are heat, colde, hunger, thirſt, care, and anguiſh, ſore laboures, calamitie, aduerſitie, dolefull times, ſword, fire, diſeaſes, griefes, and at the laſt alſo that intollerable and bitter death, whereby Gen. 2. Gen. 3.nature is ouerthrowen, as it is written, Thou ſhalt die the death. Againe, Curſed is the earth for thy ſake, in ſorow ſhalt thou eate of it all the daies of thy life; thornes alſo and thiſtles ſhall it bringforth to thee. And yet it is taught, that men muſt & ought to beare all theſe puniſhments patientlie, ſeeing that they owe vnto God, & haue deſerued a farre more cruell puniſhment: Yet they muſt not be ſo perſwaded as though they deſerued any thing by ſuffering this puniſhment, or ſhould receiue from God any grace or reward in recompenſe for the merit of theſe puniſhments, ſeeing that Paull ſpeaking of a much more worthie croſſe and ſufferings which the true beleuers take vppon them for Chriſts ſake, ſaith, that they be not comparable to the glorie, which ſhall be ſhewed vnto vs: And theſe puniſhments are laied vpon vs, & are patientlie to be borne, that we may acknowledge the greatnes of our ſinne & how greeuous a thing it is, & there withal our own weakenes,

needes, and miſerie, and that by experience we may kn
                     ••
                   how wicked, foull, and bitter athing it is, euen aboue all th
                     •
                   we are able to conceiue, for a man to forſake the Lord 
                     〈◊〉
                   God, as ſaith the Prophet. And moreouer that they whi
                     •
                   beeing plunged in theſe miſeries, and oppreſſed with theſe burthens, may againe be ſtirred vp to repentance, and 
                     •
                   ſeeke for fauour and helpe from God, which is a father 
                     〈◊〉
                   of mercie and compaſſion. Howbeit this is alſo expreſſelie added, that the laboures and torments which holie men doe ſuffer for the name of Chriſt, that is, in the cauſe of eternall ſaluation, for the holie trueth of Chriſt, are an acceptable and pleaſant ſacrifice to God, and haue great and large promiſes, eſpeciallie in the life to come: the which thing alſo did euen ſo fall out with Chriſt our heade, of whome the epiſtle to the Hebrewes ſpeaketh thus, that for the ioy that was ſet before him, he endured the croſſe: who alſo by himſelfe conſecrated and hallowed the croſſe to them, euen to this ende, tha
                     •
                   thoſe ſufferings which we indure for Chriſt his names ſal
                     ••
                   might be pleaſant and acceptable vnto God.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               
                  
                     Art. 9. VVE beleeue that man being created pure and vpright, and conformable to the image of God through his owne fault fell from that grace which he had receiued, and therby did ſo eſtraunge him ſelfe from God the fountaine of all righteouſnes and of all good things, that his nature is become altogether defiled, and being blinde i
                     •
                   ſpirit, and corrupt in heart, hath vtterlie loſt all that integritic▪ For although he can ſomewhat diſcerne betweene good and euill▪ yet we affirme that whatſoeuer light he hath, 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſtraightwaies becommeth darkenes, when the queſtion is of ſeeking God, ſo that by his vnderſtanding and reaſon he can neuer come to God▪ Alſo, although he be endued with will, whereby he is mooued to this or that, yet inſomuch as that is altogether cap
                     •
                  iuated vnder ſinne, it hath no liberty at al to deſire good, but ſuch as it hath receiued by grace and of 
                     Art. 10.the gift of god. We beleeue that all the ofspring of Adame i
                     •
                   infected with this contagion, which we call Originall ſome, that is, a ſteine ſpreading it ſelfe by propagation, and not by imitation onelie, as the Pelagians thought, all whoſe errors

we doe deteſt. Neither doe we thinke it neceſſarie to ſearch, how this ſinne may be deriued from one vnto an other. For it is ſufficient that thoſe thinges which God gaue vnto Adam, were not giuen to him alone, but alſo to all his poſteritie: and therefore we in his perſon being depriued of all thoſe good giftes, are fallen into all this miſerie and curſſe.
               
                  
                     Artic. 11▪
                   We beleeue that this ſteine is indeed ſinne, becauſe that it maketh all and euerie man (not ſo much as thoſe litle ones excepted, which as yet lie hide in their mothers wombe) guiltie of eternall death before God. We alſo affirme, that this ſtaine, euen after baptiſme, is in nature ſin, as concerning the fault: howbeit they which are the children of God, ſhall not therfore be condemned, becauſe that God of his gracious free goodnes and mercie, doth not impute it to them. Moreouer we ſaie, that this frowardnes of nature doth alwaies bring forth ſome fruites of malice and rebellion, in ſuch ſorte, that euen they which are moſte holie, although they reſiſt it, yet are they defiled with manie infirmities and offences, ſo long as they liue in this world.
            
            
               
                  
                     Art. 1
                        •
                     . OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               WE ſaie alſo, that euerie perſon is borne in ſinne, and leadeth his life in ſinne: that no bodie is hable trulic to ſaie, His heart is cleane. That the moſte righteous perſon is but an vnprofitable ſeruant: That the law of God is perfect, and requireth of vs, perfect, and full Obedience: That we are hable by no meanes to fulfill that law in this worldlie life, that there is no mortall creature, which can be iuſtified by his owne deſertes in Gods ſight.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               
                  
                     Art 14. Gen. 1. 
                        •
                     6. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   WE beleeue that God of the ſlime of the earth created man, after his Image, that is to ſaie, good, iuſt, and holie, who had power by his owne free will, to frame and conforme his will vnto the will of God. But when he was aduanced to honour he knew not, neither did he wel vnderſtand his excellent ſtate, but wittinglie and willinglie d
                     •
                  d make himſelfe ſubiect to ſinne, and ſo conſequentlie vnto

                  Gen. 3. 17. eternall death and malediction, whilſt that giuing eare
                     •
                  o the wordes and ſubtelties of the deuill, he did transgre
                     ••
                  e that commaundement of life, which he had receiued of the Lord, and ſo did withdraw and alienate him-ſelfe from God (his true life) his nature being altogether defiled and Rom. 5. 12.corrupted by ſinne, whereby it came to paſſe, that he made him ſelfe ſubiect both to corporall and to ſpirituall death. Wherefore being made wicked, and peruerſe, and alſo corrupt in all his wa
                     •
                  es and endeauours, he loſt thoſe excelle
                     ••
                   giftes wherewith the Lord had adorned him, ſo that there were but a few litle ſparkes and ſmall ſteps of thoſe graces Acts. 14. 16. Ro. 1. 20. 21. Ioa. 1. 5.left in him, the which notwithſtanding are ſufficient to leaue men without excuſe, becauſe that what light ſoeuer we haue, is turned into palpable darkenes, euen as the ſcripture it ſelfe teacheth, ſaying, The light ſhined in darkenes, 
                        〈◊〉
                      the darkenes comprehended i
                        •
                      not: For there Iohn doth manifeſtlie call men da
                     •
                  kenes. Therefore Looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſion. Ioh. 3. 27.whatſoeuer things are taught, as touching mans free will, we do worthelie reiect them, ſeeing that man is the ſeruant of ſinne, neither 
                        〈◊〉
                      he do anie thing of himſelfe, but as it is giuen him from heau
                        ••
                     . For who is ſo bolde as 
                     •
                  o bragge that he is able to performe Ioh. 6. 44.whatſoeuer he liſteth, when as Chriſt him-ſelfe ſaith, No man can come vnto me, except my father, which hath ſent me, d
                        •
                      draw him? Who dare boaſt of his will, which heareth, that Rom. 8. 1. Cor. 1. 14.
                  All the affections of the fleſh are enmities againſt God? Whoe will vaunt of his vnderſtanding, which knoweth, that The naturall man can not perceiue the thinges of the ſpirit of God? To conclude, whoe is he that dare bring forth anie one cogitation of his owne, which vnderſtandeth this, that we are not 2. Cor. 3. 5.
                  Able of our ſelues to thinke anie thing, but That we are ſufficient, it is altogether of God? Therefore that ſaying of the Apoſtle muſt Phil. 2. 12.needs remaine fi
                     •
                  me and ſteadfaſt, It is God which worketh i
                        •
                      vs both to will, and to doe, euen of his good pleaſure. For no mans minde, no mannes wil is able to reſt in the wil of God, wherin Chriſt himſelfe hath wrought nothing before. The Ioh. 15. 5.which alſo he doth teach vs, ſaying, Without me ye can do 
                        ••
                     
                     thing.
               
               
                  
                     Art. 15. We beleeue, that thorough the diſobedience of Adam, the ſinne, that is called Originall, hath beene ſpred and poured into all man kinde. Now Originall ſinne, is a corruption

of the whol nature, and an hereditarie euill, wherewith 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  euen the verie infantes in their Mothers wombe ar
                     •
                   polluted: the which alſo as a moſte noyſome roote d
                     •
                  t
                     ••
                   branch out moſte aboundanlie all kinde of ſinne in man, and is ſo filthie and abominable in the ſight of God, that it alone is ſufficient to the condemnation of all man-kinde. Neither are we to beleeue that this ſinne is by baptiſme vtterlie extinguiſhed or plu
                     •
                  ked vp by the rootes, ſeeing that out of it, as out of a co
                     •
                  rupt fountaine, continuall flo
                     •
                  des & riuers of iniquitie do dailie ſpring and flow▪ how be it to the children of God it doth not tend, neither is it imputed to condemnation, but of the meere fauour and mercie of God it is remitted vnto them, not to this end, that they truſting vnto this remiſſion ſhould be rocked a ſleepe in ſecuritie, but that it may ſtirre vp often ſighes in the faithfull by the ſenſe and feeling of this corruption, and that they ſhould ſomewhat the more earneſtlie deſire, To bedeliuered from this 
                  Ro. 7. 
                        •
                     8. 24
                  bodie of death Therefore we doe condemne the error of the Pelagians, which affirme, that this Originall ſinne is nothing elſe but a certaine kinde of imitation.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               
                  
                     Art. 2. ALſo they teach that after the fal of Adam al men deſcended one from another after a naturall manner, haue originall ſinne euen when they are borne. We meane by originall ſinne that which the holie fathers, and all of ſounde iudgement and learning in the Church doe ſo call, namelie that guilt, whereby all that come into the world, are through Adams fall ſubiect to Gods wrath and eternall death, and that verie corruption of mans nature deriued from Adam. And this corruption of mans nature comprehendeth both the defect of originall iuſtice, integritie, or obedience, and alſo concupiſcence. This defect is horrible blindnes, and diſobedience, that is to witte, to want that light and knowledge of God, which ſhould haue beene in our nature beeing perfect, and to want that vprightnes, that is, that perpetuall obedience, that true, pure, and chiefe loue of God, and thoſe other gifts of perfect nature. Wherefore thoſe defectes and this concupiſcence are things damnable, and of their owne nature worthie

of death. And this originall blot is ſinne indeede, condemning, and bringing eternall death, euen now alſo, vpon them, which are not borne againe by baptiſme and the holie Ghoſt.
               They condemne the Pelagians, who deny original ſinne, and thinke that thoſe defects or this concupiſcence are things indifferent, or puniſhments onelie, and not of their owne nature damnable and dreame that man maie ſatisfie the law of God, and maie for that peculiar obedience b
                     •
                   pronounced iuſt before God.
               
                  Theſe thinges are thus found in another edition,
                  
                     
                        Art. 2. ALſo they teach that after Adams fall all men begotten after the common courſe of nature are bo
                        •
                     e with ſinne, that is, without the feare of God, without 
                        〈◊〉
                      in him, and with concupiſcence, And that this diſeaſe or originall blot is ſinne indeed, condemning and bringing eternal death euen now vpon all that are not borne aga
                        •••
                      by baptiſme and the holie Ghoſt.
                  They condemne the Pelagians and others, that deny this originall blotte to be ſinne in deede, and that they maie 
                        ••
                     
                     tenuate the glorie of the merit and benefits of Chriſt, they do reaſon that a man maie by the ſtrength of his owne reaſon, be iuſtified before God.
                  
                     
                        Artic. 18. Concerning free will, they do teach, that mans will hath ſome freedome to looke the 
                           •
                        obſeruat. 
                           〈◊〉
                         this 
                           〈◊〉
                        .performe a ciuill iuſtice, and to mal
                        •
                      choiſe of things that are within the reach of reaſon: but i
                        •
                      hath no power to performe a ſpiritual iuſtice, without the holie ſpirit, becauſe Paul ſaith, The naturall man perceiueth 
                           〈◊〉
                         the things which are of the ſpirit of God: and Chriſt ſaith, without me ye can do nothing. Now this ſpiritual iuſtice is wrought in vs, when we are looke the 
                           ••••
                        eru.helped of the holie Ghoſt. And we receiue the holy Ghoſt, when we aſſent vnto the word of God, that we maie be comforted through faith in all terrours of conſcience, as Paul teacheth, when he ſaith, That ye maie receiue the promis of the ſpirit through faith. Theſe things almoſt in as manie words ſaith Saint Auguſtine lib. 3. Hypog
                           •
                        eſs.
                  
                  We confeſse that there is in all men a free will, which hath indeed the iudgement of reaſon, not that it is thereby apt without god either to begin, or to performe anie thing, in matters pertaining to God, 
                        〈◊〉
                      only in works belonging to this preſent life, whether they be good,

or euill. In Good works I affirme thoſe to be, which ariſe of the goodnes of nature, as to be willing to labour in the fielde, to deſire meate or drinke, to deſire to haue a friend, to deſire apparell, to deſire to build an houſe, to marie a wife, to nouriſh cattell, to learne the art of diuerſe good things, to deſire any good thing pertaining to this preſent life, all which are not without Gods gouernment, yea they now are, and had their beginning from God. In euill thinges I account ſuch as theſe, to deſire to worſhip an image, to deſire manſlaughter. This ſentence of Auguſtine doth notablie teach what is to be attributed to free will, and doth put a plaine difference betweene ciuill diſcipline or the exerciſes of humane reaſon, and ſpirituall motions, true feare, patience, conſtancie, faith, inuocation in moſte ſharpe tentations, in the middeſt of Satans ſubtill aſſaultes, in the terrours of ſinne. In theſe ſurelie we had great neede to be guided and looke the 2. obſeruat.helped of the holie ſpirit, according to that ſaying of Paull, The ſpirit helpeth our infirmitie.
                  We condemne the Pelagians & all ſuch as they are, who teach that by the onelie powers of nature without the holie ſpirit, we may loue God aboue all, and fullfill the law of god, as touching the ſubſtance of our actions. We doe freelie and neceſſarilie miſlike theſe dreames: for they doe obſcure the benefits of Chriſt. For therefore is Chriſt the Mediatour ſet forth, and mercie promiſed in the Goſpell, becauſe that the lawe cannot be ſatisfied by mans nature, as Paull witneſſeth, when he ſaith, Rom. 8. The wiſedome of the fleſh is enmitie against God. For it is not ſubiect to the law of God, neither in deede can be. For albeit that mans nature by it ſelfe can after ſome ſort* performe externall workes (for it can conteine the handes from theft & murther) yet can it not make Looke the 3. obſeru. vpon this confeſſ.thoſe inward motions, as true feare, true faith, patience, and chaſtitie vnleſſe the holie ghoſt doe gouerne and helpe our hearts. And yet in this place alſo doe we teach, that it is alſo the commaundement of God, that the earnall motions ſhould be reſtrained by the induſtrie of reaſon and by ciuill diſcipline, as Paul ſaith, The law is a ſchoolemaſter to Christ: Alſo, The law is giuen to the vniuſt.
                  
               
               
                  Theſe things are thus found in another edition.
                  
                     
                        Artic. 18. As touching free wil they teach, that mans wil hath ſome libertie to worke a ciuill iuſtice, and to chuſe ſuch things as

reaſon can reach vnto. But that it hath no power to worke the righteouſnes of God, or a ſpirituall iuſtice, without the ſpirit of God: Becauſe that the naturall man perceiueth not the things that are of the ſpirit of God. But this power is wrought in the heart, when as men do receiue the ſpirit of God through the worde. Theſe thinges are in as many wordes affirmed by Saint Auguſtine. Lib. 3. Hypognost: &c. as before. They condemne the Pelagians, and others, who teach, that onelie by the power of nature, without the ſpirit of God, we are able to loue God aboue all, alſo to performe the commaundements of God, as touching the ſubſtance of our actions. For although that nature be able in ſome ſorte to do the externall workes (for it is able to withold the hands from theft and murther) yet it cannot worke the inward motions, as the feare of God, truſt in God, chaſtitie, patience.
                  Touching the cauſe of ſinne, they teach, that albeit God doth create and preſerue nature, yet the cauſe of ſinne is the will of the wicked, to wit of the Deuil, and of vngodlie men, which turneth it ſelfe from God vnto other things, againſt the commaundements of God: when he ſpeaketh a lie, he ſpeaketh of his owne.
                  
               
               
                  This is found thus in an other edition.
                  TOuching the cauſe of ſinne, they teach, that albeit God doth create and preſerue our nature, yet the cauſe of ſinne is the will of the wicked, to weete of the Deuill, and of vngodlie men: which will beeing deſtitute of Gods helpe, turneth it ſelfe from God, as Chriſt ſaith, Ioan. 8. When he ſpeaketh a lie, he ſpeaketh of his owne.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
               ANd ſeeing the controuerſies, which are ſprong vp, do chiefly pertaine vnto two articles of the creed, namelie to the article, I beleeue the remiſſion of ſinnes, and, I beleeue the Catholike Church, we wil ſhew the fountaines of theſe controuerſies, which beeing well weighed, men may eaſilie vnderſtand, that our expoſitions are the verie voice of the Goſpell, and that our aduerſaries haue ſowed corruptions in the Chuch. And firſt of the article.
               
                  
                  I beleeue the remiſſion of ſinnes.
                  HEere manie and great corruptions are deuiſed of our aduerſaries. I beleeue, nay, ſaie they, I doubt: alſo, Then I wil beleeue, when I ſhall haue merites enow. Alſo, they do not ſay, I beleeue certainely that remiſſion is giuen freely for the Sonne of God, not for anie merites of ours, or anie worthines of ours. Alſo, They doe not rightlie ſhew what ſinne is, and feigne that man is able to ſatisfie the law of god, and that by the fullfilling of the lawe, he becommeth iuſt before God, in this life. Therefore firſt, as touching ſinne, and the cauſe thereof, we do faithfullie retaine the doctrine of the true Church of God. Seeing that God in eſſence is one, the eternall Father, the coeternall Sonne, being the image of the Father, and the coeternall holie Ghoſt, proceeding from the Father and the ſonne, of infinit wiſedome, power, and goodnes, true, iuſt, bountiful, chaſte, moſte free, as he deſcribeth him ſelfe in his lawe; and ſeeing he hath therfore made the Angells & men, that being frō al eternity he might impart vnto them his light, wiſedome, & goodnes, and that they ſhould be the temples of God, wherein god might dwell, that God might be all in all, as Paull ſpeaketh: he therefore created them at the beginning good and iuſt, that is, agreeing with the minde and will of God, and pleaſing him. He alſo gaue them a cleare knowledge of God, and of his wil, that they might vnderſtand that they were made of God, that they might be obedient, as it is written in the ſift Pſalme: Thou art not a God that loueth wickednes. But the deuilles and men abuſed the libertie of their will, ſwarued from God, and by this diſobedience they were made ſubiect to the wrath of God, and loſt that vprightnes, wherein they were created. Therefore freewill in the Deuill and in men was the cauſe of that fal, not the wil of god, who neither willeth ſinne, nor alloweth it, nor furdereth it, as it is written, When the Deuill ſpeaketh a lie, he ſpeaketh of his owne, and he is the Father of lying. And 1. Ioh. 3. He that committeh ſinne, is of the deuill, becauſe the deuill ſinneth from the beginning. Now ſinne, is that, whatſoeuer is contrarie to the iuſtice of God, which is an order in the minde of god (which he did 
                        〈…〉
                      by his owne voicein the lawe and in the goſpell)

whether it be originall diſobedience, or actuall, for the which the perſon is both guiltie, and condemned with euerlaſting puniſhment, except he obtaine remiſſion in this life, for the Sonne the Mediatours ſake. We doe alſo condemne the madnes of Marcion, the Manichees, & ſuch like, which are repugnant in this wholl queſtion to the true conſent of the Church of God.
               
               
                  Of Origenall ſinne, Artic. 2.
                  
                  AS touching originall ſinne, we doe plainelie affirme, that we doe retaine the conſent of the true Church of God, deliuered vnto vs from the firſt Fathers, Prophets, Apoſtles & the Apoſtles ſchollers, euen vnto Auguſtine, & after his time: & we doe expreſſelie condemne Pelagius, & all thoſe who haue ſcattered in the Church like doting follies to thoſe of the Pelagians. And we ſaie, that all men, ſince the fall of our firſt parents, which are borne by the coupling together of male and female, doe together with their birth bring with them Originall ſinne, as Paul ſaith, Rom. 5. By one man ſinne entred into the world, and by ſinne death. And Epheſ. 2. We were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. Neither doe we diſlike that vſuall definition, if it be well vnderſtoode; Originall ſinne is a want of Originall iuſtice which ought to be in vs: Becauſe that Originall iuſtice was not onelie an acceptation of mankinde before God, but in the verie nature of man a light in the minde, whereby he might aſſuredlie beleeue the worde of God: and a conuerſion of the will vnto God, and an obedience of the heart agreeing with the iudgement of the lawe of God, which was graffed in the minde: and, as we ſaide before, man was the temple of God. That Originall iuſtice doth comprehend all theſe things, it maie be vnderſtood by this ſaying, Man was created after the Image and likenes of God, which Paul doth thus interpret, Epheſ. 4. Put ye on the new man, which after God is created in righteouſnes and true holines, where vndoutedlie by true holines he vnderſtandeth all thoſe vertues, which ſhine in our nature, and are giuen by God, not aſcited by arte, or gotten by inſtruction (as now thoſe ſhadowes of vertues, ſuch as they are in men, be aſcited) becauſe that then God dwelling in man did gouerne him. And when we conſider what Originall 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
ſignify, then the priuation oppoſite therunto is leſſe obſcure. Therefore Originall ſinne is, both for the fall of our firſt parents, and for the corruption which followed that fall, euen in our birth to be ſubiect to the wrath of God, and to be worthie of eternall damnation, except we obteine remiſſion for the Mediatours ſake. And this corruption is, to want now the light or the preſence of God, which ſhould haue ſhined in vs: and it is an eſtranging of our will from God, and the ſtubbernnes of the heart reſiſting the lawe of the minde, as Paull ſpeaketh; and, that man is not the Temple of God, but a miſerable Maſſe, without God, and without iuſtice. Theſe wants, and this wholl corruption, we ſaie to be ſinne, not onelie a puniſhment of ſinne, and a thing indifferent, as manie of the Sententiaries doe ſaie, That theſe euills are onelie a puniſhment, and a thing indifferent, but not ſinne. And they doe extenuate this Originall euill, and then they feigne that men maie ſatisfie the lawe of God, and by their owne fulfilling of the law become iuſt. The Church muſt auoide ambiguities. Therefore we doe expreſſelie name theſe euills, Corruption, which is often named of the auncient writers, Euill concupiſcence. But we diſtinguiſh thoſe deſires which were created in our nature, from that confuſion of order which hapned after our fall, as it is ſaide, Iere. 17. The heart of man is wicked. And Paull ſaith, The wiſdome of the fleſh is enmitie againſt God. This euill Concupiſcence we ſay to be ſinne, and we affirme, that this wholl doctrine of ſinne, as it is propounded and taught in our Churches, is the perpetuall conſent of the true Church of God.
               
               
                  Of free will. Art. 4.
                  
                  NOwe let vs make manifeſt alſo the doctrine of free will. Men truelie inſtructed in the Church haue allwaies diſtinguiſhed betweene diſcipline, and the newnes of the ſpirit, which is the beginning of life eternall: and they haue taught, that in man there is ſuch freedome of will, to gouerne the outward motions of the members, that thereby euen the vnregenerate maie after a ſotte performe that outward diſcipline, which is an externall obedience according to the law. But man by his naturall ſtrength is not able to free himſelfe from ſinne and eternall death: but this free
                        ••
                     me and conuerſion of man vnto God, and this ſpirituall

newnes wrought by the ſonne of God, quickning 
                        •
                     s by his holie ſpirit, as it is ſaide, If any man hath not the ſpiriteſ Chriſt, the ſame is not his: & the wil hauing receiued the holie Ghoſt, is not now idle. And we giue. God thankes for this vnſpeakeable benefite, that for the ſonne his ſake, and thorough him he giueth vs the holie Ghoſt, and doth gouerne vs by his ſpirit. And we condemne the Pelagians, and the Manichees, as we haue at large declared in another place.
               
               
                  Of the difference of ſinne. Artic. 10.
                  
                  SEeing it is ſaid, that ſinnes remaine in the regenerate, it is neceſſarie to haue a difference of ſinnes deliuered vnto vs. For out of that ſaying, Luc. 11. He went and tooke vnto him ſeauen other ſpirites worſſe then himſelfe, and they enter in, and dwell there, &c. And of ſuch like ſayings it is manifeſt, that ſome, who are regenerate, doe greeue and Looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſion.ſhake of the holie ghoſt, and are againe reiected of God, and made ſubiect to the wrath of God and eternal puniſhments. And Ezech. 18. it is written, when the righteous man ſhall tur
                           ••
                         from his righteouſnes, and commit iniquitie, he ſhall die therein and, when the wicked man ſhall turne from his wickednes, and d
                           ••
                         iudgement and iustice, he ſhall liue therein. Therefore it is neceſſarie that thoſe ſinnes, which remaine in holie men in this mortall life, and yet doe not ſhake of the holie Ghoſt, be diſtinguiſhed from other ſinnes, for the which man is againe made ſubiect to the wrath of God, and to eternall puniſhments. So Paull, Rom. 5. diſtinguiſheth betweene ſinne that raigneth, and ſinne that raigneth not. And Rom. 8. he ſaith, If yee liue after the fleſh, yee ſhall die: but if yee mor
                           •
                        ifi
                           •
                         the decde
                           •
                         of the bodie by the ſpirit, yee ſhall liue. And in the firſt Epiſtle to Timothie, Chap. 1. he giueth a rule: Fight a good fight, keeping faith and a good conſcience. Therefore when a man doth not keepe the faith, but either wittinglie, or by ſome error looſeth ſome part of the foundation, that is, ſome article of faith, or alloweth Idoles (as manie doe, which are deceiued with falſe opinions, or doe not vpholde themſelues by the comfort of faith, but are ouercome by doubting or by diſpaire, or againſt their conſcience doe breake anie commaundement of God) he doth ſhake of the holie Ghoſt, and is made againe ſubiect to the wrath of G
                        •
                      and

to euerlaſting puniſhments. Of theſe men ſaith Paull, Rom. 8. If ye liue according to the fleſh, ye ſhal die. And, 1. Cor. 6. Neither fornicatours, nor adulterers, nor Idolaters, &c. ſhall inherit the kingdome of God. And that the oth Ezech. 18. doth clearely ſaie, As I liue, ſaith the Lord, I doe not deſire the death of a ſinner, but rather that he be conuerted, and liue. In this oath two parts are ioyned together, conuerſion, & life. God doth deſire, and that with an oath, the couerſion of man: therefore they doe not pleaſe him, which retaine a purpoſe to ſinne. Now in this number we compriſe both the ſinnes of aſſectate omiſſion (that is, affectate negligence in a duetie, which is contrarie to that ſaying, This is required, that we be faithfull) And alſo affectate ignorance, ſuch as is Phariſaicall, and is to be ſeene in an infinite multitude, which endeuoreth not to ſearch out the doctrine of the Church, and ignorantlie retaineth Idolls, or doth alſo further the rage which is vſed in the defence of Idolls. Thus much of thoſe falls, whereby the holie Ghoſt is ſhaken of. There be alſo other ſinnes in the regenerate, who keepe faith & a good conſcience, which doe not corrupt the foundation, Looke the 2. obſeru. vpon this confeſſion.neither are ſinnes againſt the conſcience, but are the reliques of Originall ſinne, as, darkenes, doubting, carnall ſecuritie, wandring flames of vitious affections, and omiſſions, or ignorances not affected. Some extenuate theſe euills, and name them deformities beſide the lawe of God. But this blindnes is greatlie to be reprooued, and we muſte conſider both the greatnes of the euill in this wholl pollution, which is contrarie to the lawe and will of God, and alſo the greatnes of the mercie and benefit of the Sonne of God, whoe couereth theſe great and lamentable woundes in this miſerable nature. And Paull commaundeth vs to Reſiſt thoſe euilles by the ſpirit: that is, Atticus and Scipio doe bridle their corrupt affections by reaſon, but loſeph and Paull doe bridle them by the ſpirit, that is, by the motions of the holie Ghoſt, by true griefe, true faith, feare of God, and inuocation. Paull, feeling in him ſelfe doubtes and other wandring motions, is ſorowfull, and by faith perſwaded, that this pollution is couered by the Mediatour, and by the feare of God 
                        •
                     oth ſtaie himſelfe, that he giue no place to anger, or to o
                        ••
                     er wandring motions: and there withall he doth inuocate

God, and deſire his helpe, ſaying, O Lord create in me 
                     Pſa. 50.
                     a new heart. When we doe after this ſorte withſtand that corruption, which as yet remaineth in the regenerate, theſe euills are couered, & it is called ſinne that doth not raigne, or veniall ſinne, and the holie Ghoſt is not ſhaken of.
                  It is euident that this doctrine concerning the difference of ſinnes, is true, plaine, and neceſſarie for the Church. And yet manie know, what manner of intricate diſputations are to be found in the bookes of our a duerſaries touching the ſame, &c. Hauing thus brieflie declared the ſumme of the doctrine of iuſtification, we ſhould now alſo declare and confute the arguments, which are obiected againſt this iudgement of ours; but becauſe diuers men doe obiect diuers things, we haue onelie recited our confeſſion, and offer our ſelues to larger declarations in euerie member of the confeſſion.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               
                  Of ſinne. CHAP. 4.
               
                  WE beleeue and confeſſe that in the beginning man was created of God, iuſt, wiſe, endued with free will, adorned with the holie Ghoſt, and happie: but afterward for his diſobedience he was depriued of the holie Ghoſt, and made the bondman of Satan, and ſubiect both to corporall and eternall damnation: and that euill did not ſtate in one onelie Adam, but was deriued into all the poſteritie. And whereas ſome affirme, that ſo much integritie of minde was left to man after his fall, that by his naturall ſtrength and good workes he is able to conuert and prepare himſelfe to faith and the inuocating of God, it is flatlie contrarie to the Apoſtolike doctrine & the true conſent of the Catholike Church. Rom. 5. By one mans treſpaſſe euill was deriued into all men to condemnation. Eph. 2. When ye were deade in treſpaſſes and ſinnes, wherein in times paſt ye walked according to the courſe of this world, and after the prince, &c. And a litle after, We were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. He ſaith, Deade in ſinnes, and, the children of wrath, that is, ſtraungers from the grace of God. But as a man being corporallie dead, is not able by his owne ſtrength to prepare
                        •
                      conuert himſelfe to receiue corporall life, ſo he which is ſpirituallie
                  
                  dead is not able by his owne power to conuert himſelf, to receiue ſpirituall life. Auguſtine ſaith. The Lorde, that he Tom. 7. contra 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     
                     piſ
                        •
                     . Pelag. ad 
                        〈…〉
                      Cap. 8.
                  might anſwere Pelagius to come, doth not ſaie, without me ye can hardlie doe anie thing, but he ſaith, without me ye can doe nothing. And that he might alſo anſwere theſe men that were to come, in the verie ſame ſentence of the Goſpell, he doth not ſaie, without me ye can not perſit, but, without me ye can not do anie thing. For if he had ſaid, ye can not perſit, then theſe men might ſaie, we haue neede of the helpe of God, not to begin to do good, for w
                     •
                   hau
                     •
                   that of our ſelues, but to perſit it. And a litle aſter, The preparation of the heart is in man, but the anſwere of the tongue is of the Lord. Men not well vnderſtanding this, are deceiued, thinking that it apperteineth to man to prepare the heart, that is, to begin anie good thing without the helpe of the grace of God. But farre be it from the children of promis ſo to vnderſtand it, as when they heard the Lord ſaying, without me ye can do nothing, they ſhould as it were reprooue him, and ſaie, Beholde, without thee we are able to prepare our hearts or when they heare Paul the Apoſtle ſaying, Not that we are fitte to think anie thing, as of our ſelues, they ſhould alſo reprooue him and ſaie, Beholde we are fitte of our ſelues, to prepare our heartes, and ſo conſequentlie to thinke ſome good thing. And againe, 
                  Tom. 9. in Io. tract. 49.
                  Let no man deceiue him-ſelfe: it is of his owne, that he is Sathan, it is of God, that he is happie. For what is that, of his owne, but of his ſinne? take awaie ſinne, which is thy owne, and righteouſnes, ſaith he, is of me. For what haſt thou, that thou haſt not receiued? Ambroſe ſaith, Although it be in man, to will that which De inuocat. gen
                        •
                     . l. 1. c. 9. Hom. 1. de annu
                        •
                     tiat. beat
                        •
                      Ma
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     .is euill, yet he hath not power, to will that which is good, except it it be giuen him. Bernard ſaith, If humane nature, when it was perfect,, could not ſtand, how much leſse is it able of it ſelfe to riſe vp againe, beeing now corrupt?
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFT SECTION. OF ETERNALL PREDESTINATION.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of the Predeſtination of God, and the election of the Saints. CHAP. 10.
               
                  GOD hath from the beginning freelie, and of his meere grace, without anie reſpect of men predeſtinated or elected the Saintes, whome he wil ſaue in Chriſt, according to Eph. 1. 4.the ſaying of the Apoſtle, And he hath choſen vs in him before the foundation of the world. 
                  2. Tim. 1. 9.And againe. Who hath ſaued vs, and called vs with an holie calling, not according to our workes, but according to his owne purpoſe and grace, which was giuen vnto vs thorough Chriſt Ieſus before the world was, but is made manifeſt by the appearance of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. Therefore though not for any merit of ours, yet not without a meanes, but in Chriſt, and for Chriſt did God chooſe vs, & they who are now engrafted into Chriſt by faith, the ſame alſo were elected. But ſuch as are without Chriſt, were reiected, according to that of the 2. Cor. 13. 5.Apoſtle, Prooue your ſelues whether you be in the faith. Knowe you not your owne ſelues how that Ieſus Chriſt is in you? except you be reprobates. To conclude, the Saints are choſen in Chriſt by God vnto a ſure ende, which ende the Apoſtle declareth,

when he ſaith, He hath choſen vs in him, that we ſhould be holie, 
                  Epheſ. 1. 4▪
                  
                  and without blame before him thorough loue, who hath predeſtinated vs to be adopted through Ieſus Chriſt vnto himſelfe, for the praiſe of his glorious grace. And although God knoweth who are his, & now & then mention is made of the ſmall number of the elect, yet we muſt hope wel of al, & not raſhlie iudge any man to be a reprobate: for Paul ſaith, to the Philippians, I thank 
                  Phi. 1. 3. &c.
                  my God for you all (Now he ſpeaketh of the wholl Church of the Philippians) that you are come into the fellowſhip of the Goſpell, and I am perſwaded, that he that hath begon this worke in you, will performe it, as it becommeth me to iudge of you all. And when the Lorde was demaunded, whether there were few that ſhould be ſaued? he doeth not anſwere and tell them, that fewor more ſhould be ſaued, or damned, but rather he exhorteth euerie man, to Striue to enter in at the ſtreight gate. As Luc. 13.if he ſhould ſaie, it is not for you raſhlie to inquire of theſe matters, but rather to endeuour that you maie enter into heauen, by the ſtraight way. Wherfore we do not alow of the wicked ſpeeches of ſome, who ſaie, Few are choſen, and ſeing I know not whether I am in the number of thoſe fewe, I will not defraud my nature of her deſires. Others there are which ſaie, If I be predeſtinated and choſen of God, nothing can hinder me from ſaluation, which is alreadie certainelie appointed for me, whatſoeuer I doe at anie time. But if I be in the number of the reprobate, no faith or repentance wil help me, ſeeing the decree of god cannot be changed. Therefore all teachings and admonitions are to no purpoſe. Now againſt theſe men, the ſaying of the Apoſtle maketh much. The ſeruant of God muſt be apt to teach, inſtructing 
                  2. Tim. 2. 24. &c.
                  them which are contrarie minded, prouoing if God at any time will giue them repentance, that they may know the trueth, and that they maie come to amendment out of the ſnare of the deuill, which 
                  Li. de bono pr
                        •
                     ſeuerantiae. Cap. 14.
                  
                  are taken of him at his pleaſure. Beſide Auguſtine alſo teacheth, that both the grace of free election & predeſtination, and alſo holſome admonitions and doctrines are to be preached.
               
               We therefore condemne thoſe, who ſeeke other where, then in Chriſt, whether they be choſen from all eternity, and what God hath decreed of them before all beginning. For men muſt firſt heare the Goſpel preached, and beleeue it: If thou beleeue, and be in Chriſt, thou maiſt vndoubtedlie

recken of it, that thou art elected. For the father hath reucaled vnto vs in Chriſt his eternall ſentence of predeſtination, as we euen now ſhewed out of the Apoſtle, 2. Tim. 1. This is therfore aboue all to be taught and well waied, what great loue of the Father towards vs in Chriſt is reuealed▪ we muſt heare what the Lord doth dailie preach vnto vs in his Mat 11. 18. Iohn. 3. 16.Goſpell, how he calleth, and ſaith, Come vnto me all ye that labour & are burthened, and I will refreſh you. And, So God loued the world, that he gaue his onely begotten Sonne for it, that al which beleeue 
                  Mat. 18. 14.
                  in him ſhould not periſh, but haue life euerlaſting. Alſo, It is not the will of the Father, that any of theſe litle ones ſhould periſh. L
                     •
                  t Chriſt therefore be our looking glaſſe, in whome we maie beholde our predeſtination. We ſhall haue a moſte euident & ſure teſtimonie that we are written in the booke of life, if we communicate with Chriſt, and he be oures, and we his by a true faith. Let this comfort vs in the temptation touching predeſtination, then which there is none more daungerous, that the promiſes of God are generall to the Luc. 11.faithfull, in that he ſaith, Aske, and ye ſhall receiue: Euerie one that asketh, receiueth: and to conclude, in that we praie with all the Church of God, Our father which art in heauen: and for that in baptiſme we are ingrafted into the bodie of Chriſt, and are fedde in his Church, often times with his fleſh and bloode vnto euerlaſting life. Thereby we being ſtrengthned, we are commaunded to worke our ſaluation with feare and trembling, according to that precept of Paul.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASILL.
               
                  Arti
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     ſſ. 3.
                   HEreupon we confeſſe, that God, before he had created the worlde, had choſen all thoſe, to whome he would freelie giue the inheritance of eternall bleſſednes.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               WE beleeue that out of this vniuerſall corruption & damnation, wherein by nature all men are drowned, God did deliuer and preſerue ſome, whome by his eternall and immutable counſell, of his owne goodnes and mercie, without anie reſpect of their workes, he did chuſe, in Chriſt Ieſus, and others he left in that corruption and damnation, in whome he might as well make manifeſt his

iuſtice, by condemning them iuſtlie in their time, as alſo declare the riches of his mercie in the others. For ſome are not better then others, til ſuch time as the Lord doth make a difference, according to that immutable counſell, which he had decreed in Chriſt Ieſus before the creation of the worlde: neither was anie man able by his owne ſtrength to make an entrance for himſelfe to that good, ſeeing that of our nature we can not haue ſo much as one right motion, affection, or thought, till God do freelie preuent vs, and faſhion vs to vprightnes.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               
                  
                     Art. 16. WE beleeue that God (after that the wholl ofspring of Adam was caſ
                     •
                  e headlong into perdition and deſtruction, thorough the fault of the firſt man) hath declared and ſhewed himſelfe to be ſuch a one, as he is indeed, namelie, both mercifull and iuſt. Mercifull by deliuering and ſauing thoſe from condemnation and from death, whome in his eternall counſell, of his owne free goodnes, he hath choſen in Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, without any regard at all of their worke: but Iuſt, in leauing others in that their fall and perdition, whereinto they had throwen themſelues headlong.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               
                  THe confeſſion of Auſpurge doth ſo mention predeſtination in the 20. article, the title wherof is, De fide, Of faith, that it affirmeth it to be a needles thing, to diſpute of predeſtination in the doctrine of iuſtification by faith. Which in what ſorte it may be ſaid, we haue declared in the. 6. obſeru. vpon this confeſſ. ſect 9. where theſe wordes of the confeſs. are rehearſed.
               
                  Alſo the SAXON CONFESSION Doth in the ſame ſenſe, by the way make mention of Predeſtination and Election, about the end of the third Article, where it treateth of faith, which parte we haue therefore placed in the 9. ſection.
            
         
         
            
            THE SIXTH SECTION. OF THE REPAIRING OR DELIVERANCE OF MAN FROM HIS FALL, BY IESVS CHRIST ALONE: AND OF HIS PERSON, NATVRES, OFFICE, and the workes of Redemption.
            
               THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               Of Ieſus Chriſt, being true god and man, and the onely ſauiour of the world. CHAP. II.
               
                  MOreouer we beleuee and teach, that the Sonne of God, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, was from all eternitie predeſtinated and foreord
                     •
                  ined of the father to be the Sauiour of the world. And we beleeue that he was begotten, not onely then, when he tooke fleſh of the Virgine Mary, nor yet a litle before the foundations of the world were laide, but before all eternity, & that of the father, after an vnſpeakeable manner. For Iſaiah Iſa. 53▪ Mich. 5. 2.ſaith, Who can t
                        •
                     l his generation? And Micheah ſaith, Whoſe egreſse hath bin from euerlaſting. For Iohn ſaieth, In the 
                  Ioh. 1. 1. Phil. 2. 6.
                  beginning was the worde, and the worde was with God, and God was the worde &c. Therefore the Sonne is coequall and conſubſtantiall with the father, as touching his diuinitie, true God,

not by name onelie, or by adoption, or by ſpecial fauour, but in ſubſtance & nature. Euen as the Apoſtle ſaith elſewh
                     •
                  re This is the true God, and life euerlaſting. Paul alſo ſaieth, He hath 
                  1. 
                        •
                     oh 5. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  made his ſonne the heire of al things, by whom alſo he made the world: The ſame is the brightnes of his glorie, & the ingraued f
                        ••
                     me of his 
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      2.
                  perſon, bearing vp al things by his migh
                        ••
                     e worde. Likewiſe in the Ioh 17. 5.Goſpell the Lorde himſelfe ſaith, Father glorifie 
                        〈◊〉
                      me with thy ſelfe, with the glorie which I had with the before the worlde was. 
                  Iohn 5 18.Alſo elſe where it is written in the Goſpeli, The 
                        •
                     ewe
                        •
                      tought how to kill Ieſus, becauſe he ſaide that God was his father, making himſelfe equal with God. We therefore doe abhorre the blaſphemous doctrine of Arrius, and all the Arrians vttered againſt the Sonne of God. And eſpeciallie the blaſpemies of Michaell Seruetus the Spanyarde, and of his complices, which Sathan by them hath as it were drawen out of hell, & moſte boldelie and impiouſlie ſpread abroade throughout the worlde againſt the Sonne of God.
               We teach alſo and beleeue, that the eternal ſonne of the eternall God was made the ſonne of man, of the ſeede of Abraham Mat. 1.& Dauid, not by the meane of any man, as Hebion affirmed, but that he was moſte purely conceiued by the holie Ghoſt, and was borne of Marie, who was alwaies a Virgine, euen as the hiſtorie of the Goſpel doeth declare. And Paul ſaith, He took in no ſort the Angels, but the ſeed of Abraham. And Iohn the Apoſtle ſaith, He that beleeueth not that Ieſus 
                  Heb. 2. 16.
                  Chriſt is come in the fleſh, is not of god. The fleſh of Chriſt therefore was neither fleſh in ſhew onelie, nor yet fleſh brought from heauen, as Valentine and Marcion dreamed. Mo
                     •
                  eouer our Lord Ieſus Chriſt had not a ſoule without ſenſe and reaſon, as Apollinaris thought: nor fleſh without a ſ
                     ••
                  le, as Eunomius did teach, but a ſoull with it reaſon, and fleſh with it ſenſes, by which ſenſes he felt true griefes in the time of his paſſion, euen as he himſelfe witneſſeth when he ſaid, Mat. 26. Ioh. 12.
                  My ſoule is heauie euen to death. And▪ 
                  My ſoule is troubled, &c.
               
               We acknowledge therfore that there be in one & the ſame Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, two natures, the deuine, and the humane nature: & we ſay that theſe two are ſo conioyned or vnited, that they are not ſwallowed vp, confounded, or mingled together, but rather vnited or ioyned together in one perſon, the proprieties of ech nature being ſafe and remaining

ſtill: ſo that we do worſhip one Chriſt our Lord, and n
                     ••
                   two, I ſay, one, true, god & man, as touching his diuine nature, of the ſame ſubſtance with the father, & as touching his humane nature of the ſame ſubſtance with vs, & Like vnto 
                        〈◊〉
                      all things, ſinne onelie excepted. As therfore we deteſt the here
                     ••
                   of Neſtorius, which maketh two Chriſtes of one, and diſſolueth the vnion of the Perſon, ſo doe we curſſe the madnes 
                     〈◊〉
                   Eutiches, and of the Monophelites, or Monophyſickes, who ouerthrow the proprietie of the humane nature. Therefore we doe not teach that the diuine nature in Chriſt did ſuffer, or that Chriſt according to his humane nature is yet in t
                     ••
                   worlde, and euen in euerie place. For we doe neither thinke nor teach, that the bodie of Chriſt ceaſed to be a true bodie after his glorifying, or that it was deified, and ſo deified, that it put of it properties, as touching bodie and ſoule, and became altogether a diuine nature, and began to be one ſubſtance alone: And therefore we doe not allow or receiue the vnwittie ſubtilties, and the intricate, obſcure, and in conſtant diſputations of Schuenkfeildius, and ſuch other vaine ianglers about this matter. Neither are we Schuenkfeildians. Moreouer we beleeue, that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt did truel
                     •
                   
                  1. Pet 4. 1.ſuffer and die for vs in the fleſh, as Peter ſaith. We abhor the moſte horrible madnes of the Iacobites and the Turkes, which abandone the paſſion of our Lord. Yet we denie not but that the Lorde of glorie (according to the ſaying of Paul,) 1. Cor. 2. 8.
                  was crucified for vs. For we doe reuerentlie and religiouſlie receiue and vſe the communication of proprieties drawen from the ſcriptures, & vſed of all antiquitie in expounding and reconciling places of ſcripture, which at the firſt ſight ſeeme to diſagree one from another.
               We beleeue and teach that the ſame Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, in that true fleſh, in which he was crucified and died, roſe againe from the dead, and that he did not raiſe vp another fleſh in ſteede of that which was buried, nor tooke a ſpirit in ſteede of fleſh, but retained a true bodie: Therefore whileſt that his diſciples thought that they did ſee the ſpirit of their Lord Chriſt, he ſhewed them his handes and feete, which were marked with the prints of the nailes & wounds, 
                     
                        •
                     uc. 24. 39.ſaying, Behold my handes and my feete, for I am he indeed: Handle me and ſee, for a ſpirit hath not fleſh and bones, as yee ſee me haue.
               
               
                  
We beleeue that our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt in the ſame his fleſh did aſcend aboue all the viſible heauens into the verie higheſt heauen, that is to ſaie, the ſeate of God and of the bleſſed ſpirits, vnto the right hand of God the father, which ▪although it doe ſignifie an equall participation of glorie 
                     
                        •
                      l
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     e the 
                        〈…〉
                      vpon this co
                        ••
                     eſſ. Ioh. 14. Acts. 3.and maieſtie, yet it is alſo taken for a certaine place, of which the Lorde ſpeaking in the goſpell, ſaith, That he will go and prepare a place for his. Alſo the Apoſ
                     •
                  le Peter ſaith, The heauens muſt containe Chriſt, vntill the time of reſtoring of all thinges. And out of heauen the ſame Chriſt will returne vnto iudgement, euen then, when wickednes ſhall chieflie reigne in the world, and when Antichriſt hauing corrupted true religion ſhall fil all things with ſuperſtition and impietie, and ſhall moſte cruellie deſtroie the Church with fire and bloodſhed. Now Chriſt ſhall returne to redeeme his, and to aboliſh Antichriſt by his comming, and to iudge the quick and the dead. For the dead ſhall ariſe, and thoſe 
                  Act. 17.
                  which ſhall be found aliue in that daie (which is vnknowne vnto all creatures) ſhalbe changed in the twinckling of an eye, and all the faithfull ſhall be taken vp to meete Chriſt in the ayre, that thenceforth they maie enter with him into heauen there to liue for euer. But the vnbeleeuers or vngodlie ſhall deſcend with the deuils into hell, there to burne for euer, and neuer 1. Cor. 15. Mat. 25. 41. 2. Tim. 2.to be deliuered out of torments. We therefore condemne all thoſe which denie the true reſurrection of the fleſh, and thoſe which thinke amiſſe of the glorified bodies, as did Ioannes Hieroſolymitanus, againſt whome Ierome wrote. We alſo condemne thoſe, which thought both the deuils and al the wicked ſhall at the length be ſaued, and haue an end of their torments. For the Lorde himſelfe hath abſolutelie ſet it downe, that, Their fire is neuer quenched, and their worme neuer 
                  Mar. 9.
                  dieth. Moreouer we condemne the Iewiſh dreames, that before the daie of iudgement there ſhall be a golden world in the earth: and that the godly ſhal poſſeſſe the kingdomes of the world, their wicked enemies being troade vnder foote. For the Euangelicall truth. Mat. 24. and 25. and Luke 18. & the Apoſtolike doctrine in the 2. to the Theſſalonians. 2. & in the 2. to Tim. 3. & 4. ar found to teach farre otherwiſe. Rom. 41. 5.
               
               Furthermore by his paſſion or death, & by al thoſe things which he did and ſuffered for our ſakes, from the time of

his comming in the fleſh, our Lord reconciled his heavenl
                     •
                   father vnto al the faithful, purged their ſinne, ſpoiled death broke in ſunder condemnation and hell, and by his reſuection from the dead he brought againe & reſtored life, ar
                     •
                   immortalitie. For he is our righteouſnes, life, and reſuection, and to be ſhort, he is the fullnes and perfection, the ſaluation and moſte aboundant ſufficiencie of al the faithfull. For the Apoſtle ſaith, So it pleaſeth the Father that all f
                        ••
                     
                     nes ſhould dwell in him. And, In him ye are complet. Colloſ 1. and 2. For we teach and beleeue that this Ieſus Chriſt our Lord is the onelie and eternall ſauiour of Looke the 1. obſe
                        •
                     ua
                        •
                      this confeſſ.mankinde, yea and of the whole worlde, in whome are ſaued by faith all that euer were ſaued before the lawe, vnder the lawe, and i
                     •
                   the time of the goſpell, and ſo manie as ſhall yet be ſaued to the end of the world. For the Lord himſelfe in the Goſpell Ioh. 10.faith, He that entereth not in by the dore vnto the ſhepf
                        •
                     lde, but climeth vp an other waie, he is a theefe and a robber. I am the dore of the ſheepe. And alſo in another place of the ſame goſpell Ioh. 8. Act. 4.he ſaith, Abraham ſawe my daies, and reioyced. And the Apoſtle Peter ſaith, Neithere is there ſaluation in anie other, but i
                        •
                      Chriſt: for among men there is giuen no other name vnder hea
                        ••
                      wherby they might be ſa
                        •
                     ed. We beleue therfore that thorough 1. Cor. 10.the grace of our Lord Chriſt we ſhalbe ſaucd, euen as our fathers were. For Paull faith, That all our fathers did eate the ſame ſpiritual meate, and dranke the ſame ſpiritual drinke, for they dranke of the ſpiritual rocke, that followed them, and that rocke 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  Apoc. 15.
                  Chriſt. And therefore we reade that Iohn ſaid, That Chriſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      that lambe which was ſlaine from the beginning of the world. And Iohn. 1.that Iohn Baptiſt witneſſeth, That Chriſt is that lambe of God, that taketh awaie the ſinnes of the world. Wherfore we do plainly and openly profeſſe & preach, that Ieſus Chriſt is the onlie redeemer & ſauiour of the world, the king and high prieſt, the true and looked for Meſſias, that holie and bleſſed one (I ſaie) whom all the ſhadowes of the law, and the Propheſies of the Prophetes did prefigure and promiſe, and that God did performe and ſend him vnto vs, ſo that now we are not to looke for any other. And now there remaineth nothing, but that we all ſhould giue all glorie to him, beleeue in him, and reſt in him onelie, contemning and reiecting al other aides of our life. For they are fallen from the grace

of God, and make Chriſt of no value vnto themſelues, whoſoeuer they be that ſeeke ſaluation in anie other things beſides Chriſt alone.
               And to ſpeake manie thinges in few wordes, with a ſinceare heart we beleeue, and with libertie of ſpeach we freelie profeſſe, whatſoeuer thinges are defined out of the holy ſcriptures, and comprehended in the Creedes, and in the decrees of thoſe foure firſt and moſte excellent councells holden at Nice, Conſtantinople, Epheſus, and Chalcedon, together with bleſſed Athanaſius his Creede, and all other Creedes like to theſe, touching the myſterie of the incarnation of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: and we condemne al things contrarie to the ſame. And thus doe we retaine the Chriſtian, ſounde, & Catholike faith, wholie and inuiolable, knowing that nothing is contained in the foreſaid Creedes, which is not agreeable to the worde of God, and maketh wholie for the ſincere declaration of faith.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  
                     
                        Artic. 10. The eternal Counſel of the reſtoring of man.
                  ANd though man by this fault was deputed to damnation, and had incurred moſte iuſte wrath, yet God the father neuer ceaſed to haue a care ouer him, the which is manifeſt by the firſt promiſes, by the wholl law (which as it is holie, and good, teaching vs the will of God, righteouſnes, and trueth, ſo doth it worke anger, and ſtirre vp, not extinguiſh, ſinnes in vs, not through it owne fault, but by ours) and by Chriſt, ordeined and exhibited for this purpoſe,
               
               
                  Ieſus Chriſt and thoſe benefittes which we reap by him.
                  
                     
                        Art. 11. THis Chriſt the true ſonne of God, beeing true God and true man, was made our brother, when, according to the time appointed, he had taken vpon him wholl man (that is, conſiſting of ſoule & bodie) and in one indiuiſible perſon vnited two natures (yet were not theſe natures confounded) that he might reſtore vs beeing dead to life, and make vs fellow heires with him-ſelfe. He taking fleſh of the moſte pure virgine Marie, the holie Ghoſt working

together, fleſh, I ſaie, beeing ſacred by the vnion of the Godhead, and like vnto ours in all thinges, ſinne onelie accepted (becauſe it behooued our ſacrifice to be vnſpotted) gaue the ſame fleſh to death, for the purgation of all ſince.
                  The ſame Chriſt as he is to vs a full and perfect hope a
                        ••
                      truſt of our immortalitie, ſo he placed his fleſh, being raiſed vp from death into heauen, at the right hand of his almightie father.
                  This conquerour, hauing triumphed ouer death, ſinne, and all the infernall deuills, ſitting as our captaine, head and chiefe high Prieſt, doth defend and plead our cauſe continuallie, til he do reforme vs to that Image after which we were created, and bring vs to the fruition of life euerlaſting. we looke for him to come in the end of the world, a true and vpright iudge, and to giue ſentence vpon all fleſh (beeing firſt raiſed vp to that iudgement) and to aduaunce the godlie aboue the skie, and to condemne the wicked, both in ſoul and bodie, to eternall deſtruction.
                  Who, as he is the onelie Mediatour, interceſſor, ſacrifice, and alſo our high Prieſt, Lord, and King, ſo we doe acknowledge, and with the wholl heart beleeue, that he alone i
                        •
                      our attonement, redemption, ſanctification, expiation, wiſdome, protection, and deliuerance, ſimplie herein reiecting all mean of our life and ſaluation, beſide this Chriſt alone. The latter parte of this article we placed alſo in the ſecond ſection, which entreateth of the onelie mediator.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASILL.
               Of Chriſt, being true God and true man.
               WE beleeue and confeſſe conſtantlie, that Chriſt in the time hereunto appointed, according to the promiſe of God, was giuen to vs of the father, and that ſo the eternall word of God was made fleſh, that is, that this ſonne of God, being vnited to our nature in one perſon, was made our brother, that we through him might be made partakers of the inheritance of God.
               We beleeue that this Ieſus Chriſt was conceiued of the holie Ghoſt, borne of the pure and vndefiled Virgine Marie, ſuffered vnder Pontius Pilate, crucified, and dead for our ſinnes: and ſo by the one oblation of him ſelfe, he did ſatisfie

God our heauenlie father for vs, and reconcile vs to him, and ſo by his death he did triumph, and ouercame the world, death, and hell. Moreouer, according to the fleſh he was buried, deſcended into hell and the third daie he roſe againe from the dead. Theſe thinges being ſufficientlie approoued, he in ſoul and bodie aſcended into heauen, and ſitteth there at the right hand, that is, in the glorie of God the father almightie: from thence he ſhall come to iudge the quick and the dead. Moreouer, he ſent to his diſciples, according to his promiſe, the holie Ghoſt, in whome we beleeue, euen as we do beleeue in the father, and in the ſonne. We beleeue that the laſt iudgement ſhall be, wherein our fleſh ſhall life againe, and euerie man, according as he hath Rom. 2. 2. Cor. 5. Ioa. 5.done in this life, ſhall receiue of Chriſt the Iudge: to weete eternall life, if he hath ſhewed forth the fruites of faith, which are the workes of righteouſnes, by a true faith, and vnfeigned loue: and eternall fire, if he hath committed good or euill, without faith or loue.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  CHAP. 4. Towardes the middle.
               NEither hath anie man, of all thinges whatſoeuer, anie thing at all whereby he maie deliuer, ſet free, or redeeme himſelfe from his ſinnes and condemnation, without Ioh. 15.Chriſt, by whome alone, they which trulie beleeue, are freed from ſinne, from the tyrannie and priſon of the deuill, from the wrath of God, and from death and euerlaſting torments. And a litle after towardes the end of the ſaid fourth Chap. Together with this point, and after it, conſidering that both the matter it ſelfe, and order of teaching ſo requireth, the miniſters of the Church teach vs after our fall to acknowledge the promiſe of God, the true word of grace, and the holie goſpell, brought to vs from the priuy counſell of the holie Tri
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  ie, concerning our Lord Chriſt, and our wholl ſaluation purchaſed by him.
               Of theſe promiſe, there be three principall, wherein all the reſt are contained. The firſt was made in Paradiſe in theſe wordes, I will out enmitie betweene thee and the woman, 
                  Gen. 3.
                  and betweene thy ſeed and her ſeede. He ſhal breake thine head, and thou ſhalt bruyſe his heele. The ſecond was made to Abraham,

which afterwardes Iacob alſo and Moſes did reneu
                     •
                  . The third to Dauid, which the Prophets recited & expounded. In theſe promiſes are deſcribed and painted forth thoſe 2. Kig. 7. 23.moſte excellent and principall workes of Chriſt our Lorde, which are the verſe ground worke whereon our ſaluation Pſ. 131 89.ſtandeth, by which he is our Mediator and Sauiour: namelie his conception in the wombe of the Virgine Marie, and Iſa. 9. 11.his birth of her alſo, for he was made the ſeede of the woman: alſo his afflictions, his riſing againe from death, his ſitting at the right hand of God, where he hath obtained the dignitie of a Prieſt and King: of which thing the wholl life of Dauid was a certaine type, for which cauſe the Lorde Eph. 34.calleth himſelfe another Dauid, & a Shepheard. And this was the Goſpell of thoſe holy men before the law was giuen, and ſince. And Chapter the 6. a litle from the beginning. For this is verie certaine, that after the fall of Adam no man was able to ſet himſelfe at libertie out of the bondage of ſinne, death, and condemnation, or come to be trulie reconciled vnto God, but onelie by that one Mediator betweene God and man, Chriſt Ieſus (through a liuelie faith in him) who alone, by his death, and blood ſhedding, tooke from vs that image of ſinne and death, and put vpon vs by faith the image of 1. Cor. 2.righteouſnes and life. For he made vnto vs of God, wiſedome, righteouſnes, ſanctification, and redemption.
               
               But firſtmen are taught, that theſe things are to be beleeued concerning Chriſt: namelie that he is eternal, & of the nature of his heauenlie father, the onelie begotten ſonne, begotten from enerlaſting, and ſo together with the Father Ioh. 1. Hob. 1. Coloſſ. 1.and the holie Ghoſt one, true, and indiuiſible God, the eternall, not created worde, the brightnes and the Image or ingrauen forme of the perſon of his Father, by whome all thinges, as well thoſe thinges which maie be ſeene, as thoſe which can not be ſeene, and thoſe thinges which are in heauen, and thoſe which are in the earth, were made and created.
               Moreouer that he is alſo a true and natural man, our brother in verie deed, who hath a ſoule and a bodie, that is, true and perfect humane nature, which, by the power of Ioh. 1.the holie Ghoſt, he tooke, without all ſinne, of Marie a pure Virgine: according as S. Iohn ſaith, The worde was made fleſh.
               
               
                  
And thus of theſe two natures, their properties not being changed nor confounded, yet by a wonderfull communication thereof, there is made one indiuiſible perſon, one Chriſt, Immanuell, our King and prieſt, our redeemer, our Mediatour, and perfect reconciler, full of grace and trueth, ſo that of his fullnes we all doe take grace for grace: For the law was giuen by Moſes, but grace and trueth, was giuen and exhibited, by Ieſus Chriſt, being God and man in one perſon▪ This grace and trueth are our men taught to acknowledge, and by faith to beholde, in all thoſe ſauing and wonderful works or affections of Chriſt, which, according to the meaning of the holie Scripture, are by a ſtead faſt faith to be beleeued and profeſſed: ſuch as are his comming downe from heauen, his conception, birth, torments, death, buriall, refurrection, aſcenſion vnto heauen, ſitting at the right hand of God, and his comming againe from thence to iudge both the quicke & the dead. In theſe principal affections, as in a cheſt wherin treaſure is kept, are al thoſe holſome fruits of our true iuſtification laide vp, and are taken out from thence for the elect and thoſe which doe beleeue, that in Spirit and conſcience they may be partakers thereof through faith: which all hereafter, at the daie of our ioyfull reſurrection, ſhall be fullie and perfectlie beſtowed vpon vs. And towardes the ende of that Sixth Chapter, theſe words are added. In this Chapter alſo particularlie and for neceſſarie cauſes, to ſhunne and auoide many pernicious and Antichriſtian deceites, it is taught concerning Chriſte his Looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.preſence, namelie that our Lorde Chriſt according to his bodely cōuerſation is not amongeſt vs any longer in this worlde, neither wil be vnto the ende of the worlde, in ſuch ſort and manner as he was here conuerſant amongeſt vs in his mortalitie, and wherein he was betraied, and circumciſed, nor yet in the forme of his glorified bodie, which he got at his reſurrection, and in the which he appeared to his diſciples, & the for
                     ••
                  eth day after his reſurrection, departing from them, aſcended manifeſtly into heauen. For after this manner of his preſence & companie he is in the high place, & with his father in heauen, where al tongues profeſſe him to be the Lord, and euerie faithful one of Chriſt muſt beleeue that he is there, & worſhip him there, according to the ſcriptures, as alſo that part of the Catholike

Chriſtian faith doth expreſſelie witnes, which is this, He aſcended into heauen, he ſitteth as the right hand of God the father almightie: Alſo that other article: from thence ſhal he come (that 1. Theſ. 4.is from an higher place, out of heauen with his Angells) is iudge both the quick & the dead. So doth Paul alſo ſay, The Lord himſelfe ſhall deſcend from heauen with a ſhoute, and with the voice 
                  Act. 3.
                  of an Archangell, and with the trumpet of God. And S. Peter ſaith, Whom heauen muſt cōtaine, vntil the time that al things be reſtored. 
                  Mar. 16.And the Euangeliſt Marke: But when the Lord had ſpoken with thē, he was taken vp againe into heauen, & ſitteth at the right hand of God. And the Angels which were there preſent, whe he was Act. 1.taken vp into heauen, ſaid, This Ieſus which is taken vp from you into heauen, ſhal ſo come againe, as you haue ſeene him go into heauē.
               
               Furthermore this alſo doe our men teach, that the ſelfe ſame Chriſt, verie God and verie man, is alſo with vs herein this worlde, but after a diuerſe manner from that kinde of preſence which we named before, that is, after a certaine ſpirituall manner, not obiect to our eies, but ſuch a one as is hid from vs, which the fleſh doth not perceiue, and yet it is verie neceſſarie for vs to our ſaluation, that we may be partakers of him, whereby he offereth and communicateth himſelfe vnto vs, that he may dwell in vs, and we in him: and this truelie he doth by the holie Ghoſt, whome in his owne place (that is, in ſteede of his owne preſence, whereby he was bodelie amongſt vs) he promiſed that he would ſend vnto his Church, and that he would ſtil abide with it by the ſame ſpirit in vertue, grace, and his holſome trueth, at al times, euen Math. 28. Iohn. 16.vntill the ende of the worlde, when he ſaid thus: It is good for you that I go hence, for except I go hences, the comforter will not come 
                  Ioh. 14.
                  vnto you: but if I goe away, I wil ſend him vnto you. And againe, I wil praie the father, and he ſhal giue you another comforter, (that is, another kinde of comforter then I am) that he may abide i
                        •
                      you for euer, euen the ſpirit of trueth, whome the worlde cannot receiue, becauſe it ſeeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him, for he dwellesh in you, & ſhalbe in you. I wil not leaue you comforth but I wil come to you, namelie by the ſelfe ſame ſpirit of trueth.
               Now then euen as our Lord Chriſt by his latter kinde of preſence being not viſible, but ſpirituall, is preſent in the miniſters of the Church, in the word, and in the ſacraments; euen ſo alſo by the ſelfe ſame miniſters, worde, and ſacraments

he is preſent with his Church, and by theſe meanes doe the elect receiue him through inwarde faith in their heart, and doe therefore ioyne themſelues together with him, that he maie dwell in them, and they in him, after ſuch a ſorte, as is not apparent, but hidden from the world, euen by that faith ſpirituallie: that is to ſaie, in their ſoules and hearts, by the ſpirit of truth, of whome our Lord ſaith, He abideth with you, and ſhall be in you. And, I will come againe 
                  Ioh. 14.
                  vnto you.
               
               This iudgement & declaration of our ſaith, is not new, or now firſt deuiſed, but verie ancient Now that this was commonhe taught and meant in the Church of olde, it is plaine and euident by the writinges of the auncient Fathers of the Church, and by that decree, wherein it is thus written, and they are the wordes of Saint Auguſtine: Our Lorde is aboue 
                  In Io. Tract. 30.
                  vntill the end of the worlde, but the trueth of the Lorde is here alſo: for the bodie of the Lorde, wherein he roſe againe, muſt of neceſſitie be in one place, but his truth is diſperſed euerie where.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               
                  
                     Art. 13. WE beleeue, that whatſoeuer is requiſite to our ſaluation, is offered and communicated vnto vs now at length in that one Ieſus Chriſt, as he who beeing giuen to ſaue vs, is alſo made vnto vs wiſdome, righteouſnes, ſanctification, and redemption, in ſo much as whoſoeuer doth ſwarue from him, doth renounce the mercie of the Father, that is, our onelie refuge.
               
                  
                     Artic. 14. We beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt, being the wiſdome, and eternall ſonne of the father, tooke vpon him our nature▪ ſo that he is one perſon, God and man. Man, I ſaie, that might ſuffer both in ſoule and alſo in bodie, and made like vnto vs in all things, ſinne onelie excepted, for that his fleſh was indeede the ſeede of Abraham and Dauid, howbeit by the ſecret and incomprehenſible power of the holie Ghoſt, it was conceiued in doe time in the wombe of that bleſſed Virgin. And therefore we deteſt, as contrarie to that truth all thoſe hereſies wherewith the Churches were troubled in times paſt: and namelie we deteſt thoſe deuilliſh imaginations of Seruetus, who gaue to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, an imaginarie deity, whom he ſaid to be the Idea & patterne of al

thinges, and the counterfeit or figuratiue ſonne of God: to conclude he framed him a bodie compacted of three elements vncreated, and therfore he did mingle and ouerthrow both his natures.
               We beleeue that in one and the ſame perſon, which is 
                     Artic. 15.Ieſus Chriſt, thoſe two natures are truelie and inſeperablie ſo conioyned, that they be alſo vnited, either of thoſe natures neuertheles retaining it diſtinct proprietie, ſo, that euen as in this diuine coniunction the nature of the word reteining it proprieties, remained vncreate, infinite, and filling all places; ſo alſo the humane nature remained, and ſhall remaine for euer, finite, hauing it naturall forme, dimenſion, and alſo proprietie, as from the which the reſurrection and glorification, or taking vp to the right hand of the father, hath not taken awaie the trueth of the humane nature. Therefore we do ſo conſider Chriſt in his deitie, that we doe not ſpoile him of his humanitie.
               
                  
                     Art. 16. We beleeue that God did declare his infinite loue and goodnes towards vs in this, that he hath ſent his ſonne, who ſhould die, and riſe againe, and fullfill all righteouſnes, that 
                     Artic. 17.he might purchaſe eternall life for vs.
               We beleeue that by that onelie ſacrifice, which Ieſus Chriſt offered on the croſſe, we are reconciled to God, that we maie be taken for iuſt before him, becauſe we can not be acceptable to him, nor enioy the fruite of our adoption, but ſo farre foorth, as he doth forgiue vs our ſinnes. Therefore we affirme, that Ieſus Chriſt is our entire and perfect waſhing, in whoſe death we obteine full ſatisfaction, whereby we are deliuered from all thoſe ſinnes whereof we are guiltie, and from the which we could not be acquitted by anie other remedy.
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               
                  
                     Art. 2. WE beleeue, that Ieſus Chriſt the onely ſonne of the eternall Father (as long before it was determined before all beginnings) when the fulnes of time was come, did take of that bleſſed and pure virgine, both fleſh, and all the nature of man, that he might declare to the worlde the ſecret and hid wil of his father: which wil had bene laide vp from before al ages and generations: and that he might

finiſh in his humane bodie the Myſterie of our redemption, and might faſten our ſinnes to the croſſe, and alſo that handwriting, which was made againſt vs.
               We beleeue that for our ſakes he died, and was buried, deſcended into hell, the third daie, by the power of his godhead, returned to life and roſe againe, and that the fourth daie after his reſurrection, whiles his diſciples beheld and looked vpon him, he aſcended into heauen, to fullfill all things, and did place in Maieſtie and glorie the ſelfe ſame bodie, wherewith he was borne, wherein he liued on earth, wherein he was ieſted at, wherein he had ſuffered moſt painfull torments, and cruell kinde of death, wherein he roſe againe, and wherein he aſcended to the right hand of the father, aboue all rule, aboue all power, all force, all Dominion, and aboue euerie name, that is named, not onelie in this worlde, but alſo in the worlde to come: And that there he now ſitteth, and ſhall ſit, till all things be fully perfited. And although the Maieſtie, and godhead of Chriſt be euerie where abound antlie diſperſed, yet we beleeue, that his body, as Saint Auguſtine ſaith, muſt needes be ſtill in one place: and that Chriſt hath giuen Maieſtie vnto his bodie, but yet hath not taken awaie from it the nature of a bodie: and that we muſt not ſo affirme Chriſt to be God, that we denie him to be man: and, as the Martyr Vigilius ſaith, That Christ hath left vs, touching his humane nature, but hath not lefe vs, touching his diuine nature: and that the ſame Chriſt, though he be abſent from vs, concerning his manhead, yet is euer preſent with vs, concerning his godhead.
               From that place alſo we beleeue that Chriſt ſhall come againe to execute that generall iudgement, as well of them whome he ſhall finde aliue in the bodie, as of them that ſhal be alreadie dead.
               
                  
                     Artic. 18. And therfore that our onelie ſuccour, and refuge is to flie to the mercie of our father by Ieſus Chriſt, and aſſuredlie to perſwade our mindes, that he is the Obteiner of forgiuenes for 
                        ••
                     r ſinnes: And, that by his bloode, all our ſpots of ſinne, be waſhed cleane: That he hath pacified, and ſet at one, all things by the bloode of his croſse: That he by the ſame one onely ſacrifice, which he once offered vpon the Croſſe, hath brought to effect, and fulfilled al things, and that for that cauſe he ſaid, when he gaue

vp the Ghoſt, It is finiſhed, as though he would ſignifie, that the price, and r
                     •
                  nſome was now fully paide for the ſinne of mankinde.
               
                  
                     Art 19. If there be any, that thinke this ſacrifice not ſufficient, let them goe in Gods name and ſeeke a better. We verelie, becauſe we know this to be the Onely ſacrifice, are well content with it alone, and looke for none other: and, foraſmuch as it was to be offered but once, we commaunde it not to be renewed againe: and, becauſe it was full, and perfit in all points, and partes, we doe not ordeine in place thereof any 
                     Art. 21.continuall ſucceſſion of offerings.
               To conclude, we beleeue that this our ſelfeſame fleſh, wherein we line, although it die, and come to duſt, yet at the laſt ſhall returne againe vnto life, by the meanes of Chriſtes ſpirit, which dwelleth in vs: and that then verilie, whatſoeuer we ſuffer here in the meane while for his ſake, Chriſt will wipe awaie all teares and heauines from our eyes: and that we through him ſhall enioie euerlaſting life, and ſhall for euer be with him in glorie. So beit.
            
            
               
                  
                     Art. 17. OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               WE beleeue that out moſte mightie and gracious God when he ſaw that man had thus throwen himſelfe into the damnation both of ſpirituall and corporal death, and was made altogether miſerable and accurſed) by his wounderfull wiſdome and goodnes, was induced both to ſeek him, when through feare he had fled from his preſence, and alſo moſt louingly to comfort him, giuing vnto him the promiſe of his owne ſonne to be borne of a woman, which ſhould breake the head of the ſerpent, and reſtore him to ſelicitie and happines.
               
                  
                     Art. 18. Moreouer we confeſſe, that God did then at the length fullfill his promiſe made vnto the Fathers, by the mouth of his holie Prophetes, when in his appointed time he ſent his onelie and eternall ſonne into the world, who toke vpon him the forme of a ſeruant, beeing made like vnto men, and did truelie take vnto him the nature of man, with all infirmities belonging thereunto (ſinne onelie excepted) when he was conceiued in the wombe of the bleſſed Virgine Mary, by the power of the holie ghoſt, without anie meanes of man. The which nature of man he put vpon him, not onely in reſpect

of the bodie, but alſo in reſpect of the ſoule: for he had alſo a true ſoule, to the intent he might be true and perfect man. For ſeeing that as well the ſoule, as the bodie of man, was ſubiect to condemnation, it was neceſſarie that Chriſt ſhould take vpon him aſwell the ſoule, as the bodie, that he might ſaue them both together. Therefore contrarie to the hereſy of the Anabaptiſts, which denie that Chriſt did take vpon him the fleſh of man, we confes that Chriſt was partaker of fleſh & blood, as the reſt of his bretheren were, that he came from the loines of Dauid, according to the fleſh, I ſaie, that he was made of the ſeede of Dauid according to the ſame fleſh, & that he is a fruit of the Virgins wombe, borne of a woman, the branch of Dauid, a flower of the roote of leſſe, comming of the Tribe of Iuda, & of the Iewes themſelues, according to the fleſh: & to conclude, the true ſeed of Abraham & Dauid, the which ſeede of Abrahame he tooke vpon him, being made in all thinges like vnto his brethren, ſinne onelie excepted, as hath beene ſaide before, ſo that he is indeede our true Emmanuell, that is, God with is.
               
                  
                     Art. 19. We beleeue alſo that the perſon of the ſonne was by this conception inſeperablie vnited and coupled with the humane nature, yet ſo, that there be not two Sonnes of God, nor two perſons, but two natures ioyned together in one perſon: both which natures doe ſtill retaine their owne proprieties. So that, as the diuine nature hath remained alwaies vncreated, without beginning of daies, and terme of life, filling both heauen and earth: ſo the humane nature hath not loſt his proprieties, but hath remained ſtill a creature, hauing both beginning of daies & a finite nature. For whatſoeuer doth agree vnto a true bodie, that it ſtill retaineth, and although Chriſt by his reſurrection hath beſtowed immortalitie vpon it, yet notwithſtanding he hath neither taken awaie the trueth of the humane nature, nor altered it. For both our ſaluation, and alſo our reſurrection dependeth vpon the trueth of Chriſtes bodie. Yet theſe two natures are ſo vnited and coupled in one perſon, that they could not, no not in his death, be ſeperated the one from the other. Wherefore that, which in his death he commended vnto his father, was in deed a humane ſpirit, departing out of his bodie: but in the meane ſeaſon the diuine nature

did alwaies remaine ioyned to the humane, euen then when he la
                     •
                  e in the graue: ſo that his deitie was no leſ
                     •
                  e in him at that time, then when as yet he was an infant, although for a ſmall ſeaſon it did not ſhew forth itſelfe. Wherefore we confeſſe that he is true God, and true man true god, that by his power he might ouercome death 
                     •
                  ane true man, that in the infirmitie of his fleſh he might d
                     •
                   for vs.
               
                  
                     Art. 20. We beleeue that God, which is both perfectlie mercifull, and perfectlie iuſt, did ſend his ſonne to take vpon him that nature, which through diſobedience had offended, that in the ſelfe ſame nature he might ſatisfie for ſinne, and by his bitter death and paſſion pare the puniſhment that was due vnto ſinne. God therefore hath declared and manifeſted his iuſtice in his own ſonne being loaden with our iniquities: but hath moſt mercifullie powred forth and declared his gracious goodnes vnto vs guilty wretches, and worchie of condemnation, whileſt that in his incomprehenſible loue towards vs, he deliuered vp his ſonne vnto death for our ſinnes, and raiſed him vp againe from death for our iuſtification, that by him we might obtaine immortalitie and life euerlaſting.
               We beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt is that high prieſt, appo
                     ••
                  
                  ed 
                     Art. 21.to that office eternallie, by the oath of his Father, according to the order of Melchiſede
                        •
                     h, which offered himſelfe in our name before his Father with a ful ſatisfaction for the pa
                     •
                  ifying of his wrath, laying himſelfe vpon the al
                     •
                  ar of the croſſe, and hath ſhed his blood for the clenſing of our ſinnes, as the Prophets had fore
                     •
                  olde. For it is written, that the chaſtiſment of our peace was laide vpon the ſonne of God, and by his woundes we are healed. Alſo that he was carried as a ſheepe vnto the ſlaughter, reputed amongſt ſinners and vniuſt, and condemned of Pontius Pila
                        •
                     e, as a male factour, though before he had pronounced him guiltles. Therefore he payed that which he had not taken, and being iuſt, ſuffred in ſoule and bodie for the vniuſt, in ſuch ſorte, that feeling the horror of thoſe puniſhments that were due vnto our ſinnes, be did ſweate water and blood, and at length cried out, My God, 
                        •
                     y God, why hast thou ſorſaken me? All which he ſuffered for the remiſſion of our ſinnes. Wherefore we doe not without iuſt

cauſe profeſſe with Paul, that we know 
                        ••
                     thi
                        •
                     g but Ieſus Chriſ
                        •
                     , and him crucified, and that we doe a
                        ••
                     ount all thinges as dung, in reſpect of the excellent knowledge of Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, finding in his woundes and ſtripes all manner of comfort, that can be deſerued. VVherefore there is no neede, that o
                     •
                   her we ſhould wiſh for any other meanes, or 
                     〈◊〉
                   any of our owne b
                     •
                  aines, whereby we might be reconciled vnto God beſides this one oblation once offred, by the which all the faithfull, which are ſanctified, are conſecrated, or perfected for euer. And this is the cauſe, why he was called of the Angell Ieſus, that is to ſaie, a ſauiour, becauſe he ſhould ſave his people from their ſinnes.
               
               
                  
                     Art. 37. Laſt of all we do beleeue out of the word of God, that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt (when the time appo
                     ••
                  ted by God but 
                     •
                  nto all creatures vnknowen, ſhall come, and the number of the elect ſhal be accompliſhed) ſhall come againe from heauen, and that after a corporall and viſi
                     ••
                  e m
                     •
                  nner, as heretofore he hath aſcended, being adorned with g
                     •••
                  t glorie and maieſtie, that he maie appeare as iudge of the quicke and the dead, the olde world being kindel
                     •
                  d with fire and flame, and puri
                     •
                  ied by it. Then Looke the 2. obſerua
                        •
                     . vpon this confeſſ.all creatures, and aſwell men▪ as women, and children, as manie as haue bene from the beginning, and ſhall be to the end of the world, ſhall appeare before this high Iudge, beeing ſ
                     •
                  mmoned thither by the voice of Archangeils, and the trumpet of God. For all that haue bene dead ſhall then riſe out of the earth, the ſoul and ſpirit of euerie one being ioyned and coupled together againe to the ſame bodies, wherein before they liued. They moreouer, which ſhall be aliue at the laſt dare, ſhell not die the ſame death that other men haue done▪ but in a moment and in the twinkling of an eie they ſhall be changed from corruption, to an incorruptible nature. Then the bookes ſhall be opened, namelie the bookes of euerie mans conſcience, and the dead ſhal be iudged according to thoſe things which they haue done in this world, either good or euill. Moreouer, then ſhall men render an account of euerie idle worde which they haue ſpoken, although the worlde doe now make but a ſpor
                     •
                  e and a ieſt at them. Finall e, all the hypocriſie of men, and the deepeſt ſecrets of their hearts ſhallbe made manifeſt vnto all, ſo that worthelie the onelie remembrance of this iudgement ſhall be terrible and fearefull

to the wicked and reprobate. But of the godlie and elect it is greatlie to be wiſhed for, and is vnto them exceeding comfort. For then ſhall their redemption be fullie perfited, and they ſhall reape moſte ſweete fruite and commoditie of all thoſe labours and ſorrowes, which they haue ſuffered in this world. Then, I ſaie, their innocencie ſhall be openlie acknowledged of all, and they likewiſe ſhall ſee that horrible puniſhment which the Lord will execute vpon thoſe, that haue moſte tyrannic allie afflicted them in this world with diuers kindes of torments and croſſes. Furthermore the wicked being conuinced by the peculiar teſtimony of their owne conſcience, ſhal indeed be made immortal, but with this condition, that they ſhall burne for euer in that eternal fire, which is prepared for the deuil. On the contrarie ſide the elect and faithfull ſhal be crowned with the crowne of glorie and honour, whoſe names the ſonne of God ſhall confeſſe before his Father and the Angels, and then ſhall all teares be wiped from their eyes. Then their cauſe, which now is condemned of hereſie and impietie by the magiſtrates and Iudges of this worlde, ſhall be acknowledged to be the cauſe of the ſonne of God: And the Lorde ſhall of his free mercie reward them with ſo great glorie, as no mans minde is able to conceiue. Therefore we doe with great longing expect that great da
                     •
                  e of the Lorde, wherein we ſhall moſte fullie enioy all thoſe thinges which God hath promiſed vnto vs, and through Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde, be put into full poſſeſſion of them for euer more.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGF.
               ALſo they teach, that the word, that is, the ſonne of God tooke vnto him mans nature in the wombe of the bleſſed Virgine Marie, ſo that the two natures, the deuine and the humane, inſeperablie ioyned together in the vnitie of one perſon, are one Chriſt, true God and true man: who was borne of the Virgine Marie, did truelie ſuffer, was crucified, dead, and buried, that he might reconcile his father vnto vs, and might be a ſacrifice, not onely for the originall ſinne, but alſo for all actuall ſinnes of men. The ſame alſo deſcended into hell, and did truelie riſe againe the third daie. Afterward he aſcended into heauen, that he

might ſit at the right hand of the father, and raigne for euer, and haue dominion ouer all the creatures, ſanctifie thoſe that beleeue in him, by ſending the holie ſpirit into their heartes, and giue euerlaſting life to ſuch as he had ſanctified. The ſame Chriſt ſhall openlie come againe, to iudge them that are found aliue, and the dead raiſed vp againe, according to the Creed of the Apoſtles.
               
                  In the end of this Article after theſe words (by ſending his holie ſpirit into their heartes) theſe wordes are found in ſome editions.
                  BY ſending his ſpirit into their hearts, which may reigne, comfort, and quicken them, and defend them againſt the Deuill, and the power of ſinne. The ſame Chriſt ſhall openlie come againe, to iudge the quick and the dead, &c. according to the Creed of the Apoſtles.
                  Alſo they teach, that in the end of the world Chriſt ſhall appeare to iudgement, and ſhall raiſe vp all the dead, and ſhal giue vnto men (to weete, to the godlie and elect) eternal life, and euerlaſting ioyes, but the vngodlie and the Deuills ſhall he condemne vnto endles torments.
                  Alſo we condemne the Origeniſtes, who imagined, that the deuill and the damned creatures ſhould one daie haue an end of their paines.
               
               
                  After the firſt periode of this Article, this is thus found elſe where.
                  THey condemne the Anabaptiſtes, that are of opinion, that the damned men and the deuill
                        •
                      ſhall haue an end of their torments. They condemne others alſo, which now a daies do ſpread abroade Iewiſh opinions, that before the reſurrection of the dead, the godlie ſhall get the ſoueragintie in the world, and the wicked be brought vnder in euerie place.
               
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONIE.
               Hitherto pertaineth a parte of the third article.
               THe ſonne of God, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who is the Image of the eternall father, is appointed our Mediator, Reconciler, Redeemer, Iuſtifier, and ſauiour. By the obedience and merit of him alone the wrath of God is pacified, as it is ſaid, Rom. 3. Whome he ſet forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his bloode. And, Heb. 10. It is impoſſible, that the bloode of Bulls ſhould take away ſinnes. But he offering a ſacrifice for ſinnes, ſitteth for euer at the right hand of God, &c. And although we doe not ſee as yet, Looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſion.in this our infirmitie, the cauſes of this wonderfull counſell, why mankinde was to be redeemed after this ſort, but we ſhall learne them hereafter in all eternitie, yet theſe principles are now to be learned. In this ſacrifice there are to be ſeene, iuſtice in the wrath of God againſt ſinne, infinite mercie towards vs, and loue in his Sonne towards mankinde. The ſeueritie of his iuſtice was ſo great, that there could be no reconciliation, before the puniſhment was accompliſhed. His mercie was ſo great, that his Sonne was giuen for vs. There was ſo great loue in the Sonne towards vs, that he deriued vnto himſelfe this true and exceeding great anger. O Sonne of God, kindle in our hearts, by thy holie ſpirit, a conſideration of theſe great and ſecret things, that by the knowledge of this true wrath we may be ſore afraide, and that againe by true comforte we may be lif
                     •
                  ed vp, that we may praiſe thee for euer.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               WE beleeue and confeſſe, that the Sonne of God, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, be gotten of his eternal Father, is true and eternal God, conſubſtantial with his father, and that in the fullnes of time he was made man, to purge our ſinnes, and Looke the 1. obſeruat vpon this confeſſ.to procure the eternall ſaluation of mankinde: that Chriſt Ieſus, being verie God, and verie man, is one perſon onelie, and not two, and that in this one perſon there be two natures, not one onelie, as by teſtimonies of the holie ſcripture, the holie Fathers haue declared, in

the Councells held at Nice, Epheſus, and Chalcedon. Therfore we deteſt euerie hereſie which is repugnant to this doctrine of the Sonne of God.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               ALSO we beleeue that our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, being true God, was alſo made true man, his natures not beeing confounded, but ſo vnited in one and the ſame perſon, that they ſhall neuer hereafter be diſſolued. Neither do we differ any thing in thoſe points, which the Church being taught out of the holie Goſpells, doth beleeue, concerning our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, conceiued of the holie Ghoſt▪ borne of the Virgine Marie, and who at the length, after he had diſcharged the office of preaching the Goſpell, died on the croſſe, and was buried, and deſcended into hell, and the third daie he was called backe from the dead vnto life eternall: the which life when he had by diuers arguments prooued vnto witneſſes, hereunto appointed, he was caried vp into heauen to the right hand of his Father, from whence we looke that he ſhould come to iudge the quick and the dead. In the meane time let vs acknowledge that he is neuer theleſſe preſent with his Church, that he doth renew, and ſanctifie it, and as his onelie beloued ſpouſe, beutifie it with all ſortes of ornaments of vertues: and in theſe things we doe nothing varie from the Fathers, nor from the common conſent of Chriſtians: we thinke it ſufficient, after this ſorte to teſtifie our faith.
            
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTH SECTION. OF THE LAVV AND THE GOSPELL.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVEITA.
               
                  Of the lawe of God. CHAP. 12.
                  
                     WE teach, that the will of God is ſet downe vnto vs in the lawe of God, to wit, what he would haue vs to doe, or not to doe, what is good and iuſt, or what is euill and vniuſt▪ we therefore confes that the lawe is good and holie, and that this lawe is by the finger of God either written in the heartes of men, and ſo is called the lawe of nature, or ingrauen in the two tables Exod. 20. Deut. 5.of ſtone, and more largelie expounded in the bookes of Moſes. For plainnes ſake, we deuide it vnto the morall lawe, which is contained in the commaundementes or the two tables expounded in the books of Moſes, and into the ceremoniall, which doth appoint ceremonies and the worſhip
                        •
                      of God, and into the iudicial law, which is occupied about politicall and domeſticall affaires.
                  VVe beleeue that the Looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this Confeſſ. Deu. 4. & 12.wholl will of God and all neceſſarie precepts for euerie part of this life is fullie deliuered in this lawe. For otherwiſe the Lord would not haue forbidden▪ 
                     That anie thing ſhould be either added or taken away from this law. Neither would he haue commaun
                        ••
                     d vs to goe ſtraight forward

in this, and Not to decline out of the waie either to the right handor to the left.
                  
                  We teach that this lawe was not giuen to men that we ſhould be iuſtified by keeping it, but that by the knowledge thereof we might rather acknowledge our infirmitie, ſinne, and condemnation, and ſo diſpairing of our owne ſtrength might turne vnto Chriſt by faith. For the Apoſtle ſaith plainlie, The law worketh wrath, and, by the law commeth 
                     Ro. 3. 4. Gal. 3.
                     knowledge of ſinne. And, If there had bene a law giuen, which could haue iuſtified and giuen vs life, ſurely righteouſnes ſhould haue bene by the law. But the ſpirit (to wit of the law) hath concluded all vnder ſinne, that the promiſe by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt ſhould be giuen to them which beleue. Therfore the law was our ſchoolemaſter to Chriſt, that we might be iuſtified by faith. For neither could there euer, neither at this daie can looke▪ 2. obſeru vpon the this conf. Rom. 8.anie fleſh ſatisfie the law of God, & fullfill it, by reaſon of the weaknes in our fleſh, which remaineth and ſticketh faſt in vs, euen to our laſt breath. For the Apoſtle ſaith againe, That which the law could not performe, in as much as it was weake, through the fleſh, that did God performe, ſending his own ſonne in ſimilitude of fleſh, ſubiect to ſinne. Therfore Chriſt is the perfiter of the law, and our fullfilling of it, who as he tooke awaie the curſſe of the law, when as he Gal 3.was made a curſle for vs, ſo doth he cōmunicate vnto vs by faith his full filling thereof, & his righteouſnes & obedience is imputed vnto vs. The law of God therefore is Looke the 3. obſeru. vpon this confeſſion.thus farre abrogated, as that it doeth not henceforth condemne vs, neither work wrath in vs. For we are vnder grace, and not vnder the law. Moreouer Chriſt did fulfill all the figures of the law. Wherefore the ſhadow ceaſed, when the bodie came: ſo that in Chriſt we haue now all trueth and fullnes. Yet we do not therefore diſdaine or re
                        •
                     ect the law. We remember the wordes of the Lord, ſaying, I came not to deſtroie the law and the Prophets, but to fullfill them. We knowe that Looke the 4. obſeruat.in the law are deſcribed vnto vs the kindes of vertues & vices. We know that the ſcripture of the lawe Looke the 5. obſeru▪
                     , if it be expounded by the Goſpell, is very profitable to the Church, and that therefore the reading of it is not to be baniſhed out of the Church. For although the countenance of Moſes was couered with a vaile, yet the Apoſtle affirmeth, that the vaile is taken awaie and aboliſhed by Chriſt. We condemne al thinges which the olde or

new heretikes haue taught againſt the lawe of God.
               
               
                  Of the goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, and alſo of Promiſes: of the ſpirit and of the letter. CHAP. 13.
                  THE goſpell indeede is oppoſed to the lawe: for the lawe worketh wrath, and doeth denounce a curſſe▪ but the goſpell doth preach grace and a bleſſing. Iohn Ioh. 1.ſaith alſo, The lawe was giuen by Moſes, but grace and trueth came by Ieſus Chriſt. Yet notwithſtanding it is moſte certaine, that they which were before the lawe, and vnder the lawe, were not altogether deſtitute of the goſpell: For they had notable Euangelicall promiſes, ſuch as theſe are: The ſeede of the woman ſhall bruiſe the Serpents head. In thy ſeede 
                     Gen. 3. Gen. 22. Gen. 
                           •
                        0. Deut. 8. Act. 3.
                     ſhall all the nations of the earth be bleſſed. The ſcepter ſhall not be taken from Iuda, vntil Silo come. The Lord ſhall raiſe vp a Prophet from amongeſt his owne brethren, &c. And we doe acknowledge that the fathers had two kinde of promiſes reuealed vnto them, euen as we haue. For ſome of them were of preſent & tranſitorie thinges, ſuch as were the promiſes of the lande of Canaan, and of victories, and ſuch as are now a dayes, concerning our dailie bread. Otherſome there were then, & alſo are now, of heauenlie & euerlaſting things, as of Gods fauour, remiſſion of ſinnes, & life euerlaſting, through faith in Ieſus Chriſt. Now the fathers had not onelie outwarde or earthly, but ſpiritual & heauenly promiſes in Chriſt. For the Apoſtle Peter ſaith, that the Prophets which propheſied of the grace that ſhould come to vs, haue ſearched and inquired of this ſaluation. Whereupon the Apoſtle Paul alſo ſaith, that the goſpell of God was promiſed before by the Prophets of God in the holie ſcriptures. Hereby then it appeereth euidentlie, that the fathers were not altogether deſtitute of all the Goſpell.
                  And although after this manner our fathers had the goſpell in the writinges of the Prophets, by which they attained ſaluation in Chriſt through faith, yet the goſpell is properlie called that glad and happie tidings, wherein firſt by Iohn Baptiſt, then by Chriſt the Lorde himſelfe, and afterward by the Apoſtles & their ſucceſſours, is preached to

vs in the world, that God hath now performed that, which he promiſed from the beginning of the world, & hath ſent, yea and giuen vnto vs, his onelie ſonne, and in him reconciliation with the father, remiſſion of ſinnes, all fulnes, and euerlaſting life. The hiſtorie therefore ſet downe by the foure Euageliſts, declaring how theſe thinges were done or fulfilled of Chriſt, and what he taught and did, and that they which beleeued in him had al fulnes, this, I ſaie, is truelie called the Goſpell. The preaching alſo and ſcripture of the Apoſtles, in which they expound vnto vs how the ſonne was giuen vs of the father, and in him all things pertaining to life and ſaluation, is truelie called the doctrine of the Goſpell, ſo as euen at this daie it looſeth not that worthie name, if it be ſincere.
                  The ſame preaching of the Goſpel is by the Apoſtle tearmed 2. Cor. 3.
                     the ſpirit, and the miniſterie of the ſpirit, becauſe it is lining, and workeing thorough faith in the eares, yea in the hearts of the faithfull thorough the illumination of the holie ſpirit. For the letter, which is oppoſed vnto the ſpirit, doth in deede ſignifie euerie outward thing, but more ſpeciallie the doctrine of the law, which without the ſpirit & faith worketh wrath, & ſtirreth vp ſin in the mindes of thē, that do not truly beleeue. For which cauſe it is called by the Apoſtle, the miniſtery of death: for hitherto pertaineth that ſaying of the Apoſtle, The letter killeth, but the ſpirit giueth life. The falſe Apoſtles preached the Goſpel, corrupted by mingling of the law therewith, as though Chriſt could not ſaue without the law. Such alſo were the Hebionites ſaid to be, which came of Hebion the heretike: and the Nazarites, which before time were called Myneans. Al which we doe condemne, ſincerely preaching the worde, and teaching, that the beleeuers are iuſtified by the ſpirit onelie, and not by the law. But of this matter there ſhall follow a more large diſcourſe in the title of iuſtification.
                  And although the doctrine of the Goſpel compared with the Phariſees doctrine of the law might ſeeme (when it was firſt preached by Chriſt) to be a new doctrine, the which thing alſo Ieremie propheſied of the new Teſtament, yet in deed it not onelie was, & as yet is (though the Papiſts call it new, in regarde of Popiſh doctrine, which hath of long time

                     
                        
                           •
                        . Tim. 1. bin receiued) an ancient doctrine, but alſo the moſt ancient in the world. For God from all eternitie fore ordeined to ſaue the world by Chriſt: and this his predeſtination and eternal counſel hath he opened to the world by the Goſpell. Whereby it appeareth that the Euangelicall doctrine and religion was the moſte auncient of all that euer were, are, or euer ſhalbe: Wherefore we ſaie that all they erre foullie, and ſpeake things vnworthy the eternall counſell of God, who tearme the Euangelicall doctrine and religion, a new ſtart vp faith ſcarce thirtie yeares olde: to whome that ſaying of Iſaiah doth verie well agree, Woe vnto them that ſpeake good 
                           〈◊〉
                         euill, and euill of good, which put darkenes for light, and light
                           ••
                         darkenes, that put bitter for ſweete, and ſweete for ſowre.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               Therefore in the wholl Euangelicall doctrine, this ought firſt and chiefely to be vrged, that we are ſaued by the onelie mercie and grace of God, and by Chriſt his merittes▪ whereof that men may know how much they ſtand in neede, their ſinnes muſt be verie clearelie laid open vnto them, by the law, and by Chriſt his death.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               Of the word of God, or the holie Goſpell, CHAP. 10.
               
               
                  1. Cor. 4. 2. Cor. 3. ANd ſeeing that the adminiſtration of thee new teſt
                     •
                   ment, & alſo the word and the ſacraments are lawfully committed to the Miniſters of the Church, and their lippe
                        •
                     
                   
                  Malac. 2.
                  ought to preſerue knowledge, that the law maie be ſought at their mouth, therefore in this Chapter it is further taught, what the word of God, and the holie goſpell is. Now the Preaching of the word of God and of the Goſpell, is the true miniſterie of grace, inſtituted and commaunded of Chriſte our Lord, wherein the full and perfect will of God, touching eternall reconciliation, neceſſarie to ſaluation, and made manifeſt in the holie ſcripture, is declared and preached vnto all people. This doctrine did Chriſt giue in charge vnto his diſciples in the wordes of this

ſentence, Goye into all the world, and preach the Goſpell to euerie 
                  Marc. 16.
                  creature. This doctrine doth Peter profeſſe before Cornelius, when he ſaith. He commaunded vs to preach vnto the 
                  Act. 10.
                  people, and to teſtifie that this is he, that is ordeined of God to be the Iudge of the quick and the dead. To him alſo giue all the Prophets wines, that through his name, all that beleeue in him, ſhall receiue remiſſion of ſinnes.
               
               This miniſtery is more honorable, greater, and more neceſſarie to ſaluation, then are the ſacraments: the which is prooued by that ſentence of the moſte excellent Apoſtle 1. Cor. 
                        •
                     .Saint Paul, For Chriſt ſent me not to Baptize (that is, not chieflie to do this) but to preach the Goſpell. For onelie through the pure Goſpell, and the preaching thereof, is faith ſowed inwardlie in the heart by the holie Ghoſt, and from thence alſo muſt we conceiue and ſeeke the true meaning of God and Chriſt, touching all thinges neceſſarie to ſaluation, and alſo touching the ſacramentes them-ſelues. Amongſt thoſe, who by reaſon of their age are able to vſe their vnderſtanding, it is of neceſſitie, that the preaching of the Goſpell go before the receiuing of the ſacramentes. Wherof we maie ſee an euident proofe in thoſe three thowſand which were conuerted by Peter: alſo in Cornelius, & Act. 2. Act. 8.in the Chamberlaine we maie ſee, that, according to the example of Phillippe, the queſtion is thus to be made, Doest thou beleeue with all thy heart? Then it maie be that thou who haſt true faith grafted in thy heart maieſt receiue profit, by the participation of the ſacraments. For without the hearing of the word of God, which is the ſauing power of God, no Rom. 1.man ſhall wittinglie attaine vnto faith and ſaluation, according Ro. 
                        •
                     0.to that ſaying of Paull. Therfore faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And againe, How ſhall they beleeue in him, of whome they haue not heard? Therefore herein our preachers endeuour them ſelues moſte earneſtlie, that in our Eccleſiaſtical meetings they maie propound vnto the people the ſincere word of God, without all mixture or inuentious of men. For which cauſe alſo they do, by an auncient cuſtome, recite in the mother and vulgare tongue, which maie be vnderſtood of all, not onelie thoſe Chapters which are appointed to be read out of the goſpell at certaine times, but alſo all other partes of holie ſcripture, and do exhort

the people with an earneſt deſire to heare the word o
                     •
                   God, and to frequent thoſe Eccleſiaſticall meetings, that by the diligent teaching of the Goſpell, and by often repeating it in their ſermons, they maie firſt teach the people repentance and faith, and then the vſe and adminiſtration of the ſacraments, and by this meanes prepare them to the right receiuing of the ſacraments: & afterwardes alſo, bo
                     ••
                   whileſt the ſacraments be adminiſtred, and after they be adminiſtred, they doe conuenientlie inſtruct them in all thoſe thinges which the Lord commaunded, and chieflie in thoſe things which doe appertaine to the leading of an honeſt life, and ſuch a one, as beſeemeth a Chriſtian profeſſion; Math. 28.as Chriſt ſaith, Teach them to keepe all things which I 
                        〈◊〉
                      commaunded you.
               
               In this place alſo it is taught verie diligentlie, and as the matter requireth, touching the difference, which is to be obſerued betwixt the worde, or doctrine, and worke of the lawe, and betwixt the worde and force of the holie Goſpell. The worde or miniſterie of the lawe and of the olde Teſtament, is the worde of death, feare, and of the letter, alſo the worde of wrath and the worde of malediction: but the worde of the new Teſtament, that is, of the holie Goſpell, is the miniſterie of faith, and the ſpirit of cleerenes, or glorie through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the worde of grace, of the new couenant, the worde of comfort, and the meſſenger of peace. Of 2. Cor. 3▪ Ioh. 6.them both the Apoſtle writeth thus, The letter killeth, but the ſpirit quickneth. And Chriſt ſaith, The wordes which I ſpeake, 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſpirit and life. Alſo there is mention made of the vſe of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      law, in the fourth Chapter of this confeſſion (beginning with theſe wordes. This doctrine of the true knowledge of ſinne, &c.) 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      is to be ſeene before in the fourth Section, whereunto all that Chapter apperteineth.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               WE beleeue that all the figures of the law are takes awaie by the comming of Chiſt, howbeit we are aſſured that the truth and ſubſtance of them doth abide i
                     •
                   him, in whome they are all fulfilled. Yet we muſt vſe the doctrine of the law, and the Prophets, both to frame our life aright, and alſo that we may ſo much the more be confirmed

in the promiſes of the Goſpell.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               WE beleeue that all the ceremonies, figures, and ſhadows of the law, haue ceaſed at the comming of Chriſt, ſo that now euen the vſe of them ought to be taken away & aboliſhed among Chriſtians. Yet in the mean time, the truth & ſubſtance of them doth remaine to vs in Chriſt, in whome they are all fulfilled. And therfore we doe ſtill vſe the teſtimonies of the law & the Prophets, to confirme our ſelues in the doctrine of the goſpell, and to lead an honeſt life, vnto Gods glorie, according to his will.
            
            
               
                  THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE doth by the way mention the doctrine of the Goſpell, & of the end thereof, in the 4. and 5. Articles, which we haue placed in the ninth Section, wherein iuſtification, and remiſſion of ſinnes by faith in Christ, is handled.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
               ANd that the benefittes of this Mediatour might be knowen vnto mankinde, and applied vnto vs, there was a promiſe giuen ſtraight in the beginning after the fal of our firſt parents, and afterwardes often times repeated, and by voice of the Prophets declared; but moſte cleerely was it recited by the verie Sonne, and afterwardes by the Apoſtles: And there was a miniſtery inſtituted to teach, and to ſpread abroade that promiſe, alſo there was a Church made, and often renued by the ſame very voice, touching the Sonne of God our attonement. By this myniſterie the Sonne of God alwaies was, is, and ſhall be effectuall in the beleeuers, as it is ſaide, Rom. 1. The Goſpell is the power of God vnto ſaluation to euerie one that beleeueth. And he doth renue this miniſterie, when he ſaith, As my Father ſent me, ſo doe I ſend you alſo. Go, & preach repentance & remiſſion of ſinnes in my name. He wil that ſin ſhould be reprooued in all mankind, as he ſaith, The ſpirit ſhall reprooue the world of ſinne, becauſe they beleeue not in 
                        •
                     ee. And Rom. 1. The wrath of God is reueiled from heauen againſt all vngodlines and vnrighteouſnes of men. God will haue his wrath to be acknowledged againſt all ſinne, and chieflie againſt the contempt of the Sonne, as he ſaith in the

Pſalme, Kiſse the Sonne, leſt he be angrie, and ſo ye periſh from the waie, &c. He wil haue vs truelie to be put in great feare, by the knowledge of our darkenes, of our horrible wickednes, and our ſtubbernes. And truelie God himſelfe doth amaz
                     •
                   our heartes with the ſenſe of his anger, as Ezechiah ſait
                     •
                  , Like a Lyon he brake all my bones. And to this iudgement 
                     〈◊〉
                   doth not onelie vſe the voice of the miniſterie of the law
                     •
                   and of the Goſpell, but alſo all calamities be as it were the voice of the lawe, admoniſhing vs of the wrath of God, 
                     〈◊〉
                   calling vs to repentance. Now when the minde is terrified by this voice that reprooueth ſinnes, then let it heare th
                     •
                   peculiar promiſe of the goſpel, touching the Sonne of God, and let him be aſſured that his ſinnes are freelie remitted f
                     ••
                   the Sonne of God hisſake, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who is our attonement, and that of mercie, not for any 
                     〈◊〉
                   or loue of ours.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE
               
                  Of the lawe. CHAP. 6.
                  
                     WE acknowledge that the l
                           •
                        w of God (whereof the 10. commaundementes are an abrigedment) doth commaund the beſt, the moſt iuſt, and moſte perfect workes, and that man is not onelie bounde to obeie the morall precepts of the lawe, but alſo if he ſhould doe the workes of the 10. commaundements, in ſuch perfection and integritie as the lawe requireth, that he ſhould indeed be counted iuſt before God for his workes, and ſhould obtaine eternall ſaluation by his merites. But whereas ſome men doe thinke, that man can come to that ſtate in this life, as to be able by his works not onelie to fullfil the 10. commaundements, but alſo to doe more and greater workes, then are commaunded in the lawe, which they call works of ſupererogation, it is contrarie to the doctrine of the Prophetes and Apoſtles, and it is repugnant to the iudgement of the true Catholike Church. For the lawe was not giuen to this end, to ſignifie, that man might perfectlie fullfill the commaundements thereof in this life, but to ſhew to man his imperfection, & to teſtifie of the vnrighteouſnes of man, and of the wrath of God againſt all men, & to ſtirre them vp to ſeke remiſſion of their ſinnes, righteouſnes, and ſaluation by faith in the only
                     
                     Sonne of God, our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. Rom. 3. By the lawe commeth the knowledge of ſinne. And, Rom. 7. The law is ſpirituall, but I am carnall, ſolde vnder ſinne. And, Rom. 8. The wiſedome of the fleſh is enmitie againſt God. For it is not ſubiect to the lawe of God, neither indeede can be. And, Galat. 3. Curſsed is euerie man, that continueth not in all thinges which are written in the booke of De Spirit
                           ••
                         & litera. cap. 36.
                     the lawe, to doe them. Auguſtine ſaith, This firſt commaundement of iuſtice, wherein we are commaunded to loue the Lorde, with all our heart, with all our ſoule, and with all our minde, whereupon followeth that other commaundement, of louing our neighboure, we ſhall fullfill in that life, where we ſhall ſee him face to face. But therfore it is euen now alſo commaunded vnto vs, that we might be admoniſhed, what it behoueth vs to require by faith, whether to ſend our hope before hand, and by forgetting thoſe thinges which are behinde, what fore thinges we ſhould ſtretch our ſelues vnto. And hereby, ſo far as I can iudge, he hath profited much in this life, in that righteouſnes which is to be perfited, who by profiting doth knowe, how far he is from the perfection sf righteouſnes. And againe. Charitie is a vertue, whereby that is loued which is to be beloued. This is in ſome Auguſt. Ieron
                           •
                        m. e
                           •
                        . 29.
                     greater, in others leſser, and in ſome none at all. But the moſte abſolute loue, which now cannot be increaſed, ſo long as a man liueth here, is not to be founde in anie man. For ſo long as it may be increaſed, that which is leſſe then it ought to be, commeth of our corruption: by reaſon of which corruption there is not a iuſt man in the earth, that doth good and ſinneth not: by reaſon of which corruption no fleſh liuing ſhall be iuſtified in the ſight of God: for which corruptions ſake, If we ſaie that we haue no ſinne, we deceiue our ſelues, and the trueth is not in vs: for the which alſo, though we profit neuer ſo much, yet it is neceſsary for vs to ſaie, Forgiue vs our debtes, although all our wordes, deedes, and thoughtes are alreadie forgiuen vs in baptiſme. And againe, All the commaundements of God are counted Lib. 1. Retract. cap. 19.
                     as done, when as whatſoeuer is not done, is notwithſtanding pardoned. And Ierome ſaith, This is onelie perfection vnto men, if they know that they are vnperfect. This is the true wiſedome of man, to know that he is imperfect, and (that I maie ſo ſpeake) the perfection of all iuſt men in the fleſh, is imperfect.
               
               
                  
                  Of the Goſpell of Chriſt. CHAP. 8.
                  ALthough manie preceptes of the law of God be conteined in the writings of the Euangeliſtes and Apoſtles, and Chriſt himſelfe doth teach, that we must not rend
                           ••
                         euill for euill, nor looke vpon a woman wantonlie, and ſuch like: yet we muſt not think that the Goſpel of Chriſt is a new law: whereby, as the fathers in times paſt were ſaued vnder the olde teſtament by the olde law, ſo now men vnder the new teſtament ſhould be ſaued▪ by a new law. For except a man take the name of the law generallie for doctrine, as the Prophets now and then do vſe the name of the law, certainlie the Goſpell of Chriſt, is not properlie a law, as Paull doth commonlie vſe the name of the law, but it is a good and ioyfull meſſage, touching the ſonne of God, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that he onelie is the purger of our ſinnes, the appeaſer of the wrath of God, and our redeemer and ſauiour.
                  Neither are the commaundements of the law, which are conteined in the Apoſtles writings, any new law, but they are an interpretation of the olde law, according to the iudgement of the holie Ghoſt, which alſo were to be ſeene before, and that not obſcurelie, in the writinges of the Prophets. But they are repeated in the preaching of the goſpell of Chriſt, that the ſeueritie of the law of God, and the corruption of our nature beeing declared, we might be ſtirred vp to ſeeke and embrace Chriſt reuealed in his Goſpell, and that we maie know after what rule we are to frame our life through faith in Chriſt. Wherefore if we will ſpeake properlie of the law of God, and Goſpell of Chriſt, as of Chriſt we are not to make a new lawgiuer, ſeeing that he neither hath made a new law, nor inſtituted a new politi
                        •
                     e kingdome in this earth, ſo muſt we not make a new law of the Goſpell, which by more harde and ſeuere commaundements doth bring eternall ſaluation to the doers thereof. But we thinke it to be moſt certaine, that the naturall, or morall law of the olde and new Teſtament is one and the ſame, and that neither the men which liued vnder the olde Teſtament, nor thoſe which liue vnder the new Teſtament,

doe obteine eternal ſaluation, for the merit of the workes of the law, but onelie for the merit of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, through faith. Chriſt out of Iſaiah doth recite his office, for the which he was ſent into the earth: The ſpirit of the Lorde, 
                     Luc. 4.ſaith he, is vpon me, becauſe he hath annointed me: he hath ſent me to preach the Goſpell to the poore, &c. Here Chriſt teacheth that his proper office is, not to make a new lawe, which ſhould terrifie and kill miſerable ſinners, but to preach the Goſpell, which might comfort and quicken ſinners. Gal. 4. When the fulnes of time was come, God ſent his Sonne made of a woman, and made vnder the law, that he might redeeme them which were vnder the law, and that we by adoption might receiue the right of ſonnes. And Acts. 15, it is ſaide, Why tempt ye God, to laie an yoke vpon the Diſciples neckes, which neither our fathers, nor wee, were able to beare? but we beleeue through the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to be ſaued, euen as they, &c. And Auguſtine ſaith, Contra Ad
                           •
                        
                        mantū Manichaei diſcipulū. Cap. 3.
                     That people which receiued the old Teſtament, was helde vnder certaine ſhadowes and figures of thinges before the comming of the Lorde, according to the wonderfull and moſte orderlie diuiſion of times. Yet therein was ſo great preaching and foretelling of the new Teſtament, that in the Euangelicall and Apoſtolike diſcipline (though it be painfull and diuine) no commaundements or promiſes can be found, which are wanting euen in thoſe olde bookes.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE EIGHT SECTION. OF REPENTANCE AND THE CONVERSION OF MAN.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               CHAP. 14.
               
                  THe goſpel hath the doctrine of repentance Luc. 24.ioyned with it: for ſo ſaide the Lord in the Goſpell, In my name muſt repentance and remiſſion of ſinnes be preached among all nation▪
                   Byrepentance we vnderſtand the change of the minde in a ſinfull man ſtirred vp by the preaching of the Goſpell and by the holy ſpirit, receiued by a true faith, by which a ſinneful man 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .doth eftſonnes acknowledge his naturall corruption and a
                     ••
                   his ſinnes, ſeeing them conuinced by the word of God, & i
                     •
                   hartely greeued for them, and doth not onelie bewaile and freelie confeſſe them before God with ſhame, but alſo doth loath and abhorre them with indignation, thinketh ſeriouſlie of preſent amendment, and of a continuall care of innocencie and vertues, wherein to exerciſe himſelfe holilie all the reſt of his life. And ſurely this is true repentance, namely an vnfeined turning vnto god and to all goodnes, and a ſerious returne from the Deuill and from all euill. Now we doe expreſſelie ſaie that this repentance is the meere gift of god, and not the worke of our owne ſtrength. For the Apoſtle

doth will the faithful Miniſter diligentlie to Inſtruct thoſe 
                  2. Tim. 2.
                  which withſtande the trueth, if that at any time the Lord will giue them repentance, that they may acknowledge the trueth. Alſo the ſinnefull woman in the goſpell, which waſhed Chriſts feete with her teares, and Peter which bitterlie wept and bewailed his deniall of his Maſter, doe manifeſtlie ſhew, what minde the penitent man ſhould haue, to witte, verie earneſtlie lamenting his ſins committed. Moreouer the Prodigal ſonne, and the Publican in the Goſpell that is compared with the Phariſie, doe ſet forth vnto vs a moſt fit paterne of confeſſing our ſinnes to God. The Prodigall ſonne ſaide, Father, I haue ſinned againſt heauen, and againſt thee, I am not worthie to be called thy ſonne, make me as one of thy hired ſeruants. The Publican alſo not daring to lift vp his eies to heauen, but knocking his breſt, he cryed, God be mercifull vnto me a ſinner. And we dout not but the Lord receiued them to mercie. For Iohn the Apoſtle 1. Ioh. 2.ſaith: If we confeſſe our ſinnes, he is faithfull and iuſt to forgiue vs our ſinnes, and to purge vs from all iniquitie. If we ſaie wee haue not ſinned, we make him a lier, and his word is not in vs.
               
               We beleeue that this ſincere confeſſion which is made to God alone, either priuatelie betweene God and the ſinner, or openlie in the Church, where that generall confeſſion of ſinnes is rehearſed, is ſufficient, and that it is not neceſſarie for the obteining of remiſſion of ſinnes, that any man ſhould confeſſe his ſinnes vnto the prieſt, whiſpering them into his eares, that the prieſt laying his hands on his head, he might receiue abſolution, becauſe that we finde no commaundement nor example thereof in the holie ſcripture. Dauid proteſteth & ſaieth, I made my fault knowne to thee, and my vnrighteouſnes 
                  Pſa. 32.
                  did I not hide from thee. I ſaid, I will confeſse my wickednes to the Lord againſt my ſelfe, and thou haſt forgiuen the hainouſnes ofmy ſinne. Yea and the Lord teaching vs to pray, and alſo to confeſſe our ſinnes, ſaide, So ſhall you praie, Our father which art in 
                  Math. 6.
                  heauen, forgiue vs our debtes, euen as we forgiue our debters. It is requiſite therefore that we ſhould confeſſe our ſinnes vnto god, and be reconciled with our neighbour, if we haue offended him. And the Apoſtle Iames ſpeaking generallie of confeſſion, ſaith, Confes ech of you your ſinnes one to another. If ſo be that any man beeing ouerwhelmed with the burthen of Iacob. 
                        •
                     .his ſinnes and troubleſome temptations wil priuatelie aske

counſell, inſtruction, or comfort, either of a miniſter of the Church, or of any other brother that is learned in the law of God, we doe not miſlike it. Like as alſo we doe fullie alow that generall and publike confeſſion, which is wont to be rehearſed in the Church and in holie meetings (whereof we ſpake before) beeing as it is, agreeable with the ſcripture.
               
                  All theſe things which are ſpoken of the keies, doe properly perteine to the 10. Sect. As concerning the keies of the kingdome of heauen, which the Lord committed to his Apoſtles, they prate manie ſtraunge thinges, and of theſe keies they make ſwordes, ſpeares, ſcepters, and crownes, and full power ouer mightie kingdoms, yea & ouer mens ſoules and bodies. But we iudging vprightlie according to the word of God, do ſaie that al miniſters trulie called, haue and exerciſe the keies, or the vſe of them, when as they preach the Goſpell, that is to ſay, when they doe teach, exhorte, reprooue, and keepe in order the people committed to their charge. For ſo doe they open the kingdome of God to the obedient, and ſhut it againſt the diſobedient. Theſe keies did the Lorde promiſe to the Apoſtles, in the 16. Chapter of Mathew, and deliue▪ them in Iohn 20. Chapter, Marke 16. Luke the 24. when as he ſent forth his diſciples, and commaunded them To preach the Goſpell in all the world, & to forgiue ſinnes. The Apoſtle in the Epiſtle to the Cor. ſaith, That the Lorde gaue to his miniſter
                        •
                     
                   
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Cor. 5.
                  the ministerie of reconciliation. And what this was, he ſtraighwaie maketh plaine, and ſaieth, The worde or doctrine of reconciliation. And yet more plainelie, expounding his words he he addeth, that the miniſters of Chriſt, Do as it were go an imbaſſage in Chriſts name, as if God himſelfe ſhould by his miniſters exhort the people to be reconciled to god, to weet, by faithful obedience. They vſe the keies therfore, when as they perſwade to faith and repentance. Thus do they reconcile men to God, thus they forgiue ſins, thus do they open the kingdome of heauen, and bring in the beleeuers: much differing herein from thoſe, of whome the Lorde ſpake in the Goſpell, W
                        •
                     t be vnto you lawyers, for ye haue taken awaie the keie of knowledge. You haue not entred in your ſelues, and thoſe that would haue entered, ye forbad. Rightlie therefore and effectuallie do miniſters abſolue, when as they preach the Goſpell of Chriſt, and thereby remiſſion of ſinnes, which is promiſed to euerie one that beleeueth, euen as euerie one is baptized, and doe teſtifie

of it, that it doth particularlie appertaine to all. Neither doe we imagine that this abſolution is made anie whit more effectual, for that which is mumbled into ſome prieſts eare, or vpō ſome mans head particularly: yet we iudge that men muſt be taught diligentlie, to ſeeke remiſſion of ſinnes in the bloode of Chriſt, and that euerie one is to be put in minde, that forgiuenes of ſinnes doth belong vnto him. But how diligent and carefull euerie penitent man ought to be in the endeuour of a new life, and in ſleying the olde man, & raiſing vp the new man, the examples in the goſpel do teach vs. For the Lord ſaith to him, whome he had healed of the palſie, Behold thou art made hole, ſinne no more, leſt a worſſe thing 
                  Ioh. 5.
                  come vnto thee. Likewiſe to the adulteres woman, which was deliuered, he ſaid, goe thy waie, and ſinne no more. By which Ioh. 8.wordes he did not meane that any man could be free from ſinne, whiles he liued in this fleſh, but he doth commend vnto vs diligence and an earneſt care, that we (I ſaie) ſhould endeuour by al meanes, and begge of god by praier, that we might not fall againe into ſinne, out of which we are riſen after a manner, and that we maie not be ouercome of the fleſh, the world, or the deuill. Zacheus the publicane, being receiued into fauour by the Lorde, he cryeth out in the Luc. 9.goſpell, Beholde Lorde, the halfe of my goods I giue to the poore, & if I haue taken from anie man anie thing by forged cauillation, I reſtore him foure folde. After the ſame manner we preach that reſtitution and mercie, yea and giuing of almes, are neceſſarie for them which doe truelie repent. And generallie out of the Apoſtles words we exhort men, ſaying, Let not ſinne 
                  Rom. 6.
                  raigne in your mortall bodie, that you ſhould obey it through the luſtes thereof. Neither giue ye your members as weapons of vnrighteouſnes to ſinne: but giue your ſelues vnto God, as they that are aliue from the dead, and giue your members as weapons of righteouſnes vnto God.
               
               Wherefore we condemne all the vngodlie ſpeaches of certeine, which abuſe the preaching of the Goſpel, and ſaie. To returne vnto God, it is verie eaſie, for Chriſt hath purged al our ſinnes. Forgiuenes of ſinnes is eaſily obteined: What therefore will it hurt to ſinne? And, we neede not take anie great care for repentance, &c. Notwithſtanding we alwaies teach, that an enterance vnto God i
                     •
                   open for all ſinners,

and that this God doth forgiue all the ſinnes of the faithful, Marc. 3.onelie that one ſinne excepted, which is committed againſt the holy ghoſt. And therefore we condemne the olde and new Nouatians and Catharines, and eſpeciallie we condemne the Popes gaineful doctrine of penance, and againſt his Simonie and Simoniacall indulgences we vſe that ſentence of Simon Peter, Thy 
                        〈◊〉
                      perieſh with thee, becauſe 
                  Act. 8.
                  thou thougheſt that the gift of god might be bought with mony. Thou haſt no parte or fellowſhippe in this matter, for thy heart is not vpright before God. We alſo diſalow thoſe, that think that themſelues by their owne ſatisfactions can make recompence for their ſinnes committed. For we teach that Chriſt alone by his death, & paſſion, is the ſatisfaction, propitiation, and purging of all ſinnes. Neuertheles we ceaſe not to vrge, as was before ſaid, the mortification of the fleſh, and yet we Iſa. 53. 1. Cor. 1▪
                  adde further, that it muſt not be proudly thruſt vppon God, for a ſatisfaction for our ſinnes, but muſt humblie as it becommeth the ſonnes of god, be performed, as a new obedience, to ſhew thankfull mindes for the deliuerance and full ſatiſfaction obteined by the death and the ſatisfaction of the ſonne of God.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  CHAP. 5.
                  NOw that we know what ſinne is, in the next place we are taught concerning holie repentance: which doctrine doth bring great comfort to all ſinners, and generallie, it is verie profitable and neceſſarie to ſaluation, for all men, as well for Chriſtians which beginne to learne, as for thoſe which haue profited, yea euen for ſinners that haue fallen, yet ſuch which by the grace of God being conuerted, Math. 3. Mar. 1.doe repent. Of this repentance Iohn Baptiſt did preach, and after him Chriſt, in theſe words, Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand. Afterwarde alſo the Apoſtles preached Luc. 24.thereof throughout the wholl world, for ſo it is written, And thus it hehooued, that repentance and remiſſion of ſinnes ſhoulde be preached in his name among all nations. Now this repentance doth whollie ariſe out of a true knowledge of ſinne, and the

wrath of God: And to attaine vnto this knowledge, we muſt vſe the full and entire helpe of the miniſterie, by peaching to laie open vnto vs both the doctrine of repentance or the law, touching that righteouſnes which is due vnto God, and the ſentence of God pronounced againſt ſin, & alſo of faith in Chriſt Ieſus, and of that holy ſatisfaction, which he hath made for vs, by ſuffering moſte greeuous torments. This repentance and ſauing conuerſion doth our mercifull God, by his peculiar gifte, offer, and beſtowe, and he writeth the ſame in the hearts of the faithfull, euen as he ſaith, I will giue you a new heart, and I will put my ſpirit in the midſt of you, and 
                     Ezech. 36. Heb. 8. Ezech. 36. Ierem. 31.
                     I will cauſe you to walke in my waies. Againe, That you maie repent of your ſinnes, and of your Idolatrie. And againe, When I was conuerted, I did repent.
                  
                  This ſauing repentance (which doth differ verie much from the repentance of Eſau and ludas) taketh it true and right beginning from this gifte of God, who beſtoweth it, and from the ſermons of the word of God, whereby ſinne is reprooued: and it hath this in order firſt, that it is a feare and terrour of the ſecret heart before God, and that by repenting and ſorowing it doth tremble at this iuſt and ſeuere iudgement and reuengement, whereupon ariſeth a heauie, trembling, and vnquiet conſcience, a troubled minde, a heart ſo ſorrowfull, carefull, and bruiſed, that a man can haue no comfort with himſelfe and of himſelfe, but his ſoull is full of all griefe, ſadnes, anguiſh, and terrour, wherby he is much troubled, becauſe of the feare of that burning wrath, which he ſeeth in the ſeuere countenance of God. We haue an example in Dauid, when he ſaith, There is nothing ſound 
                     Pſal. 38.
                     in my fleſh, becauſe of thine anger, neither is there reſt in my bones, becauſe of my ſinnes. I am become miſerable, and crooked verie ſore: I goe mourning all the daie. Such a terrour and true ſenſe of ſinne doth worke in the faithful an inward chaunge of the minde and the ſoule, and a conſtant deteſting of ſinne and the cauſes and occaſions thereof. Hereunto it is ſtreightwaie added, by diligent teaching of the troubled, terrified, & repentant, that ſuch men ought, in a ſincere affection of the heart, with repentance, & an humble ſubmiſſion of the minde, by their confeſſion and inuocation to turne vnto the Lord, and by faith in Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde to conceiue

ſure and vndoubted truſt in his mercie, to hold faſt the apprehended promiſe, and to relie whollie thereon; and ſeeing they haue no righteouſnes of themſelues, earneſtlie and faithfullie to deſire of the diuine grace, that God would haue mercie on them, & vouchſafe of his grace to forgiue them their ſinnes, for the Sonne, and his pretious merites 1. Ioh. 2. Gal. 3.ſake, who was made an attonement or reconciliation for ſinne, yea▪ alſo a curſſe, that he might make or conſecrate vs as holie vnto God. For to ſuch men (that they may be ſtirred vp to the greater confidence) that ſure and pretious promiſe is propounded, and by preaching ought to be propounded, whereby the Lord doth ſaie, Call vpon me i
                           •
                        
                      
                     Pſal. 50.
                     the daie of trouble, and I will deliuer thee: and this they ought to doe, as often as they haue neede, and ſo long as they liue. Hereof the iudgement of Saint Auguſtine is extant, Lib. 1. de Penitentia. Cap. 1. No man can well meditate of repentance, except he be perſwaded of the mercie of God toward him, or, as he ſaith, but he that ſhall hope for indulgence.
                  
                  Now al men, which do truelie repent them of their ſinnes & in regarde thereof are ſorowfull, and miſlike themſelues, ought to ceaſe from the cōmitting of euil, & learne to do that which 
                     Iſa. 1. Luc. 3.
                     is good: for ſo writeth Eſai in that place, wherin he exhorteth to repentance. And Iohn Baptiſt in the like ſort admoniſhing the people, ſaith, See that you bring forth, or do, the 
                           〈◊〉
                         worthie of repentance: which doth chieflie conſiſt in mortification 
                     Coloſſ. 3. Epheſ. 4.
                     or putting of the old man, & in putting on the new man, which after God is created in righteouſnes, &c. as the Apoſtolike doctrine doth ſignifie. Moreouer the penitent are taught, Looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.to come to the Phiſitians of their ſoules, and before them to confeſſe their ſinnes to God, yet no man is commaunded or vrged to tell and reckon vp his ſinnes, but this thing is therefore vſed, that by this meane euerie one maie declare their griefe, wherewith they be troubled, and how much they miſlike them-ſelues for their ſinnes, and maie peculiarlie deſire and know that they obteine of their God counſell and doctrine, how they maie hereafter auoid them, and get inſtruction and comfort for their troubled conſciences, and abſolution by the power of the Keies, and remiſſion of ſinnes, by the miniſterie of the Goſpell inſtituted of Chriſt▪ and when theſe things are performed to them of the miniſters,

they ought to receiue them at their handes with confidence, as a thing appointed of God, to profit and to doe ſeruice vnto them for their ſauing health, & without doubting to enioy the remiſſion of their ſinnes, according to the word of the Lord, whoſe ſinnes you remit, they are remitted. 
                     Ioan. 
                           •
                        0.And they relying vpon this vndoubted faith, ought to be certaine and of a reſolute minde, that through the miniſterie of thoſe keies, concerning the power of Chriſt, and his word, all their ſinnes be forgiuen them. And therfore they which by this meanes and order obteine a quiet and ioyfull conſcience, ought to ſhew them-ſelues thankfull for this heauenlie bountifullnes in Chriſt, neither muſt they receiue it in vaine, or returne againe to their ſinnes according to that faithful exhortation of Chriſt, wherein he commaundeth vs to take heede: Beholde then art made wholl, ſinne 
                     Ioan. 5. Ioan. 8.
                     nomore, lest a worſse thing happen vnto thee. And, ſee that thou ſinne no more. Now the foundation, whereon the whol vertue and efficacie of this ſauing repentance doth ſtay it ſelfe, is the merit of the torments of the death, and reſurrection of our Lord and ſauiour, whereof he him ſelfe ſaith, Theſe thinges it behooued Chriſt to ſuffer, and to riſe againe the third daie, 
                     Luc. 24.
                     and that repentance and remiſſion of ſinnes ſhould be preached in his 
                     Marc. 1.
                     name to all people. And againe, Repent, and beleeue the Goſpell.
                  
                  Alſo they teach, that they, whoſe ſinne is publike, and therefore a publike offence, ought to giue an looke th
                           •
                         2. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.externall teſtimonie of their repentance, when God doth giue them the ſpirit of repentance, and that for this cauſe, that it maie be an argument and teſtimonie, whereby it may be prooued or made euident, that the ſinners which haue fallen, Marc. 5. & 18.and do repent, do truelie conuert them ſelues: alſo that it maie be a token of their reconciliation with the 1. Tim. 5.Church and their neighbour, and an example vnto others, which they maie feare and reuerence.
                  Laſt of all, the wholl matter is ſhut vp with this or ſuch like clauſe of admonition, That euerie one ſhal be condemned whoſoeuer he be, which in this life doth not repent in the name of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, according to that ſentence pronounced by Chriſt, Except ye repent▪ ye ſhall al in like ſort periſh, as they did, who were ſlaine with the fall of the tower of Silo.
                  
                  
                     
Hitherto alſo perteineth that parte of the ſame confeſſion, which treateth
               
               
                  Of the time of grace CHAP. 20.
                  
                  FVrthermore among all other thinges they teach, concerning the time of grace, and the fatherly viſitation, that men maie learne to conſider, that all that time of age, they lead in this life, is giuen them of God to be a time of grace, in the which they maie ſeeke their Lord and God his grace and mercie, and that they maie be loued of him, and by this meanes obteine here their ſaluation in Chriſt; whereof the Apoſtle alſo made mention in his ſermon, which he preached at Athens, ſaying, God hath aſſigned 
                     Act. 17.
                     vnto man the times, which were ordeined before, and the bandes of their habitations, that they ſhould ſeeke the Lord, if ſo be they might haue groped after him, and found him. And by the Prophet Eſaie the Lorde ſaith, In an acceptable time h
                           ••
                        e 
                     Iſa. 49. 
                           •
                        . Cor. 6.
                     I heard thee, and in the daie of ſaluation haue I helped thee. Beholde now, ſaith Saint Paull, is the acceptable time, no
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         the daie of ſaluation. Therefore at all times the people be admoniſhed, that whileſt they liue on the earth, and are in good health and haue in their hands, and do preſentlie enioy the time of grace offered by God, they would truelie repent, and beginne the amendment of their life, and reconcile themſelues to God: that they would ſtirre vp their conſcience by faith in Chriſt, and quiet it by the miniſterie of the Goſpell in the Church, and herein confirme themſelues, that God is mercifull vnto them, and remitteth all their ſinnes for Chriſt his ſake. Therefore when they are confirmed in this grace which is offred them to eſtabliſh & confirme their calling, & do faithfullie exerciſe themſelues in good works, then at the length they are alſo in an aſſured hope to looke for a comfortable end, & they muſt certenlie perſuade thēſelues, that they ſhal aſſuredlie be caried by the Angels into heauen, & eternall reſt, as was the ſoule of that Luc. 16. Ioan. 12. & 14. & 17.godlie Lazarus, that they maie be there, where their Lord and redeemer Ieſus Chriſt is, and that afterward in the daie of reſurrection this ſoule ſhall be ioyned againe with the bodie, Ioan. 5.to take full poſſeſſion of that ioy and eternall glorie, which can not be expreſſed in words. For they ſhall not c
                           ••
                        e
                     
                     into condemnation, but by making a waie through it, they ſhall paſſe from death into life.
                  The epiſtle to the Hebrewes to ſtirre vs vp to vſe ſuch exhortations, ſaieth, Exhort your ſelues among your ſelues, exhort 
                     Heb. 4.
                     ye one another dailie, ſo long as it is ſaid to daie. Let no man among you be hardned by the deceit of ſinne. For we enter into the reſt, which haue beleeued, that is, which haue obeied the voice of God, while wee had time giuen vs. On the other ſide we muſt alſo holde this moſte aſſuredlie, that if anie man, beeing polluted with ſinnes, and filthie deedes manifeſtlie contrarie to vertue, do in dying departe out of this worlde without true repentance and faith, that his ſoule ſhall certainlie goe into hell, as did the ſoule of that rich man, who wanted faith, in the bottomeles pit whereof there is no droppe of grace, and that in the daie of iudgement that moſte terrible voice of the Sonne of God ſounding in Math. 29. Ioh. 5.his eares ſhall be heard, wherein he ſhall ſaie, Departe from me ye curſſed into euerlaſting fire, which is prepared for the Deuill and his Angells: for they which haue done euill, ſhall come forth to the reſurrection of iudgement.
                  
                  Therefore in teaching they doe continuallie vrge this, that no man differ repentance and turning vnto God, till he come to be olde, or till he lieth ſicke in his bed, and in the meane time doe boldelie practiſe his wantonnes in ſins, and in the deſires of the fleſh and the world, becauſe it is written, Doe not ſaie, The aboundant mercie of the Lord will purge my ſinnes: for mercie and wrath doe haſten with him, and his indignation ſhall lie vpon the ſinners. Make no tarying to turne vnto the Lord, and put not of from daie to daie. For ſuddenlie ſhall the wrath of the Lorde breake forth, and in thy ſecuritie thou ſhalt be destroyed, and thou ſhalt periſh in time of vengeance. But that eſpeciallie is a moſte daungerous thing, if anie man, after he hath receiued the gift of the grace of God (and that in the teſtimonie of a good conſcience) doth of ſet purpoſe, and wantonlie ſinne, and contemne, and make no account of all thoſe exhortations and allurements, proceeding ou
                        •
                      of a louing heart, and that to this ende, that he maie in time thinke on that which is for his health, and repent, and moreouer doth perſiſt in a bold and blind perſwaſion of the mercie of God, and truſting thereto, doth ſinne, and doth

confidentlie abuſe it, and goeth forward in that ſort withou
                        •
                      repentance, euen vnto the laſt pinch, and then beginne
                        •
                     h being forced thereunto by the terrours of death and the feare of infernall puniſhments, ſo late to conuert himſelfe, and to call for the mercie of the Lorde, as when the ſeuere and intollerable anger of the Lord wa
                        •
                     eth hot
                        ••
                     , and puniſhments ruſh and breake foorth, as doth the great violence of floodes, which can not be reſiſted. Therefore of ſuch a man, (which thing we ſpeake with ſorowe) it is hard to beleeue that he can trulie repent, and therefore it is to be doubted, leſt that be fulfilled in him, which the Lord doth threaten by the Prophet Micheas, That inſteed of grace he ſhall feele the wrath of God, and that it will come to paſſe that the wrath of God ſhall ſley him. For in Mich. 3.a fearefull ſpeach doth he ſaie thus, Then ſhall they crie to the Lord, but he will not heare them, but he will hide his face fo
                           •
                         them at that time, becauſe they haue continuallie liued wickedlie. 
                     Ezech. 8. Iere. 7. & 11. Iſa. 65. & 66.Yea the Lord himſelfe ſaith, Although they crie in mine 
                           〈◊〉
                         with a loude voice, yet will I not heare them, ſeeing they would no
                           •
                         heare my voice, when as all the daie long I ſpread out my hands to them, and gaue them large time and ſpace for grace. For the which cauſe the holie Ghoſt crieth out, and ſaith, Todaie
                     Pſal 95. Heb. 3. 
                     if ye will heare his voice, harden not your hartes, as in the gi
                           •
                        
                        uing in the daie of that tentation in the wildernes.
                  
                  Therefore according to all theſe thinges, our men doe diligentlie, and out of the groundes of the Scripture, exhort, that euerie man do in time vſe and follow this faithful counſell, and neceſſarie doctrine, that ſo he maie turne awaie the feare of this moſte heauie daunger, yea that he doe not betraie the health of his owne ſoule. For vndoubtedly this horrible daunger is greatlie to be feared, leſt whatſoeuer here that doth raſhlie or ſtubbornelie condemne or neglect this time of grace, ſo louinglie graunted of the Lord, he doe receiue, and that worthelie, that rewarde of eternall puniſhment, which is due thereunto: euen as ſaint Ambroſe alſo, amongſt manie other thinges, which he handleth diuerſlie Lib. 3. de paenit. qui Auguſtini eſſe putatur.to this purpoſe, doth thus write, and in theſe wordes: If any man at the verie point of death ſhall repent, and be abſolued (for this could not be denied vnto him) & ſo departing out of this life dieth, I dare not ſaie, that he departeth hence in good caſe, I do not affirme it,
                     
                     neither dare I affirme or promiſe it to anie man, becauſe I would deceiue no man, ſeeing I haue no certeintie of him. Doe I therefore ſaie that be ſhall be damned? neither doe I ſaie that he ſhall be deliuered. For what other thing I ſhould ſay, I know not▪ Let him be commended to God. Wilt thou then, O brother, be freed from doubting? repent whiles thou art in health. If thou will repent, when thou canſt not ſin, thy ſinnes haue left thee, and not thou thy ſinnes. Yet that no man maie diſpaire, they teach this alſo, that if anie man, in the laſt hower of his life, ſhew out ſignes of true repentance, which thing doth fall out verie ſeldome (for that is certainlie true which is written in the epiſtle to the Hebrues, And this will we alſo doe, ſo that God giue vs leaue to doe it) that ſuch a Heb. 
                           •
                        .one is not to be depriued of inſtruction, comforte, abſolution, or remiſſion of ſinnes. For the time of grace doth laſt ſo long as this liſe doth laſt: wherfore, ſo long as we liue here, it is meete that we ſhould thinke of that Propheticall and Apoſtolicall ſentence, To daie, ſeeing yee haue heard his voice, harden not your heartes. Now herein doe our men labour, and Heb. 3.endeuour them ſelues moſte earneſtlie, that all men maie obeie this louing commaundement and counſell▪ and that they ſpeedelie repent, before the ſunne be darkened after a ſtrange manner, and the hilles be ouerwhelmed with darknes, & that laying ſinne aſide, they would turne them ſelues to god, by flying vnto him in true confidence, and with a conſtant inuocation, from the bottome of the heart, and that they do their faithful indeuour, that they be not repelled from the glorie of eternall life, but that they maie liue with Chriſt & his Church in this life for a time, and in the other life for euer.
               
               Amen.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               TOuching Repentance they teach, that ſuch as haue fallen after Baptiſme may finde remiſſion, at what time they returne againe. And that the Church is bounde to giue abſolution vnto ſuch, as returne by repentance. Now repentance or the conuerſion of the vngodlie ſtandeth properlie of theſe two parts. The one is contrition, that is, a terror ſtricken into the conſcience through the acknowledgement of ſinne, wherin we doe both perceiue gods diſpleaſure, and are greeued that we haue ſinned, and doe

abhorre and eſchue ſinne, according as Ioell preacheth▪ 
                  Rent your heartes, and not your garments, and turne vnto the Lord your God, &c. The other parte is faith, which is begotten in vs, by the Goſpell or by abſolution, & doth beleeue that the ſinnes are vndoubtedlie forgiuen for Chriſt ſake, and doth comfort the conſcience, freeing it from feares. Of which faith ſpake Saint Paull when he ſaieth, Beeing iustified by faith 
                        〈◊〉
                      haue peace with God. Afterward there muſt follow the good fruites of repentance, that is, obedience vnto God, according to that ſaying, We are debters not to the fleſh, to liue after the fleſh. For if ye liue after the fleſh, ye ſhall die. But if by the ſpirit ye mortifie the workes of the fleſh, ye ſhall liue.
               
               They condemne the Nouatians which would not abſolue them which hauing fallen after baptiſme returned to repentance. They condemne alſo thoſe that teach not that remiſſion of ſinnes commeth freelie by faith for Chriſt ſake, but labour to prooue that remiſſion of ſinnes commeth by the worthines of contrition, of charitie, or of ſome other works, and would haue mens conſciences in time of repentance to doubt, whether they may obteine remiſſiō, & doe ſay plainly, that this douting is no ſin. Likewiſe they condemne thoſe which teach that Canonicall ſatisfactions are neceſſarie to redeeme eternal paines or the paines of purgatory. Though Looke the 3. obſeruat.we are of that minde that the calamities of this life may be aſſwaged by good workes, as Eſaie teacheth Chap. 58. Breake thy bread vnto the hungrie, and the Lord ſhal giue thee reſt continuallie. Beſides they condemne Looke the 4. obſeruat.the Anabaptiſts, who denie that they that are once iuſtified can againe looſe the ſpirit of God. Alſo they condemne thoſe that ſtiflie holde, that ſome may attaine to ſuch a perfection in this life, as that they cannot ſinne any more.
               
                  This eleuenth Article we finde in ſome editions placed in the twelfth place, and after the firſt periode we finde theſe wordes.
                  Now repentance conſiſteth properlie of theſe two partes, one is contrition or terrours, ſtricken into the conſcience through the ſight of ſinne: The other is faith, which is conceiued by the goſpel or by abſolution, & doth beleue that for Chriſt ſake the ſinnes be forgiuen, and comforteh the conſcience, and freeth it from terrours. Then there muſt follow

good workes, which are fruites of repentance.
                  They condemne the Anabaptiſts, who denie that men once iuſtified can looſe the ſpirit of God, & doe ſtiflie holde that ſome men may attaine to ſuch a perfection in this life, that they can ſinne no more. In like caſe the Nouatians are condemned, which would not abſolue ſuch as had fallen after Baptiſme, though they returned to repentance. They alſo that teach that remiſſion of ſinnes is obteined for our owne loue or good works, and ſuch as teach that Canonicall ſatisfactions are neceſſarie to redeeme euerlaſting or purgatorie paines, are whollie miſliked of vs.
                  Concerning confeſſion of ſinnes they teach that priuate abſolution is to be reteined ſtill in Churches, though it be a needeles thing in confeſſion to make a rehearſall of the ſinnes. For it is an impoſſible thing to reckon vp all a mans offenſes, according as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, Who doth vnderſtand his faults, &c.
                  
               
               
                  This twelfth Article we finde in the place of the eleuenth, in ſome editions, and it is word for word the ſame, but that the last wordes are thus ſet downe,
                  Though a reckoning vp of al ſinnes be not neceſſarie. For it is impoſſible, as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, &c.
               
               
                  Art. 3. Of abuſes.
                  Of confeſſion.
                  THe Diuines and Canoniſts haue caſt a great myſt of darkenes chieflie vpon this point of Chriſtian doctrine touching repentance: as not onelie their bookes doe teſtifie, but alſo the conſciences of al the godlie, which doe confeſſe that the intricate and endles diſputations of the diuines, and the infinite traditions about the matter of repentance, was euen a fearefull racking of their conſciences. For they doe no where teach any certaintie, how remiſſion of ſins is obteined. And as for faith, there is no word amongſt them. Yea they bid men to be alwaies in doubt of remiſſion of ſinnes. Afterward they torment mens conſciences, with a harſh reckoning vp of their faults, and with ſatisfactions. For what a ſnare vnto a mans conſcience was the tradition, which requireth them to reckon vp all their ſinnes.
                  As for ſatisfactions, they did obſcure and darken the benefit

of Chriſt, becauſe that euen the learned among them did imagine that eternall death was recompenſed by them. But the vnlearned were perſwaded that forgiuenes of the fault was purchaſed by ſuch deedes. What that their ſeruices for the moſt part were not commaunded of God? as babling of praiers, inuocation of Saints, Pilgrimages, and ſuch like ſtuffe. Thus was the pure doctrine of repentance ouerwhelmed with an huge heape of vnprofitable and euill opinions. And it is manifeſt that the godly in manie ages paſt haue greatlie wiſhed that this doctrine had beene more purelie taught.
                  Furthermore, it is eſpeciallie needefull that the doctrine of repentance ſhould be taught in the Church moſt purelie and ſincerely. Therfore our Diuines haue laboured to cleare this point as much as might be. And ſurelie they haue ſo opened and cleared it, that the ſoundeſt euen amongſt our aduerſaries do confeſſe, that in this matter they haue weldeſerued of the Church for we do ſimply and plainlie without anie Sophiſtrie laie ſorth that, which the Goſpell teacheth touchingrepentance, that men may perceiue how they muſt returne vnto Chriſt, by what meanes remiſſion of ſinnes is obteined, what worſhip & what workes doe pleaſe God: Firſt we teach that contrition is requiſite, thatis, the true terrors and ſorrows of the minde, which feeleth the wrath of God, is grieued for ſinne committed▪ and ceaſeth to do euill. And though theſe ſorrows be requiſite, yet muſt we know that remiſſion of ſinnes is not graunted for the worthines of contrition, or of theſe ſorrowes, but we muſt ioyne faith with them, that is, a truſt and confidence of mercie promiſed for Chriſtes ſake, and we holde, that our ſinnes are freelie forgiuen for Chriſtes ſake.
                  When we once are comforted in theſe terrours by faith, we do vndoubtedlie obteine remiſſion of ſinnes, as we haue ſaid before. And this faith our mindes do conceiue by the Goſpell; alſo by the abſolution, which preacheth and applieth the Goſpell vnto the diſtreſſed conſciences. And for this cauſe do our diuines teach, Look the 5. obſeru.that priuate Abſolution is to be reteined in the Church, and they ſet out the dignitie of it, and the power of the keies, with true and verie large commendations: namelie becauſe the power of the keies

doth diſpenſe the Goſpell not onelie to al in general, but alſo to euerie * one in particular: as Chriſt ſaith, Thou haſt wonne thy brother, &c. and becauſe we muſt beleeue the voice of the Goſpell, which is diſpenſed vnto vs in abſolution by the miniſtery of the Church, no otherwiſe then a voice ſounding from heauen.
                  This wholl benefit of abſolution and of this miniſterie hath heretofore beene whollie obſcured with the falſe opinions of ſuch, as taught, that abſolution was naught worth, without ſufficient contrition, and did afterwards wil men to miſdoubt of abſolution, becauſe no man knewe whether his contrition were ſufficient or not. What els was this but quite to take awaie from all conſciences the comfort of the Goſpell, and to remooue out of the Church and cleane to aboliſh the miniſtery of the Goſpel or the power of the keies? whodoth not ſee that theſe pernitious errors are worthely reprooued?
                  Now ſeeing that confeſſion yealdeth a place where to beſtowe abſolution in priuate, and this cuſtome doth vpholde the vnderſtanding of the power of the keies, and remiſſion of ſinnes, among the people; beſides ſeeing that this conference auaileth much for admoniſhing and inſtructing of men, therefore we doe duelie retaine Confeſſion in our Churches, yet ſo, as that wee teach that reckoning vp of the faultes is not neceſſarie by Gods lawe, and that mens conſciences are not to be clogged with it. For there is no commaundement in all the Apoſtles writinges ſounding that way. Againe, this rehearſing of all ones ſinnes is a thing impoſſible, according to that in the Pſalme, Who can vnderſtand his faultes. And Ieremie ſaieth, The heart of man is corrupt and vnſearchable. But if no ſinnes could be forgiuen, but ſuch as are reckoned vp, mens conſciences could neuer be at reſt, becauſe they neither ſee, nor can call to minde the greateſt number of them. Whereby it maie eaſilie be gathered, that the miniſterie of abſolution and remiſſion of ſinnes doth not depend vpon the condition of numbring them vp all.
                  The auncient writers alſo doe teſtifie that this counting of ſinnes by tale is a thing needles. Chryſoſtome on the Epiſtle to the Heb. ſaith, Let vs recken of it, that we haue ſins, and let not the tongue alone vtter it, but the conſcience within vs alſo.
                     
                     And let vs not barelie ſaie we are ſinners, but let vs recken vp our ſinnes particularlie, I doe not bid the to bewraie thy ſelfe openlie, nor to occuſe thy ſelfe to other, but to followe the ſaying of the Prophet, Laie open thy waies before the Lord, confeſſe thy ſinnes before God, vtter thy ſinnes with praier before the true iudge, not remembring them with the tongue, but with the conſcience, & then in deed maiſt thou hope to finde mercie. That ſermon of Chryſoſtomes, teacheth not onelie what is to be thought of reckoning vp of ſinnes, but doth alſo verie wiſelie ioyne contrition and faith together, as they are ioyned by vs. Firſt he will haue vs acknowledge our ſinnes vnfainedly, and abhorre them from our heartes: In the next place he teacheth to adde thereunto praier & faith, which maie aſſure vs that we are forgiuen. Elſewhere he ſaith, Acknowledge thy ſins that thou maiſt as them away. If thou are aſhamed to ſhew thy ſins to any man, then vt▪ them euerie day in thy heart: I ſay not▪ goe, confes thy ſins to thy fellow ſeruant, that may vpbraide thee with them, butconfes them vnto god that is able to cure thē. The gloſſe vpon the dercees touching penance, the 5. diſtinct▪ graunteth that Confeſſion was ordeyned of the Church, and is not commaunded in the ſcriptures of the olde and new Teſtament: of the ſame iudgement are manie of the Doctors. Wherefore our iudgement touching the doctrine of confeſſion is neither new nor without reaſon.
                  Laſtlie there is moſte need of all that the godlie ſhoulde be admoniſhed, touching ſatisfactions. For there was more hurte and daunger in them, then in numbring vp of ſinnes, in as much as they darkened the benefit of Chriſt: becauſe that the vnlearned thought they did obtaine remiſſion of the guilt of ſin for their owne workes ſake: and beſides mens conſciences were much diſtreſſed if aught were omitted that was inioyned for ſatisfaction. Againe, ceremonies and pilgrimages, and ſuch like fruitles workes, were thought meete for ſatisfaction, rather then thinges commaunded of God. And forſooth their teachers themſelues dreamed that eternall death was fullie redeemed by them. Therfore we thought it needfull that godlie mindes ſhould be ſet free from ſuch errors, and we teach that their canonicall ſatisfactions, which they call workes not due &c, are neither auaileable for the remiſſion either of the fault or euerlaſting puniſhment, nor yet neceſſarie. It was a cuſtome long ſince

in the Church, that in publike penance ſuch as had fallen & did returne to the Church againe, ſhould not be receiued without ſome puniſhment laid vpon them for examples ſake: from which cuſtome theſe ſatisfactions did ſpring But the fathers minde was by ſuch examples to fraie the people from ſinnes: they did not account that Ceremonie to be a iuſt recompence for the fault, or for eternall death, or for purgatorie paines. Theſe things were afterwards coyned by ignorant and vnlearned men. But thoſe auncient cuſtomes Looke the 6. Obſeruat.were in time worne out of vſe, and laid aſide. As for vs, we doe not burden mens conſciences with ſatisfactions: but this weteach, that the fruites of repentance are neceſſarie, and that obedience, the feare of God, faith, loue, chaſtitie, & the wholl renuing of the ſpirit ought to increaſe in vs.
                  We giue men warning Looke the 7. obſeruat.of this alſo, that ſinnes are eftſonnes puniſhed euen by temporal puniſhments in this life, as Dauid, Manaſſes, & manie others were puniſhed, and we teach that theſe puniſhments maie be mitigated by good works, & the whol practize of repentance, as Paul declareth, If we would iudge our ſelues we ſhould not be iudged of the lord. And repentance deſerued (that is, obteined) that God ſhould alter his purpoſe, touching the deſtruction of Niniuie.
                  Thus whereas before the diſputations were intricate and endles, and full of groſſe opinions, now that doctrine beeing purged is deliuered to the people ſo, as it maie be vnderſtoode, and auaile much vnto godlines. We doe ſtill holde and ſet forth the true partes of repentance, Contrition, Faith, Abſolution, Remiſſion of ſinnes, Amendment of the wholl life, Mitigation of preſent puniſhmentes: and wee are in good hope, that the godlie will not onelie not reprehend anie thing in this place▪ but alſo will giue them thankes which haue purged this pointe of Chriſtian doctrine, which is requiſite and profitable in all Churches to be expounded moſte plainlie and ſet out moſte clearelie. Chriſt, ſaith, that the Angells in heauen doe reioyce whenſoeuer they ſet a ſinner repent. And therefore the Churches, and the Angells themſelues doe reioyce at the pure doctrine of repentance thus ſet downe.
               
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONIE.
               
                  Hitherto perteine firſt the two laſt clauſes of the third Article. Of the remiſſion of ſinnes, &c. Which are thus ſet downe.
                  IT is moſt certeine, that the preaching of Repentance doth perteine to all men, and accuſe all men. So alſo the promiſe is generall, and offereth remiſſion of ſinnes to all, according to thoſe generall ſpeaches, Math. 11. Come vnto me all ye that labour, and are heauie loaden, and I will refreſh you. Alſo Ioh. 3. That euerie one, which beleeueth in him ſhould not periſh. Rom. 10. Euery one that beleeueth in him, ſhal not be confounded. Againe, He that is Lord ouer al, is rich vnto al, that cal on him. Rom. 11. The Lord hath ſhut vp al vnder diſobedience, that he might haue mercie on al. Let euerie one compriſe himſelfe in this generall promiſe, and not giue himſelfe to diſtruſt, but let them ſtriue that they may aſſent to the worde of God, & obey the holie Ghoſt, and deſire that they may be helped, as it is ſaid, Luc. 11. How much more wil he giue the holie Ghoſt to them that aske it?
                  
               
               
                  
                     Of Repentance. Artic. 16.
                  BY the mercie of God this parte of Doctrine ſpeciallie is declared in our Churches with great perſpicuitie, wheras the Sentētiaries haue wrapped it in moſt intricate Labyrinthes. Firſt we doe openlie condemne the Catharans, and the Nouarians, who feigned that neither the elect could fal into ſinnes againſt the
                        •
                      conſcience, neither that they who had fallen after their amendmēt were to be receiued again, & our confutations of theſe furies are extant, Neither dowe goe about to make brawlings about the worde Repentance: if any man like it better, let him vſe the worde Conuerſion, which worde the Prophets alſo haue often vſed. Moreouer we doe willing he reteine the worde Contrition, and we ſale that the firſt part of repentance or Conuerſion is Contrition, which is, truely to tremble through the knowledge of the wrath of God againſt ſinnes, and to be ſorie that we haue offended God: and we ſaie, that there muſt needes be ſome ſuch great feare and griefes in thoſe that are conuerted, & that they doe not repent, which remaine ſecure and without greefe, as it is ſaide, 2. Cor. 7. Ye ſorowed to repentance: And

Ezech. 20. Andye ſhal miſlike your ſelues in your owns 
                           〈◊〉
                         and acknowledge your ſelues to be worthie of puniſhment and inſtruction. And theſe true griefes are a feeling of the wrath of God▪ as is declared more at large in an other place. But here we reprooue our aduerſaries, who feigne that Contrition doth deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, and that Contrition 
                        〈◊〉
                      be ſufficient. In either errour there be great my
                        ••
                     es. For remiſſion is giuen freelie for the mediatours ſake, and what contrition can be ſufficients Yea rather the more the ſorrow encreaſeth without aſſurance of mercie, ſo much the more mens heartes doe ſhe from God, and no creature is able to ſuſteine the greatnes of this ſorow, whereof Eſaie ſpeaketh, Chap. 38. He brake all my bones, like a Lyon. But thoſe idle dreames of the writers doe declare, that they leade a careleſſe life, and that they are 
                        〈◊〉
                      in the Goſpell. Now theſe true ſorowes doe ariſe, when the ſinne of the contempt of the Sonne of God (as is declared in the Goſpell▪) is repreoued. The ſpirit ſhall reprooue the worlde of ſinne, becauſe they beleeue not in me. Ioh. 16. And by the voice of the Morall law other ſinnes are reprooued, as Paull ſaith, Rom. 3. By the law came the knowledge of ſinne.
                  
                  As touching priuate confeſſion, to be made vnto the Paſtours, we affirme, that the ceremonie of looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.priuate abſolution is to be retained in the Church, & we doe conſtantlie retaine it for manie weightie cauſes▪ yet with all we doe teach, that men muſt neither commaund, nor require the recitall of offenſes in that priuate talke, becauſe that recitall of offences is neither commaunded of God, nor a thing poſſible, and it maketh godlie mindes to doubt, and it maketh faith faint.
                  And this we doe much more reprehend, that in the doctrine of Repentance or conuerſion, our aduerſaries doe no where make mention of iuſtifying faith, (whereof we haue ſpoken before) by which alone Remiſſion of ſinnes is truelie receiued, the heart is lifted vp euen when it hath a feeling of the wrath of God, and we are freed from the ſorowes of hell, as it is written. Rom. 5. Being iuſtified by faith▪ we haue peace. Without this faith ſorowes are no better then the repentance of Saul, Iudas, Oreſtes, and ſuch like, as are mentioned in tragedies. Neither doe our aduerſaries teach the

Goſpell, but the law, and humane traditiones, either omitting this faith, or elſe fighting againſt it. But ſeeing that 
                        〈◊〉
                      true conuerſion there muſt be theſe changes, a mortification, & a quickning, as it is ſaid Rom. 6. & in diuers other places, for doctrines ſake we doe deuide conuerſion or repentance into three parts, into contrition, faith, and new obedience: theſe thinges doth true conuerſion comprehend, as the voice of God, & the true experience of the Church do declare. Yet do we not make contention either about the manner of ſpeaking, or about the number of the partes, but we wiſh that all men may ſee thoſe thinges which are neceſſarie. And it is moſte neceſſarie for the Church, that there ſhould be a true, plaine, and moſt cleare doctrine, touching the wholl conuerſion, which alſo is verie often repeated in thoſe ſermons, which are ſet downe in the ſcriptures, and that with great perſpicuitie, & without anie intricate labyrinthes, as the Baptiſt and Chriſt ſaie, Math. 3. Repent, and beleeue the Goſpell, Againe, Repent: Beholde the lambe of God, that taketh awaie the ſinnes of the world. And Paule ſaieth. Ro. 3. All men are depriued of the glorie of god. Here he ſpeaketh o
                        •
                      contrition, afterward of remiſſion: But we are iuſtified freelie by his grace, through redemption that is in Christ Ieſus, by faith. Therefore it is neceſſarie, that in the doctrine of conuerſion or repentance there ſhould mention be made of faith. Neither is it ſufficient that our aduerſaries ſaie, that they alſo doe ſpeake of faith, and that faith doth goe before repentance. For they ſpeake of the doctrine of knowledge, I beleeue the forgiuenes of ſinnes, to wit, that they be forgiuen to others, euen as the deuills doe know the Creede: but the Goſpell doth require this true faith, which is an aſſurance of the mercie of God, promiſed for the ſonne of god his ſake, and reſting in the Sonne of God, which ſaith, I beleeue that remiſſion of ſinnes is giuen vnto me alſo, and that freelie, not for anie Contrition, not for anie my merits, but for the Sonne of God, who by the infinite goodnes and wiſedome of the godhead is appointed a Mediatour & redeemer. I know that the commaundement of God is immutable, ſo that euerie one maie determine in theſe griefes, that he is aſſured lie receiued into fauour for Chriſt his ſake. This is the proper voice of the goſpel: this decree is brought

by the Sonne out of the boſome of the eternall father, and is ſealed vp by his blood and reſurrection. Not to aſſent to this wil and decree, is to contemne the Sonne of God: and concerning this ſinne, Iohn ſaith, cap. 3. He that beleeueth not the Some, the wrath of God abideth on him. But he that beleeueth that his ſinnes be forgiuen for this Mediatours ſake, he doth now certainelie receiue remiſſion of his ſinnes for Chriſt his ſake, which is effectuall in him, and quickneth and ſanctifieth him by his holy Spirit: and being now reconciled, he is vndoubtedly accounted iuſt, for the Mediatours ſake, & is heir of eternal life. Either to omit, or to corrupt, or to diſlike this neceſſarie comfort, touching conuerſion, is as much as manifeſtlie to extinguiſh the Goſpel. As touching this faith, abſolution ought both to admoniſh vs, and alſo to confirme it, as Dauid was confirmed, when he heard this abſolution, 2. Reg. 12. The Lorde hath taken awaie thy ſinne. So know thou that the voice of the Goſpell doth declare remiſſion vnto thee alſo, the which remiſſion is namelie propounded to thee in abſolution. Doe not thou feigne, that the Goſpell doth nothing at all pertaine to thee, but knowe that it was therfore publiſhed, that by this meanes men imbracing the Goſpell might be ſaued▪ and that it is the eternall and immutable commaundement of God, that thou ſhouldeſt beleeue it. He that doth not by this faith imbrace the Goſpell, but is ſtill doubting, he doth in vaine heare the abſolution. Whē as by this comfort the hearts are quickned, & are now made the dwelling places of God. Then is it neceſſarie that they ſhould now begin a new obedience, as is ſaide before. But to returne to wicked deedes, is * to ſhake of God, and againe to looſe that righteouſnes and life, as Iohn ſaith. 1▪ Iohn. 3. He that doth righteouſnes, is righteous, he that committeth ſinne, is of the deuill. But we haue before rehearſed the ſumme of the doctrine of new obedience.
               
               
                  
                     Of ſatisfaction. Arti. 17.
                  NOw what a confuſion there is in their doctrine of Satisfactions, which they tearme workes not due, inioyned by the Church, it were long to rehearſe, and few before theſe times haue vnderſtoode it: but we doubt not but that this wholl part alſo is true lie and cleerely expounded in our Churches. It was a cuſtome among our firſt fathers,

that they which defiled themſelues with murther, Idolls, or filthie luſtes, ſhould be barred their companie, and chieflie from their ſacrifices. This cuſtome both the Sinagogue reteined, and other nations alſo, which were not altogether ſauage, in Aſia and in Greece. In the meane time they which were defiled, wandred vp & downe, beeing branded with the marks of their guiltines, as Oreſtes, A draſtus, & many others. This cuſtome in the beginning did the Church alſo keepe. Thoſe that were defiled, it ſeuered from the mutuall ſociety, afterward it did not ſodenlie receiue thoſe againe that did repent, that it might be knowne that they did vnfeignedlie aske pardon, and for examples ſake it might profite others, but for certaine daies abſolution was deferred, that they might be ſeene to aske pardon publikelie. So was that inceſtuous Corinthian debarred, & afterward receiued againe, not without deliberation, 1. Cor. 5. This wholl cuſtome was appointed looke the 4. obſeruat.for examples ſake, and is politicall, nothing at all pertaining to the Remiſſion of ſinnes. But afterward thorough ſuperſtition it ſo encreaſed, that faſtes and forbearing the companie of man or wife, were inioyned for manie yeares. When theſe burthens had increaſed too much, the Biſhoppes did releaſe them againe, and this releaſe of ſuch rites was called Indulgence.
                  
                  The Monkes not conſidering the hiſtorie of theſe things, feigned that eternall puniſhment might be recompenſed by the puniſhments of Purgatorie, or other puniſhments of this life: and they added, that Satisfactions were inioyned of the Church, that thoſe puniſhments might be mitigated▪ and that ſatisfactions ſhoulde be workes not due by the law of God. We reiect theſe Monkiſh fables, which euen they themſelues doe not vnderſtand, and we retaine moſte ſure rules, to wit, That eternall puniſhments are remitted together with the fault, for the Sonne his ſake, not for anie o
                        ••
                      ſatisfactions, according to that which is written in Hoſea, Cap. 13. O death, I will be thy death: O Hell, I will be thy deſtruction. Alſo Rom. 5. Being iuſtified by faith, we haue peace. Secondlie we ſaie that theſe not due workes, whereof theſe men ſpeake, are not any worſhip of God, or ſatisfactions, but that they doe pertaine to this ſaying, Mat. 15. They doe in vaine worſhip me with the commaundements of men▪
                      And looke the 5. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.certainelie

the power of the keies hath no commaundement to inioyne ſuch puniſhments. Alſo we feare that this applying of indulgences, by which the Pope doth applie the merites of Saintes vnto others, is but counterfeit, and that the indulgences in times paſte were nothing elſe, but a releaſing of the Canons, which did nothing appertaine to thoſe ſatisfactions, whereof the monkes doe ſpeake. Now it is another thing to ſpeake of ſatisfaction which is due, as of the reſtoring of theft, of that which hath bin gotten by vſury, of another mans wife, or his good name.
                  This reſtitution is a worke that is due, pertaining to new obedience, as Paull ſaith, Eph. 4 Let him that hath ſtolne ſteale no more. He that withholdeth another mans wife, hath neither contrition, faith, nor new obedience. Neither are the commaundements of god, touching due ſatisfaction, which we ſaie ought to be made, to be mingled with thoſe trifling ſonges of popiſh ſatisfactions. Alſo this we confeſſe, that in this life manie horrible puniſhments are ſpread ouer the Church, ouer Empires, & ouer families, for certaine ſins of manie men, yea euen of the Elect: as the ſedition that was raiſed vp againſt Dauid, did not lightlie afflict that whol ciuil regiment, & many holy families. Therfore we diſtinguiſh betwixt eternall puniſhment, and the puniſhment of this life▪ and we ſaie, that eternall puniſhment is remitted onelie for the Sonne of God his ſake, when we are iuſtified and quickned by faith.
                  And albeit that euen temporall puniſhments looke the 6. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.are chieflie mitigated for the Sonne of God his ſake, who is the hearbour for the Church, becauſe this weake nature can not ſuſteine the greatnes of the wrath of God, as Daniel praieth, Chap. 9. For the Lordes ſake heare thou vs, and haue 
                           〈◊〉
                         vnto our helpe, &c. Yet wee teach this alſo, that euen for the very* conuerſions ſake our puniſhments are mitigated, becauſe that in the Saints the legall promiſes being added to their workes, are not without their effect, but haue their rewardes: Such a promiſe is this: Giue, and it ſhall be giuen vnto you. And when Paull ſaith 1. Cor. 11. If we would iudge our ſelues, we ſhould not be iudged, he ſpeaketh of wholl repentance, not of thoſe moſte vaine ſhadowes, which they reaſon to preuaile, although a man fall againe into mortall

ſinne. And in this matter they haue deuiſed new iugling trickes. They confeſſe that theſe ſatisfactions are not recompences, but they ſaie, that we muſte admitte ſuch ſatisfactions as chaſtiſements, as Paull doth puniſh the Corinthian. 1. Cor. 5. That chaſtiſement was excommunication: and we confeſſe, that they which are guiltie of manifeſt hainous deedes, are by a lawfull iudgement and order to be excommunicated, neither is iuſt excommunication a vaine lightning. Yet notwithſtanding the power of the Church doth not puniſh by corporall force, as by priſon, or by hunger, but it doth onelie Looke the 7 obſeruat.pronounce this ſentence; The priſon and common puniſhments doe pertaine to ciuill gouernours. But ſuch is the frowardnes of certaine men, that although they ſee themſelues conuinced by the euidence of truth, yet they ſeeke to dallie by ſophiſtrie, leſt if they ſhould giue place, they ſhould be thought to haue betrayed their fellowes. God, which ſeeth the heart, knoweth, that with a ſimple indeauour, we haue ſought out the trueth.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               
                  
                     Of Repentance. CHAP. 12.
                  SEing that we muſt alwaies acknowledge our ſinnes, and beleeue that they be forgiuen for Chriſt his ſake, wee thinke it alſo meete that men ſhould alwaies repent in this life. But diuers men expound repentance diuerſlie; commonlie they make three partes of repentance, Contrition, Confeſſion, and Satisfaction. We will ſeuerallie and brieflie runne ouer theſe partes▪ that we maie declare what we maie thinke to be in deede Catholike and Apoſtolike▪ in this doctrine of Repentance.
               
               
                  
                     Of Contrition. CHAP. 13.
                  WE call Contrition a feeling of the wrath of God▪ or a ſorrow and great feare of the minde, raiſed by the knowledge of the greatnes of our ſinnes, and the weightines of the wrath of God. And we thinke that ſuch a Contrition, as the law of God doth vſe to ſtirre vp in man, is neceſſarilie required in true repentance: but to teach that it

doth deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, or that it is a purging of our ſinnes before God, we thinke it contrarie to the Apoſtolike doctrine. God truelie doth not deſpiſe a contrite and an humble heart, as the Pſalme ſaith: but therefore he doth not deſpiſe it, becauſe the Sonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt tooke vpon him a contrite & humble heart, by whoſe onelie contrition and humiliation our ſinnes are purged before God, and his wrath is pacified. Now we are made partakers of this pacification, when with a contrite and humble heart we beleeue, that Ieſus Chriſt alone is our reconciler with the heauenlie Father. Iſa. 53. He was wounded for out trangreſſions, he was broken for our iniquities: the chaſtiſment of our peace was vpon him, and by his ſtripes we are healed. 1. Ioh. 2. He is the propitiation for our ſinnes. Act. 10. To him giue all the Prophets witnes, that through his name, all that beleeue in him, ſhall haue remiſſion of their ſinnes. Alſo the examples of Cain, Eſau, Saul, Iudas Iſcarioth, and ſuch like, doe witnes, that Contrition is not a merit of remiſſion of ſinnes. For theſe men, although they had ſo great contrition, that it ſeemed to them a thing more tollerable to diſpatch their life either by ſtrangling, or by thruſting themſelues in with ſwordes, rather then to ſuffer thoſe horrible griefes, yet could they not obteine remiſſion of their ſinnes. The Gloſſe ſaith, If we looke narrowlie to the matter, remiſſion of ſinnes is to be attributed to the grace of God, not to contrition. Wherfore we confeſſe, that to ſhew forth true repentance, Contrition is neceſſarie, yet not to this ende, that it ſhould be any merit or purging of our ſinnes before God: but that man, acknowledging the greatnes of his ſinnes, ſhould be ſtirred vp to ſeeke remiſſion of ſinnes & ſaluation, in the onelie free clemencie and mercie of God, and that onelie for Ieſus Chriſt our Lord his ſake, by faith.
               
               
                  
                     Of Confeſſion. CHAP. 14.
                  THey call confeſſion a reckoning vp of ſinnes before a Prieſt. Therfore ſuch confeſſion as hath hitherto bin vſed, as it was not commaunded of God, ſo it is manifeſt, that the auncient Church did not exact it with ſuch ſeueritie, as if it had beene neceſſarie to obteine eternal ſaluation. And it is not to be doubted, but that we ought to acknowledge our ſelues before God to be ſinners, and to confeſſe our ſinnes

to God, yea the auncient Eccleſiaſticall writers doe graunt▪ that it is free for any one to reckon vp his ſins before man, vnles in ſome matter man be offended, and the trueth, by lauful and deuine calling, is to be declared. Chryſoſtome ſaith, I will thee, not to bewraie thy ſelfe openlie, nor to accuſe 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     Chryſin cap. 12. ad Heb. in hom. 31. In Pſal. Miſerere. Auguſt. lib. 10. Confeſſ. cap. 3.
                     
                     ſelfe before others: but I counſell thee to obeie the Prophet, ſaying, Open thy waie vnto the Lorde. And againe, If thou ar
                           •
                         aſhamed to ſhew thy ſinnes to any man, then vtter them euerie daie in thine heart: I ſaie nos, goe, confeſse thy ſinnes to they felow ſeruant, that maie vpbraide thee with them, but confeſse them vnto God, that is able to cure them. Now although theſe wordes of Chryſoſtome vſe to be expounded of thoſe ſinnes, which were before confeſſed to a Prieſt, yet is this expoſition a manifeſt wreſting of the meaning of Chryſoſtome: and the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie doth euidentlie witnes, that this cuſtome of confeſſing vnto a Prieſt was abrogated in the Ambr. ſuper Luc. de poe
                        
                           •
                        ten. Dist. 1. Cap. 
                           •
                        etrus.Church of Conſtantinople. Auguſtine ſaith, What haue I 
                           〈◊〉
                         doe with men, that they ſhould heare my confeſſions, as if they 
                           〈◊〉
                         able to heale all my griefes? They are verie curious to know an other mans life, and verie ſlow in amending their own. Ambroſe ſaith, Peter ſorrowed and weept, becauſe he erred as man: I doe not final what he ſaide, I know that he wept: I reade of his teares, I doe not reade of his ſatisfaction.
                  
                  And although looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.we thinke, that it is not neceſſarie to ſaluation, to reckon vp ſinnes before a Prieſt, and that it is not any merite of remiſſion of ſinnes: yet we endeuour, that a generall confeſſion of ſinnes, ſo farre as may be, and is lawfull, maie be reteined in our Churches, and that for two cauſes. One is, that by this priuate conference, the ignorant may be admoniſhed and inſtructed in neceſſarie matters: the other, that by this occaſion, the Goſpell of Chriſt, touching remiſſion of ſinnes, maie be heard priuatelie (the which Goſpell is the true Keie of the Kingdome of heauen, and abſolution from ſinne) and that by the hearing of the Goſpell, or abſolution, faith m aie be either conceiued, or confirmed. For, that we may truelie repent, we thinke that there is nothing more ſure & certaine, then that of neceſſity we ſhould haue faith, to this ende, that as the Goſpel of Chriſt doth declare it, ſo we may aſſuredlie beleeue that our ſinnes are freely pardoned and forgiuen for our Lord Ieſus Chriſt his ſake.
                  
                     
We are not ignorant, if we looke vnto our workes, that we are not one he to doubt, but alſo to diſpaire of our ſaluation, becauſe that our workes, ſeeme they neuer ſo good, cannot ſtand vpright before the ſeuere tribunal ſeat of God. Neither are we ignorant, that ſome doubt of the mercie and fauour of God doth alwaies cleaue to our fleſh, ſo long as we liue in the bodie. But ſeeing that God doth promiſe vnto vs his free mercie for Chriſt his Sonnes ſake, and doth require of vs, that we doe obedientlie beleeue the Goſpell of his ſonne, he therewith alſo doth require, that we mortifie the doubting of the fleſh, and haue a moſte aſſured affiance in his mercie, that we doe not accuſe his promiſe to be ſo full of deceit, as we are of doubting. And that we maie conceiue ſure confidence therein, he placed our ſaluation, not in the merites of our righteouſnes, which is vnperfect, but onelie in the merites of his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: whoſe righteouſnes, as it is moſte perfect, ſo is it moſte firme and conſtant in the iudgement of God. Mar. 1. Repent, and beleeue the Goſpell. He commaundeth vs to beleeue the Goſpell, which declareth vnto vs the certaine fauour of God toward vs for Chriſt his ſake: therefore he will not haue vs to doubt of his fauour toward vs, but that we maie conceiue ſure conſidence thereof. Ioan 6. This is the worke of God, that ye beleeue in him, whome the Father hath ſent. If God require of vs, that we beleeue in his Sonne, certeinlie he would not haue vs to doubt, but that we put our ſure confidence in him. Iames. 1. If anie of you want wiſdome, let him aske of him which giueth it, namelie of God, who giueth, I ſaie, to all men without exception, & vpbraideth not, and it ſhall be giuen him, but let him aske with confidence, nothing doubting. Hilarie ſaith▪ 
                     In Mat. ca. 5
                     
                     The kingdome of heauen, which the Prophets foreſhewed, Iohn preached, and our Lord profeſſed to conſiſt in him ſelfe, he will haue vs to hope for, without anie doubting of a wauering will. Otherwiſe iuſtification through faith is none at all, if faith itſelfe be doubtfull. And In Manueli. cap. 23.
                     Auguſtine ſaith, He that doth diſpaire of the pardon of his ſinnes, doth denie that God is mercifull: he that doth diſtruſt of the mercie of God, doth great iniurie vnto God, and, as much as in him lieth, 
                     Sixtus Pontiſex. Tom. 1. Epiſt. Sixti Pontiſici
                           •
                        .
                     he denieth that God hath loue, trueth, and power, in which thinges all our hope doth conſiſt. Sixtus ſaith, He which is doubtfull in faith, is an infidell. Wherefore we thinke that they, who counſell

vs to doubt of the fauour of God towards vs, doe 
                        •
                     ot onelie diſſent from the true iudgement of the Catholike Church, but alſo prouide verie ill for the ſaluation of the Church.
               
               
                  
                     Of Satisfaction. CHAP. 15.
                  AS touching ſatisfaction, we beleeue and confeſſe, that the alone paſſion and death of the onelie begotten ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt is a ſatisfaction for our ſinnes, and that this ſatisfaction of▪ Chriſt is offered and applied to vs by the miniſterie of the Goſpell, and is receiued of vs by faith. We alſo confeſſe that after the ſatisfaction of Chriſt is applied, and by faith receiued, we ought neceſſarily to doe thoſe good workes, which God hath commaunded: not that by them we might purge our ſinnes before God, but that we might bring forth good fruites of repentance, and teſtifie our thankefullnes. For, as touching praier, faſting, giuing of almes, & ſuch like works, we thinke that they are diligentlie to be performed, yet that they haue a farre other vſe, then that they ſhould by their merites either ſatisfie God for our ſinnes, or applie vnto vs the merite of Chriſt.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               
                  Of Confeſſion. CHAP. 20.
               SEeing that true confeſſion of ſinnes, and ſuch as hath it beginning from godlines, can be performed of no man, whome his repentance and true ſorow of minde doth not force thereunto▪ it cannot be wreſted out by anie precept. Wherefore neither Chriſt himſelfe, nor the Apoſtles would commaund it. Therfore for this cauſe our preachers doe exhort men to confeſſe their ſinnes, and therewithall they ſhew what fruit ariſeth hereof, that a man ſhould ſecretlie ſeeke for comforte, counſell, doctrine, inſtruction, and at the hands of a man, that is a Chriſtian, and wiſe, yet by commaundement they vrge no man, but doe rather affirme, that ſuch commaundements doe hinder godlines. For that conſtitution of confeſſing ſinnes vnto a

prieſt, hath driuen infinite ſoules vnto deſperation, and is ſubiect to ſo manie corruptions, that of late it ought to haue bene abrogated, and without doubt had bene abrogated, if the gouernours of Churches of late time had burned with ſo great a zeale to remooue awaie ſtumbling blookes, as in times paſt Neſtorius the Biſhoppe of Conſtantinople did burne, who did vtterlie aboliſh ſecret confeſſion in his Church, becauſe that a certaine noble woman, going often to Church, vnder pretence of doing the workes of repentance, was deprehended to haue to doe with a Deacon. Infinite ſuch vndoubted ſinnes were committed euerie where. Moreouer the Pontifical laws do require that the hearer & iudge of confeſſion ſhould be ſo holie, learned, wiſe, mercifull, that a man can hardlie finde out, eſpeciallie among thoſe that are commonlie appointed to heare confeſſions, to whom he might confeſſe him ſelfe. And now the Schoolmen doe thinke, that it is better to confeſſe ſinnes to a laie man, then to that Prieſt, by whome we maie not looke to be edified in godlines. This is the ſumme: That confeſſion bringeth more hurt then profit, which ſound repentance & true ſorow of the minde for ſinnes committed doth not wring out. Therfore ſeeing this is the gift of god alone, that we maie repent of our ſinnes, & be truelie ſorowfull for that we haue ſinned, nothing, that maie turne to ſaluation, can be done in this matter by commaundementes, as hath hitherto bene too too manifeſt euen by experience.
            
         
         
            
            THE NINTH SECTION OF IVSTIFICATION BY FAITH, AND OF good workes, and their Rewards.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  
                     Of the true Iuſtification of the faithfull. CHAP. 15.
                  
                     TO iuſtifie, in the Apoſtles diſputation touching iuſtification, doth ſignifie to remitte ſinnes, to abſolue from the faulte, and the puniſhment therof, to receiue into fauour, to pronounce a man iuſte. For the Apoſtle 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         8.ſaith to the Rom. God is he that iuſtifieth, who is he that can condemne? Where to Iuſtifie, and to condemne, are oppoſed. And in the Actes of the Apoſtles the Apoſtle ſaith, Through Chriſt is preached vnto 
                     Act. 13.
                     you forgiuenes of ſinnes, and from all things (from which ye could not be iuſtified by the lawe of Moſes) by him, euery one that beleueth, is iuſtified. For the lawe alſo in and in the Prophets we reade: Deut. 2. 5.that If a controuerſie were riſen amongſt anie, and they came 
                           〈◊〉
                         iudgement, the Iudge ſhould iudge them, that is, iuſtifie the righteous, and make wicked or condemne the wicked. And in the 5. chapter of Iſaiah, woe to them which iustifie the wicked for rewards. Now it is moſt certaine, that we are all by nature ſinners, and before the iudgement ſeat of God conuicted of vngodlines, and guiltie of death. But we are iuſtified, that is,

acquitted from ſinne and death by God the iudge, through the grace of Chriſt alone, and not by any reſpect or merit of ours. For what is more plaine then that which Paule ſaieth? All haue ſinned, and are deſtitute of the glorie of God, and are 
                     Rom. 3.
                     iuſtified freelie by his grace, through the redemption which is in Chriſt Ieſus. For Chriſt tooke vpon him ſelfe and bare the ſinnes of the world, and did ſatisfie the iuſtice of God. God therfore is mercifull vnto our ſinnes for Chriſt alone that ſuffred and roſe againe, and doth not impute them vnto vs. But he imputeth the iuſtice of Chriſt vnto vs for our owne: ſo that now we are not onely clenſed from ſinne, and purged 2. Cor. 5.and holie, but alſo indued with the righteouſnes of Chriſt, yea and acquitted from ſinne, death and condemnation: finallie, we are righteous, and heires of eternall life. To ſpeake Rom. 4.properlie then, it is God alone that iuſtifieth vs, and that onelie for Chriſt, by not imputing vnto vs our ſinnes, but imputing Chriſtes righteouſnes vnto vs.
                  But becauſe we doe receiue this iuſtification not by anie works, but by faith in the mercie of god and in Chriſt: therefore we teach and beleeue with the Apoſtle that ſinnefull man is iuſtified onelie by faith in Chriſt, not by the lawe, or by anie workes. For the Apoſtle ſaith, We conclude that man is iuſtified by faith without the workes of the law. If Abraham was 
                     Rom. 3. Rom. 4. G
                           ••
                        . 15.
                     iuſtified by workes, he hath whereof to boast, but not with God. For that ſaith the ſcripture? Abraham beleeued God, and it was imputed to him for righteouſnes. But to him that worketh not, but beleueeth in him that iuſtifieth the vngodlie, his faith is counted for righteouſnes. And againe, You are ſaued by grace through ſaith, and 
                     Eph. 2.
                     that not of your ſelues: it is the gift of God. Not by workes, leſt anie might haue cauſe to boaſt. &c. Therefore becauſe ſaith doth apprehend Chriſt our righteouſnes, a
                        ••
                      doth attribute al to the praiſe of god in Chriſt, in this reſpect 
                        〈…〉
                      is attributed to faith chieflie becauſe of Chriſt, whome it receiueth, and not becauſe it is a work of ours. For it is the gift of God. Now, that we doe receiue Chriſt by faith, the Lord ſheweth at large. Ioa. 6. where he putteth eating for beleeuing, and beleeuing for eating. For as by eating we receiue meat, ſo by beleeuing we are made partakers of Chriſt. Therefore we doe not parte the benefite of iuſtification, giuing part to the grace of God or to Chriſt, & a part to our

ſelues our charitie, workes, or merit, but we doe attribute it whollie to the praiſe of God in Chriſt, and that through faith. Moreouer, our charitie and our workes cannot plea
                        •
                     e God if they be done of ſuch as are not iuſt: wherfore we 
                        〈◊〉
                      firſt be iuſt, before we can loue or doe anie iuſt workes. We are made iuſt (as we haue ſaid) through faith in Chriſt, 
                        •
                      the meere grace of God, who doth not impute vnto vs o
                        •
                      ſinnes, but imputeth vnto vs the righteouſnes of Chriſt, ye
                        •
                      and our faith in Chriſt he imputeth for righteouſnes vn
                        ••
                      vs. Moreouer the Apoſtle doth plainelie deriue lo
                        •
                      from faith ſaying, The ende of the commaundement is loue, prceeding 
                     1. Tim. 
                           •
                        .
                     from a pure heart, a good conſcience, and a faith vnfeine
                           •
                        
                      Wherefore in this matter we ſpeake not of a fained, vaine or dead faith, but of a liuely and quicking faith, which for Chriſt (who is life, and giueth life) whome it apprehendeth, both is in deed, and is ſo called, a liuelie faith, & doth prooue it ſelfe to be liuelie, by liuely workes. And therefore Iames doth ſpeake nothinge contrarie to this our doctrine, for he ſpeaketh of a vaine and dead faith, which certaine bragge
                        •
                      
                     Iac. 2.of, but had not Chriſt liuing within them by faith. A
                        ••
                      Iames alſo ſaieth that workes doe iuſtifie, yet is he not contrarie to Saint Paull (for then he were to be reiected) but he ſheweth that Abraham did ſhew his liuelie and iuſtifying faith by workes. And ſo doe all the godlie, who yet truſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      Chriſt alone, not to their owne works. For the Apoſtle ſaid: Gal. 2.againe, I liue, howbeit not I, but Chriſt liueth in me. But the 
                           〈◊〉
                         which now I liue in the fleſh, I liue through the faith of the ſonne of God, who loued me, & gaue himſelfe for me. I do not deſpiſe the g
                           •••
                         of God, for if righteouſnes be by the law, then Chriſt died in vain, &c.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Of Faith and good workes: Of their rewarde, and of mans merit. CHAP. 16.
                  CHriſtian faith is not an opinion or humane perſuaſion, but a ſure truſt, and an euident and ſteadfaſt aſſent of the minde, to be briefe, a moſte ſure comprehenſi
                        •
                     e of the trueth of God ſet forth in the ſcriptures and in the Apoſtles Creede, yea and of God himſelfe, the chiefe bleſſednes, and eſpeciallie of Gods promiſe, and of Chriſt, who i
                        •
                      the conſummation of all the promiſes. And this faith is th
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     eere gift of God, becauſe God alone of his power doeth

giue it to his elect, according to meaſure, and that when, to whome, and how much he will, and that by his holie ſpirit, through the meanes of preaching the Goſpell, and of faithfull praier. This faith hath alſo her increaſes, which vnles they were likewiſe giuen of God, the Apoſtles would neuer haue ſaide, Lord increaſe our ſaith. Now all theſe thinges Luc. 11.which we haue ſaide hitherto of faith, the Apoſtles taught them before vs, euen as we ſet them downe: for Paul ſaieth, Faith is the grounde or ſure ſubſiſtence of things hoped for, and the euidence 
                     Heb. 11.
                     or cleare and certeine comprehenſion of things which are not ſ
                           •••
                        e And againe he ſaith, that all the promiſes of God in Chriſt 
                     2. Cor. 1.
                     are yea, and in Chriſt are Amen. And the ſame Apoſtle ſaith to the Philippians, that it was giuen them to beleeue in Chriſt. And Rom. 12. 2. Theſſ. 2. & 3.alſo, God doeth diſtribute vnto euerie man a meaſure of faith. And againe, All men haue not faith, and al doe not obey the Goſpel. Beſides Luke witneſſeth and ſaith, As many as were ordeined to life, beleeued. And therefore he alſo calleth faith, The 
                     Act. 13. Rom. 10.
                     faith of Gods elect. And againe, Faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of god. And in an other place he willeth mē to praie for faith. And the ſame alſo calleth Faith, Powreful, 
                     Tit. 1. Galat. 5.
                     and that ſheweth it ſelfe by loue. This faith doth pacifie the conſcience, and doth open vnto vs a free acceſſe vnto God, that with confidence we maie come vnto him, and may obteine at his handes whatſoeuer is profitable and neceſſarie. The ſame faith doth keepe vs in our dutie which we owe to God and to our neighbour, and doth fortifie our patience in aduerſitie, it doth frame and make a true confeſſion, and (in a worde) it doth bring forth good fruite of all ſorts, and good workes which are good in deede doe proceede from a liuely faith, by the holie Ghoſt, and are done of the faithfull according to the will or rule of Gods worde. For Peter the Apoſtle ſaieth, Therefore giuing al diligence thereunto, ioyne moreouer vertue with your faith, and with vertue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, &c.
                  
                  It was ſaid before that the law of God, which is the will of God, did preſcribe vnto vs the patterne of good workes. And the Apoſtle ſaieth, This is the wil of God, euen your ſanctification, that you abſteine from al vncleannes, & that no man oppreſſe 
                     1. Theſſ. 
                           •
                        .
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         deceiue his brother in any matter. But as for ſuch workes and worſhips of god as are taken vp vpon our owne liking, which

                     Coloſſ. 2. Saint Paull calleth wilworſhippe, they are not allowed, not Mat. 15.liked of God. Of ſuch the Lord ſaieth in the Goſpell. They worſhip me in vaine, teaching for doctrine the precepts of men: Wee therefore diſalowe all ſuch manner of workes, and we approoue and vrge men vnto ſuch as are according to the 
                        〈◊〉
                      and commaundement of God: Yea and theſe ſame workes that are agreeable to Gods will, muſt be done, not to th
                        •
                      ende to merit eternall life by them, for life euerlaſting, as th
                        •
                      Apoſtle ſaieth, is the gift of God: nor for oſtentations ſake which the Lord doth reiect, Mat. 6. nor for lucre, which alſo he miſliketh, Mat. 23. but to the glorie of God, to comment & ſet forth our calling, and to yeald thankefulnes vnto god and alſo for the profit of our neighbours. For the Lorde Mat 5.ſaith againe in the Goſpell, Let your light ſo ſhine before men, that they may ſee your good workes, and glorifie your Father which 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     Epheſ. 4. Coloſſ. 
                           •
                        .
                     in heauen. Likewiſe the Apoſtle Paull ſaieth, Walke worthie of your calling▪
                      Alſo, Whatſoeuer you doe, ſaith he, either in worde, o
                           •
                         in deede, doe all in the name of the Lord Ieſus, giuing thankes to God the Father by him. Let no man ſeeke his owne but euerie 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         4. 
                           〈◊〉
                         3.
                     his brothers. And, let ours alſo learne to ſhew forth good works for neceſſarie vſes, that they be not vnprofitable. Notwithſtanding therefore that we teach with the Apoſtle that a man is iuſtified by faith in Chriſt, and not by any good workes, yet we doe not lightlie eſteeme or condemne good workes: becauſe we know that a man is not created or regenerated thorough faith, that he ſhould be idle, but rather that without ceaſing he ſhould doe thoſe things which are good and profitable. For in the Goſpel the Lorde ſaith, A good tree bringeth forth good fruite. And againe, Whoſoeuer abideth in mee, bringeth forth good fruite. And laſtlie the Apoſtle ſaith, W
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         the workm
                           •
                        nſhip of God, created in Chriſt Ieſus to good works, which 
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         15. 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     god hath prepared, that we ſhould walke in them. And againe, Wh
                           •
                         gaue himſelfe for vs, that he might deliuer vs from all iniquitie, and purge vs to be a peculiar people to himſelfe, zealous of good workes. We therefore condemne all thoſe, which doe contemne good workes, and doe bable that they ate needeles, and 
                        
                           •
                        .not to be regarded. Neuertheleſſe, as was ſaide before, we doe not thinke, that we are ſaued by good workes, or that they are ſo neceſſarie to ſaluation, that no man was euer ſaued without them. For we are ſaued by grace,

and by the benefite of Chriſt alone. Workes do neceſſarilie proceede from faith: but ſaluation is improperlie attributed to them, which is moſte properlie aſcribed to grace. That ſentence of the Apoſtle is verie notable, If by grace, then not 
                     Rom. 11.
                     of workes: for then grace were no more grace: But if of workes, then it is not of grace: for then workes were no more workes.
                  
                  Now the workes which we doe are accepted and allowed of God through faith▪ becauſe they which doe them pleaſe God by faith in Chriſt, and alſo the workes themſelues are done by the grace of God through his holie ſpirit. For Saint Peter ſaith, that Of euerie nation, he that feareth God, 
                     Act. 10. Coloſſ. 1.
                     and worketh righteouſnes, is accepted with him. And Paul alſo, Wee ceaſe not to praie for you, that you maie walke worthie of the Lorde, and in al thinges pleaſe him, being fruitfull in euerie good worke. Here therefore we diligentlie teach not falſe and Philoſophicall, but true vertues, true good workes, and the true duties of a Chriſtian man. And this we doe, with all diligence and earneſtnes that we can, inculcate and beate into mens mindes, ſharplie reproouing the ſlothfulnes and hypocriſie of all thoſe, who with their mouthes praiſe and profeſſe the goſpell, and yet with their ſhameful life doe diſhonor the ſame, ſetting before their eies in this caſe Gods horrible threatninges, large promiſes, and bountifull rewardes, and that by exhorting, comforting, and rebuking. For we teach, that God doth beſtow great rewardes on them that doe good, according to that ſaying of the Prophet, Iſa 4. Mat. 5. & 10.
                     Refraine thy voice from weeping, becauſe thy worke ſhall haue a rewarde. In the Goſpell alſo the Lorde ſaide, Reioyce, and be glad, becauſe your rewarde is great in the heauens. And, he that ſhall giue to one of theſe little ones a cuppe of colde water, verilie I ſaie vnto you he ſhall not looſe his rewarde: Yet we doe not attribute this reward, which God giueth, to the merit of the man that receiueth it, but to the goodnes or liberalitie, and trueth of God, which promiſeth and giueth it: who although he owe nothing vnto anie, yet he hath promiſed to giue a reward to thoſe that faithfully worſhip him, notwithſtanding that he do alſo giue them grace to worſhip him. Beſides there are many things vnworthie the maieſty of god, & many vnperfect thinges are found in the workes euen of the ſaints, & yet becauſe god doth receiue into fauor, & imbrace

the works of them for Chriſts ſake, therefore he performeth Iſa. 64.vnto them the promiſed reward. For otherwiſe, our righteouneſſes are compared to a menſtruous cloath▪ yea, & the Lord in the goſpell ſaith, When you haue done al things which are commaunded 
                     Luc. 17.
                     you, ſaie, we are vnprofitable ſeruants: that which we 
                           〈◊〉
                         to doe, we haue done. So that though we do teach that god 
                        〈◊〉
                      giue a rewarde to our good deeds, yet withall we teach 
                        〈◊〉
                      Auguſtine, that God doth crowne in vs, not our deſertes, but 
                           〈◊〉
                         owne gifts. And therefore whatſoeuer rewarde we receiue, we ſaie that it is a grace, and rather a grace then a rewarde: becauſe thoſe good things which we doe, we doe them rathe
                        •
                      by God, then by our ſelues: and becauſe Paul ſaith, what 
                           〈◊〉
                         thou, that thou haſt not receiued? If thou haſt receiued it, Why 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     1. Cor. 4.
                     thou boaſt, as though thou hadſt not receiued it. And that which the bleſſed Martyr Ciprian doth gather out of this place, That we muſt not boaſt of any thing, ſeeing nothing is our owne. We therefore condemne thoſe who defend the merites of men, that they may make fruſtrate the grace of God.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               NOw we attaine vnto theſe ſo diuine benefits, and the true ſanctification of the ſpirit of God, by Faith (which is the meere gifte of God, not by anie either ou
                     •
                   ſtrength, or merites:) which faith being a ſure and vndoubted ſubſtance, and laying holde on thinges to be hoped for from the good will of God, doth ſend out of it ſelfe charitie and then verie excellent fruites of all vertues: yet doe we not attribute anie thing to theſe workes, although they be the workes of godlie men, but that ſaluation which we haue obteined, wee doe whollie attribute to the verie grace of God. And this indeed is the onelie true worſhip of God, to wit, a faith moſte fruitfull of God workes, and yet not putting anie confidence in workes.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASILL.
               WE confeſſe the remiſſion of ſinnes through faith in Chriſt crucified: and though this faith doeth without intermiſſion exerciſe, and ſhew forth it ſelfe in the workes of charitie, and by this meanes is tried, yet we doe not attribute righteouſnes and ſatisfaction for our ſinnes

vnto workes, which are fruites of faith, but onelie to a true confidence and faith in the blood of the lambe of God ſhed for vs. For we doe vnfeignedlie profeſſe, that all thinges are giuen vs freelie in Chriſt, who is our righteouſnes, holines, redemption, waie, trueth, wiſdome, and life. Therefore the faithfull doe worke, not to ſatisfie for their ſinnes, but onelie that they maie in ſome ſorte ſhewe them ſelues thankefull vnto God our Lorde for great benefits beſtowed vpon vs in Chriſt, And in the margent vpon the word Thankfull. Thankefullnes conſiſteth in requiting of benefites receiued: but we can requite nothing to God, becauſe he wanteth nothing. Therefore we haue an eie to thoſe thinges which he requireth of vs: and thoſe a
                     •
                  e, faith, and the workes of charitie: he requireth Faith toward him ſelfe▪ Charitie toward our neighbour.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  Of Chriſt our Lorde, and of Iustification by Faith. CHAP. 6.
                  
                  THE ſixth point of Chriſtian doctrine in our Churches is, as touching ſound and liuelie faith in Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde, and of true Iuſtification by this Faith. And a little after, Our men are taught to acknowledge this grace and truth, and in all the ſauing and wonderfull works, which Chriſt brought to effect, by faith to beholde thoſe things, which, according to the meaning of the holie ſcripture, are in a ſteadfaſt faith to be beeleeued and profeſſed: ſuch are theſe, The comming of Chriſt from heauen, his conception, natiuitie, torments, death, buriall, reſurrection, aſcending into heauen, his ſitting at the right hand of God, and his comming againe from thence to iudge the quicke and the dead. In theſe principall effectes, as in a cheſt wherein treaſure is kept, are all thoſe ſauing fruites of true iuſtification laide vp, and from thence they are taken for the elect and faithfull, that in ſpirit and conſcience by faith they maie be made partakers thereof, all which ſhall hereafter be perfectlie and fullie giuen vnto them, in the daie of that ioyfull reſurrection. Theſe thinges are alſo 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     
                     in the ſixth Section, ſo farre ſoorth as they deſcribe the workes of Chriſt, and the fruites thereof.
                  
                  Out of this foundation, of this iuſtifying faith, and of true and perfect iuſtification thereby, according to euident & cleare teſtimonies in the ſcriptures, we are further taught▪ Firſt, that no man by his owne ſtrength, or by the power of his own wil, or of fleſh & bloode, can attaine vnto, or haue this ſauing or iuſtifying faith, except God of his grace, by the holy ghoſt, & by the miniſterie of the goſpell preached, do plant it in the heart of whome he liſt, and when he liſt: Rom. 10. 2. Theſſ. 3.ſo that that heart maie receiue all things, which are offered to ſaluation, and made knowne touching the ſame, by the Ioh. 3.publike preaching of the worde, and by the ſacraments inſtituted of Chriſt. Hereof holie Iohn Baptiſt ſaith, Man can 
                     Ioan. 6.
                     take nothing to himſelfe, except it be giuen him from aboue. Alſo our Lord Chriſt himſelfe ſaith, No man commeth to me, except the Father, which ſent me, do drawe him. And a litle after, Except it be giuen him of my Father, that is, from aboue, by the holie Mat. 16.ghoſt. And to Peter Chriſt ſaid, Fleſh & blood hath not reueiled this vnto thee.
                  
                  Now this faith properlie is an aſſent of a willing heart to the wholl trueth deliuered in the Goſpell, whereby man is lightned in his minde and ſoule, that he may rightly acknowledge and receiue for his onelie Sauiour, his God, and Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and vpon him, as on a true 
                        •
                     ocke, he maie builde his wholl ſaluation, loue, followe, and enioie him, & repoſe all his hope and confidence in him: and by this valiant confidence he maie lift vp him ſelfe, and truſt, that for him and his onelie merite, God is become to him, louing, gentle, bountifull, & alſo that in him and for him he aſſuredlie hath, and ſhall haue for euer, eternall life, according to his true promiſe, which he confirmed with an Ioan. 6.othe, ſaying, Verelie I ſaie vnto you, he that beleeueth in me hath eternall life. And, This is the will of him that ſent me, that he which ſeeth the ſonne, and beleeueth in him, ſhould haue eternal life, and I wil raiſe him vp in the laſt daie. Alſo, This is life eternall, that they know thee the true God, and whome thou haſt ſent, Ieſus Chriſt. And Iſaiah, ſaith, By his knowledge ſhall my righteous ſeruant iuſtifie manie. This faith alone, and this inward confidence of the heart in Ieſus Chriſt our Lord doth iuſtifie, or make

a man iuſt before God, without any workes which he maie adde, or anie merite of his: of which faith Saint Paull ſaith, Rom. 4.
                     But to him which worketh not at all, but beleeueth in him that iuſtifieth the wicked man, his faith is imputed for righteouſnes. And before Rom. 3.he ſaide, But now is the righteouſnes of God made manifeſt without the lawe, hauing witnes of the law and of the Prophetes: to wit, the righteouſnes of God, by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, vnto all, and vpon all that beleeue. And in another place, He that beleeueth 
                     Act. 13.
                     in him, is made righteous. And this righteouſnes or iuſtification is the remiſſion of ſinnes, the taking awaie of eternall puniſhment, which the ſeuere iuſtice of God doth require, and to be clothed with Chriſts righteouſnes, or with imputation thereof: alſo it is a reconciliation with God, a receiueing into fauour, whereby we are made acceptable in the beloued, and fellow heires of eternall life. For the confirming of which thinges, and by reaſon of our new birth or regeneration, there is an earneſt added, to wit, the holie Ghoſt, who is giuen and beſtowed freelie, out of that Eph. 1.infinite grace, for Chriſt his death, blood ſhedding, and his reſurrection. All theſe thinges hath Paull deſcribed verie excellentlie in his Epiſtle to the Romanes, where he bringeth in Dauid ſpeaking in this wiſe, Bleſſed are they whoſe iniquitie 
                     Rom. 4. Pſal 32.
                     is forgiuen: whereof he ſpeaketh in that wholl Chapter. And to the Galathians he ſaith, God ſent forth his Sonne, that 
                     Gal. 4. Rom. 8.
                     we might receiue the adoption. Now becauſe ye are ſonnes, God hath ſent forth the ſpirit of his Sonne, crying in your hearts, Abba, Father. For, whomeſoeuer God doth iuſtifie, to them he doth giue the holie Ghoſt, and by him he doth firſt regenerate them, as he promiſeth by the Prophet, ſaying: I will giue 
                     Ezech. 11. & 36. Rom. 5.
                     them a new heart, and I will put my ſpirit in the middeſt of them, that as before ſinne had reigned in them to death, ſo alſo then grace might reigne by righteouſnes vnto eternall life through Ieſus Chriſt. And this is the communion or participation of the grace of God the father, of the merit of Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde, and of the ſanctification of the holie Ghoſt: this is the lawe of faith, the lawe of the ſpirit, and life, written by the holie Ghoſt.
                  But the liuelie and neuer drying ſpring of this iuſtification, is our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt alone, by thoſe his ſauing workes, that is, which giue ſaluation, from whome all holie

men from the beginning of the world, as well before the law was publiſhed, and vnder the lawe, and the diſcipline thereof, as alſo after the lawe, haue and doe drawe, haue and doe receiue ſaluation, or remiſſion of their ſinnes by faith in the moſte comfortable promiſe of the goſpell: and doe applie, and approper it as peculiar to themſelues, onelie for the ſole death of Chriſt, and his bloodſhedding, to the full and perfect aboliſhing of their ſinnes, and the clenſing from them all, whereof we haue manle teſtimonies in the Scripture. Holie Peter before the wholl councell at Hieruſalem, doth prooue by ſound arguments, that Saluation is not to be found in any other, then in Chriſt Ieſus alone, 
                     Act. 4.& that vnder this large cope of heauen, there is no other name giuen vnto men, whereby we maie be ſaued. And in another place he appealeth to the conſenting voyces and teſtimonies of all the Prophets, who ſpake with one minde, and by one ſpirit, as it were by one mouth: and thus he ſaide, As touching this Ieſus, all the Prophets beare witnes, that through his name, all 
                     Act. 10.
                     that beleeue in him, ſhall receiue remiſſion of ſinnes. And to the Heb. 1. Eph. 1. 1. Ioan. 2.Hebrwes it is written, He hath by himſelfe purged our ſinnes. and againe. We haue redemption through his blood, euen the remiſſion of ſins. And S, Iohn ſaith, we haue an aduocate with the Father, Ieſus Chriſt the righteous, & he is the propitiation or attonement for our ſinnes▪ and not for ours onlie, but alſo for the ſinnes of the 
                     Heb. 10.
                     wholl world. And againe to the Hebrewes, We are ſanctified by the offering of the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt once made: and a litle after he addeth, with one onlie offering hath he conſecrated for euer them that are ſanctified, namely of God, by the ſpirit of God. Therfore al ſinners and ſuch as are penitent ought to flie incontinentlie thorough their wholl life to our Lord Chriſt alone, for remiſſion of their ſinnes, and euerie ſauing grace, according Heb. 4.to that in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, Seeing that 
                           〈◊〉
                         haue a great high Prieſt, euen Ieſus the Sonne of God, which is entered into heauen, let vs holde faſt this profeſſion, which is concerning Chriſt our Lord: and ſtraight way he addeth, Let vs therefore goe boldlie vnto the throne of grace, that we maie receiue mercie, and finde grace to helpe in time of neede. Alſo Chriſt him ſelfe crying out, ſaith. He that thirſteth, let him come to me, and 
                     Ioan. 
                           •
                        . Ioan. 6.
                     drinke. And in an other place. He that commeth vnto me, ſhal not hunger: & he that beleeueth in me, ſhal neuer thirſt. Now they that

attaine to this iuſtification by Chriſt our Lord, are taught, to take vnto themſelues true and aſſured comfort, out of this grace & bountie of God, to enioy a good & quiet conſcience before God, to be certaine of their owne ſaluation, and to haue it confirmed to them by this meanes, that ſeeing they are here the ſonnes of God, they ſhall alſo after death in the reſurrection be made heires. In the meane time they ought Rom. 8. Galat. 4.both to deſire to be brought to this, that they maie receiue the fruit of perfect ſaluation, and alſo cheerefullie to looke for it, with that confidence, according to the promiſe of the Lord, that ſuch ſhall not come into iudgement, but that by Ioh. 5.making awaie they haue alreadie paſſed from death into life. Of al other points of doctrine we account this the chiefeſt and weightieſt, as that wherein the ſumme of the Goſpell doth conſiſt, Chriſtianitie is founded, and the pretious and moſt noble treaſure of eternall ſaluation, & the onelie and liuelie comforte proceeding from God, is comprehended. Therefore herein our preachers doe labour eſpeciallie, that they maie well inſtruct the hartes of men in this point of doctrine, & ſo ſowe it, that it maie take deepe root.
               
               
                  Of good workes, and a Chriſtian life. CHAP. 7.
                  
                  IN the ſeuenth place we teach, that they, whoe are made righteous and acceptable to God, by faith alone in Chriſt Ieſus, & that by the grace of God without any merits, ought in the wholl courſe of their life that followeth both all together iointlie, & euerie one particularlie, according as the order, condition, age, and place of euery one doth require, to performe and exerciſe thoſe good works, and holie actions, which are commaunded of God, euen as God commaundeth, when he ſaith, Teach them to obſerue all thinges, which I haue commaunded you. Now theſe good workes or holie actions, are not certaine affections deuiſed of fleſh and bloode (for ſuch the Lorde forbiddeth) but they are expreſſelie ſhewed and propounded vnto vs by the ſpirit of God, to do the which God doth binde vs, the rule and chiefe ſquare whereof God himſelfe is in his word: for ſo he ſaith by the Prophet, Walke not in the commaundements of your Fathers, and 
                     Ezech. 2
                           •
                        .
                     keepe not their iudgements, and defile not your ſelues with their Idoles: I am Iehouah your God, walke ye in my commaundementes, and keepe my iudgements, and doe them. Likewiſe Chriſt ſaieth,

                     Teach them thoſe thinges, which I haue commaunded you. Therefore Math. 18.the 10. commaundements, and loue, which by faith worke
                        •
                     h righteouſnes, on the right hand, & on the left hand, as well toward God as toward our neighbour, is a certaine ſumme, a moſt ſtreight ſquare, & a moſt artificiall ſhaping or deſcription of all good workes. Now an example of this ſquare is the moſte holie life of Chriſt, whereof he himſelfe Math. 11.ſaith, Learne of me, becauſe I am meeke and humble in heart. And what other thing would he teach, by vttering thoſe eight ſentences Math. 5.of happines, then to ſhewe what manner of life the true children of God ought to lead, and what be the works which God hath commaunded.
                  Therefore according to theſe thinges they reach with all care and diligence, touching the difference, which is to be knowen and kept, betwixt thoſe works which are deuiſed and taught of men, and thoſe which are commaunded of God. Thoſe workes which are commaunded of God, ought not to be interrmitted for humane traditions. For Chriſt doth grieuoſlie reprehend this in them that doe otherwiſe, & in the Phariſes, ſaying, Why doe you tranſgreſse the commaundements 
                     Math. 15.
                     of God for your traditions? And againe, In vaine doe they worſhip me, ſeeing they do only teach the commaundements of men. 
                     Looke the 1. Obſeruat vpon this confeſſ. Mar. 7. Iſa. 29. Iſa. 1. & 64.But ſuch works as are taught of men, what ſhew ſoeuer they haue euen of goodnes, are in no caſe to be ſo highly eſteemed, as thoſe, which are commaunded of God. Yea, to ſaie ſomewhat more, if they be not of faith, but contrary to faith, they are of no value at all, but are an abomination and filthines before the face of God. Now all good workes are deuided, firſt, generallie, into thoſe which pertaine to all true Chriſtians, according to the vnitie of faith and catholicke ſaluation. Secondly they are deuided particularly into thoſe which are proper to the order, age, and place of euery man, as the holie Ghoſt doth ſeuerallie teach Elders, Maſters, the common ſorte, Parentes, children, the maried, the vnmaried, and euerie one, what be their proper bonds and workes. Moreouer in this point men are diligentlie taught to know, how, and wherein good workes doe pleaſe God. Truelie they pleaſe God no otherwiſe, then in the onelie name of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, in whoſe name, they ought to be done to the glorie of god, according to the doctrine of

Paull the Apoſtle, who ſpeaketh thus, Whatſoeuer you doe in wordes and in deedes, doe all in the name of our Lord Ieſus. And Coloſſ. 3. 1 Cor. 10. Ioh. 15.the Lorde himſelfe ſaith, Without me ye can doe thing, that is, nothing that maie pleaſe God, and be for your ſaluation. Now to doe good workes in the name of Chriſt, is to doe them, in a liuelie faith in him, whereby we are iuſtified, and in loue, which is poured forth into our hearts by the holie Ghoſt, in ſuch ſorte that God loueth vs, and we againe loue him and our neighbour. For the holy Ghoſt doth ſanctifie, mooue, and kindle the hearts of them which are iuſtified, to doe theſe holie actions, as the Lorde ſaieth, He 
                     Ioan. 14. 1 Ioan. 2.
                     ſhall be in you: And the Apoſtle, The anoynting of God teacheth you Theſe two, Faith and loue, are the fountaine and ſquare of all vertues and good workes, according to the teſtimony of the Apoſtle, The end of the commandement is loue out of a pure 
                     1. Tim. 1. Heb. 11. 1. Cor. 13.
                     heart and a good conſcience, and faith not feigned. And againe, Without faith it is not poſſible to pleaſe God. Alſo, without loue nothing doth profit a man.
                  
                  In the next place they teach, why and to what purpoſe or end, ſuch good workes, as pertaine to Chriſtian godlines, ought to be done, to wit, not in this reſpect, that men by theſe workes ſhould obtaine iuſtification or ſaluation, and remiſſion of ſins (for Chriſt ſaith, When you haue done all thoſe 
                     Luc. 17.
                     thinges which were commaunded you, ſaie, we are vnprofitable ſeruants. Alſo Paull ſaith, Not for the workes of righteouſnes, which 
                     Tit. 3.
                     we haue done, but through his mercie hath he ſaued vs: wherewith Pſa. 143.al thoſe words of Dauid agree, when he praieth, Lord enter not into iudgement with thy ſeruant, becauſe that in thy ſight ſhall no fleſh liuing be iuſtified.) But Chriſtians are to exerciſe themſelues in good works, for theſe cauſes following. Firſt, that by this meane, they may prooue and declare their faith, & by theſe workes be knowne to be true Chriſtians, that is, the liuelie members and followers of Chriſt, whereof our Lorde ſaith, Euerie tree is knowen by his owne fruites. In deede good Luc 
                           •
                        .workes are aſſured arguments, and ſignes and teſtimonies, and exerciſes of a liuelie faith, euen of that faith, which lieth hidde in the heart, and to be ſhorte, of the true fruit thereof, and ſuch as is acceptable to God. Paull ſaith, Chriſt liueth in me: for in that I now liue in the fleſh, I liue by faith in the Sonne of God. And trulie it can not be otherwiſe, but Gal. 2.
                     
that as ſinne doth bring forth death, ſo faith, and iuſtification, which ariſeth therout, doth bring forth life, inwardlie in the ſpirit, and outwardlie in the works of charitie. Secondlie we muſt therefore doe good workes, that Chriſtians might confirme and build vp their Election and vocation in themſelues, and preſerue it looke the 2. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ. 2. Pet. 1.by taking heed that they fall not in mortall ſinnes, euen as Saint Peter teacheth, among other thinges writing thus: Wherefore brethren endeauour rather to make your election and vocation ſure, or to confirme it. And how this maie be done, he doth brieflie declare a litle before, Therefore giuing all diligence thereunto, ioyne vertue with your faith: and with vertue, knowledge: and with knowledge, temperance: and with temperance, pacience: & with pacience, godlines: & with godlines, brotherlie kindnes: and with brotherlie kindnes, loue. For if theſe thinges be among you, and abound in you, they will make you that ye neither ſhall be idle, nor vnfruitfull in the knowledge of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. In which place Saint Peter doth euidently ſhew, that we muſt endeuour to exerciſe ourſelues in good workse, looke the 3. obſeruat.firſt for this cauſe, leſt that the grace of faith & a good conſcience, which we haue, be either loſt or defiled, but that it maie rather be preſerued. (For the holie Sap. 1. Mat. 12. Luc. 11.Ghoſt doth flie from Idolaters, and departeth from prophane men, and the euill and vnpure ſpirit doth returne into an emptie and idle houſe. Alſo, whoſoeuer doth either looſe, or defile a good conſcience, what commendable thing, or what worke can he do that is pretious and acceptable to God? how ſhall he giue himſelfe to prayer?) Secondlie for this cauſe, that we maie profitte and increaſe more and more in this grace, and that we maie gaine vnto the Lorde, by occupying thoſe talents which are committed to our truſt: whereof Saint Paull ſaith, Now we all beholding, 
                     2. Cor. 3.
                     as in a mirrour, the glorie of the Lord with open face, are changed into the ſame Image from glorie to glorie: that is, we beholde Chriſt, who is the image and glorie of the Father, & herein we indeauour, that we maie be conformed to the likenes of this Image, by the holie ghoſt, which doth kindle vs therunto, til this Image doth get her perfection, by the bleſſed reſurrection. Thirdly we muſt do & exerciſe our ſelues in good workes, as well for the promiſes of this life, as alſo for the reward of eternall life (whereof mention is made verie often

and at large in the holie ſcripture) & that by faith in Chriſt wee maie haue a more eaſie entrance to the attaining of thoſe rewards, and to the eternal kingdome of heauen, as S. Peter teſtifieth, ſaying, If ye doe theſe thinges, ye ſhall neuer fall. 
                     2. Pet. 1.
                     For by this meanes an entring ſhalbe miniſtred vnto you abundantlie into the euerlaſting kingdome of our Lorde and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. But chiefelie we muſt doe the workes of mercie, whereby we maie benefit our neighbour, whereby we prouide and doe for him, and whereof he ſtandeth in neede, ſuch as theſe be, to giue almes, to viſite the ſicke, to haue a care of them, or to be at hand to doe them ſeruice, to teach the ſimple, by counſell and labour to helpe others, to pardon offences, and ſuch like, which all haue the promiſes of the bountifullnes of God and of rewardes, to doe the which Chriſt our Lord doth exhort in theſe words, Be ye mercifull, 
                     Luc 6.
                     is your Father is mercifull. Giue, and it ſhall be giuen to you; forgiue, and ye ſhall be forgiuen. And in an other place, Sell your 
                     Luc. 12.
                     goods, and giue almes: get you bagges, which waxe not olde, a treaſ
                           ••
                        e that cannot faile in heauen, where no theefe commeth, and where the moth corrupteth nothing. Alſo, When thou makeſt 
                     Luc. 14.
                     a feaſt, call the poore, the maimed, the lame, the blinde, and thou ſhalt be bleſſed, becauſe they can not recompence thee: for thou ſhalt be recompenced at the reſurrection of the iuſt. Alſo, I was an hungred, I thirſted, I was a ſtraunger, naked, ſicke, and in priſon, and in all thinges ye helped me by your ſeruice: Verilie I ſaie vnto you. In as much as ye did theſe thinges to one of the leaſt of my brethren, ye did them to me. Come hither ye bleſsed of my Father, inherit the kingdome prepared for you before the beginning of the worlde. By theſe it is plaine and manifeſt, that thoſe works which proceede of faith, do pleaſe God, & are rewarded with aboundant grace, to wit, with the recompence of al kinde of good thinges & bleſſings, both in this life, & in the life to come.
                  Laſtly this doctrine is ſhut vp with this or ſuch like exhortation, that no man can perfectlie doe theſe works of Chriſtian godlines, or fullie performe the commaundementes of God, and that no man can be found, who doth not faile in anie parte hereof, and who is cleane without ſinne: as it is written, There is not a man ſo iuſt on the earth, who doth vprightlie, and not ſinne: and that therefore euerie one ought to Eccleſ. 7.ſeeke and to enioy his perfection, in Chriſt Ieſus, in his

grace, pretious ſacrifice and merit, by that faith and his iuſtification, which conſiſteth in the remiſſion of ſinnes, if he will not haue anie thing in himſelfe that maie deſerue damnation. For Chriſt alone is our perfection, and fulfilling of the lawe, our life and righteouſnes, and whoſoeuer receiue him by faith, and doe whollie truſt in him, theſe men haue all their ſinnes waſhed awaie in the bloode of Chriſt, ſo that afterwarde they neede not to feare condemnation. For thus Paull writeth, Therefore now there is no condemnation to 
                     Rom. 8.
                     them which are in Christ Ieſus, which doe not walke according to the fleſh, but according to the ſpirit. For to theſe men Chriſt i
                           •
                        
                      
                     1. Cor. 1.
                     made of God wiſedome, righteouſnes, ſanctification, and redemption.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               WE beleeue that our wholl righteouſnes doth conſiſt 
                     Art. 13.in the remiſſion of our ſinnes, which is alſo, as Dauid doth teſtifie, our onelie felicitie. Therefore we do vtterlie reiect all other meanes, whereby men do thinke that they maie be iuſtified before God, and caſting awaie all opinion of vertues and merits, we doe altogether reſt in the onelie obedience of Ieſus Chriſt, which is imputed to vs, both that all our ſins maie be couered, and alſo that we may obtaine grace before god. To conclude, we beleeue that we cannot finde where to reſt our ſelues, if we decline neuer ſo litle from this foundation, but rather we ſhall be alwaies vnquiet, becauſe we are not at peace with God, till we be certenlie perſuaded, that we are loued in Ieſus Chriſt, becauſe that in our ſelues we are worthie of all hatred.
               
                  
                     Art. 20. We beleeue that by faith alone we are made partakers of this righteouſnes, as it is written, He ſuffered, to purchaſe ſaluation for vs, That whoſoeuer beleeueth in him ſhould not periſh. And this is therefore done, becauſe the promiſes of life offered to vs in him, are then applied to our vſe, and made effectuall to vs, when we doe imbrace them, nothing doubting but that we ſhall enioy thoſe thinges, wherof the Lorde by his owne mouth hath aſſured vs. Therefore that righteouſnes, which we obteine by faith, doth depend vpon free promiſes, whereby the Lord doth declare and teſtifie,

that we are beloued of him.
               
                  
                     Art. 21. We beleeue, that by the ſecret grace of the holie Ghoſt we are indued with the light of faith, which is the free gifte of God, and is proper to them alone, to whome it pleaſed God to giue it, ſo that the faithfull haue not whereof to boaſt in themſelues, ſeing that rather they are more then double debters, becauſe they are preferred before others. And further we beleeue, that faith is giuen to the elect, not that they might once onelie be brought into the right waie, but rather that they maie goe forwarde therein vnto the ende, becauſe that as the beginning is of God, ſo is alſo the accompliſhment.
               
                  
                     Art. 22. We beleeue, that we, who by nature are the ſeruants of ſinne, are regenerated vnto a new life, by meanes of this ſame faith: and by this faith we receiue grace to liue holily, whiles we doe imbrace that Euangelicall promiſe, that the Lorde will giue vnto vs the holie ghoſt. Therefore it is ſo farre, that faith ſhoulde extinguiſh the deſire to liue well and holilie, that it doth rather increaſe and kindle it in vs: whereupon good workes doe neceſſarilie follow. Neuertheles, although God, that he maie fullie ſaue vs, doe regenerate vs, and frame vs to a holie life; yet we confeſſe, that the good workes, which we doe, by the direction of his ſpirit, are not ſo regarded of God, as that we ſhoulde be iuſtified thereby, or deſerue to be counted the children of God, becauſe we ſhould wauer with a perpetuall doubting and trembling, vnleſſe we ſhould relie vpon that onelie ſatisfaction, whereby Chriſt Ieſus hath diſcharged vs of the puniſhment or forfaite for our offence.
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               BEſides, though we ſaie, we haue no neede at all by our owne workes, and deedes, but appoint all the meanes of our ſaluation to be in Chriſt alone, yet ſaie we not, that for this cauſe men ought to liue looſelie, and diſſolutelie: nor that it is ynough for a Chriſtian, to be Baptized onelie, and to beleeue: as though there were nothing elſe required at his hande. For true Faith is liuelie, and can in no wiſe be idle. Thus therefore teach we the people,

that God hath called vs, not to follow riotte, and wantonnes, but, as S. Paull ſaith, Vnto good workes to walke in them: That we are deliuered from the power of darkenes, to the ende that 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſhould ſerue the liuing God: to cutte awaie all the remnantes of ſinne, and to worke our ſaluation in feare, and trembling that it maie appeare that the ſpirit of ſanctification is in our bodies, and that Chriſt himſelfe dwelleth in our hearts.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               WE beleeue that the holie Ghoſt, dwelling in o
                     ••
                   
                  
                     Art. 22.heartes, doth beſtow vpon vs true faith, that 
                     〈◊〉
                   may attaine vnto the knowledge of this ſo great a myſtery. The which faith doth imbrace Ieſus Chriſt with all his merites, doth challenge him vnto it ſelfe as proper and peculiar, and doth ſeeke for nothing beſides him. For it is neceſſarie that either all thoſe things which are required vnto our ſaluation be not in Chriſt, or if all be in him, that then he which by faith poſſeſſeth Ieſus Chriſt, hath alſo perfect ſaluation. Therefore it is an horrible blaſphemie againſt God, to affirme that Chriſt is not ſufficient, but that we haue need of other meanes beſides him. For thereupon it ſhould follow, that Chriſt is onelie in parte our Sauiour. Wherefore we doe iuſtlie ſay with Saint Paull, that we are iuſtified by faith alone, or by faith with out the workes of the law. Yet to ſpeak properly, we do not meane, that faith by it ſelfe, or of it ſelfe doth iuſtifie vs, which is but onelie as an inſtrumnet, whereby we apprehend Chriſt, which is our iuſtice. Chriſt therfore himſelfe is our righteouſnes, which imputeth all his ments vnto vs: faith is but the inſtrument, whereby we are coupled vnto him, by a participation and communion of al his benefittes, and whereby we are kept in that fellowſhippe. So that all thoſe our effects are euen more then enough vnto vs for our abſolution from all our ſinnes.
               We beleue that al our felicitie doth conſiſt in the remiſſion 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     3.of our ſins, which we haue by Ieſus Chriſt, & that in it alone al our righteouſnes before God is conteined, as S. Paul teacheth out of the Prophet Dauid, who declareth the happines 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      4. 
                        〈…〉
                      2. 
                        〈…〉
                      3.of thoſe men to whom God imputeth righteouſnes with out workes. And the ſame Apoſtle ſaith, that we are iuſtified by
                  
                  the redemption made in Chriſt Ieſus. We therfore leaning vpon this, as a ſure foundation, doe yeald all glorie vnto God, hauing a moſte baſe and humble opinion of our ſelues, knowing full well who and what manner of creatures we be in deede. Therfore we doe not preſume of our ſelues, or of any of our owne merites, but being vpholden by the onelie obedience of Chriſt crucified, we doe reſt altogether in it: and to the intent it may become ours, we beleeue in him. This righteouſnes alone is all ſufficient, both to couer all our iniquities, and alſo to make vs ſafe and ſecure againſt all temptations. For it doth driue from our conſciences all feare, all horrour and dread, whereby we might be hindred from approching to God, and neede not to imitate the example of our firſt father, who for feare flying from the preſens of god, went about to hide and couer himſelfe with figge leaues. And truelie if we truſting vnto our ſelues neuer ſo litle, or to any other creature, ſhould preſent our ſelues before the Maieſtie of God, it is certaine we ſhould by and by be ouerwhelmed with it. Therefore euerie one of vs muſt rather crie out with Dauid, and ſaie, Lord enter not into iudgement with thy ſer
                     
                        ••
                     nt, for in thy ſight ſhall no man liuing be iuſtified.
               
               
                  
                     Art. 24. We beleeue, that this true faith, beeing beſtowed vpon euerie one of vs by the hearing of the word of God, and the operation of the holie ſpirit, doth regenerate vs, and make 
                     •
                  s as it were new men, raiſing vs vp vnto newnes of life, and ſetting vs free from the bondage of ſinne. Wherefore this iuſtifying faith is ſo farre from withdrawing men from a right and holie kinde of liuing, or from making them more faint in godlines, that on the contrarie ſide no man without it can performe any good thing, to this ende, that God may haue the glorie, but men doe all things, either in regard of themſelues, or els for feare of iuſt condemnation. Therefore it cannot be, that this holie faith ſhould be idle in a man. Neither doe we ſpeake of a vaine and dead faith, but onlie of that, which in the Scripture is ſaid, to worke by loue, and which mooueth a man to exerciſe himſelfe in thoſe workes, which God himſelfe hath commaunded in his word. But theſe workes which doe come from the ſincere roote of faith, are therefore good and acceptable vnto God, becauſe they be ſanctified by his grace, but are nothing auaileable

to iuſtifie vs. For we are iuſtified by faith in Chriſt, y
                     ••
                   euen before ſuch time, as we could bring forth any 
                     〈◊〉
                   worke, for our works before faith can no more be good, the the fruite of a good tree, before that the tree it ſelfe be goo
                     •
                   Therefore we doe good workes, yet not to merit any thi
                     ••
                   by them. For what is it poſſible for vs to merit? Nay 
                     〈◊〉
                   we, by reaſon of the good workes, which we doe (if we doe 
                     •
                  
                  ny) are more bound vnto God, then God vnto vs: For 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  he, which worketh in vs both the will and the deede, of his owne 
                        〈◊〉
                      mercie. Whereupon it is our duties alwaies to haue a regar
                     •
                   vnto that, which is written, When ye haue done all that is commaunded you, ſay, that we are vnprofitable ſeruants, for we haue 
                        〈◊〉
                      that which we ought to doe. Furthermore, we doe not hereupon denie, that God doth recompence good works in thoſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   be his, but we affirme that this recompenſe commeth of his meere grace, becauſe he crowneth his owne gifts in vs. Yea although we doe good workes, yet we doe not put any ho
                     ••
                   of ſaluation in them. For we are not able to bring forth any workes, which are not polluted with the corruption of 
                     〈◊〉
                   fleſh▪ and for that cauſe be worthie of puniſhment: If it we
                     •
                   graunted, that we were able to bring forth any ſuch worke, yet the bare rememberance of our ſinnes were ſufficient t
                     •
                   remooue that worke out of the ſight of God. Therefore we ſhould alwaies ſtand in doubt, ſtaggering as it were this way and that way, and our miſerable conſciences ſhould be i
                     •
                   continnall torment, vnles they ſhould relie vpon the onely merite of our Sauiour Chriſt his death and paſſion, and reſt in it alone.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               THat we might obteine theſe benefits of Chriſts, namely, remiſſion of ſinnes, iuſtification, and life euerlaſting▪ Chriſt hath giuen his Goſpell: wherein theſe benefits are laied forth vnto vs, as it is written in the laſt of Luc. that repentance ſhould be preached and remiſſion of ſinnes in his name among all nations. For whereas all men borne after a natural manner haue ſinne in them, and cannot truelie ſatisfie the law of God, looke the 1. obſeruat vpon this confeſſ.the goſpell bewraieth our ſinne, & ſheweth 
                     •
                   Chriſt the Mediator, & ſo inſtructeth vs touching remiſſion of ſinnes. When as the Goſpell doth conuict vs of ſinne, o
                     •
                  
                  
hearts thereby terrified muſt firmelie beleeue, that there is giuen vnto vs freely for Chriſts ſake, that remiſſion of ſinnes, and iuſtification by faith, by the which we muſt beleeue and confeſſe, that theſe things are giuen vs for Chriſts ſake, who was made an oblation, and hath appeaſed the fathers wrath for vs. Notwithſtanding therefore that the Goſpell doe require repentance, yet to the ende that the remiſſion of our ſinnes maie be certaine and vndoubted, it teacheth vs, that remiſſion is giuen vs freelie, that is, that it doth not depend vpon the condition of our owne worthines, nor is giuen for any works that went before, nor for the worthines of ſuch as follow after. For then ſhould remiſſion be vncertaine, if we ſhould thinke, that then onelie, we obteine remiſſion of ſins, when we had deſerued it by our former workes, or when our repentance were well worthie of it. For in true terrours the conſcience findeth no worke which it maie oppoſe againſt Gods wrath, but Chriſt is giuen and ſet forth vnto vs to appeaſe the wrath of God. This honour muſt not be transferred from Chriſt vnto our owne works, therefore Paull ſaith, Yeare ſaued freelie. Againe, Therefore by faith, freelie, that the promiſe might be ſure, that is, thus ſhall remiſſion be certaine, when we know that it dependeth not vpon the condition of our vnworthines, but is giuen vs for Chriſt his ſake. This is a ſure and neceſſarie comfort to all godlie mindes, that are terrified with the conſcience of their ſinnes. And thus doe the holie fathers teach, and there is a notable ſentence in Saint Ambroſe, worthie the remembring, in theſe wordes. This God hath appointed, that he which beleeueth in Christ, ſhould be ſaued, without any work, by faith alone, receiuing the remiſſion of ſinnes. Now this worde Faith, doth not onelie ſignifie a knowledge of the hiſtorie of Chriſt, but alſo to beleeue and aſſent unto this promiſe, that is proper vnto the Goſpell, wherein remiſſion of ſinnes, iuſtification, and life euerlaſting are promiſed vnto vs for Chriſts ſake. For this promiſe alſo doth pertaine to the hiſtory of Chriſt, euen as in the Creede vnto the hiſtorie is added this article, I beleeue the remiſſion of ſins. And vnto this one the other articles, touching the hiſtory of Chriſt, are to be referred. For the benefitte is the end of the hiſtorie▪ therefore did Chriſt ſuffer, and riſe againe, that for him remiſſion of ſinnes and euerlaſting life might be giuen vnto vs.
               
                  
                  Theſe things are found thus in an other edition.
                  
                     
                        Art. 4. ALſo they teach, that men cannot be iuſtified before God by their owne power, merites, or workes, but are iuſtified for Chriſts ſake thorough faith, when they beleeue that they are receiued vnto fauour, and their ſinnes forgiuen thorough Chriſt, who by his death hath ſatisfied for o
                        ••
                      ſinnes. This faith doth god impute for righteouſnes vnto them before himſelfe. Rom. 3. & 4.
                  For this cauſe Chriſt hath appointed the miniſterie of 
                        Art. 5.teaching the goſpel, which preacheth repentance & remiſſion of ſinnes: and the preaching of either of theſe is general, and laieth open the ſinnes of all men, and promiſeth remiſion of them vnto al that beleeue: for to the end that remiſſion might not be doubted of, but that all diſtreſſed mindes might know that they ought to beleeue, that remiſſion of ſinnes is vndoubtedlie granted vnto them for Chriſt, & not for their owne merits or worthines. All theſe doe certainlie obtaine remiſſion of ſinnes. And when as we doe in this ſort comfort our ſelues by the promiſe of the goſpell, and doe raiſe vp our ſelues by faith, therewithall is the holie ſpirit giuen vnto vs. For the holie ſpirit is giuen, and is effectual, by the worde of god and by the Sacraments. When as we do heare or meditate of the goſpell, or doe receiue the Sacraments, and comforte our ſelues by faith, therewithall the ſpirit of god is effectuall, according to that of Saint Paull, Gall 3. That the promiſe by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt might be giuen to them that beleeue. And to the Cor. The Goſpell is the miniſterie of the ſpirit. And to the Rom. Faith commeth by hearing▪
                      When as then we doe comforte our ſelues by faith, and are freed from the terrours of ſinne by the holie ſpirit, our hearts do conceiue the other vertues, acknowledge trulie the mercie of god, and conceiue the true loue and the true feare of god, truſt, and hope of gods helpe, praier, & ſuch like fruites of the ſpirit.
                  Such therefore as teach nothing concerning this faith, whereby we receiue remiſſion of ſinnes, but will haue mens conſciences ſtand in doubt, whether they obteine remiſſion or no, and doe adde further, that this doubting is no ſinne, are iuſtlie condemned. And theſe alſo doe teach, that men maie obteine remiſſion of ſinnes for their owne worthines:

but they doe not teach to beleeue, that remiſſion of ſinnes is giuen freelie for Chriſt ſake. Here alſo are condemned thoſe phantaſticall ſpirites, which dreame that the holie ghoſt is giuen, or is effectuall without the worde of god. Which maketh them contemne the miniſterie of the gofpel and ſacraments, and to ſeeke illumination without the word of god, and beſides the goſpell. And by this meanes they draw awaie mens mindes from the worde of god vnto their owne opinions, which is a thing verie pernitious and hurtfull. Such were in olde time the Manichees, and Enthuſiaſts. And ſuch are the Anabaptiſts now a daies. Theſe and ſuch like frenſies we doe moſt conſtantlie condemne. For they aboliſh the true vſe of gods worde, and doe falſlie imagine that the holie ſpirit may be receiued without the word, and ſticking too much to their owne fancies, they inuent wicked opinions, and are the cauſe of infinite breaches.
               
               
                  Theſe things are found thus in another edition.
                  
                     
                        Art. 5. FOr the obteining of this faith the miniſtery of teaching the goſpell and miniſtring of the ſacraments was ordeined. For by the word and Sacraments, as by certaine inſtruments, the holie ghoſt is giuen, who worketh faith, where, and when it pleaſeth god, in thoſe that heare the goſſpell, faith I ſaie, to beleeue, that god, not for our owne merites, but for Chriſt, doth iuſtifie ſuch as beleeue, that they are receiued into fauour for Chriſts ſake.
                  They condemne the Anabaptiſts and others, who are of opinion, that the holie ghoſt is giuen vnto men without the outward word, thorough their preparations and workes.
                  Alſo they teach, that when we are reconciled by faith, 
                        Art. 6.the righteouſnes of good workes, which God hath commaunded, muſt follow of neceſſitie: euen as Chriſt hath alſo commaunded: If thou wilt enter into life, keepe the commaundements. But for ſomuch as the infirmitie of mans nature is ſo great, that no man can ſatisfie the lawe, it is needfull that men ſhould be taught, not onelie that they muſt obey the lawe, but alſo how their obedience pleaſeth God, leſt that their conſciences ſinck downe into deſpaire, when they ſee that they doe not ſatisfie the law.
                  This obedience therefore pleaſeth god, not becauſe it ſatisfieth the lawe, but becauſe the perſon that performeth

it, is reconciled by Chriſt, through faith, and beleeueth that the reliques of ſinne which remaineth in him be pardoned. Wherfore we muſt alwaies holde that we do obtaine remiſſ
                        •
                      no of ſinnes, and that a man is pronounced iuſt, freelie, for Chriſt, through faith. And afterward that this obedience towardes the law doeth alſo pleaſe god and is accounted a kinde of iuſtice and Looke the 2 obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.deſerueth rewards For the conſcience cannot oppoſe it owne cleannes or workes vnto the iudgement of God, as the Pſal. witneſſeth. Enter not into iudgement with thy ſeruant, for no man ſhall be iuſtified in thy ſight, and Iohn ſaith, If we ſaie that we haue no ſinne, we deceiue our ſelue
                           •
                        
                        ▪ if we confeſse our ſinnes, he is faithfull & iuſt to forgiue our ſinnes. And Chriſt ſaith. When ye haue done all that ye can, ſaie ye▪ we are vnprofitable ſeruants. After that the perſon is reconciled and become iuſt by faith, that is, acceptable to god, his obedience pleaſeth God, and is accounted for a kinde of iuſtice, as Iohn ſaith, Euerie one that abideth in him, ſinneth not. and 2. Cor. 1. our reioycing is this, the witnes of our conſcience. This obedience muſt ſtriue againſt euill deſires, and dailie by ſpirituall exerciſes become more pure, alwaies watching and carefull to doe nothing againſt conſcience, according to that ſaying, The ſumme of the lawe is loue out of a pure heart, and a good conſcience, and faith vnfained. But they which obey their wicked luſtes, and doe againſt their owne conſciences, Looke the 3. & 4. obſ.liuing in mortall ſinne, doe neither retaine or holde the righteouſnes of faith, * nor the righteouſnes of good workes, according to the ſaying of Paull, they which doe ſuch thinges ſhall not inioy the kingdome of God.
                  
               
               
                  Theſe things are thus ſet downe in an other edition.
                  ALſo they teach, that this faith muſt bring forth good fruites, and that it is behoouefull to doe the good workes commaunded of God, becauſe god requireth them, and not vpon anie hope to merit iuſtification by them. For remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification is apprehended by faith, as Chriſt himſelfe witneſſeth, When you haue done 
                           〈◊〉
                         theſe things, ſaie, we are vnprofitable ſeruants. the ſame alſo doe the auncient writers of the Church teach, for Ambroſe ſaith: This is ordained of God, that he that beleeueth in Chri
                           ••
                        , ſhallbe ſaued, without worke, by faith alone, freelie, receiuing remiſſion of ſinnes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Hitherto alſo appertaineth the 20. Article.
                  THat our aduerſaries doe accuſe vs to neglect the doctrine of good works, 
                        •
                     t is a manifeſt ſlaunder; for the books of our diuines are extant, wherin they do godly & profitably teach, touching good works, what works in euery calling do pleaſe god. And whereas in moſte Churches there hath bin of a long time no word of the moſte ſpeciall works, namely, of the exerciſes of faith, and of the praiſe of ſuch workes as pertaine to Ciuill gouernment, but for the moſte parte they ſpent all their ſermons in ſetting forth praiſes of humane traditions, and in commending holie daies, faſtings, the ſtate of Monkes, Fraternities, Pilgrimages, the worſhip of Saints, Roſiers, & other vnprotable ſeruices, now by the goodnes of God the Church is reclaimed vnto the true & profitable worſhip, which god doth require and approoue. The Prophets doe bewaile this calamity of the Church in very vehement ſermons, that the true worſhip of god being forgottē, mens ceremonies & a wicked confidence in ceremonies ſhould haue place the chiefe in the Church. From this error they reuoke the Church vnto the true ſeruice of God, & vnto good works in deed. What can be more forceablie ſpoken, then that ſermon in the 49. Pſal. The God of Gods, the Lord hath ſpoken, and called the earth. Here god doth preach vnto al mankinde, condemning their vaine truſt in ceremonies, and propoundeth an other worſhip, giuing them to vnderſtand, that he is highlie diſpleaſed with them, that in the Church doe ſo preach ceremonies, that they ouerturne the true worſhip of God. Manie ſuch like ſermons are to be found in the Prophets, as Eſay, Cap. 58. and Zachar. 7. Michah. Cap 6. and Hoſea crieth, I will haue mercie, and not ſacrifice: and the knowledge of God, rather then burnt offerings. And it is not vnknowen that many godlie and learned men, haue heretofore greatlie wiſhed, that the doctrine touching the comfort of conſciences▪ and the difference of workes, had beene more ſound. For both theſe parts of doctrine ought alwaies to be in the Church, namelie the Goſpell of faith, for to inſtruct and comfort the conſciences, and alſo the doctrine that declareth which are good workes in deede, and which is the true worſhip of god. As for our aduerſaries ſeeing that they doe corrupt the doctrine

of faith, they cannot afforde any ſounde comforte to the conſciences: for they will haue men to ſtand in doubt of the remiſſion of their ſinnes & yet afterwards they b
                        •
                     d men ſeeke remiſſion of ſinne by their owne workes: they deu
                        ••
                      Monkeries, and other ſuch workes, and then they aboliſh the true worſhip of God: for prayer and other ſpirituall exerciſes are laide aſide, when mens mindes are not eſtabliſhed i
                        •
                      a ſure truſt in Chriſt. Moreouer their workes of the ſecond table cannot pleaſe god, except faith goe with them. For this obedience that is but begonne, and is vnperfect, doth pleaſe God for Chriſt ſake alone. Thirdlie they debaſe the workes commaunded of God, and preferre mans traditions farre before them. Theſe they ſet out with moſte goodlie titles, calling them the perfection of the Goſpell: but in the meane time, they ſpeake ſo coldelie of the duetie of a mans calling, of magiſtracie, of marriage, &c. that many graue men haue doubted, whether theſe ſtates of life did pleaſe God or no. Therefore our preachers haue with great care and ſtudie ſet forth both theſe kindes of doctrine, teaching the goſpell concerning faith, and adioyning therewith a pure and holie doctrine of workes.
               
               
                  Of Faith.
                  FIrſt, touching faith and iuſtification, they teach thus. Chriſt hath fitly ſet downe the ſumme of the goſpell, whē as in the laſt of Luke he willeth, that repentance & remiſſion of ſinnes ſhould be preached in his name. For the goſpel Looke the 5 obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.reproueth and conuinceth ſinnes, & requireth repentance, and withall offreth remiſſion of ſinnes for Chriſt ſake, freelie, not for our owne worthines. And like as the preaching of repentance is generall, euen ſo the promiſe of grace is generall▪ and willeth all men to beleeue and to receiue the benefit of Chriſt, as Chriſt him ſelfe ſaith, Come vnto me all yee that are laden▪
                      and Saint Paule ſaith, He is riche towards all, &c. Albeit therefore that contrition in repentance be neceſſarie, yet we muſt know that remiſſion of ſinnes was giuen vnto vs, and that we are made iuſt of vniuſt, that is, reconciled o
                        •
                      acceptable, and the ſonnes of God, freelie, for Chriſt, and not for the worthines of our Contrition, or of any other workes, which either go before, or follow after But this ſame benefite muſt be receiued by faith, whereby we muſt beleeue

that remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification is giuen vs for Chriſts ſake. This knowledge and iudgement bringeth ſure conſolation vnto troubled mindes, and how neceſſarie it is for the Church, conſciences that haue had experience can eaſilie iudge. There is in it no abſurditie, no difficultie, no craftie deceite. looke the 6. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.Here needeth no diſputations of predeſtination, or ſuch like: for the promiſe is generall, and detracteth nothing from good workes, yea rather it doth ſtirre vp men vnto faith and vnto true good workes. For remiſſion of ſinnes is remooued from our workes, and attributed vnto mercie, that it might be an vndoubted benefit, not that we ſhoulde be idle, but much more, that wee ſhoulde knowe how greathe our obedience doth pleaſe god euen in this our ſo great infirmitie. Now for any man to diſpiſe or miſlike this doctrine, whereby both the honour of Chriſt is extolled, and moſt ſweete & ſure comfort offered vnto godlie mindes, and which conteineth the true knowledge of gods mercie, and bringeth forth the true worſhip of God and eternall life, it is more then Phariſaicall blindnes.
                  Before time when as this doctrine was not ſet forth, many fearefull conſciences aſſaied to eaſe themſelues by workes, ſome fled to a monaſticall life, others did chuſe out other workes, thereby to merit remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification. But there is no ſure comforte without this doctrine of the goſpell, which willeth men to beleeue, that remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification are freelie giuen vnto vs for Chriſts ſake, and this wholl doctrine is appointed for the true conflict of a terrified conſcience. But we will adde ſome teſtimonies. Paull Rom. 3. We are iustified freelie, by his grace, through redemption that is in Chriſt Ieſus, whome god hath ſet forth, to be a reconciliation thorough faith in his bloode. Rom. 4. But to him that worketh not, but beleeueth in him that iuſtifieth the vngodlie, his faith is counted for righteouſnes. Epheſ. 2. By grace ye are ſaued, through faith, and not of your ſelues. In theſe and ſuch like ſentences Paull doth plainlie teach, that remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification are giuen vs freelie, and not for the worthines of our workes. And in the 4 to the Rom. he diſputeth at large, why this conſolation is needefull for vs, for if the promiſe did depend vpon the worthines of our works, it ſhould be vncertaine. Wherefore to the end that we may haue ſure

and firme comforte againſt the feares of ſinne and death, and that our faith maie ſtand faſt, it is needefull, that it leane onelie vpon the mercie of God, and not vpon ou
                        •
                      worthines. Therefore Paul ſaieth, Therefore it is by faith, according to grace, that the promiſe might be ſure. For our works cannot be ſet againſt the iudgement of God, according to that ſaying, If thou markeſt our iniquities, who ſhall indure
                           •
                        t. And therefore Chriſt is giuen for a Mediatour to vs, and this honour is not to be transfered vnto our workes.
                  When therefore we doe ſaie, that we are iuſtified by faith, we do not meane, that we are iuſt for the worthines of that vertue, but this is our meaning, that we doe obteine remiſſion of ſins, and imputation of righteouſnes by mercie ſhewed vs for Chriſts ſake. But now this mercie can not be receiued, but by faith. And Faith doth not here ſignifie onelie a knowledge of the hiſtorie, but it ſignifieth a beleefe of the promiſe of mercie which is graunted vs through our Mediatour Chriſt Ieſus. And ſeeing that faith is in this ſorte vnderſtoode of a confidence or truſt of mercie, Saint Paull, and Saint Iames, doe not diſagree. For where as Iames ſaith, The Deuills beleeue, and tremble, he ſpeaketh of an hiſtoricall faith, now this faith doth not iuſtifie. For the wicked and the deuill are conning in the hiſtorie. But Paull when he ſaith: Faith is reckoned for righteouſnes, he ſpeaketh of a truſt and confidence of mercie, promiſed for Chriſts ſake: and his meaning is, that men are pronounced righteouſe, that is reconciled through mercie promiſed for Chriſts ſake, whome we muſt receiue by faith. Now this noueltie of this figuratiue ſpeach of Saint Paull, We are iuſtified by faith, will not offend holie mindes, if they vnderſtand that it is ſpoken properlie of mercie, and that herein mercie is adorned with true and due praiſes. For what can be more acceptable to an afflicted and fearefull conſcience in great greefes, then to heare that this is the commaundement of God, & the voice of the bridgrome Chriſt Ieſus, that they ſhould vndoubtedlie beleeue, that remiſſion of ſinnes or reconciliation is giuen vnto them, not for their owne worthines, but freelie, through mercie, for Chriſts ſake, that the benefite might be certaine? Now Iuſtification in theſe ſayings of Saint Paull doth ſignifie remiſſion of ſins, or reconciliation, or imputation

of righteouſnes, that is, an accepting of the perſon. And herein we doe not bring in a new found opinion into the Church of God. For the ſcripture doth ſet downe at large this doctrine touching faith, and Saint Paul doth eſpecially handle this point in ſome of his epiſtles: the holie fathers alſo doe teach the ſame. For ſo ſaith Ambroſe in his booke, de 
                           ••
                        at. Gent. If ſo be that iuſtification, which is by grace, were due vnto former merittes, ſo that it ſhould not be a gift of the giuer, but a 
                           •
                        warde of the worker, the redemption by the bloode of Chriſt would growe to be of ſmall account, and the prerogatiue of mans works would not yeald vnto the mercies of God. And of this matter there be many diſputations in Saint Auguſtine, And theſe are his wordes. Forſomuch as by the law God ſheweth to man his infirmitie, that flying vnto his mercie by faith he might be ſaued. For it is ſaide, that he carieth both the law and mercie in his mouth. The law to 
                           •
                        onuict the proude: and mercie, to iuſtifie thoſe that are humbled. Therefore the righteouſnes of God through ſaith in Chriſt is reuealed vpon al that beleeue. And the M
                        •
                     leuitan Synode writeth. I
                           •
                         not this ſufficientlie declared, that the Law worketh this, that ſinne ſhould be knowen, and ſo againſt the victorie of ſinne, men ſhould flie to the mercie of god, which is ſet forth in his promiſes, that the promiſes of God, that is the grace of God, might be ſought vnto for deliuerance, and man might beginne to haue a righteouſnes, howbeit not hi
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••
                        ne, but Gods?
                  
               
               
                  Of good works.
                  WHen as we do teach in our Churches the moſt neceſſary doctrine, and comforte of faith, we ioyne therewith the doctrine of good workes, to wit, that obedience vnto the law of God is requiſite in them that be reconciled. For the Goſpell preacheth newnes of life, according to that ſaying. I will put my lawes in their heartes: This new life therefore muſt be an obedience towardes God. The Goſpell alſo preacheth repentance, and faith cannot be, but onlie in them, that doe repent, becauſe that faith doth comfort the heartes in contrition & in the feares of ſin, as Paul ſaith, Being iuſtified by faith, we haue peace. And of repentance he ſaith, Rom. 6. Our olde man is crucified, that the bodie of ſinne might be aboliſhed, that we might no more ſerue ſinne. And Eſaie ſaith, Where will the Lorde dwell? In a contrite and humbled ſpirit, &c.
                  
                  Secondly, among good works, the chiefeſt, & that which is

the chiefeſt worſhip of God, is faith, which doth bring forth manie other vertues, which could neuer be in men, except their hearts had firſt receiued to beleue. How ſhall they call 
                           〈◊〉
                         him, in whome they doe not beleeue? So long as mens mindes are in doubt, whether God heareth them or not, ſo long as euer they thinke that God hath reiected them, they doe neuer truelie call vpon God. But when as once we doe acknowledge his mercie through faith, then we flie vnto God, we loue him, we call vpon him, hope in him, looke for his helpe, obeie him in afflictions, becauſe we doe now know our ſelues to be the ſonnes of God, and that this our ſacrifice, that is, our afflictions, doth pleaſe God. Theſe ſeruices doth faith bring forth. Verie well therefore ſaide Ambroſe, Faith is the mother of a good wil, and of iuſt dealing Our Aduerſaries wil ſe
                        •
                     e verie honourablie to ſet out the doctrine of good workes, and yet concerning theſe ſpirituall workes, to wit, faith, and the exerciſes of faith in praier, and in all matters, counſells, and daungers of this life, they ſpeake neuer a worde. And in deede none can euer ſpeake wel of theſe exerciſes, if the conſciences be left in doubt, and if they know not that God requireth faith as a ſpeciall worſhip of his. And when as that huge ſhew of outward works is caſt (as a myſt) before mens eies, the mindes, eſpeciallie ſuch as be not well inſtructed, are led aware from beholding theſe inward exerciſes. Now it is verie requiſite, that men ſhould be taught and inſtructed, concerning theſe inwarde workes and fruites of the ſpirit. For theſe they be that make a difference betweene the godlie and hypocrites. As for externall worſhip, externall ceremonies, and other outwarde workes, the verie hypocrites can performe them. But theſe ſeruices and duties belong onelie to the true Church, true repentance, feare, faith, praier, &c. Theſe kindes of worſhip are eſpeciallie required, and commended in the Scripture. Pſal 49. Offer vnto God the ſacrifice of praiſe▪
                      and, Call on me in the day of trouble, &c.
                  
                  Thirdlie, by this faith, which doth comforte the heart in repentance, we doe receiue the ſpirit of God, who is giuen vs to be our gouernour & helper, that we ſhould reſiſt ſinne and the deuill, and more and more acknowledge our owne weakenes, and that the knowledge and feare of God, and faith maie increaſe in vs: wherefore our obedience to God

and a new life ought to increaſe in vs, as Saint Paull ſaith, We muſt be renued to the knowledge of God, that the new lawe maie be wrought in vs, and his Image, which hath created vs, be renued, &c.
                  Fourthlie, we teach alſo how this obedience, which is but begunne onelie and not perfect, doth pleaſe God. For in this ſo great infirmitie, and vncleannes of nature, the Saints doe not ſatisfie the law of God. The faithfull therefore haue neede of comforte, that they maie know how their ſlender and imperfect obedience doth pleaſe God. It doth not pleaſe him, as ſatisfying his lawe, but becauſe the perſons themſelues are reconciled & made righteous through Chriſt, and doe beleeue that their weaknes is forgiuen them, as Paull teacheth, There is now no condemnation to them which are in Chriſt, &c. Albeit then that this new obedience is farre from the perfection of the Lawe, yet it is righteouſnes, and is worthie of a rewarde, euen becauſe that the perſons are reconciled. And thus we muſt iudge of thoſe works, which are indeed highlie to be commended, namelie * that they be neceſſarie, that they be the ſeruice Looke the 7▪ obſeru. vpon this confeſſion.of God, and ſpirituall ſacrifices, and doe deſerue a rewarde: Neuertheles this conſolation is firſt to be held touching the perſon, which is verie neceſſarie in the conflict of the conſcience, to weere, that we haue remiſſion of ſinnes freelie by faith, and that the perſon is iuſt, that is, reconciled, and an heire of eternall life through Chriſt, and then that our obedience doth pleaſe God, according to that ſaying, Now ye are not vnder the law, but vnder grace. For our workes maie not be ſet againſt the wrath and iudgement of God: But the terrours of ſinne and death muſt be ouercome by faith and truſt in the mediatour Chriſt, as it is written, O death, I will be thy death. and Iohn. 6. Chriſt ſaith, This is the will of the Father, which ſent me, that euerie one which ſeeth the ſonne, and beleeueth in him, ſhould haue life euerlaſting. and S. Paull. Being iuſtified by faith, we haue peace with God. and the Church alwaies praieth, forgiue vs our treſpaſſes. And thus do the fathers teach, concerning the weaknes of the ſaints, and concerning faith. Auguſtine in his expoſition of the 30. Pſalm. ſaith. Deliuer me in thy righteouſnes. For there is a righteouſnes of God, which is made ours, when it is giuen vnto vs.
                     
                     But therefore is it called the righteouſnes of God, leſt man ſhould thinke that he had a righteouſnes of himſelfe. For, as the Apoſtle Paull ſaith, To him that beleeueth in him that iustifieth the 
                           ••
                        
                        ked, that is, that of a wicked maketh a righteous man, If God ſhould deale by the rule of the law, which is ſet forth vnto vs, he muſt needs be condemned: If God ſhould as it were deale by the rule propounded in the law, whom ſhould he deliuer? for he findeth al men to be ſinners. So ſaith Paul: Al haue ſinned, & ſtand in need of the glory of god. What is this to ſtand in need of Gods glorie? That he ſhould deliuer thee, & not thou thy ſelfe. For thou canst not deliuer thy ſelfe. Thou haſt need of a Sauiour. Why doeſt thou vaunt thy ſelfe? what maketh thee to preſume of the law and of righteouſnes? Seeſt thou not that which doeth fight within the? doeſt thou not heare one that ſtriueth, and confeſſeth his weaknes, and deſireth aide in the battell? O miſerable man that I am? &c.
                  
                  Now it may eaſilie be perceiued, how needefull this doctrine is for the Church, that men may know, that they doe not ſatisfie the law of God and yet may haue true comforte, knowing how their imperfect obedience doth pleaſe God. This doctrine hath beene horriblie darkened, and ſuppreſſed heretofore by certeine fond perſwaſions, wherein vnlearned men haue imagined againſt the authoritie of the ſcripture that they can fullfill the law of God, and that they are iuſt through the fullfilling of the law, &c. And that Monkes are perfect, and doe performe more notable & worthie workes, then the law doth require. In the meane while there is not a worde, how the Mediatour Chriſt is to be apprehended by faith: but they willed man to doubt, or elſe to truſt in his own workes. But as touching this obedience, we doe teach, Looke the 3. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.that they which commit mortall ſinnes are not iuſt, becauſe god requireth this obedience that we ſhould reſiſt ſinnefull luſts. They then which ſtriue not againſt them, but obeie them, contrarie to the commaundement of God, and doe things againſt their conſciences, they are vnrighteous, and doe neither retaine the holy ſpirit, nor faith, that is, confidence and truſt of gods mercie. For confidence, which ſeeketh remiſſion of ſinnes, cannot ſo much as be in ſuch, as are delighted with their ſinnes, and remaine without repentance.
                  
                     
Fiftlie this point is needfull alſo to be taught, by what meanes men maie doe good workes. We ſhewed a litle before how our workes doe pleaſe God. In this place we adde how they maie be done. looke the 8. obſeruatAlbeit that men by their owne ſtrength be able to doe outward honeſt deedes in ſome ſort, and muſt alſo performe this ciuill obedience, yet ſo long as men are voide of faith, they are in the power of the Deuill, who driueth them to ſhamefull ſinnes, occupieth their mindes with wicked and blaſphemous opinions, for that is the kingdome and tyrannie of the Deuil. looke the 9. obſeruat.Moreouer, nature by it ſelfe is weake, & cannot without gods helpe, ſtrengthen it ſ
                        •
                     lfe to the performaunce of anie ſpirituall workes. And for that cauſe are men taught, that in the Goſpell the holie ſpirit is promiſed, who ſhal aide and gouerne the mindes of them, who do repent & beleeue the Goſpel. Wherfore in ſo great infirmitie of nature, in the middeſt of theſe aſſaultes of Sathan, and in all daungers, faith muſt be exerciſed in calling vpon God, euen throughout our wholl life, that we maie continue alwaies in the faith, & in our obedience towards God. Therfore Zacharie, ſaith. I will poure forth the ſpi
                           •
                        it of grace, & of praier, vpon the houſe of Dauid, & upon the inhabitans of Ieruſalem. He calleth him the ſpirit of grace, becauſe the holie ſpirit doth confirme and comforte troubled mindes, and beareth record, that God is pleaſed with vs. He calleth him the ſpirit of praier, to the end, we ſhould dailie exerciſe our faith in praier, that by theſe exerciſes our faith might be confirmed, and a new life grow vp and increaſe in vs.
                  There is no doubt but true vertues are the giftes of Go, ſuch as are, faith, clearenes of iudgement in diſcerning of pointes of religion, courrage of minde, ſuch as is requiſite in them which teach & profeſſe the Goſpel, true care & paines in gouerning of Churches, true humilitie, not to hunt after preferment, not to be puft vp with populare praiſe, nor caſt downe with their diſliking and ill will, true charitie, &c. Theſe Princelie vertues Paull calleth Gods gifts, Rom. 12. Hauing diuers giftes, according to the grace that is giuen vs. And of theſe he ſaieth to the Cor. Theſe thinges worketh one and the ſame ſpirit, diſtrubuting to euerie one, according, &c.
                  
                  
                     
Vnto theſe giftes we muſt ioyne our exerciſe which maie both preſerue the ſame, and deſerue an increaſe of them: according to the ſaying: To him that hath, ſhal be giuen. And it is notably ſaid of Auguſtine. Loue deſerueth an increaſe of loue to weet, when tis put in vſe. For good workes haue rewardes, as in this life, ſo alſo after this life, in the euerlaſting life. Now becauſe that the Church in this life is ſubiect to the croſſe, and to the death of the bodie, therefore many rewardes are differred vntill the life to come, which though it be vndoubtedlie beſtowed through mercy for Chriſts ſake on thoſe which are iuſtified by the faith of Chriſt, yet there is alſo a rewarding of good workes, according to that ſaying, your rewarde is great in heauen. By this it is euident, that the doctrine of good workes, is through the goodnes of God purelie and truelie taught in our Churches. How full of obſcuritie and confuſion the doctrine of good workes was in former times, all godlie mindes know full well. There was none that put men in minde of the difference of mans traditions and the lawe of God: none that taught, how good workes did pleaſe God, in this ſo great infirmitie of ours. To be briefe, there was not one word of faith, which is moſt needfull vnto remiſſion of ſinnes. But now that theſe matters be opened and vnfolded, godlie conſciences lay holde of comforte, and of certaine hope of ſaluation, and doe vnderſtand which is the true worſhip and ſeruice of God, and know how it pleaſeth god, and howe it doth merit at his handes.
               
               
                  This article is thus ſet downe in an other edition.
                  OVr diuines are falſelie accuſed to forbid good workes. For their writinges extant vpon the tenne commaundements, and others of the like argument, do beare witnes, that they haue to good purpoſe taught, concerning euerie kinde of life and duties, what trades of life, and what workes in euery calling doe pleaſe God. Of which thinges preachers in former times taught litle or nothing, onely they did vrge certaine childiſh and needles workes. As keeping of holie daies, ſet faſts, fraternities, pilgrimages, worſhipping of Saints, friaries, Monkeries, and ſuch traſh wherof our aduerſaries hauing had warning, they

do now forget them, & do not preach ſo concerning theſe vn profitable works, as they were wont to doe. Beſides they begin now to make mention of faith, which they were wont to pas ouer with ſilence. But yet they ceaſe not to obſcure & darken this doctrine of faith, while they leaue the conſcience in doubt & would haue men to merit remiſſion of ſins, by their workes, and teach not that we doe by faith alone vndoubtedlie receiue remiſſion of ſinnes for Chriſtes ſake. When as therfore the doctrine of faith, which ſhould be eſpecially aboue others taught in the Church, hath bene ſo long vnknowen, as all men muſt needes graunt, that there was not a word of the righteouſnes of faith in all their ſermons, and that the doctrine of workes onelie was vſuall in the Churches, for this cauſe our diuines did thus admoniſh the Churches. Firſt that our workes cannot reconcile God vnto vs, or deſerue remiſſion of ſins, grace, & iuſtification, at his hands. But this we muſt obtaine by faith whiles we beleeue that we are receiued into fauour for Chriſt ſake who alone is appointed the Mediatour & interceſſor by whom the father is reconciled to vs. He therfore that truſteth by his works to merit grace, doth deſpiſe the merit and grace o
                        •
                      Chriſt, and ſeeketh by his owne power, without Chriſt, to come vnto the father, whereas Chriſt hath ſaid expreſſelie of himſelfe, I am the waie, the trueth, and the life. This Doctrine of faith is handled by Paule almoſte in euerie Epiſtle. Eph. 2. ye are ſaued freelie by faith, and that not of your ſelues, it is the gift of God, not of workes, &c. And leſt anie here ſhould cauill, that we bring in a new found interpretation, this wholl cauſe is vnderpropped with teſtimonies of the Fathers. Auguſt. doth in manie volumes defend grace & the righteouſnes of faith againſt the merit of works. The like doth Ambroſe teach in his booke, De voca
                           •
                        . Gent. and els where▪for thus he ſaith in the forenamed place. The redemption made by the bloode of Christ would be of ſmall account, and the prerogatiue of mans workes would not giue place to the mercie of God, if the iuſtification, which is by grate, weere due to merites going before, ſo as it ſhould not be the liberalitie of the giuer, but the wages or hire of the labourer.
                  
                  This doctrine though it be contemned of the vnskilfull ſor
                        •
                     
                     ▪ yet 
                        •
                     ne godlie, and fearefull conſcience doth finde

by experience, that it bringeth verie great comfort: becauſe that the conſciences cannot be quieted by anie workes, but by faith alone, when as they beleeue aſſuredlie, that God is appeaſed towards them for Chriſtes ſate, as Paul teacheth, Rom. 5. Beeing iuſtified by faith, we 
                           〈◊〉
                         peace with God. This doctrine doth whollie belong to the conflict of a troubled conſcience, and can not be wel vnderſtood, but where the conſcience hath felt a conflict. Wherefore all ſuch as haue had no experience thereof, and al that are prophane men, which dreame that Chriſtian righteoſnes i
                        •
                      naught elſe, but a ciuill and philoſophicall iuſtice, are 
                        〈◊〉
                      iudges of this matter. In former ages mens conſciences were vexed with the doctrine of works, they neuer heard any comfort out of the Goſpell. Whereupon conſcience draue ſome into Monaſteries, hoping there to merit fauour by a monaſticall life. Others found out other workes, whereby to merit fauour, & to ſatisfie for ſinne. There was verie great neede therefore to teach this doctrine of faith in Chriſt, and after ſo long time to renew it, to the end that fearefull conſciences might not want comfort, but might know, that grace and forgiuenes of ſinnes and iuſtification were apprehended and receiued by faith in Chriſt.
                  Another thing, which we teach men, is, that in this place the name of Faith doth not onelie ſignifie a bare knowledge of the hiſtorie, which maie be in the wicked, and is in the Deuill, but it ſignifieth a faith, which beleeueth, not onelie the hiſtorie, but alſo the effect of the hiſtorie, to weete, the article of remiſſion of ſinnes, namelie, that by Chriſt we haue grace, righteouſnes, and remiſſion of ſins. Now he that knoweth, that the father is merciful to him through Chriſt, this man knoweth God truelie: he knoweth that God hath a care of him, he loueth God, and calleth vpon him: In a worde, he is not without God in the world, as the gentiles are. As for the deuilles, and the wicked, they can neuer beleeue this article of the remiſſion of ſinns. And therefore they hate God as their enimie, they call not vpon him, they looke for no good thing at his handes. After this manner doth Auguſtine admoniſh his reader touching the name of faith, and teacheth, that this word faith, is taken in the

ſcriptures, not for ſuch a knowledge, as is in the wicked, but for a truſt and cofidence, which doth comfort and cheare vp diſquieted mindes.
                  Moreouer our deuines do teach, that it is requiſite to doe good workes, not for to hope to deſerue grace by them, but becauſe it is the will of God that we ſhould do them. And becauſe that the holie ſpirit is receiued by faith, our hartes are preſentlie renued, and doe put on new affections, ſo as they are hable to bring forth good workes. For ſo ſaith Ambroſe, Faith is the breeder of a good wil and of good actions For mans powers, without the holie ſpirit, are full of wicked affections, and are weaker then that they can do anie good deede before God. Beſides, they are in the deuilles power, who driueth men forward into diuers ſinnes, into profane opinions, and into very hainous crimes. As was to be ſene in the Philoſophers, who aſſaying to liue an honeſt life, could not attaine vnto it, but defiled themſelues with open and groſſe faultes. Such is the weaknes of man, when he is without faith and the holie ſpirit, & hath no other guide, but the naturall powers of man. Hereby euerie man maie ſee that this doctrine is not to be accuſed, as forbidding good works, but rather is much to be commended, becauſe it ſheweth after what ſorte we muſt doe good workes For without faith the nature of man can by no meanes performe the workes of the firſt and ſecond table. Without faith it cannot call vpon God, hope in God, beare the croſſe, but ſeeketh helpe from man, and truſteth in mans helpe. So it commeth to paſſe that all luſtes and deſires and all humane d
                        •
                     uiſes and counſells doe beare ſwaie, ſo long as faith and truſt in God is abſent. Wherfore Chriſt ſaith. Without me ye can do nothing. Ioan. 15. and the Church ſingeth. Without thy power there is taught in man, and there is nothing but that which is hurtfull.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
               
                  Of the remiſſion of ſinnes, and of Iuſtification.
                  WE ſaid before that theſe controuerſies doe pertaine to the interpreting of two Articles of the

Creede, I beleeue the remiſſion of ſinnes, and, I beleeue the holie Catholike Church. Neither doe we ſpeake of not neceſſarie or ſight thinges. It is moſte neceſſarie, that in the Church the doctrine touching ſinne ſhould be propounded, and that men ſhould know what ſinne is, and that there ſhould be an euident difference betweene polit
                        •
                     call iudgements, and the iudgement of God. But ſeing our aduerſaries doe not teach aright, what ſinne is, they confirme in men an euill ſecuritie, and manie falſe opinions. Againe, what can be more miſerable, then either to obſcure, or to be ignorant of this great benefit, namelie the Remiſſion of ſinnes, and deliuerance from eternall death? ſeing that there is no difference betwixt the Church and other men, when as the light is extinguiſhed, concerning free Remiſſion of ſinnes, for the Sonnes ſake, and concerning Faith, whereby Remiſſion muſt be receiued: neither is there anie other comfort drawing vs back from eternall death, neither can there be anie true Inuocation, without this comfort: & God himſelfe hath ſo often commaunded, that his Sonne ſhould be heard, and the Goſpell kepte, which is a wonderfull decree, brought forth out of the ſecret counſell of the Godhead, when it was hidde from all creatures; therefore it is moſte neceſſarie, that the true doctrine, touching remiſſion of ſinnes, ſhould be kept vndefiled.
                  But in all ages, euen from our firſt fathers time, the deuils haue ſcattered ſubtill deluſions, againſt the true doctrine, concerning the Sonne of God, and eſpeciallie in this article, whome notwithſtanding God hath oftentimes refuted, good teachers being againe raiſed vp, that the Church might not vtterlie periſh. Adam, Seth, Noe, Sem, Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, and others after them, did ſhewe the true difference, betwixt the Church of God and other men, and taught that to the Church was giuen the promiſe, touching the Mediatour the Sonne of God, and touching Remiſſion of ſinnes, and that this Remiſſion is to be receiued freelie, for the Mediatours ſake: And they tied Inuocation to this God, which had manifeſted himſelfe by giuing a promiſe, concerning the Mediatour, and they had externall rites giuen them of God, which were ſignes of the promiſe, and the ſinewes of the publike Congregation.

Theſe rites did a great parte of the multititude imitate, omitting the doctrine of the promiſes & faith: and when they had deuiſed this perſuaſion, that men by obſeruing theſe rites might deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, they heaped vp manie ceremonies, and by litle and litle boldnes went ſo farre (as commonlie it commeth to paſſe) that diuers men deuiſed diuers Gods. So the heathen departed from the true Church of god, and from the knowledge of the true god, and the promiſe of the Redeemer.
                  The ſame thing alſo hapned after Moſes his time. Ceremonies were appointed for this cauſe, that they ſhould be admonitions of the Mediatour, of the Doctrine of Faith, of free remiſſion for the Mediatours ſake. But they feigned that ſinnes were forgiuen for thoſe rites and ſacrifices, and by this ſuperſtition they heaped vp ſacrifices, and forgot the Mediatour, and were without true comfort, and without true inuocation. The ſame thing hapned alſo after the Apoſtles time, the light of the goſpell being loſt, wherein is propounded free remiſſion for the Mediatours ſake, and that to be receiued by Faith. They ſought remiſſion by Monaſticall exerciſes, by ſingle life, by diuers obſeruations, by the offering in the Maſſe, by the interceſſion of dead men, and manie monſtrous ſuperſtitions were deuiſed, as the hiſtories of the wholl Church which ſucceeded the Apoſtles doe declare. Againſt theſe errours the infinite mercie of God hath oftentimes reſtored the voice of the Goſpell. And as among the people of Iſraell he did often raiſe vp Prophets, which ſhould purge the doctrine diligentlie, ſo in the Church, after the Apoſtles time, when the writings of Origen and Pelagius, and the ſuperſtition of the people had corrupted the puritie of the goſpell, yet notwithſtanding, as in a miſt, the light of the goſpell was againe kindled by Auguſtine, and him followed Proſper, Maximus, and others, who reprooued the falſe opinions touching this Article. Afterward when the Monkes were ſprong vp, and that opinion, which faigneth men to merit by their workes, was a freſh ſpread abroad, yet there were ſome of a better iudgement, although they added ſtable to the foundation: as Hugo, Bernard, Gilbert, William of Paris, Tauler, Ambroſe, Weſell, and others in other places. And now by the

voice of Luther, the doctrine of the goſpell is more cleered, and more euidentlie reſtored, and the Lambe ſhewed vnto vs, as the Baptiſt ſaith, Beholde the lambe of God, that tak
                           •••
                         awaie the ſinnes of the world. He that beleeueth in the Sonne, hath eternall life: he that beleeueth not, the wrath of God abideth on him. This ſame voice of the Goſpell our Churches doe pu
                        •
                     l
                        •••
                     , and that without corruption: and we doe diſcerne that diſcipline, or righteouſnes, which a man not regenerat maie performe, from the righteouſnes of faith, and that newnes, whereof the goſpell doth preach.
                  We ſaie that all men are to be reſtrained by diſcipline, that is, by that righteouſnes, which euen the vnregenerate ought, and after a ſorte maie performe, which is an obedience in externall actions, according to all the commaundements of God apperterning to all men. looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.Becauſe that God left this libertie in man after his fall, that the outward members might after a ſorre obeie reaſon and the will, in ſtirring vp or omitting outward motions: as. Achilles maie draw his ſword, or put it vp into the ſheath: Scipio maie reſtraine his members, ſo that he meddle not with another mans wife, as in their place theſe thinges are trulie and copiouſlie declared. Now it is moſte certaine, that this diſcipline is commaunded of God, and that the breaking thereof is puniſhed with preſent and eternall puniſhments, euen in thoſe which are not conuerted vnto god, according to thoſe ſainges. The law was made for the vniuſt. He that taketh the ſword, ſhall periſh with the ſword. Alſo, Forni
                           •
                        atours and adulterers the Lorde will iudge. Alſo, Woe vnto thee which ſpoileſt, becauſe thou ſhalt be ſpoiled. And although all men ought to gouerne their manners by this diſcipline, and God doth ſeuerelie commaund, that all kingdomes ſhould defend this diſcipline, and he by horrible puniſhmentes doth declare his wrath againſt this outward contumacie: yet this externall diſcipline, euen where it is moſt honeſt, is not a fulfilling of the law, neither doth it deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, neither is it that righteouſnes, wherby we are accepted before God, nor that light ſhining in the nature or men, as righteouſnes ſhined in vs in our creation, or as new righteouſnes ſhall ſhine in vs in the life eternall. But all this diſcipline, is an externall gouernment, ſuch as

it is, like vnto the leafe of a figge tree, wherewith our firſt parentes after their fall did couer their nakednes: neither doth it anie more take awaie ſinne, and the corruption of nature and death, then thoſe figge leaues did. Hence it is, that Paul doth ſo often crie out, that ſinne is not taken awaie by the law. Rom. 3. By the workes of the law no fleſh ſhall be iuſtified in his ſight, And Rom. 8. When it was impoſſible to the law to iuſtifie, &c. And Gal. 2. If righteouſnes doth come by the law, then Chriſt died in vaine. And Tit. 3. Not by the workes of righteouſnes, which we haue done, but according to his mercie he hath ſaued vs. And it is a reproch vnto the Sinne of God, to imagine that anie our workes are merittes, or the price of remiſſion of ſinnes, and that they are propitions for ſinnes. Therefore we do openlie condemne thoſe Phariſaical & Pelagian doting dreames, which fa
                        •
                     gne that that diſcipline is a fullfill ng of the law of god alſo that it doth deſerue remiſſion, either of congreitie, or of con
                        ••
                     gnity, or that it is a righteouſnes, whereby men are made acceptable to God.
               
               
                  And after a few pages in the ſame Article.
                  Seeing that the minde is raiſed vp by this faith, it is certaine that remiſſion of ſinnes, reconciliation, and imputing of righteouſnes is giuen for the ment of Chriſt alone, and that Chriſt is effectuall in vs, and doth by his holie ſpirit quicken the beleeuers, and deliuer vs from eternall death, and withall make vs heires of eternall life. So ſaith Paul, Rom. 3. We conclude that man is iustified by faith, without the workes of the lawe. Alſo, we are iuſtified freelie by his grace, through the redemption that is in Chriſt Ieſus, whome God hath ſet forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. And, Act. 10. To him giue all the Prophets wi
                           •
                        nes, that all that beleeue in him, ſhall receiue remiſſion of ſinnes.
                  
                  Now the wordes are knowne and manif
                        •
                     ſt. Faith doth ſignifie not onelie the knowledge of the hiſtorie (for that is alſo in the Deuilles, of whome it is ſaid, The deuilles do beleue, and tremble) but it doth ſignifie, to embrace al the Articles of Faith, and among thoſe this article, I do bele
                           •
                        e the remiſſion of ſinnes, neither do I beleue that it is onelie giuen to others, but to me alſo. This faith is alſo a confidence, reſting in the Mediatour, according to that, Beeing inſtified by faith, we haue peace. So that Paull ſpeaketh of faith, which

conſenting to all the articles of the Creede, doth beholde and imbrace the promiſe: for it ioyneth together faith and the promiſe. Rom. 4. Therefore it is by faith, that the premiſe might be ſure.
                  
                  In expounding the word Iuſtified, it is vſuallie ſaid, To is iuſtified, doth ſignifie, of vnrighteous to be made righteous, which beeing rightlie vnderſtood, doth agree alſo to our purpoſe. Of vnrighteous to be made righteous, that is, acquitted from the guilt, for the ſonne of God his ſake, that is, laying holde by faith vpon Chriſt himſelfe, who 
                           〈◊〉
                         our righteouſnes (as Ieremie & Paul do ſaie) becauſe that by his merit we haue remiſſion, and God doth impute his righteouſnes to vs, and for him doth account vs iuſt, and by giuing his holie ſpirit, doth quicken and regenerate vs, as it is ſaide, Ioh. 5. This is life in his Sonne: He that hath the Sonne, hath eternall life: he that hath not the Sonne of God, hath not life. And. Rom. 3. That he may be iuſt, and a iuſtifier. And although newnes is withall begunne, which ſhall be perfect in the life eternal, wherunto we are redeemed, yet neither for the new qualities, nor for any workes, is any man in this life made iuſt, that is, acceptable to God, and heire of eternall life, but onelie for the Mediatours ſake, who ſuffered, roſe againe, reigneth, and praieth for vs, ſhadowing and quickning vs. For although vertues are here begunne, yet be they ſtill imperfect, & the reliques of ſinne do ſticke in vs. Therefore we muſt holde this comfort, that the perſon is accepted for the Sonne of God his ſake, his righteouſnes beeing imputed to vs, as it is ſaid, Rom. 4. Abraham beleeued God, and it was imputed to him for righteouſnes. Alſo, Bleſſed are they, whoſe inic
                           •
                        ities be forgiuen, and whoſe ſinnes be couered. Therefore this ſaying muſt be vnderſtood correlatiuelie, We are iuſtified by faith, that is, we are iuſtified by confidence in the Sonne of God, not for our quality, but becauſe he is the reconciler, in whom the heart doth reſt in confidence of the promiſed mercie for his ſake. Which confidence he doth raiſe vp in vs by his holie Spirit, as Paull ſaith, Ye haue receiued the Spirit of the a
                           ••
                        ption of the ſonnes, by whom we crie, Abba, Father.
                  
                  Here alſo we muſt ſpeake of the excluſiue member. Paull doth often repeat the word Freely, by which it is moſte certaine, that the condition of our merites is excluded. Therefore

it is ſaide in our Churches, We are iuſtified by Faith alone, which we ſo vnderſtand, and declare, Freely, for the onelie Mediatours ſake, not for our contrition, or other our merites, we haue our ſinnes forgiuen, vs and are reconciled to God. For, although contrition and many other vertues are together with Faith or with this confidence kindled in vs, yet theſe vertues are not the cauſe, or the merit of the Remiſſion of ſinnes, neither doth the perſon pleaſe God in regarde of them, according to that ſaying, No man li
                           •
                        ing ſhall be iuſtified in thy ſight▪
                      but the perſon hath remiſſion, and doth certenlie pleaſe God, by reaſon of the Mediatour, who muſt be apprehended by faith, as it is ſaide, Eph. 3. B
                           •
                         whome we haue boldnes, and entrance with confidence, by Faith in him. This wholl doctrine is more manifeſt in the true conuerſion and dailie inuocation of the godlie. When we are in great feare by the knowledge of the wrath of God, this one comfort is f
                        •
                     rme and ſure, to flie to the Sonne of God, who ſaith, Come vnto me, all ye that labour, and are loaden, and I will refreſh you. Alſo, As I liue, I will not the death of a ſinner, but that he returne and liue. Alſo, Grace aboundeth more then ſinne. In theſe griefes if man be taught, to doubt of the remiſſion of ſinnes, ſorrow will haue the vpper hand, and then follow moſte greeuous murmurings againſt God, and deſperation, and eternall death: but if man be taught, that doubting is to be ouercome by faith, then ſhall he vnderſtand, that by the worde Faith, is not onelie ſignified the knowledge of the ſtorie: he ſhall know that confidence doth relie vpon the onelie Mediatour, and he ſhall perceiue what is meant by theſe wordes, Freely, for the Mediatour ſake, remiſſion is receiued by faith alone, and ſo the perſon is made acceptable.
                  This wraſtling hath at all times inſtructed ſome. For though Origen, & manie other 
                        •
                     rit
                        ••
                     s 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſententiaries haue brought forth an impu
                        •
                     e kinde of doctrine, yet in Auguſtine and certaine others we 
                        •
                     eede diuers ſentences which ſhew, that they alſo receiued comfort out of th ſe true fountains. Who although they d
                        •
                     e 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſpeake vnproperlie, of thinges vnlike, becauſe they were 
                        〈…〉
                      negligent in ſpeaking, yet we maie 
                        〈…〉
                      what was their perpetuall iudgement, if we will iudge 
                        〈◊〉
                      Auguſtine 
                        ••
                     on the Pſal. 31. ſaith. Who be happie
                           •
                         not they 
                           •
                        n whome god ſhall not ſinde
                     
                     ſinnes, for thoſe he findeth in all men. For all men haue ſinned, and are deſtitute of the glorie of God. Therefore if ſinnes be found in 
                           〈◊〉
                         men, it is euident, that none are happie, but thoſe whoſe ſinnes it forgiuen. This therefore the Apoſtle did thus commend: Abra
                           •
                        a
                           •
                         beleeued God, and it was imputed to him for righteouſnes. Here certainlie Auguſtine by faith doth vnderſtand confidence, which receiueth remiſſion of ſinnes: and that which is ſaid in Geneſis, and in Paull, he doth altogether vnſterſtand it, as we expound it. And in his booke, De ſpiritu & litera, he ſaith, By the law we feare God, and by faith we flie to his mercie. Bernard in his Sermon, De 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      ſaith, Firſt of all it is neceſsarie to beleeue, that thou canſt not haue remiſſion of ſinnes, but by the mercie of God. But a
                           •••
                         thereunto, that thou maiſt alſo beleeue this, that through him thy ſinnes be forgiuen thee. This is the witnes which the holie Ghoſt doth 
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        e in our heart, ſaying: T
                           •
                        y ſinnes be forgiuen thee. For ſo doth the Apoſtle thinke, that a man is iuſtified freelie by faith. In this ſentence the iudgement of our Churches is plainlie and properlie alledged, and like teſtimonies are to be ſound in this author. Baſill alſo, in his ſermon of Humilitie doth moſt properly ſet forth our iudgement, in theſe wordes: He that reioyceth, let him reioyce in the Lorde, ſaying, that Chriſt is maie vnto v
                           •
                         of God, wiſedome, and righteouſnes, and ſanctification, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         a
                           •
                         it is written, He that reioyceth, let him reioyce in the Lorde. For this is per
                           ••
                        ct and ſound reioycing in God, when as a man is not puffed vp by reaſon of his owne righteouſnes, but doth acknowledge that he doth ſtand in neede of the true righteouſnes, and that he is iuſtified by faith alone in Chriſt.
                  
                  Seeing therefore that by this which hoth bin ſpoken it is manifeſt, what the worde Faith doth ſignifie, in this propoſition, We are iuſtified by Faith, herereupon we maie vnderſtand, that the Monkes and others doe daungerouſlie er
                        •
                     e, which doe commaund thoſe that are turned to God, to doubt whether they doe pleaſe God. This common errour of doubting is euidentlie refuted by theſe wordes, Being iuſtified by Faith, we haue peace with God. Alſo, Therefore is righteouſnes of faith, that the promiſe might be ſure. For ſo long as mens hearts are tormented with doubting, they flie from God, they doe not reſt in God, nor call vpon him: and the promiſe becommeth vnto them but a vaine ſound, becauſe

they giue not conſent vnto it. To conclude, it is the eternall and immutable commaundement of God, that we ſhould beleeue in the Son of God, according to this ſaying, The ſpirit ſhall conuince the world of ſinne, becauſe they beleeue not in me. Alſo 1. Ioh. 5. He that beleeueth not God, ma
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        h him a l
                           •
                        er. Now it is a fooliſh cauill, when they ſaie, that we muſ
                        •
                     e doubt, in reſpect of our vnworthines, and not in reſpect of mercie. For the promiſe was therefore giuen, therefore the Sonne of God was appointed our Mediatour, becauſe we are vnworthie: and that for his ſake, hauing ſuffered, being raiſed vp againe, and now 
                        ••
                     king interceſſion for vs, and dwelling in vs, and cloathing vs with his right
                        •••
                     ſ
                        ••
                     s, the Father might vndoubtedlie be mercifull to this 
                        〈◊〉
                      lumpe of ours, being vnworthie, and full of 
                        〈…〉
                      to that ſaying, There is now no condemnation 
                           〈◊〉
                         them which talke in Christ Ieſus. Al
                        •
                     o it is a
                        •
                     ſude which they 
                        •
                     ore, that we muſte doubt, by reaſon of our vnworthines. For we are not to doubt, whether our vnworthines doe diſpleaſe God▪ but with true ſighes let vs confeſſe that we are 
                        〈◊〉
                      and let vs ley to the promiſe, whereunto God heth commaunded vs to aſſert. Neither is that ſaying Eccl
                        ••
                      9. 
                        ••
                     tlie applied to this doubting, Man know
                           •
                        th not 
                           〈…〉
                         worthie of loue, or of hatred. It is madnes to imagine that Salomon ſhould haue anie ſuch meaning, that neither the iuſt, nor the vniuſt ought to determine with them ſelues, whether they pleaſe or diſpleaſe God, ſeing it is moſte certaine, that they, which perſeuere in wicked deedes 
                        〈◊〉
                      their conſcience, doe diſpleaſe God. But Salomon doth withdraw vs from externall ſhewes to the wo
                        •
                     de of God: as though he ſhould ſaie: Doe not determine with thy ſelfe, that by reaſon of thy proſperity thou art in fauour with god, or by reaſon of thy aduerſitie thou art out of fauour with him. Alexander doth not therefore pleaſe God, becauſe he is a Conquerour, and enioyeth a large empire. Let not Iob in his calamitie, nor Dauid in his exile thinke that they be forſaken of God, becauſe they be miſerable; let them not iudge according to theſe euents or outwarde ſhewes, but by the word of God: and then euen in the middeſt of our miſ
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     ie we ſhall receiue this comfort, As I liue, I will not the death of a ſinner, &c. God ſo loued the worlde, that he 
                           〈◊〉
                         his onelie begotten
                     
                     Sonne, that euerie one that beleeueth in him ſhould not periſh, &c. To conclude, This errour of doubting, is altogether heatheniſh, and doth aboliſh the goſpel, & in true conuerſion taketh awaie comforte from them that feele the wrath of God. Men are rather to be taught, that this is vndoubtedlie the voice of the goſpell, that we ſhoulde beleeue the Sonne of God, and be aſſured, that grace doth abounde much more then ſinne: and therefore let vs withſtand doubting, by wraſtling get the vper hand, and by faith ouercome it, that we maie haue acceſſe to God: inuocate him, and giue him thankes. Theſe cheife pointes of worſhippe are fearefullie hindred, when mens mindes are ſhaken with the wanes of doubting, as experience teacheth. Hereof it is euident, why it is neceſſarie, that the decree of the Tridentine councell, which confirmeth the errour of doubting, ſhould be reprooued. Alſo, by all that which hath bin ſaide, it maie be vnderſtood, that we doe iuſtlie finde faulte with that Syne
                        •
                     doche, wherby ſome interpret Pauls words after this ſort, We are iuſtified by Faith, that is, by a formed loue, as they ſpeake. For they vnderſtand the worde faith onelie of knowledge, and thinke that this is the meaning; We are iuſtified by Faith, that is, we are prepared to righteouſnes, that is, to other vertues, to wit, obedience & fulfilling of the law. So this is it onelie which they ſaie. Man is righteous for his owne vertues: then they will him to doubt, whether he be furniſhed with thoſe habites, whereof they ſpeake.
                  Now we haue declared before, that by Faith is ſignified a confidence reſting in the Sonne of God the reconciler, for whome we are receiued, and doe pleaſe God, not for our vertues, or fullfilling the lawe. And ſeeing that in this ſame comfort, the confidence, whereby we doe reſt in the Sonne of God, is indeede a motion, kindled by the holie Ghoſt, whereby the heart is quickned, and freed from eternal death, this conuerſion is called regeneration, Ioan. 3. Except a man be borne againe of water, and of the ſpirit. And now man is made in deed the dwelling place of God, who is effectuall in him: as it is ſaide Ioan. 14. If anie man loue me, he will keepe my worde, and my Father will loue him, and we will come vnto him, and will dwell with him. The eternall Father and the Sonne, by the holie Ghoſt, doe quicken our heartes, when

as by faith they are raiſed vp in this comforte, as Paull ſaieth, Galat. 3. That ye might receiue the promiſe of the ſpirit through faith. Therfore we doe not ſpeake of an idle faith: and the vnskilful are deceiued, whiles they thinke that remiſſion of ſinnes doth happen to ſuch as are idle, without a certaine motion of the minde, without wraſtling, and without a feeling of comforte in true griefes, in that age which now is able to vnderſtand the voice of doctrine, according to that ſaying, Faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God▪
                      and becauſe that in repentance we propound comforte vnto the conſcience, Looke the 6. obſeruat. vpon the Auguſt. confeſſ.we do not here adde queſtions of predeſtination or of election, but we lead al readers to the worde of God, and exhort them to learne the will of God out of his worde, as the eternall Father by expreſſe voice commaunded. Heare him. Let them not looke for other reuelations.
               
               
                  Hitherto alſo pertaineth the fift Article.
                  Of new obedience.
                  THe wholl benefit of the Sonne of God is to be conſidered: for he will ſo take awaie ſinne and death, and deliuer vs from the kingdome of the Deuill, that ſinne being altogether aboliſhed, and death vanquiſhed, he may reſtore vnto vs eternall life, wherein God maie communicate vnto vs his wiſedome, righteouſnes, and ioye, and wherein God maie be all in all. This great benefit he doth beginne in this miſerable lumpe of ours, in this life, as it is written, 2. Cor. 5. If ſo we ſhalbe found clothed, and nor naked. Alſo Mat. 10. They that ſhall continue to the end, ſhal be ſaued. Therefore when we receiue remiſſion of ſinnes, and are reconciled, and ſealed by the holie Ghoſt, it is a horrible madnes to waſte theſe good gifts, as theſe waſters are diſcribed in the parable of the houſe, that was made cleane, and in the ſecond Epiſtle of Peter, Cap. 2. it is ſaide If they after they haue eſcaped from the filthines of the world, are yet tangled againe therein, and ouercome, the latter ende is worſſe with them then the beginning. Now theſe good giftes are waſted or powred out, if a man doe not holde the foundation, that is, the Articles of Faith, and either willinglie, or being deceiued, imbraceth wicked opinions or Idoles: alſo if a man doe fall greiuouſlie againſt his conſcience. Theſe rules are often times repeated, as Galat. 5. Thy which doe ſuch thinges ſhall not inherit the kingdome of God.
                     
Therefore it is neceſſarie to haue a care to auoide ſuch falls. If this manifeſt neceſſitie, the great puniſhment, to wit, the loſſe of eternall life, being ſet before their eies, doe not mooue ſome to doe good workes, they ſhew them ſelues to be of the number of thoſe, of whome it is ſaid, 1. Ioh. 3. He that committeth ſinne, is of the Deuill. Alſo, If anie man haue not the Spirit of Christ, he is not his. And there be manie cauſes of this neceſſitie. Firſt, a debte, that is an immutable order, that the creatures ſhould obeie God. Therefore Paull ſaieth, Rom. 8. Ye are debters▪
                      Alſo, leſt the holie Ghoſt and faith be ſhaken of, let there be a care to auoid preſent puniſhments: becauſe it is mo
                        •
                     le certaine, that manie falles, euen of the Elect, are fearefullie puniſhed, in this life, as the Church ſpeaketh in Micheas. cap. 7. I will beare the wrath of the Lord, becauſe I haue ſinned againſt him. And the hiſtories of all times doe containe fearefull examples of puniſhments, as Dauid, Salomon, Menaſſes, Ioſias, Nabuchodonozor, & innumerable others were greiuoſlie puniſhed. Wherein this is moſte to be lamented, that in the verſe puniſhments manie ſinnes are heaped vp: as in the ſedition raiſed vp againſt Dauid, & in the renting of the kingdome, for the ſinne of Salomon And touching the neceſſitie of doing good workes, the Lord ſaith, Mat. 5. Except your righteouſnes exceed the righteouſnes of the Scribes and of the Phariſies, ye ſhal not enter into the kingdome of heauen. The neceſſitie, which is manifolde, being thus conſidered, theſe queſtions inſue thereupon: what workes are to be done: How they maie be done: In what ſorte they doe pleaſe god▪ What rewardes they haue: what is the difference 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the 
                           〈…〉
                         the 4. Sect.of ſinnes: * what ſinnes do ſhake of the holie Ghoſt, and what not.
               
               
                  What workes are to be done.
                  IT is the will of god▪ that Faith and workes be gouerned by his word. Therefore we muſt keepe the rule, touching good workes both internall and externall, contained in the commaundementes of god, which doe pertaine to-vs, as it is ſaid, Ezech. 23. Wa
                           ••
                        eye in my commaundements. And theſe internall and externall workes doe then become the worſhip of god, when they be done in faith, and are referred to this end, that god by this obedience may be glorified.

Now we haue ſhewed before, that euen the vntegenerate maie performe this externall obedience or diſcipline▪ as 
                        •
                     icero liueth honeſtlie, and for his paines in gouernment deſerueth well of all mankinde▪ but his minde is full of doubts, touching the Prouidence of god, neither doth he knowe, nor ſpeake vnto the true god in inuocation, neither doth he know the promiſes, and he alwaies doubteth whether he be heard, eſpeciallie when he is in miſcrie, and then is he angrie with god, and thinketh that he is vn
                        •
                     uſ
                        •
                     lie puniſhed, 
                        •
                     ei
                        •
                     g he was a honeſt Citizen, & profitable for the common wealth. Such darkenes in the minde, is great ſinne, ſuch as reaſon, not being i'luminated by god▪ is not 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     o iudge of.
                  Therefore inward obedience, true knowledge of god, the feare of god▪ ſorrowes in repentance, truſt to obteine mercie promiſed for the Sonne of god, inuocation, hope, loue, joy in god, & other vertues muſt be begunne alſo in the regenerate, and they muſt be referred to a proper ende, to wit, that God maie be obeied. Theſe kindes of true worſhip cannot be giuen vnto God, without the light of the goſpel, and without faith▪ which▪ our aduerſaries, who will ſee me to be ioylie preachers of good workes, do neither vnderſtand, nor require: ſeeing they omitte the doctrine of faith, which is a confidence to obtaine mercie, reſting in the Sonne of god, which is an eſpeciall worke, and the chiefe worſhipe of God. Of workes not commaunded of god, we ſhall ſpeake hereafter, and we muſt holde faſt that rule, Math. 15. In vaine doe they worſhip me with the commaundements of men. And in the Church it falleth out often times, that ceremonies deuiſed by men are more carefullie kept, then the commaundements of God, yea the authoritie of 
                        •
                      har
                        ••
                     aicall & vniuſt traditions is preferred before the commaundements of God: as in manie ages, for the vniuſt and wicked commaundement of ſingle life, the commandement of god concerning true chaſtitie, was horriblie violated. Therefore we muſt conſider of the difference of the lawe, whereof we will ſpeake againe hereafter.
               
               
                  How good workes maie be done.
                  GReat is the infirmitie of man, and the deuill a moſt cruel enemie, who for the hatred he beareth to God,

rageth againſt mankinde, and doth endeuour all that he can, eſpeciallie to deſtroy the Church, as it is written of Peter. 1. Pet. 5. Watch, becauſe your aduerſarie the deuill goethabout like a roaring Lyon, ſeeking whome he maie deuour. 
                     looke the 2. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.Therefore although men by their naturall ſtrength maie after a ſorte performe the externall diſcipline, yet are they often ouercome by this common infirmitie: and the deuill alſo doth often times force men, not altogether ſauage, to commit horrible factes, as he deceiued Eue, and compelled the brethren of Ioſeph, Dauid, and others innumerable. Therefore what diligence, or what aduiſement, can be ſufficient for this moſt ſubtill enemie? Here let vs laie holde vpon that moſt ſweete comfort, The ſonne of God appeared to deſtroy the workes of the Deuill. 1, Iohn. 3. The ſonne of God is the keeper of his Church, as he ſaith, Ioh. 10. Noman ſhall take my ſheepe out of my handes. He doth protect vs, and alſo by his holie ſpirit doth confirme our mindes in true opinions: as he doth beginne eternall life, ſo doth he kindle in our heartes good motions, faith, the loue of God, true inuocation, hope, chaſtitie, and other vertues. We are not Pelagians, but we do humblie 
                        ••
                     e thankes to the eternall God, the Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and to his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, and to the holie Ghoſt, both for the wholl benefit of ſaluation reſtored againe to mankinde, and alſo for this benefit, that the Sonne of God doth dwell in the Church, and doth defend it with his right hand againſt the furies of the Deuills and men, and doth driue awaie the deuills from vs, and doth vpholde vs in this ſo great infirmitie of ours, and by his word doth kindle in our mindes the knowledge of God, and doeth confirme and gouerne our mindes by his holie ſpirit. We do certainlie know that theſe benefits are in deede giuen vnto vs, as it is ſaid moſte comfortablie in Zacharie, cap. 12. I will powre out vpon the houſe of Dauid, and vpon the inhabitants of Ieruſalem, the ſpirit of grace and praiers. He nameth the ſpirit of grace, becauſe that in this comfort, the ſonne of God, ſealing vs by his holie ſpirit, doth teſtifie that we are in fauour, and that we are deliuered from the paines of hell. Secondlie he nameth the ſpirit of praiers, becauſe that when we haue acknowledged the remiſſion of ſinnes, we do not now f
                        •
                     ie from God, we do not murmure againſt God, but we approch

                     
                        •
                     nto him with true faith and hope, we do aske and looke for helpe at his handes, we loue him, and ſubmit our ſelues to him: and thus is the beginning of obedience wrought. After that manner ſaith the Lord. Ioh. 14. I will praie the father, and he will giue you another comforter, euen the ſpirit of truth. The holy Ghoſt doth kindle the light of truth in our minds, and new motions in our heartes, agreeable to the law of god. Let
                        •
                     s acknowledge this ſo great a gift, and let vs endeuour to keepe it thankfullie, and deſire dailie to be helped in ſo great daungers of this life. The will is not idle, when it hath receiued the holie ghoſt.
               
               
                  How our now obedience doth pleaſe God.
                  THe Phariſie in Luke, cap. 18▪ doth admire & pleaſe him ſelfe, being bewitched with this perſuaſion, that 
                        •
                     e doth ſatiſfie the law, and for this diſcipline, ſuch as it is 
                        •
                     oth pleaſe God. Manie ſuch there be among men, who thinke themſelues ſecure, if they performe neuer ſo litle though it be but a ſhadow of diſcipline. But the heauenlie 
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     ce doth often times accuſe the arrogancie of theſe men: and therefore the Lord ſaith Luc. 13. Except ye recent, ye ſhall 
                           〈◊〉
                         in like ſorte periſh▪
                      and 1. Ioh. 1. If we ſaie we haue no ſinne 
                           ••••
                        liers. Therefore their imagination is vaine, which think that obedience doth pleaſe god for it owne worthies, and that it is a merit of Condignitie, as they ſpeake, and ſuch a righteouſnes before God, as is a merit of eternal life. And yet afterward they do adde, that we muſt alwaies doubt whether our obedience do pleaſe God, becauſe it is euident, that in euerie one there is much pollution, manie ſinnes of ignorance, and omiſſion, and manie not ſmall blemiſhes. Here it is neceſſarie that mens conſciences ſhould be inſtructed aright in either of theſe points, both cōcerning our infirmitie, and alſo concerning the comfort. It is neceſſarie that the regenerate ſhould haue the righteouſnes of a good conſcience, and obedience begunne in this life, as hathbeene ſaid: yet neuertheles, in this life there is ſtill remaining in our nature, in our ſoule, and in our heart, verie much pollution, which they do the more ſee, and bewaile, which haue receiued more light then others, as the Prophets and Apoſtles, according to that complaint of Paull Rom. 7. I ſee an other law in my members, which ſtriueth againſt
                     
                     the law of my minde, and maketh me captiue to the law of ſinne. There is as yet in euery one a great miſt, manifold ignorāce, and manie ſorowfull doubtes, errors in counſells, raiſed by diſtruſt, by falſe opinions, and a vaine hope, manie vitious flames of luſtes, much neglect of duetie, murmuringes and indignations againſt God in his puniſhments: to conclude it is vnſenſiclenes and madnes, not to be willing to confes that the feare & loue of God is much more colde in vs, then it ought to be. Theſe confeſſions are repeated in the ſermons of the Prophets and Apoſtles. Pſa. 143. Enter not into iudgement with thy ſeruant, for in thy ſight ſhall no man liuing be iuſtified. And 1. Ioh. 1. If we ſaie, that we haue no ſinne, we deceiue our ſelues, and the trueth is not in vs. This confeſſion is neceſſarie, and mans arrogancie to be reprooued. Alſo the errour of our aduerſaries, who feigne, that men in this mortall life maie ſatiſfie the law of God, and of thoſe, who ſ
                        •
                     ie, that the euill of concupiſcence, which is bred with vs, is not ſinne, nor an euill repugnant to the law or will of God, is to be reprehended. Theſe errours doth Paul manifeſtlie confute, Rom. 7. & 8.
                  Then muſt comfort alſo be ioyned thereunto. Firſt, let the regenerate perſon aſſure himſelfe, that he is reconciled to God, by faith alone, that is, by confidence in the Mediatour, and that the perſon is certenlie accounted righteous, for the Sonne of God the Mediatour, and that freelie for his merit. Secondlie, let vs confeſſe with true griefe, that there remaine as yet in the re
                        •••
                     erate man many ſinnes, and much pollution, worthie of the wrath of God. Thirdlie, let him neuertheleſſe know, that obedience, and the righteouſnes of a good conſcience, muſt be begunne in this life, and that this obedience, although it be verie farre from that perfection which the law req
                        •
                     ireth, is neuertheleſſe, in the regenerate, acceptable to God, for the Mediatours ſake, who maketh requeſt for vs, and by his meritte doth couer our great and vnſpeakeable miſeries. Thus for the Mediatours ſake, both the perſon is receiued, and alſo our workes doe pleaſe God, that in either of them our faith may ſhine. Therefore Peter ſaith, 1. Pet. 2. Offer vp ſpirituall ſacrifices, acceptable to God through Ieſus Chriſt. This comfort is ſet forth. Rom. 8. Now there is no condemnation to them, which doe walke in
                     
                     Chriſt Ieſus. And, Rom. 3. Ye are not vnder the law, but vnder grace. In that place this queſtion is asked, whether our 
                        ••
                     edience doe pleaſe God, ſeeing it doth not ſatiſfie the law
                        •
                      Paull anſwereth, that it doth pleaſe God, Becauſe we are not vnder the law, that is, condemned by the law, but 
                           •
                        e are vnder grace, reconciled, or receiued into ſ
                        •
                     uour. Rom. 8. Who ſhall 
                           〈◊〉
                         Chriſt hath died for vs, and is riſen againe, and ſitteth at the right hand of God, and maketh requeſt for vs: that is, holie men doe pleaſe God, for the Sonne his ſake, who alſo offered his obedience for vs, and maketh requeſt for vs. Wee muſt oppoſe theſe ſayings to doubting, leſt faith and inuocation be extinquiſhed: for doubting doth weaken our inuocation.
                  Seeing therefore that we know, both that new obedience is neceſſarie, and that helpe is certenlie giuen vs, and that this obedience doth pleaſe God, although it be vnperfect and needie, let vs knowledge the infinite mercie of God, and giue thanks for it, and haue a great care how to gouerne our actions, becauſe we know, that we are both helped, and that this obedience is acceptable to God for the Sonnes ſake. And let this neceſſitie be alwaies in our eies, that if the benefits of God, to wit, Iuſtification, and regeneration, be ſhaken of, we looſe eternall life, according to that ſaying, We ſhal be clothed, if ſo be that we be not found naked. And, Rom. 8. If any haue not the Sp
                           •
                        rit of Chriſt▪ he is not his. And alwaies in Iuſtification let there be alſo a beginning of newnes of life. The theefe hanging on the cr
                        •
                     ſ
                        •
                     e, hath good workes, and thoſe both internall and externall: it g
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     ueth him that he had ſinned, and he confeſſe
                        •
                     h that he is iuſtlie puniſhed: then by faith he doth acknowledge the Sauiour, and deſireth ſaluation of him, and therefore he b
                        •
                     areth expreſſe abſolution, and the preaching of eternall life, and the promiſe, and reſteth in this voice of the Meſſias, and 
                        •
                     ubmmitteth himſelfe to god, and doth not beare the puniſhment impatientlie, but is eaſed by acknowledging the Meſſias, and by the hope of eternall life, and giueth thankes to god: Moreouer, to giue an euident token of his confeſſion, he found fault with the other which curſed Chriſt. Theſe thinges are done by him, becauſe this verie Meſſias, beeing partner with him in his puniſhment, in a wo
                        •
                     de doth teach his minde, and by

                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſome comfort the Worde is effectual in him, and through 
                        〈◊〉
                      the eternall Father doth poure the holie ghoſt into the heart of this hearer, that he may kindle in him, ioye, loue, inuocation, hope of eternall life, and other vertues.
               
               
                  Of Rewardes.
                  PAull ſaith, Rom. 6. Eternall life is the gift of God, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde: and, they that are reconciled, or iuſtified, Are heires annexed with the Sonne of God, and that for his ſake, not for their owne merittes. Faith, receiuing remiſſion of ſinnes, and iuſtification, and the hope of eternall life, doe relie vpon the Sonne of god the Mediatour, as it is ſaid, Ioh. 6. This is the will of the Father, that 
                           ••
                        erie one that beleeueth in him, ſhould haue eternall life. And, Rom. 5. Beeing iustified by faith, we haue peace with God, through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt▪ by whom we haue acceſſe through faith vnto this grace wherin we ſtand, and reioyce vnder the hope of eternall life. He ioyneth faith and hope together, and affirmeth, that either of them doth relie vpon the Mediatour: And it is manifeſt, that hope ought not to relie on our workes, becauſe it is ſaide, Pſal. 142. No man liuing ſhall be iuſtified in thy ſight. But as they which repent are accounted iuſt by faith, for the onelie Sonne of god his ſake, and for him, and thorough him are quickned; ſo for him, and not for our merites, is eternall life giuen vnto vs; as the theefe on the croſſe heareth this promiſe, To daie thou ſhalt be with me in Paradiſe, Luc. 23.
                  Neither muſt we dreame, that the Sonne of god did merit, or giue vnto vs, a preparation onelie to eternall life: but let that moſt comfortable ſaying of Hoſee be alwaies in our ſight: O death, I will be thy death. O hell, I wil be thy deſtruction. For the Sonne of God, & thorough him, we are deliuered form eternal death, & tranſlated into life eternall, as he ſaith, I giue vnto them eternall life. And. 1. Ioh. 5. He that hath the Sonne, hath life. And let hope be ſure & firme, as Peter ſaith 1. Pet. 1. Hope perfectlie, that is, looke for eternall life, not with doubtfull opinion in: an aſſured hope, to wit, for the Mediatours ſake. And Auguſtine ſaith well, in his booke of meditations, The certainetie of our whole confidence conſiſteth in the blood of Chriſt. Let vs holde both theſe points aſſuredlie, that he which repenteth, doth freelie by faith receiue remiſſion

of ſinnes, and iuſtification for the Sonne of god his ſake, and that he is an heire of eternall life, as Paull ſaith, Rom. 8. As many as are led by the ſpirit of God, they are the Sonnes of God. And if they be children, they are alſo the heiresof God. Yet notwithſtanding, this alſo is true, looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ. in the 4. Sect.that they, which, doe ſhake of the holie ghoſt, falling from faith, or ſinning grieuouſlie againſt their conſcience, and doe not returne vnto God by repentance, are not heires, as it is ſaide, Gal. 5. They which do ſuch things, ſhall not inherit the kingdome of God. And. 1. Tim. 2. Fight a good fight, hauing faith and a good conſcience, which ſome haue put awaie, and as concerning faith haue made ſhipwracke. And, Math. 25. I was hungrie, and ye gaue me not to eate. And, Theſe ſhall goe into euerlaſting puniſhment, but the righteous ſhall goe into life eternall. Now although life eternall life, is giuen to the regenerate for the Sonne of god, yetwithall it is alſo a rewarde of good workes, as it is ſaid, Your reward is plentifull in heauen, as a patrimonie is the reward of the laboures of a ſonne, although it be giuen to the ſonne for an other cauſe.
                  Moreouer, god hath added vnto good workes certaine promiſes of his, and therefore euen for the good workes of holie men, God doth giue ſpirituall and corporall gifts euen in this life, and that diuerſelie, as it ſeemeth good to his vnſpeakable wiſedome. 1. Tim. 4. Godlines hath the promiſes of the life preſent, & of that that is to come Marc. 10. They ſhall receiue a hundred folde in this life (but with tribulation) and after this life, eternall life. Mat. 10. Whoſoeuer ſhall giue vnto one of theſe little ones to drinke a cup of colde water onelie in the name of a diſciple, he ſhall not looſe his rewarde. Luc. 6. Giue, and it ſhall be giuen to you. Exod. 20. Honoure thy Father and thy Mother, that thou maieſt liue long vpon earth. Iſa. 33. Bread ſhal be giuen him, and his waters ſhalbe ſure: they ſhall ſee the King in his glorie, that is, for obedience and good workes God doth giue quiet common weales, an honeſt & meeke gouernement, &c. Iſa. 58. Breake thy breade to the hungrie, and thou ſhalt be as a garden that is watered, &c. The example of the widow at Sarepta is well knowne: and the Pſalmiſt ſaith, Subſtance and riches are in his houſe. For ſeeing that God in this mortall and miſerable life doth gather his Church, and will haue it to be an honeſt congregation, he giueth there unto many places of entertainement,

he giueth neſtes to godlie poore families, for the bringing vp of their children, and for the ſpreading abroad of doctrine: to conclude, he will preſerue the ſocietie of mankinde, houſeholdes, and common weales, and that to this ende, that a Church may be gathered. Therefore he giueth ſometime a gouernment not troubleſome, peace, a fruitfull land, & other good thinges, for the prayers of holie men, for their diligence, and for common neceſſities ſake: as, for Ioſeph, Naaman, & Daniel, thoſe kingdomes, wherein they liued, 
                        •
                     loriſhed the more. And Ierem. 19. The baniſhed in Babylon are commaunded, to praie for the peace, and holſome gouernment of that place, where they were intertayned. So alſo often times puniſhments are heaped vp for the ſinnes of the Chuch, as is to be ſeene in the puniſhment of the tribe of Beniamin, Dauid, and others. Now god will haue vs to vnderſtand that theſe benefits are neceſſarie for the bodie, and to know that they be giuen of god: in asking of them he will haue our faith to be exerciſed, as we ſhall declare more at large in a fit place. At this time we haue therefore added theſe few thinges, that in this confeſſion there might be alſo a Teſtimonie in our Churches, that this true and neceſſarie doctrine, touching good workes, is faithfullie laide open.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               
                  
                     Of Iuſtification. CHAP. 5.
                  WE beleeue and confeſſe, that to do and practize ſuch righteouſnes, as is acceptable to God, theſe vertues be neceſſarie, Faith, hope, and loue, and that man can not of him-ſelfe conceiue theſe vertues, but doth receiue them of the fauour and grace of God, and that faith doth worke by loue. But we think that their iudgement doth farre diſagree from the Apoſtolike and Catholike doctrine, who teach, that man is made acceptable to God, and accounted iuſt before god, for thoſe vertues, and that when we come to ſtand before god in iudgement, we muſt truſt to the merittes of theſe vertues. For man is made acceptable to god, and counted iuſt before him, for the onelie ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, through faith: and when

we appeare before the iudgement ſeate of God, we muſt not truſt to the merit of anie of thoſe vertues, which we haue, but onelie to the merit of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, whoſe merit is ours by faith. And becauſe that before the tribunall ſeat of God, where the queſtion is of true and eternal righteouſnes and ſaluation, there is no place at al for the merites of men, but onelie for the mercie of god, and the merites of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt alone, who is receiued of vs by faith, therefore we think that the auncient Fathers our Elders ſaid truelie, that we are iuſtified before god by faith alone. Rom. 3. All haue ſinned, and are depriued of the glorie of God, and are iuſtified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Chriſt Ieſus, whome God hath ſet forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his bloode. Galat. 3. The Scripture hath concluded al vnder ſinne, that the promiſe by the Faith of Ieſus Chriſt ſhould be giuen to them that beleeue. And, Cap. 5. We thorough the ſpirit waite for the hope of righteouſnes through faith. For in Chriſt Ieſus neither Circumciſion auaileth any thing, nor vncircumciſion, but faith which worketh by loue. Hilarie ſaieth, It offendeth the Scribes, that man ſhould forgiue ſinne (for they beheld
                           •
                         nothing but man in Ieſus Chriſt) and that he ſhould forgiue that, which the law could not releaſe. For faith alone doth iuſtifie. Ambroſe ſaith, They are iuſtified freelie, becauſe that workeing nothing, nor requitting any thing, by faith alone they are iuſtified, by the gift of God. And againe, They are euidentlie bleſsed, whoſe iniquities are forgiuen, without any labour or work, and whoſe ſins are couered, no helpe of repentance beeing required of them, but onelie this, that they beleeue. Manie places might be alledged as well out of the writinges of the Prophettes and Apoſtles, as out of the holie Fathers, whereby it is prooued, that not onelie in the beginning, through the free mercie of god, theſe vertues, to wit, Faith, hope, and loue, are giuen vnto vs, but alſo afterward throughout our wholl life, and that in our extreame neceſſitie, we are not able to ſtand before the ſeuere tribunal ſeat of god, but in the confidence of the onelie free fauour of god, ſhewed vnto vs in Chriſt the Sonne of god. For this is that, both which Paul teacheth, and the Eccleſiaſticall writers doe interpret, That we are iuſtified before god by faith alone.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Of good workes. CHAP. 7.
                  
                     WE ſaie that good workes, commaunded of god, are neceſſarilie to be done, and that, through the free mercie of god, 
                     Looke the 1 obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.
                     they do deſerue certaine their own, either corporal, or ſpiritual, rewardes. But we muſt not think, that in the iudgement of god, where the queſtion is, concerning the purging of our ſins, the appeaſing of the wrath of god, and the merit of eternall ſaluation, we ſhould truſt to thoſe good works which we do. For al the good works which we do, are vnperfect, neither cā they ſuſteine the ſeuerity of the iudgement of god: but al our confidence is to be placed in the onelie mercie of god, for his Sonne our Lord Ieſus 
                           〈…〉
                         his ſake. Pſalm. 142. Enter not into iudgement with 
                        〈…〉
                      no fleſh liuing ſhallbe iuſtified in thy ſight. Galat. 5. 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      lu
                        ••
                     eth againſt the Spirit, and the ſpirit againſt the fleſh, and theſe are contrarie one to the other, ſo that ye cannot doe thoſe 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     e woulde. Rom. 7. I know, that in me, that is, in my fleſh, there dwelleth no good. Don. 9. We doe not preſent our ſupplications before thee, for our owne righteouſnes, but for thy great 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         22.tender mercies. Auguſtine ſaith, Woe to the life of man, be is neuer ſo 
                        •
                     omm
                        •
                     ndable, if thou examine i
                        •
                     
                     ▪ ſetting thy mercie aſide. And againe: All my hope is in the death of my Lorde. His death is my meri
                        •
                     te, my refuge, ſaluation, life, and my reſurrection. The mercie of the Lorde is my meri
                        •
                     te. I am not without merit, ſo long as the Lorde of mercies is not wanting. And if the mercies of the Lorde he manie, I abound in merittes. Gregorie ſaith, Therefore Gr
                           ••
                        . 
                           •
                        ib. 1. 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Eze
                           •
                        ch. 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        7. in 
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        e. 
                           〈◊〉
                         in Se
                           ••
                        . 1. adnu
                           ••
                        iat. Beatae Marciae.our righteous Aduocate ſhall defend vs in the daie of iudgement, becauſe we know, and accuſe our ſelues to be vniuſt. Therefore let vs not truſt to our teares, nor to our actions, but to the alledgeing of our Aduocate. Bernard ſaith, Our reioycing is this, the teſtimonie of our conſcience, not ſuch a teſtimonie, as that proude Phariſie had, his thought being ſeduced, and ſeducing him, giuing witnes of himſelfe, and his witnes was not true. But then is the witnes true, when the ſpirit beareth witnes with our ſpirit. Now I beleeue that this teſtimonie conſisteth in three thinges: For firſt of all it is neceſsarie to beleeue, that thou canſt not haue remiſſion of ſinnes, but through the fauour of God: Secondlie, that thou canſt haue no good worke at all, except the alſo giue it to thee: Laſtlie, that thou canſt not

deſerue eternall life by anie workes, except that alſo be giuen thee freelie.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               
                  
                     Of Iuſtification, and of Faith. CHAP. 3.
                  OVr preachers doe ſomewhat differ from the late receiued opinions about thoſe things which the people were commonly taught, concerning the meane, wherby wee are made partakers of the redemption wrought by Chriſt, and touching the dueties of a chriſtian man. Thoſe points which we haue followed, we will indeauour to lay open moſte plainely to your ſacred Maieſtie, and alſo to declare verie faithfullie thoſe places of Scripture, by which we were forced hereunto. Firſt therefore, ſeeing that we were taught of late yeares, that workes were neceſſarily required to iuſtification, our preachers haue taught, that this wholl iuſtification is to be aſcribed to the good pleaſure of God, and to the meritte of Chriſt, and to be receiued by Faith alone. To this they were mooued eſpeciallie by theſe places of Scripture. As manie as receiued him, to them he gaue power to be the ſonnes of God, euen to them that beleeue in his name; which are borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the fleſh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Ioh. 1. Verilie, verilie, I ſaie vnto you, except a man be borne againe a new, he cannot ſee the kingdome of God. Ioh. 3. No man knoweth the Sonne, but the Father, neither knoweth anie man the Father, but the Sonne, and he to whome the Sonne will reueale him. Mat. 11. Bleſsed ar
                           •
                         thou, Simon, the ſonne of Ionas, for fleſh and blood hath not reuealed this vnto thee, but my Father which is in heauen. Mat. 16. No man can come to me, except my Father draw him. Ioh. 6. By grace are ye ſaued through Faith, and that not of your ſelues: it is the gift of God: not of workes, leſt anie man ſhould boaſt himſelfe. For we are his workemanſhippe, created in Chriſt Ieſus vnto good workes, which God hath ordeyned, that we ſhould walke in them. Eph. 2. For ſeing it is our righteouſnes and eternal life, to know God, and our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and that is ſo farre from being the worke of ſleſh and blood, that it is neceſſarie to be borne againe anew, neither can we come to the Sonne, except the Father draw vs, neither

know the Father, except the Sonne reueale him vnto vs: and Paull doth write ſo expreſlie, Not of your ſelues, not of workes: it is euident enough, that our workes can helpe nothing at all, that of vniuſt, ſuch as we are borne, we maie become righteous: becauſe that, as we are by nature the children of wrath, and therefore vniuſt, ſo we are not able to doe anie thing that is iuſt, or acceptable to God: but the beginning of all our righteouſnes and ſaluation, muſt proceede from the mercie of the Lord, who of his onely fauour, and the contemplation of the death of his Sonne, did firſt offer the doctrine of truth, and his Goſpell, ſending thoſe that ſhould preach it: and ſecondlie, ſeing that naturall man can not, as Paull ſaith, 1. Cor. 2. perceiue the thinges that are of God, he cauſeth alſo the beame of his light to ariſe in the darkenes of our heart, that now we maie beleeue the goſpell preached, being perſuaded of the trueth thereof, by the holie Spirit from aboue, and then foorthwith truſting to the teſtimonie of this ſpirit, in the confidence of children to call vpon God, and to ſaie, Abba, Father, obteining thereby true ſaluation, according to that ſaying, Whoſoeuer ſhall call vpon the name of the Lord, ſhall be ſaued.
                  
               
               
                  Of good workes, proceeding out of faith, through loue.
                  THeſe thinges we will not haue men ſo to vnderſtand, as though we placed ſaluation & righteouſnes in the ſlothful thoughtes of men, or in faith deſtitute of loue (which they call faith without forme) ſeeing that we are ſure, that no man can be iuſt or ſaued, except he doe chieflie loue, & moſte earneſtlie imitate God. For thoſe which he knew before, he alſo predeſtinated to be made like to the image of his Sonne. But no man can loue God aboue all thinges, and worthelie imitate him, but he which doth indeede knowe him, and doth aſſuredlie looke for all good things from him. Therefore we cannot otherwiſe be iuſtified, that is, as to become righteous, ſo to be ſaued (for righteouſnes is euen our ſaluation) then by beeing endued chiefelie with faith in him, by which faith we beleeuing the Goſpell, and therefore being perſwaded, that God hath taken vs for his adopted children,

and that he will for euer ſhewe himſelfe a louing father vnto vs, let vs whollie depende vpon his pleaſure. This faith Saint Auguſtine doth call, in his booke De Fide & operibus, Euangelicall, To wit, that which is effectuall through loue. By this faith we are borne againe, and the image of God is repaired in vs. By this Faith, whereas we are borne corrupt, our thoughtes, euen from our childhoode, beeing altogether bent vnto euill, we become good, and vpright. For hereupon, we beeing fullie ſatisfied with one God (the ſpring of all good thinges that is neuer drie, but runneth alwaies moſt plentifullie) we doe forthwith ſhew our ſelues, as it were, Gods, towardes others, that is, toward the true ſonnes of god, indeauouring by loue to profit them, ſo much as in vs lieth. For, He that loueth his brother, abideth in the light, and is borne of God, and is wholie giuen to the new, and to the olde commaundement, touching mutuall loue. And this loue is the fullfilling of the wholl law, as Paul ſaith: The wholl law is fulfilled in one worde, namelie this, Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe. Gal. 5. For whatſoeuer the law teacheth, hitherto it tendeth, and this one thing it requireth, that at the length we maie be reformed to the perfect image of god, being good in all things, & readie and willing to do men good, the which we can neuer doe, except we be adorned with all kindes of vertues. For who can purpoſe and doe all thinges (as the duetie of a Chriſtian doth require, 1. Cor. 10.) to the true edifying of the Church, and the ſound profit of all men, that is, according to the lawe of God, and to the glorie of god, except that he both thinke, ſpeake, and doe euerie thing in order, and well, and therefore be verie familiarlie acquainted with the wholl companie of vertues.
               
               
                  
                     To whome good workes are to be aſcribed, and how neceſſarie they be. CHAP. 5.
                  
                     Rom. 8. BVt ſeeing that they, which are the Children of God, are rather ledde by the ſpirit of God, then doe worke any thing themſelues, And that Of him, & through him, & for him, 
                     Rom. 11.
                     are all things, therefore whatſoeuer things we doe well, and holilie, are to be aſcribed to none other, then to this one onelie ſpirit, the giuer of all vertues. Howſoeuer it be, he

doth not compell vs, but doth lead vs being willing, Working in vs both to will, and to doe, Philip. 2. Whereupon Saint Auguſtine writeth verie well, That God doth reward his workes in vs. And yet we are ſo farre from reiecting good workes, that we doe vtterlie denie, that anie man can fullie be ſaued, except he be thus farre brought by the ſpirit of Chriſt, that he finde no want at all in him, touching thoſe good workes, whereunto god hath created him. For there be diuers members of the ſame bodie, therefore euerie one of vs haue not the ſame office. 1. Cor. 12. It is ſo neceſſary, that the law ſhould be fullfilled, that Heauen and earth ſhall ſooner paſſe awaie, then that one iotte, or the leaſt point therof ſhall be remitted. Yet becauſe god alone is good, hath created all thinges of nothing, and doth by his ſpirit make vs altogether new, and doth wholie lead vs (for in Chriſt nothing auaileth but a new creature) none of all theſe thinges can be aſcribed to mans ſtrength, and we muſt confeſſe, that all things are the meere giftes of god, whoe of his owne accord, and not for anie meritte of ours, doeth fauour and loue vs. By theſe thinges it maie ſufficienlie be knowen, what we beleeue iuſtification to be, by whome it is wrought for vs, and by what meane it is receiued of vs, alſo by what places of ſcripture we are induced ſo to beleeue. For although of manie we haue aledged a few, yet by theſe few, anie one, that is but meanely conuerſant in the ſcripture, maie fullie perceiue, that they which read the ſcriptures ſhall finde euerie where ſuch kinde of ſentences, as doe attribute vnto vs nothing but ſinne, and deſtruction, as Hoſee ſaith, and all our righteouſnes and ſaluation to the Lord.
               
               
                  
                     Of the dueties of a Chriſtian man. CHAP. 6.
                  NOw it cannot be doubted of, what be the dueties of a Chriſtian man, and to what actions he ought chiefelie to giue him ſelfe, namelie to all thoſe, wherby euerie one, for his parte, maie profit his neighbours, and that firſt, in things pertaining to life eternall, that they alſo maie begin to know, worſhip, and feare god, and then in thinges pertaining to this life, that they maie want nothing which

is neceſſarie to the ſuſtenance of the bodie. For as the wholl lawe of god, which is a moſte abſolute commaundement of all righteouſnes, is breiflie contained in this one word, Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe, ſo in the performance of this loue, it is neceſſarie that all righteouſnes ſhould be compriſed and perfited. Whereupon it followeth, that nothing at all is to be reckoned among the duties of a Chriſtian man, which is not of force and effect to profit our neighbour, and euerie worke is ſo much the more belonging to the dutie of Chriſtian man, by how much his neighbour maie the more be profited thereby. Therefore next after Eccleſiaſticall functions, among the chiefe duties of a Chriſtian man, we place the gouernment of the Common we ale, obedience to Magiſtrates (for theſe be referred to the common profit) that care which is taken for our wife, children, familie, and the honour which is due to parents, (becauſe that without theſe the life of man cannot conſiſt) and laſtlie, the profeſſion of good artes and of al honeſt diſcipline, becauſe that except theſe be had in eſtimation, we ſhall be deſtitute of the greateſt good thinges, which are proper to mankinde. Yet in theſe, and all other duties pertaining to mans life, no man muſt raſhlie take anie thing to him ſelfe, but with a right conſcience conſider, whereunto God doth call him. To conclude, let euerie man account that his duty, and that ſo much the more excellent a duety, the more that he ſhall profit other men thereby.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE TENTH SECTION OF THE HOHOLIE CATHOLIKE CHVRCH.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of the Catholike Church of God, and of the heade of the Church. CHAP. 17.
               
                  FOraſmuch as God from the beginning would haue men to be ſaued, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, therefore it is neceſſarie that alwaies from the beginning, at this daie, and to the ende of the worlde, there ſhould be a Church, that is, a companie of the faithfull, called and gathered out of the world, a communion (I ſaie) of all Saints, that is of them, who doe truelie know, and rightlie worſhip and ſerue the true God in Ieſus Chriſt the Sauiour, by the worde and the holie ſpirit, and which by faith are partakers of all thoſe good graces, which are freelie offered thorough Chriſt. Theſe all are Cytizens of one and the ſame Citie, liuing vnder one Lord, vnder the ſame lawes, and in the ſame Eph. 2. 1. Cor. 6.fellowſhip of al good things, for ſo the Apoſtle calleth them fellow Cytizens with the Saints, and of the houſeholde of God, tearming the faithfull vpon the earth Saints, who are ſanctified by the blood of the Sonne of God. Of theſe is that article of our Creede wholly to be vnderſtoode, I beleeue the Catholike Church, the common ion of Saintes. And ſeeing that there is alwaies

but one God, and one Mediatour between God & man, Ieſus Chriſt: alſo, one ſhepheard of the wholl flocke, one head of this bodie, and, to conclude, one ſpirit, one ſaluation, one faith, one Teſtament, or couenant, it followeth neceſſarily that there is but one Church, which we therefore call Catholike, becauſe it is vniuerſall, ſpread abroade thorough al the partes and quarters of the worlde, & reacheth vnto all times, and is not limited within the compaſſe either of time or place. Here therefore we muſt condemne the Donatiſts, who pinned vp the Church within the corners of Aphricke, neither doe wee allowe of the Romane cleargy, who vaunte that the Church of Rome alone in a manner is Catholike.
               The Church is diuided by ſome into diuers partes or diuerſe ſortes: not that it is rent and diuided from it ſelfe, but rather diſtinguiſhed, in reſpect of the diuerſitie of the members that be in it. One parte therefore they make to be the Church militant, the other the Church triumphant. The militant warreth ſtill on the earth and fighteth againſt the fleſh, the world, and the prince of the world, the deuill, and againſt ſinne and death. The other beeing allready ſet at libertie, is now in heauen, and triumpheth ouer al thoſe beeing ouercome, and continuallie reioiceth before the Lord. Yet theſe two churches haue notwithſtanding a communion and fellowſhip betweene them-ſelues. The Church militant vpon the earth hath euer more had in it many particuler Churches, which muſt all notwithſtanding be referred to the vnitie of the Catholike Church. This militant Church was otherwiſe ordered & gouerned before the law, among the Patriarkes, otherwiſe vnder Moſes, by the law, and otherwiſe of Chriſt, by the goſpell. There are but two ſortes of people for the moſt parte mentioned, to witte the Iſraelites, and the gentiles, o
                     •
                   they which of the Iewes and gentiles were gathered to make a Church, There be alſo two teſtaments, the olde and the new. Yet both theſe ſortes of people haue had, and ſtill haue one fellowſhip, one ſaluation in one and the ſame Meſſiah, in whome, as members of one bode, they are all ioyned together vnder one heade, and by one faith are all partakers of one and the ſame ſpirituall meat and drink. Yet here we do acknowledge a diuerſitie of times and a diuerſitie in the pledges and ſignes of

Chriſt promiſed, and exhibited, and that now the ceremonies beeing aboliſhed, the light ſhineth vnto vs more cleerlie, our giftes and graces are more aboundant, and out libertie is more full and ample.
               This holy Church of god is called the houſe of the liuing 
                        〈◊〉
                      builded of liuing and ſpirituall ſtones, founded vpon a rocke, that can not be remooued, vpon a foundation, beſides which none can b
                        •
                     
                   
                  2. Tim. 3.
                  laied: Whereupon it is called the pillar and foundation of the truth, that doth not erre, ſo long as it relieth vpon the rock Chriſt, and vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apoſtles. And no maruell, Looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.if it do erre, ſo often as it forſaketh him, who is the alone trueth. This Church is alſo called a virgine, and the ſpouſe of Chriſt, and his onelie beloued. For the Apoſtle ſaith, I haue ioyned you vnto one husband, that I might preſent you a chaſt virgine vnto Chriſt. The Church is called a flocke of ſheepe vnder one ſhepheard, euen Chriſt, Ezec. 34. & Ioh. 10. alſo the bodie of Chriſt, becauſe the faithfull are the liuelie members of Chriſt, hauing him for their head.
               It is the head which hath the preheminence in the body, and from whence the wholl bodie receiueth life, by whoſe ſpirit it is gouerned in al thinges, of whome alſo it receiueth increaſe, that it may grow vp. Alſo there is but one heade of the bodie, which hath agreement with the bodie. And therfore the church cannot haue any other heade beſide Chriſt. For as the Church is a ſpirituall bodie, ſo muſt it needs haue a ſpiritual heade like vnto it ſelfe. Neither can it be gouerned by any other ſpirit, then by the ſpirit of Chriſt. Wherefore Coloſſ. 1.Paul ſaith, And he is the head of his bodie the Church, who is the beginning, the firſt borne of the dead, that in al things he might haue 
                  Epheſ. 5.
                  the preheminence. And in another place, Chriſt (ſaith he) is the heade of the Church, and the ſame is the Sauiour of his bodie. And Epheſ. 1.againe, Who is the heade of the Church, which is his bodie, euen the fulnes of him, which filleth all in all things. Againe, Let vs in all 
                  Epheſ. 4.
                  things grow vp into him which is the heade, that is Christ, by whome all the bodie being knit together receiueth increaſe. And therefore we do not allow of the doctrine of the Romiſh Prelates, who would make the Pope the generall Paſtour, and Supreame heade of the Cuhrch of Chriſt militant here on earth, and the verie Vicar of Chriſt, who hath (as they ſaie) al fullnes of power and ſoueraigne authoritie in the Church. For we

holde and teach, that Chriſt our Lorde is, and remaineth fill, the onelie vniuerſal Paſtour, and higheſt Biſhop, before God his father, and that in the Church he performeth all the duties of a Paſtour or Biſhop, euen to the worldes ende: and therefore ſtandeth not in neede of any other to ſupplie his roome, for he is ſaid to haue a ſubſtitute, which is abſent. But Chriſt is preſent with his Church, & is the head that giueth life thereunto. He did ſtraightlie forbid his Apoſtles & their ſucceſſours al ſuperioritie or dominion in the Church. They therefore that by gaineſaying ſet themſelues againſt ſo manifeſt a trueth, and bring another kinde of gouernement into the Church, who ſeeth not that they are to be counted in the number of them, of whome the Apoſtles of Chriſt propheſied? as Peter 2. Epiſt. 2. and Paull Act. 20. 
                     •
                  . Cor. 11. 2. Theſſ. 2. and in manie other places.
               Now by taking awaie the Romiſh head, we doe not bring any confuſion or diſorder into the Church: for we teach that the gouernement of the Church, which the Apoſtles ſet downe, is ſufficient to keepe the Church in due order, which from the beginning, while as yet it wanted ſuch a Romiſh heade, as is now pretended to keepe it in order, was not diſordered or full of confuſion. That Romiſh head doth mainteine in deede that tyrannie and corruption in the Church, which was brought into the Church. But in the meane time he hindreth, reſiſteth, and with all the might he can make, cutteth of the right and lawfull reformation of the Church.
               They obiect againſt vs, that there haue beene great ſtrifes and diſſentions in our Churches, ſince they did ſeuer themſelues from the Church of Rome, and that therefore they can not be true Churches. As though there were neuer in the Church of Rome neuer anie ſectes, anie contentions and quarrells, and that in matters of religion, maintained, not ſo much in the ſchooles, as in the holie chaires, euen in the audience of the people. We knowe that the Apoſtle ſaid, God is not the author of diſſention, but of peace. And 1. Cor. 14.
                  Seeing there is amongſt you emulation and contention, are you not carnall? Yet maie we not denie, but that God was in that Church, planted by the Apoſtle, and that that Apoſtolike Church was a true Church, howſoeuer there were ſtrifes

and diſſentions in it. The Apoſtle Paull reprehended Peter Gal. 2. Act. 15.an Apoſtle, and Barnabas fell at variance with Paull great contention aroſe in the Church of Antioch, betweene then that preached one & the ſame Chriſt, as Luke recordeth in the Actes of the Apoſtles. And there haue at all times bin great contentions in the Church, and the moſte excellent Doctors of the Church haue about no ſmall matters differed in opinions, yet ſo, as in the meane time the Church ceaſed not to be the Church for all theſe contentions. For thus it pleaſeth God to vſe the diſſentions that ariſe in the Church, to the glorie of his name, the ſetting forth of the truth, & to the end that ſuch as are approoued▪ might be manifeſt. Now as we acknowledge no other head of the Church then Chriſt, ſo we do not acknowledge euerie Church to be the true Church which vaunteth her ſelfe ſo to be: but we teach that to be the true Church indeed, in which the markes and tokens of the true Church are to be found. Firſt and chiefely the lawfull or ſincere preaching of the word of god, as it i
                     •
                   left vnto vs in the writings of the Prophets and Apoſtles which do all ſeeme to lead vs vnto Chriſt, who in the goſpel hath ſaid, My ſheep heare my voice, & I know them▪ & they follow 
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      10.
                  me, and I giue vnto them eternall life. A ſtraunger they doe not heare, but flie from him, becauſe they know not his voice. And they that are ſuch in the Church of God, haue all but one faith, and one ſpirit, and therefore they worſhip but one God, and him alone they ſerue in ſpirit and in truth, louing him with all their heartes, & with all their ſtrength, praying vnto him alone through Ieſus Chriſt the onelie Mediatour and interceſſor, and they ſeeke not life or Iuſtice but onlie in Chriſt, and by faith in him: becauſe they do acknowledge Chriſt the onelie head and foundation ofhis Church, and being ſurelie founded on him, doe dailie repaire themſelues by repentance, and doe with patience beare the croſſe laid vppon them, and beſides, by vnfeined loue ioyning themſelues to all the members of Chriſt, doe thereby declare them-ſelues to be the diſciples of Chriſt, by continuing in the bond of peace and holie vnitie: they do withall communicate in the ſacraments ordeined by Chriſt, & deliuered vnto vs by his Apoſtles, vſing them in no other manner, thē as they receiued them from the Lord him-ſelfe▪ That ſaying

of the Apoſtle Paul is well knowne to all, I receiued from 
                  1. Cor. 11.
                  the Lord that which I deliuered vnto you. For which cauſe we condemne all ſuch Churches, as ſtraungers from the true Church of Chriſt, who are not ſuch, as we haue heard they ought to be, howſoeuer, in the meane time they brag of the ſucceſſion of biſhops, of vnitie, and of antiquitie. Moreouer we haue in charge from the Apoſtles of Chriſt, To ſhunne Idolatrie, and to come out of Babylon, and to haue no fellowſhip with 
                  1. Cor. 10. 1. Ioan. 5. Apoc. 18. 2. Cor. 6.
                  her, vnles we meane to be partakers with her of al gods plagues laid vpon her. But as for communicating with the true Church of Chriſt, we ſo highlie eſteeme of it, that we ſaie plainelie, that none can liue before God, which do not communicate with the true Church of God, but ſeparate them ſelues from the ſame. For, as without the Arke of Noah there was no eſcaping, when the world periſhed in the flood, euen ſo doe we beleeue, that without Chriſt, who in the Church offereth him ſelfe to be enioyed of the elect, there can be no certaine ſaluation: and therefore we teach that ſuch as would be ſaued, muſt in no wiſe ſeparate themſelues from the true Church of Chriſt.
               But yet we do not ſo ſtrictlie ſhut vp the Church within thoſe markes before mentioned, as thereby to exclude al thoſe out of it, which either doe not communicate in the ſacraments (by reaſon that they want them, or elſe not willinglie, nor vpon contempt, but being conſtrained by neceſſitie, do againſt their willes 
                     •
                  bſtaine from them) or in whome faith doth ſometimes faile, though not quite decaie, nor altogether die: or in whome ſome ſlippes and errors of infirmitie maie be found▪ for we know that God had ſome friendes in the worlde, that were not of the common wealth of Iſraell. We know what befull the people of God in the captiuitie of Babylon, where they wanted their ſacrifices ſeuentie ye
                     •
                  es. We know verie well what hapned to S. Peter, who denied his Maſter, and what is wont daylie to fall out among the faithfull and choſen of God, which go aſtraie and are full of infirmities. We know moreouer what manner of Churces the Churches at Galatia and Corinth were in the Apoſtles time: in which the Apoſtle Paull condemneth diuers great and hevnous crimes▪ yet he calleth them the holie Churches of Chriſt. Yea and it fulleth out ſometimes,

that God in his iuſt iudgement ſuffereth the trueth of his worde, and the Catholique Faith, and his owne true worſhip to be ſo obſcured and defaced, that the Church ſeemeth almoſt quite raſed out, and not ſo much as a face 1. Reg. 19. Apoc. 7.of a Church to remaine, as wee ſee fell out in the daies o
                     •
                   Eliah, and at other times. And yet in the meane time the Lorde hath in this world, euen in this darkenes, his 
                     〈◊〉
                   worſhippers, and thoſe not a few, but euen ſeuen thouſand 2. Tim. 2.and more. For the Apoſtle crieth, The foundation of the Lord ſtandeth ſure and hath this ſeale, the Lorde knoweth who are his, &c, Whereupon the Church of God maie be termed inuiſible, not that the men, whereof it conſiſteth, are inuiſible, but becauſe it being hidden from our ſight, and knowne onelie vnto God, it cannot be diſcerned by the iudgement of man.
               Againe, not all, that are reckoned in the number of the Church, are ſaintes, and the liuelie and true members of the Church: for there be manie Hypocrits, which outward lie doe heare the worde of God, and publiquelie receiue the Sacramentes, and beare a ſhew to praie vnto God alone through Chriſt, to confeſſe Chriſt to be their onelie righteouſnes: and doe ſeeme outwardlie to worſhippe God, and to exerciſe the dueties of charitie to the bretheren, and for a while through patience to indure in troubles & calamities: And yet they are altogether deſtitute of the inward illumination of the ſpirit of God, of faith, and ſinceritie of heart, and of perſeuerance or continuance to the ende. And theſe men are for the moſt part at the length laid open what 1. Ioan. 
                        •
                     .they be. For the Apoſtle Iohn ſaieth, They went out from among vs, but they were not of vs: for if they had beene of vs, they would haue taried with vs. Yet theſe men, whileſt they doe pertend religion, they are accounted to be in the Church, howſoeuer indeed they be not of the Church. Euen as traitours in a commonwealth before they be detected are counted in the number of good Citizens: and as the cockell and darnell and chaffe are founde amongſt the wheate: and as wennes and ſwellinges are in a perfect bodie, when they Math. 13.are rather diſeaſes and deformities, then true members of the bodie. And therefore the Church is verie well compareed to a drawnet▪ which draweth vp fiſhes of all ſortes:

and to a fielde, wherein is founde both darnell and good corne. We are to haue a ſpeciall regarde, that we iudge not raſhlie before the time, nor go about to exclude, caſt of, and cut awaie them, whom the Lord would not haue excluded, nor cut of, or whome without ſome damage to the Church, we cannot ſeparate from it. Againe we muſt be verie vigilant, leſt that the godlie falling faſt a ſleepe, the wicked grow ſtronger, and doe ſome miſchiefe to the Church.
               Furthermore we teach, that it is carefully to be marked, wherein eſpeciallie the trueth and vnity of the Church conſiſteth, leſt that we either raſhlie breede or nouriſh ſchiſmes in the Church. It conſiſteth not in outward rites and ceremonies, but rather in the trueth and vnity of the Catholike faith. This Catholike faith is not taught vs by the ordinancesor lawes of men, but by the holie ſcriptures, a compendious & ſhort ſumme wherof is the Apoſtles creed. And therfore we reade in the auncient writers, that there was manifolde diuerſities of ceremonies, but that was alwaies free, neither did any man think that the vnity of the church was therby broken or diſſolued. We ſaie then that the true vnitie of the Church doth conſiſt in ſeuerall points of doctrine, in the true and vniforme preaching of the goſpell, & in ſuch rites, as the Lord himſelfe hath expreſly ſet downe: and here we vrge that ſaying of the Apoſtle verie earneſtly, As many of vt therefore as are perfect, let vs be thus in minded. If 
                  Phil. 5.
                  any man thinke otherwiſe, the Lord ſhall reueale the ſame vnto him. And yet in that whereunto we haue attained, let vs all follow one direction, and all of vs be like affected one towardes another.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               Of the Church.
               THis we holde, that of ſuch liuelie ſtones, beeing by this meane built vpon this liuelie rocke, the Church, and the holy gathering together of al the Saints, the Spouſe of Chriſt (which beeing clenſed by his blood, he ſhal once in time to come preſent without blot before his Father) is founded. The which Church, though it be manifeſt to the ties of God alone, yet is it not onelie ſeene and knowen, by certaine outwarde rites, inſtituted of Chriſt himſelfe, and

by the worde of God, as by a publique and lawfull diſcipline▪ but it is ſo appointed, that without theſe marks no man can be iudged to be in this Church, but by the ſpecial priuiledge of God.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASILL.
               Of the Church.
               
                  Math. 1. Epheſ. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. Cor. 11. Eph. 5. Heb. 12. Ioan. 1. Galat. 5. Rom. 1. Ioan. 1. 1. Ioh. 3. WE beleeue a holie Chriſtian Church, that is, a communion of Saints, a gathering together of the faithfull in ſpirit, which is holie, and the Spouſe of Chriſt: wherein all they be Citizens, which doe truelie confeſſe, that Ieſus is the Chriſt, the Lambe that taketh away the ſins of the worlde, and doe ſhew forth that faith by the workes of loue. And a little after. This Church of Chriſt doth labour all that it can, to keepe the bondes of peace and loue in vnitie. Therefore it doth by no meanes communicate with Sectes, and the rules of orders, deuiſed for the difference of daies, meates, apparell, and ceremonies.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  Of the holie Church, and of the godlie inſtitution and gouernement thereof, and of Diſcipline. Alſo of Antichriſt. CHAP. 8.
               IN the eight place it is taught, touching the acknowledging of the holie Catholike Chriſtian Church. And firſt of all, that the foundation and head of the holy Church is Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe alone, together with the wholl merit of grace and trueth to life eternall, vpon whome, and by whome, this Church is at all times built, by the holie Ghoſt, the word of God, and the ſacramentes, according Math. 16.to the meaning of that which Chriſt ſaide vnto Peter, vpon this rocke, (to wit, wherof thou haſt made a true confeſſion,) 1. Cor. 3.
                  I will builde my Church. And Saint Paull ſaith, Other foundation 
                  Eph. 
                        •
                     .
                  can no man laie then that which is laid, which is Ieſus Christ. And in another place, And hath appointed him ouer all thinges to be the head of the Church, which is his bodie, and the fullnes of him,
                  
                  which filleth all in all thinges.
               
               Out of theſe thinges it is taught, that this is beleeued, held, and publikelie confeſſed, that the holie Catholike Church, beeing preſent at euerie time, & militant vpon earth, is the fellowſhippe of all Chriſtians, and is here and there diſperſed ouer the wholl worlde, and is gathered together, by the holie Goſpell, out of all nations, families, tounges, degrees, and ages, in one faith in Chriſt the Lord, or in the holie Trinitie, according to that ſaying of Saint Iohn, who ſpeaketh thus. And I ſawe a great companie which no 
                  Apoc. 7▪
                  
                  man can number, of all nations, peoples, and tongues, ſtanding before the throne, and before the lambe. This true Church, although while it lieth here in the Lords floore, to wit, in the wide worlde, and as it were in one heape confuſedlie gathered together, containeth in it as yet, as well the pure wheat, as the chaffe, the Godlie children of God, and the wicked children of the world, the liuing and dead members, of the miniſters, & of the people, yet where it is leaſt defiled, or moſt pure, it maie be knowē, euen by theſe ſignes that follow: namelie, whereſoeuer Chriſt is taught in holie aſſemblies, the doctrine of the holie Goſpell is purelie and fullie preached, the Sacraments are adminiſtred, according to Chriſts inſtitution, commaundement, meaning, and will, & the faithfull people of Chriſt doth receiue & vſe them, & by theſe gathereth it ſelfe together in the vnitie of faith and loue, and in the bonde of peace, and ioyneth it ſelfe in one, and buildeth it ſelfe hard together vpon Chriſt. There therfore is the holie Church, the houſe of God, the temples of the holie Ghoſt, liuelie members, the partes of the heauenlie Ieruſalem, the ſpirituall bodie of Chriſt, and ioynts knit together, the which are ioyned and coupled ech with other, by one head Chriſt, one ſpirit of regeneration, one worde of god, the ſame and ſincere ſacramentes, one faith, one loue and holie communion, one bonde of peace, order, diſcipline, and obedience, whether the number of this people Math. 15.be great or ſmall, as the Lorde witneſſeth, Where two or three are gathered together in my name (in what countrie and nation, and in what place ſoeuer this be) there am I in the middeſt of them: and contrarily, where Chriſt, and the ſpirit of Chriſt, dwelleth not, and the holie Goſpell cannot haue

anie place graunted vnto i
                     •
                  , &c. but on the contrarie ſide, manifeſt errors Looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ. Rom. 5.and 
                     〈…〉
                   life haue their full courſe, and by getting the vpper hand do ſpread themſelues faite, there moſt alſo needes be a Church ſo defiled, that Chriſt will not acknowledge i
                     •
                   for his welbeloued ſpouſe, ſeeing that none belongeth to Chriſt, who hath not the ſpirit of Chriſt. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Chriſtian is alſo bound with diligent care to ſeeke after this and ſuch a true part of the holie Church, and after he hath founde it, to ioylie and mainteine holie communion and fellowſhip therewith▪ as the other parte of that point of the Church in our chriſtian C
                     •••
                  de doth declare, where we doe profelie, that we 
                        〈…〉
                      communion of Saints: and ought altogether, with this fellowſhip, or ſpirituall companie of Gods people, to 
                     〈…〉
                   the true vnitie and concord of Chriſts ſpirit, to Liue and beare good will to all the members, to y
                     •
                  lde obedience thereunto, and endeauour, by all meanes poſſible, to procure the profitte and furtherance thereof, and in truth to holde agreement therewith, and by no meanes thorough ſ
                     ••
                  bbo
                     •
                  nnes to mooue ſchiſmes, ſeditions, and ſects, againſt the truth. To which thing the Apoſtle exhorteth all men, where he ſaith, Eph. 4.
                  So walke or behaue your ſelues, as worthie of the place or vocation whereunto ye are called, with all humblenes and 
                        ••
                     ekenes, with a quiet minde, and long ſuffering, forbearing one another, and indeauour ye to keepe the vnitie of the ſpirit, in the bond of peace. There is one bodie, and one ſpirit, euen as ye are called in one hope of your vocation: there is one Lord, one faith, one baptiſme, ore God, and Father 
                  Rom. 15. Phil. 2. Rom. 12. 1. Cor. 12.
                  of all, And againe, Let euerie man pleaſe his neighbour in in that that is good to edification. Alſo, doe nothing through ſ
                        •
                     r
                        ••
                     e, or for vaine glorie. Againe, Let there not be diſſentions among you. He therefore, that in this life walketh according to theſe commaundements, he is a true and liuelie member of the holie Church, which bringeth forth the fruite of Faith and loue. looke the 2▪ obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ. and the 1. obſeruat. vpon the confeſſon of Saxonie▪ in the 4 Section.But he that looſeth the ſpirit of Faith and looue in the holie fellowſhip, muſt needes be a deede member.
               Together with theſe thinges the miniſters of our Churches teach, that this is to be thought of their fellowſhip, which is in like manner to be thought of any other Chriſtian fellowſhip, whether it be great, or ſmall: to wit, that it ſelfe

alone is not that holie Catholike Chriſtian Church, but onely one part therof, as the Apoſtle writeth of the Church at Corinth, Ye are the bodie of Chriſt, and members of him, euerie 
                  1. Cor. 1
                        •
                     .
                  one for his parte. They teach alſo that there muſt be a platforme and certaine order of gouernment in the holie Church. For without a platforme of order and outward gouernement, it can not be in good caſe or go well with it, no more then it can with anie other euen the leaſt ſocietie. But this platforme of order conſiſteth chiefelie in this, that they be both ordinarilie called, and lawfullie ordained, who execute due functions in the ſame, beginning at the leaſt, & proceeding to thoſe that are of a meane ſort, & ſo ſorth euen to the chiefeſt. The next point is, that euerie one do wel diſcharge that place, & as it were his warde, to which he is called, & vſe watchfulnes, & ſuffer nothing to be ſound wanting in himſelfe, nor at his owne pleaſure do cloſelie conuey him ſelfe out of the ſame, or go beyond the bondes thereof, and meddle with other mens charges, and moreouer, that all among them-ſelues ſubmit them-ſelues one to an other, and al performe obedience from theleaſt to the greateſt, euerie man in his owne place, whereunto he is called: and do it with the affection of loue, and of his owne accord, not of conſtraint, euen for Chriſtes ſake, and for the care they haue of eternall ſaluation, according as the Apoſtles and other holie men haue taught, concerning this matter, 1. 
                        •
                     er. 3. Phil. 
                        •
                     .and after their examples, by which they founded their Churches, and according to that alſo that they brought old laws or decreees in to ſubiection▪ the which thing ourminiſters among them-ſelues do in deed declare and practize. This laudable order of gouerning the Church together with lawfull diſcipline, that is, with the ſeueritie of puniſhments appointed by God, 
                     〈…〉
                   vnto it, ought diligentlie to be 
                     〈…〉
                   ſo that the wicked, and ſuch as abide in 
                     〈…〉
                   without repentance, hauing their heartes 
                     〈…〉
                   as giue not obedience to God, and to his word, and in the Church are authors of great offences, and do not repent, or become better, after due, faithful, and 
                     〈…〉
                   that ſuch, I ſaie, may be publiquelie puniſhed, and 
                     •
                  e remooued from the holie fellowſhip, by Eccleſiaſticall puniſhment whic
                     ••
                  
                  
                  Looke the 3 obſeruat vpon this confeſſ. commonly is called abandoning, excommunicatiō, or our ſing, yet not by the helpe of the ciuil power, but by vertue of the word & the commaundement of Chriſt. And that this puniſhment maie indifferentlie be vſed towards all, no regard or reſpect is to be had of perſons, of what degree ſoeuer they be, whether they be ciuill or Eccleſiaſticall perſons, according to that ſentence of the doctrine of Chriſt, who ſaith, If thy brother treſpaſse against thee, 
                  looke the 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  goe, & reprooue him betweene him and thee alone: if he heare thee, thou hast wonne thy brother: if he heare thee not, take yet with thee one or two: If he heare not theſe, tell it vnto the Church: and if he heare not the Church, let him be vnto thee as an heathen man, and a Publicane. And Saint Paull, together with his fellow miniſters, did in expreſſe wordes giue a commaundement hereof, writing thus: We commaund you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Ieſus 
                  1. Cor. 5.
                  Christ, that ye withdraw your ſelues from euerie brother, that walketh vnordinatelie, and not after the inſtruction which he receiued of vs. And in an other place he ſaieth. Put from among your ſelues that wicked man. And yet this is not to be concealed, that at all times there haue beene manie in the Church, which ſeemed to be Chriſtians, and yet were wicked hypocrites, cloſe ſinners, farre from repentance, & that there be, and ſhal be ſuch hereafter, euen vnto the end of the world: ſuch as are neither chaſtned by this diſcipline of Chriſt, neither can eaſilie be excommunicated, or altogether ſeparated from the Church, but are to be reſerued & committed to Chriſt alone, the chiefe Shepheard, & to his cōming: as the Lord himſelfe ſaith of theſe men, that the Angells in the laſt daie ſhal firſt ſeparate ſuch from the righteous, and caſt them into the ſierie f
                        •
                     rnace, where ſhall be wailing and gnaſhing of teeth.
               
               Here with all it is alſo taught, that that miſchieuous and Dan. 9. Mat. 24. Mar. 13. 2. Theſſ. 2. 2. Pet. 2.wicked Antichriſt, ſhall ſit in the temple of God, to wit, in the Church, of whome the Prophets, Chriſt our Lord, and his Apoſtles haue foretolde vs, and warned vs to take heede of him, that the ſimple ſort among the faithfull might auoid him, and not ſuffer themſelues to be ſeduced by him. Now in Antichriſt we are to acknowledge a double ouerthwartnes▪ to witte, diſhoneſtie, and deceiuing: the firſt is an ouerthwartnes of the minde or meaning, or a bringing in of falſe doctrine, cleane contrarie to the meaning of Chriſt

our Lord, and of the holie Scripture: whereof the Apoſtle 2. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 3.ſpeaketh after this ſorte: The time will come, when they will not ſuffer anie longer the holie doctrine, but hauing their cares 
                        ••••
                     ing ſhall after their owne luſtes get them an heape of teachers, and ſhall turne their eares from the trueth and ſhall be giuen vnto fables. The other euill or offence, that we are to conſider in Antichriſt, is a corrupt and naughtie life, giuing vnto others a verie ill example, and is full of horrible ſinnes, hurtfull filthines, and all kinde of vices, which in the Antichriſtian Church are openlie practized, and that freelie, without any kinde of puniſhment: whereof the Apoſtle ſaith, This know 
                  2. Tim. 3.
                  alſo, that in the laſt daies ſhall come perilous times. For men ſhall be louers of their owne ſelues, couetous, boaſters, proud, curſed ſpeakers, diſobedient to parents, vnthankefull, prophane, without naturall affection, ſuch as cannot be pleaſed, falſe accuſers, intemperate, fierce, not louers or deſirous of that which is good, traiterous, headie, high minded, louers of pleaſure more then of God, hauing a ſl
                        •
                     ew of godlines, but haue denied the power thereof: turne awaie therefore from ſuch. Of which time alſo Chriſt foreſpake in theſe words: Math. 24.
                  And then many ſhall be offended at theſe examples, and ſhal betraie one another, and ha
                        •
                     e one another. And many falſe Prophets ſhall ariſe, and deceiue many. And becauſe iniquitie ſhal increaſe many waies, the loue of many ſhal be colde. But he that 
                        〈◊〉
                      to the end, he ſhalbe ſaued. Theſe wordes are to be vnderſtood of them, which do continue in the doctrine of Chriſt, enduring all aduerſities, wherewith they are aſſaied. And in an other Mat▪ 1
                        •
                     . Math. 11.place Chriſt crieth out: Woe to the world, becauſe of offences. And, Bleſsed is he that ſhall not be offended in me.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               
                  
                     Art. 26. THerefore we beleeue, that it is not lawfull for anie man, to withdraw himſelfe from the congregations, & to reſt in himſelfe, but rather that al men are to defende, and to preſerue the vnitie of the Church, ſubmitting themſelues to the common inſtruction, and to the yoke of Chriſt, whereſoeuer God doth appoint that true Eccleſiaſtical diſcipline, although the decrees of Magiſtrates doe gaineſaie it: from wich order whoſoeuer doe ſeparate themſelues, they doe reſiſt the ordinance of God.
               
                  
                     Art. 27. We beleeue, that verie carefullie and wiſelie the true

Church (the name wherof too manie do abuſe) is to be diſcerned. Therefore we affirme out of the worde of God, that the Church is a companie of the faithfull, which agree together in following the word of God, and in imbracing pure religion, wherein alſo they do dailie profit, growing and confirming themſelues mutuallie in the feare of God, as they which haue neede dailie to goe forward and to profit, and who, although they profit neuer ſo much, muſt notwithſtanding of neceſſitie daielie flie to the remiſſion of ſinnes. Yet we doe not denie, but that manie Hypocrites and reprobates are mingled with the faithfull, but their guilefull dealing is not able to take awaie the name of the Church.
               
                  
                     Art. 28. Therfore, ſeing we beleeue this to be ſo, we withal boldlie affirme, that where the word of God is not receiued, and where there is no profeſſion of that obedience which is due thereunto, nor anie vſe of Sacramentes, there (if we will ſpeake properlie) we cannot iudge anie Church to be. Therefore we condemne the Papiſticall aſſemblies, becauſe that the pure trueth of God is baniſhed from them, and among them the ſacraments of Faith are corrupted, counterfeited, and falſified, or altogether aboliſhed, and to conclude, among whome all ſuperſtitions and Idolatries are in full force. And therefore we thinke, that all they who ioyne them ſelues to ſuch actions, and communicate therwith, doe ſeparate themſelues from the bodie of Chriſt. Yet notwithſtanding, becauſe that in Papacie there be ſome ſmall tokens of a Church, and the ſubſtance eſpeciallie of Baptiſme hath remained the efficacie whereof doth not depende vpon him, by whome it is miniſtred, we confeſſe, that they which are there baptized, neede not to be baptized the ſecond time, howbeit, by reaſon of the corruptions, which are mingled therewith, no man can offer infants there to be baptized, but that he muſt defile him 
                     Art. 
                     
                        •
                     .ſelfe.
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               WE beleeue, that there is one Church of God, and that the ſame is not ſhute vp (as in times paſt emong the Iewes) into ſome one corner or kingdome, but that it is

Catholike, and vniuerſall, and diſperſed throughout the wholl world. So that there is now no nation, which maie truelie complaine, that they be ſhut forth, and maie not be one of the Church and people of God: and that this Church is the kingdome, the bodie, and the ſpouſe of Chriſt: that Chriſt alone is the Prince of this kingdome: that Chriſt alone is the head of this bodie: and that Chriſt alone is the Bridegrome of this Spouſe.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               
                  
                     Art. 2
                        •
                     . W
                     •
                   beleeue and confeſſe, that there is one Catholike or Vniuerſall Church, which is the true congregation or companie of all faithfull Chriſtians, which doe looke for their whol ſaluation from Chriſt alone, in as much as they be waſhed in his bloode, and ſanctified and ſealed by his ſpirit. Furthermore, as this Church hath beene from the beginning of the worlde, ſo it ſhall continue vnto the ende thereof. The which appeareth by this, that Chriſt is our eternall King, who can neuer be without ſubiects. This Church God doth defend againſt all the fury and force of the world, although for a ſmall time it may ſeeme to be verie little, and as it were vtterlie extinguiſhed to the ſight of man: euen as in the perilous time of A
                     •
                  hab, God is ſaide to haue reſerued to himſelfe ſeauen thouſand men, which bowed not their k
                        ••
                     e to Baall. To conclude, this holie Church is not ſituated o
                     •
                   limited in any ſet or certaine place, nor yet bound and tied to any certaine and peculiar perſons, but ſpread ouer the face of the wholl earth, though in minde and will, by one and the ſame ſpirit, through the power of faith, it be wholly ioyned and vnited together.
               
                  
                     Art. 28. We beleeue, that ſeeing this holie company and congregation conſiſteth of thoſe that are to be ſaued, and out of it there is no ſaluation, therefore no man, of how great dignitie and preheminence ſo euer, ought to ſeparate and ſunder himſelfe from it, that beeing contented with his owne ſolitarie eſtate, he ſhould liue apart by himſelfe. But on the contrarie ſide, that all and euerie one are bound to aſſociate themſelues to this companie, carefullie to preſerue the vnitie of the Church, to ſubmit himſelfe both to the doctrine & diſcipline of the ſame, finallie to put his necke willinglie vnder

the yoke of Chriſt, as common members of the ſame bodie, to ſeeke the edification of their brethren, according to the meaſure of gifts, which God hath beſtowed vppon euery one. Moreouer, to the end that theſe things may the better be obſerued, it is the part and duety of euery faithful man to ſeparat himſelfe according to gods word, frō all thoſe which are without the church, & to couple himſelfe vnto this cōpany of the faithful, wherſoeuer god hath placed it, yea though contrarie edicts of Princes and Magiſtrates do forbid them, vpon paine of corporall death, preſently to enſue vpon all thoſe, which doe the ſame. Whoſoeuer therefore doe either depart from the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Church, o
                     •
                   refuſe to ioyne themſelues vnto it, doe openlie reſiſt the commaundement of God.
               
                  
                     Art. 29. We beleeue, that with great diligence and wiſedome it ought to be ſearched and examined by the worde of God, what the true Church is, ſeeing that all the Sectes, that at this daie haue ſprung vp in the worlde, doe vſurpe and falſelie pretend the name and title of the Church. Yet here we doe not ſpeak
                     •
                   of the companie of hypocrites, which together with the good are mingled in the Church, though properly they 
                     ••
                  e not pertaine to the Church, wherin they are oneli
                     •
                  e preſent with their bodies; but onely of the manner, how to diſtinguiſh the bodie & congregation of the true Church from all other Sects, which doe falſlie boaſt that they be the members of the Church. Wherefore the true Church may be diſ
                     •
                  erned from the falſe by theſe notes, Firſt, if the pure preaching of the Goſpell doe floriſh in it. if 
                     〈◊〉
                   haue 
                     〈…〉
                   adminiſtration of the ſacraments, according t
                     •
                   Chriſt his inſtitution: if it doe vſe the right Eccleſiaſticall 
                     〈◊〉
                   for the reſtraining of vice: Finallie, to knit vp 
                     〈…〉
                   word, if it do ſquare all thinges to the rule of Gods word▪ refuſing whatſoeuer is contrarie to it, acknowledgeing Chriſt to be the onely head of the ſame. By theſe notes, I ſaie, it is certaine that the true Church maie be diſcerned. From the which it is not lawfull for any man to be ſeuered. Now who be the true members of this true Church, it maie be gathered by theſe markes and tokens which be common to al Chriſtians: ſuch is faith, by the vertue whereof, hauing once apprehended Chriſt the onelie Sauiour, they doe flie ſinne, and follow righteouſnes louing

the true God, and their neighbours, without turning either to the right hand, or to the left: and doe crucifie their fleſh with the effectes thereof, not as if no infirmity at all remained ſtill within them, but becauſe they doe ſight al their life long againſt the fleſh by the power of the ſpirit, hauing of ten recourſe vnto the bloode, death, paſſion, & obedience of our Lord Chriſt, as vnto a moſt ſafe refuge, in whome alone they are aſſured to finde redemption for their ſins, through faith in him. But on the other ſide, the falſe Church doth alwaies attribute more vnto her ſelfe, to her owne decrees and traditions, then to the worde of God, and will not ſuffer her ſelfe to be ſubiect to the yoke of Chriſt, neither doth adminiſter the Sacraments, ſo as Chriſt hath preſcribed, but at her owne wil and pleaſure, doth one while adde vnto them, another while detract from them. Furthermore, ſhe doth alwaies leane more to men, then to Chriſt: and whoſoeuer do goe about to leade a holie life, according to the preſcript rule of gods word, whoſoeuer doth rebuke and reprooue her faults, as her couetouſnes, and Idolatry, thoſe ſhee doth perſecute with a deadlie hatred. By theſe markes therefore it is eaſie to diſcerne and diſtinguiſh both theſe Churches the one from the other.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               ALſo they teach, that there is one holy Church, that ſhal continue alwaies. Now, to ſpeake properlie, the Church of Chriſt is a congregation of the members of Chriſt, that is, of the Saintes, which doe truelie beleeue, and rightlie obeie Chriſt: though in this life there be manie wicked ones and hypocrites mingled with this companie and ſhalbe to the daie of iudgement. Now the Church properlie ſo called, hath her notes and markes, to weete, the pure and ſounde Doctrine of the Goſpell and the right vſe of the Sacraments. And for the true vnitie of the Church, it is ſufficient, to agree opon the Doctrine of the Goſpell, and the adminiſtration of the ſacraments. Neither is it neceſſary that humane traditions, or rites inſtituted by men, ſhould be alike euerie where, according as Saint Paul teacheth, There is one Lorde, one faith, one Baptiſme, one God, and Father of all.
               
            
            
               
               Theſe things are thus ſet downe in another edition.
               ALſo they 
                     •
                  each, that there is one holy Church, which is to continue alwaies. Now the Church is a congregation of Saints, in which the Goſpell is purelie taught, and the Sacraments rightlie adminiſtred. And vnto the true vnitie of the Church, it is ſufficient, to agree vpon the Doctrine of the Goſpell, and the adminiſtration of the Sacraments. Neither is it neceſſarie that humane traditions, and rites or ceremonies ordained by man, ſhould be alike in all places, as Saint Paull ſaith, There is one ſaith, one baptiſme, one God and Father of all.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
               Of the Church.
               
                  
                     Art. 11. GOd will haue vs to vnderſtand, that mankinde is not 
                     •
                  orne by chaunce, but that it is created of God, and created, not to eternall deſtruction, but that out of mankinde he might gather vnto himſelfe a Church, to the which in all eternitie he might communicate his wiſdome, goodnes, and ioy: and he will haue his Sonne to be ſeene, for whome and through whome, by his vnſpeakeable wiſdome, and infinite mercie, he hath repayred this miſerable nature of men. Therefore amongſt men he woulde at all times haue a companie, whereunto he deliuered the doctrine, concerning his Sonne, and wherein the Sonne himſelfe did inſtitute and preſerue a miniſterie, to keepe and ſpread abroad that doctrine, by the which he hath bin, is, and wil be effectuall, 
                     •
                  nd hath conuerted manie to himſelfe, as Paull doeth manifeſtlie teach: The Goſpell is the power of God to ſaluation to eu
                        ••
                     ie one that beleeueth.
               
               But it is to be 
                     〈…〉
                   at and to be lamented, that the greateſt part of mankinde, being carried awaie with a horrible rage, ſhould contemne this voice, and teſtimonie of God, and the Sonne of God: and that in this companie, which hath the name of the Church, there haue bin alwaies many diuiſons, and that the true Church hath bin ouercome by forrein & domeſticall enemies. When men do looke vpon theſe diſſentions, and doe ſee that they which imbrace other doctrines repugnant to the goſpell, doe get the vpper hand in kingdomes, multitude, and glorie, they

doubt whether there be anie Church of God, which it is, what manner of Church it is, and where it ſhould be. And for prophane men it is a hard matter to iudge hereof: but the true Church doth certeinlie know out of the diuine Teſtament, whence theſe ſo great furies of men doe ariſe, and yet that amongſt them the Church of God is preſerued; and doth diſcerne it from other nations, and knoweth which is it, what manner of one it is, & where to be found. Therefore that all godlie men might be the better confirmed againſt theſe doubtes, this Article is ſet before them in the Creede: I beleeue the holie Catholike Church. By this profeſſion we affirme, that all mankinde is not reiected of God, but that there is, and ſhall remaine, a certeine true Church, that the promiſes of God are ſure, and that the Sonne of God doth as yet reigne, receiue, and ſaue thoſe that call vpon him. And being raiſed vp by this comforte, we doe giue God thankes, and inuocate him, we doe deſire, receiue, and looke for eternall good thinges at his hand.
               By reaſon of this admonition and comfort, the Article in the Creede is rehearſed, ſeing that the ſelfe ſame doctrine, touching the preſeruing of the Church, is verie often repeated in ſundrie Sermons in the booke of God: as Iſa. 59. This is my couenant with them, ſaith the Lord▪ my Spirit, which is vpon thee, and my wordes, which I haue put in thy mouth, ſhall not depart 
                        ••
                     t of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy ſeed, ſaith the Lorde, from henceforth euen for euer. And Chriſt ſaith, I am with you for euer, euen to the ende of the worlde. Alſo this is a ſweete comforte, that the heires of eternall life are not to be found elſwhere, then in the companie of thoſe that are called, according to that ſaying, Whome he hath choſen, them he hath alſo called. Let not therefore mens mindes goe aſtraie, beholding this ragged bodie of the Church, and peraduenture dreaming, that in other places ſome, which doe not know the goſpell, are notwithſtanding holie, and the dwelling houſe of God, as Fabius, Scipio, Ariſtides, and ſuch like. But turne thou thy eies hether: Knowe for a certaintie, that in this companie of thoſe which are called, ſome be choſen, and ioyne thy ſelfe to this companie by confeſſion and Inuocation: as Dauid ſaith, Pſal. 26. One thing haue I deſired of the Lord, and that I doe ſtill require, that I maie dwell in the houſe of
                  
                  the Lorde all the daies of my life, to beholde the will of the Lorde, an
                        •
                      to viſitte his temple.
               
               We do not therefore ſpeake of the Church, as if we ſhould ſpeake of Plato his Idea, but we ſpeake of ſuch a Church, as maie be ſeene and heard, according to that ſaying, The
                        •
                      ſound is gonne forth into all the earth. The eternall father wil haue his ſonne to be heard among al mankinde, as he ſaith▪ 
                  Heare him. And, Pſal. 2. I haue ſet my king vpon the holie hill▪ Sion: I will declare the decree. The Lord ſaid to me, thou art 
                        〈◊〉
                      Sonne, this daie haue I begotten thee. Be wiſe now therfore ye King: We ſay therfore, that the viſible Church in this life is: companie of thoſe, which doe embrace the Goſpell o
                     •
                   Chriſt, and vſe the ſacramentes aright, wherein God by the miniſterie of the Goſpell is effectuall, and doth ren
                     ••
                   manie to life eternall. And yet in this companie there be manie, which are not holie, but do agree together, concerning the true doctrine, as in the time of Marie, theſe were the Church, to wit, Zacharie, Simeon, Ioſeph, Elizabeth, Marie, Anne, the teachers, and manie other, who agreed with them in the pure doctrine, and did not heare the Sadduces and the Phariſees, but Zacharie, Simeon, Anne, Marie, and ſuch like, &c. For when the companie is very ſmall▪ yet God doth reſerue ſome remnants, whoſe voice and confeſſion is heard, and he doth oftentimes renue the miniſterie, according to that ſaying: Except the Iord had left a ſeed 
                        •
                     n to vs, we had beene like to Sodome, &c.
               
               Therefore this deſcription, taken out of the manifeſt teſtimonies of the ſcriptures, doeth declare, which is the Church, what it is, and where it is. We maie not doubt▪ that the Church is tied to the Goſpell, as Paull ſaith, If anie man teach another Goſpell, let him be accurſed. And, Ioh. 10. My ſheepe heare my voice. And Ioh. 14, If anie man loueth 
                        〈◊〉
                      he heareth my word, and my Father ſhall loue him, and we will 
                        〈◊〉
                      to him, and will dwell with him. And Ioh. 17. Sanctifie them wi
                        ••
                      thy word, thy worde is trueth. Therfore the Sadduces, the Phariſies, and ſuch like Biſhops, and others, who ſet forth an other doctrine, differing from the Goſpell, and do obſtinately eſtabliſh idolatrie, are no members of the Church of God, althouugh they holde a title and dominions. But it is manifeſt, that our aduerſaries teach and defend another

                  
                     •
                  inde of doctrine differing from the Goſpell, ſeeing they teach that the law of God maie be fulfilled by our obedience in this life, and that this obedience doth deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes: Alſo, that by this obedience men are made righteous before god. Alſo that euill concupiſcence is not ſinne, not an euil reſiſting the law of God. Alſo, that they which are conuerted, muſt doubt, whether they be in ſtate of grace, and that this doubting is not ſinne. Alſo, that dead men are to be praied vnto. Alſo, that difference of meates, monaſtical vowes, and other ceremonies choſen without anie commaundement of God, are the ſeruice of God. Alſo, that the ſacrifice in the maſſe doth deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, and other thinges, both for him that maketh it, and alſo for others that are a liue or dead. Alſo, other manifold and horrible prophanations of the ſacrament. Alſo, that Biſhops maie appoint ſeruices of God, and that the violating of thoſe ſeruices, which are appointed by them, is mortall ſinne. Alſo, that they maie enioyne the law of ſingle life, to anie degree of men. Alſo, that the rehearſall of all and euerie offence is neceſſarie to the obteining of remiſſion of ſinnes. Alſo, that canonicall ſatisfactions do recompence the puniſhments of Purgatorie. Alſo, that thoſe Synodes, wherein the Biſhops alone do giue their iudgement, can not erre. Alſo, they which do conſecrate oyles, and other things, without the commaundement of God, and do attribute thereunto a diuine power againſt ſinnes, and Deuills, and diſeaſes: Alſo, they which allow of praiers made to cert
                     •
                  ine Images, as though there were more helpe to be had: Alſo, they which do kill honeſt men, onelie for that they diſlike theſe errours, and do proſes the trueth: Theſe things ſeing they be altogether heatheniſh and idolatrous, it is manifeſt, that the mainteiners thereof, are not members of the Church, but do rule and haue ſoueraigntie, as the Phariſies and Saducies did. Neuertheles there haue bene, are, and ſhall be in the Church of God, ſuch men as doe keepe the foundation, although ſome had, haue, and ſhall haue more light, and others leſſe. And ſometime alſo euen the verie ſaints do build ſtubble vpon the foundation, eſpeciallie ſeeing that the miſerie of theſe times doth not ſuffer thoſe, which haue the beginnings of faith, to be inſtructed,

and to conferre with the better learned. yet theſe are in the number of thoſe, whome the Lord commaundeth to be ſpared, Ezech, 9. who ſigh and are ſorie, becauſe that 
                     •
                  rrors are eſtabliſhed.
               Therefore chiefelie by the voice of the Doctrine we maie and ought to iud
                     •
                  e, which, and where the true Church is, which by the voice of the true doctrine, and then by the lawfull vſe of the Sacraments, is diſtinguiſhed from other natious. And what is the voice of the true doctrine, the writings of the Prophets and Apoſtles, and the Creedes, doe declare. In theſe the doctrine is not doubtfull, touching the foundation to wit, touching the Articles of faith, the e
                     •
                  
                  ſence and will of God, the Sonne the Redeemer, the lawe▪ the promiſes, the vſe of the Sacraments, and the miniſtery. And it is manifeſt, that it is not permitted to any creature, not to Angels, nor to men, to change that doctrine, which is deliuered of God.
               Now what the Church is, the Sonne of God ſheweth, ſaying, My kingdome is not of this world. Alſo, As my Father ſen
                        •
                      me▪ ſo doe I ſend you. By the voice of the miniſters of the Goſpell an eternal Church is gathered to god, and by this voice God is effectuall, and turneth manie to himſelfe. This exceeding great benefit of God we ought to acknowledge, 
                     〈◊〉
                   thankefullie to extoll. And although the Church be a companie, that maie be ſeene and heard, yet it is to be diſtingui hed from politicall Empires, or thoſe that beare the ſworde. Biſhoppes haue not authoritie by the law of God 
                     〈◊〉
                   puniſh the diſobedient, neither doe they poſſeſſe the kingdomes of the worlde, and yet in the Church there is an o
                     •
                  
                  der, according to that ſaying▪ 
                  He aſcended, he giueth giftes 
                        〈◊〉
                      men, Apoſtles, Prophets, Euangeliſt, Paſtors, and Teachers. The Sonne of God is the high Prieſt, annointed of the eternal Father, who, that the Church might not vtterlie periſh, ha
                     ••
                   giuen vnto it miniſters of the Goſpell, partlie called immediatlie by himſelfe, as the Prophets & Apoſtles, partlie choſen by the calling of men. For he doth both allow of the choiſe of the Church, and of his infinite goodnes he is effectuall, euen when the Goſpell doth ſound, by ſuch as 
                     〈◊〉
                   choſe
                     •
                   by voices, or in the name of the Church.
               Therefore we doe reteine in our Churches alſo the publique

rite of Ordination where by the mi
                     •
                  iſierie of the Goſpell is commended to thoſe that are tru
                     •
                  lie ch
                     •••
                  n▪ 
                  
                     •
                  hoſe manners and doctrine we doe 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  ſt 
                     〈…〉
                   And touching the worthines of the 
                     〈…〉
                   teach ou
                     •
                   Churches. No 
                     〈…〉
                   then that which the Sonne of God ſ
                     ••
                  th: As my 
                        •
                     ath
                        ••
                      ſ
                        ••
                     t me, odo I ſend you. He alſo declare
                     •
                  h what 
                     •••
                  maundements he giueth, preach ye the Goſpell, and he a
                     ••
                  irmeth, that he wil be effectual by their voice, as the Father ſheweth himſelfe to be effectuall by the Sonne. Alſo, we ſet before men the commaundementes of God. He that 
                        •
                     ea
                        •
                     eth you, heareth me: 
                        〈◊〉
                      that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. Alſo, Obey them that have the ouer 
                        ••
                     ght of you. And yet theſe ſayings doe not erect a kingdom without the Goſpel: but they comm
                     ••
                  nd an obed
                     •
                  ence which is due to the voice of the Goſpell. And theſe things pertaine to the miniſte
                     •
                  ie: To teach the Goſpell, to adminiſter the Sacramentes, to giue abſolution to them that aske it, and doe not perſeuere in 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  if
                     •
                  ſt offences: to ordaine miniſters of the Goſpell, beeing 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  h
                     •
                  lie called and examined▪ to exerciſe the iudgements of the Church after a lawfull manner, vpon thoſe looke the 1. 
                        〈…〉
                      vpon this confeſſ.which are guiltie of manifeſt cr
                     •
                  mes in manners of in d
                     •
                  c
                     •••
                  ne, and to pronounce the ſentence of excommunication againſt them that are ſtubborne, & againe to al ſolue & pardon them that doe repeat. That theſe thinges maie be done 
                     〈◊〉
                   there be alſo Conſiſtories appointed in our 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               We ſaid in the 
                     〈…〉
                   the Church, that there be manie in this viſible 
                     〈…〉
                   who notwithſtanding in outward 
                     〈…〉
                   doe in 
                     〈◊〉
                   the true Doctrine. We conde
                     •••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   who ſ
                     •
                  igned that their miniſterie 
                     •
                  s not 
                     〈…〉
                   Alſo we condemne that 
                     〈…〉
                   which 
                     〈◊〉
                   that to be the viſible Church, w
                     ••
                  rein 
                     •
                  ll ar
                     •
                   holie. And we confeſſe that we are ſo 
                     〈…〉
                   viſible Church in this life, as our Lord ſaith▪ Mat. 
                     •
                  2. The kingdome of God, is like vnto a drawe net, 
                        〈◊〉
                      into 
                        〈…〉
                      w
                        ••
                     rein 
                        〈◊〉
                      are gathered both good and bad▪
                   but yet they which become enemies to the true doctrine, ceaſe to be members of this viſible congregation, according to that ſaying: Iſ anie man teach another Goſpell, let him be acc
                        ••
                     ſed.
               
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               
                  Of the cheefe Biſhop.
                  THere be thoſe that attribute this to the Biſhop of Rome, that he is the heade of the Vniuerſall Church, & that he hath power in earth, not onelie to ordeine ciuill kingdomes, and to gouerne all Eccleſiaſticall perſons and matters, but alſo to commaund the Angels in heauen, to deliuer ſoules out of Purgatorie, and to bleſſe, or deliuer whom it pleaſeth him. But we acknowledge, that if the Biſhop of Rome were a godly man, and did teach the goſpel of Chriſt, according to the writings of the Prophets & Apoſtles, then he had a miniſterie of high authoritie in this earth, to wit, a miniſterie of remitting and reteining ſinnes, then which miniſterie there is nothing greater or more excellent in this earth. But he alone hath not this miniſterie, but he hath it in common with all thoſe, who by a lawful calling do preach the Goſpell of Chriſt. For the miniſterie of remitting or reteining ſinnes, which otherwiſe is called the key of the kingdome of heauen, is not giuen to the free power of the perſon of men, but it is ſo neerelie annexed to the worde of the goſpell, that ſo many as do preach the Goſpel, may truly be ſaid to remit, and to reteine ſins, to wit, to remit their ſins, who by faith doe receiue the Goſpell; to reteine theirs, that doe contemne the Goſpell. Mar. 16. Preach the Goſpell to euerie creature. He that ſhall beleeue, and be baptized, ſhall be ſaued: but he that will not beleeue, ſhall be damned. Hilarie, De Trinit, lib. 6. ſaith. The father reuealed it to Peter, that he ſhould ſaie, thou art the Sonne of God, Therfore vpon this rock of Confeſſion is the Church builded: this faith is the foundation of the Church: whatſoeuer this faith ſhall looſe or binde in earth, ſhall be looſed or bound in heauen. Chryſoſtome ſaith: They which beare the keies be the prieſts, to whome the worde of teaching, and interpreting the Scriptures, is committed. Now the keie is the worde of the knowledge of the Scriptures, by which keie the trueth is opened to men. Auguſtine, De Doct
                           •
                        . Chriſt. Lib. 1. Cap. 18. ſaith: Theſe keies did he giue to the Church, that whatſoeuer it looſeth in earth, ſhould be looſed in heauen: to 
                           •
                        it, that whoſoeuer would not beleeue, that his ſinnes are forgiuen hi
                           •
                         in the Church, they ſhould not be forgiuen to him: but whoſoeuer
                     
                     ſhould beleeue, and being corrected doth turne from his ſinnes, being placed in the lappe of the Church, ſhould, by the ſame faith and correction be healed. Ambroſe ſaith, Sinnes are remitted by the worde, whereof the Leuite is the interpreter or expounder. Bernard, in epiſt. ad Eug. ſaith. The true ſucceſſ
                           ••
                        er of Paull will ſate with Paull, Not that we haue dominion ouer your ſaith, but we are helpers 
                           •
                        f your ioy. The heires of Peter will heare Peter, ſaying: Not as though ye were Lordes ouer Gods heritage, but that ye maie be enſamples to the flocke. Thomas, in Summa ſua, parte, 3. in addit. q. 6. art. 6. ſaith: Becauſe the Church is founded vpon Faith, and the Sacraments, therefore it doth not pertaine to the miniſters of the Church to make new Articles of Faith, or to ſet a parte thoſe which are made, neither to appoint new Sacramentes, or to take awaie thoſe, which are appointed: but this is proper to that excellencie of power, which i
                           •
                         due to Chriſt alone, who is the foundation of the Church. And therfore, as the Pope cannot diſpenſe, that anie one maie be ſaued without Baptiſme, ſo can he not diſpenſe with anie to be ſaued without confeſſion, becauſe that he bindeth by force of a Sacrament. And although Thomas haue his opinions, touching confeſſion, yet this which he ſaith, It doth not pertaine to the Miniſters of the Church (among whome he reckoneth the Pope) to make new Articles of Faith, and to appoint new Sacraments, is in deede an Apoſtolike and Catholike iudgement. For no other miniſterie doeth perteine to the miniſters of the Church, which haue their calling from Chriſt, then that which we ment
                        •
                     oned before, and which the Apoſtles of Chriſt, themſelues did execute, touching the remittting and reteining of ſinnes. Therefore if anie thing more then this miniſterie be attributed to the Biſhop of Rome, this is either giuen vnto him by mans ordinances, or els it is feigned by the Monkes and other flatterers, againſt the authoritie of the worde of God.
               
               
                  Of the Church.
                  
                     
                        Art. 31. WE beleeue and co
                        •
                     f
                        •
                     ſſe, that there is one holie Catholique, and Apoſtolique Church, according to the Creede of the Apoſtles, and the Nicene Creede. 2. That this Church is ſo gouerned of the holie Ghoſt, that although he ſuffer it to be weake in this earth, yet he doth

                     
                        •
                     lwaies preſerue it, that it doe not periſh either by errours▪ or by ſinnes. 3. That in this world manie naughtie men and hypocrites, are mingled with this Church. 4. That theſe naughtie men and hypocrites, if by a lawfull calling they ſhall take vponthem the miniſterie of the Church, ſhall not of themſelues anie whit hinder the trueth of the Sacraments, except they peruert the ordinance of Chriſt, and teach wicked thinges. 5. That in this Church there is true remiſſion of ſinnes. 6. That this Church Looke the 
                           •
                        . obſeruat. upon this confeſſ.hath authoritie to beare witnes of the holie Scripture. 7. That this Church hath authoritie looke the 
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        bſer
                           •
                        at.to iudge of all doctrines, according to that, Trie the ſpirits, whether they be of God. And▪ 
                     Let the other iudge. 8. That this Church hath authoritie * to interpret the ſcripture.
                  But where this Church is to be ſought, and whether her authoritie be limited within certaine boundes, diuers men doe iudge diuerſlie. But we thinke, that men are to iudge, by the authoritie, both of the holie Scripture, and alſo of the auncient Fathers, that the true Catholike, and Apoſtolike Church, is not tied to one certaine place or nation, nor to one certaine kinde of men, but that it is in that place or nation, where the Goſpel of Chriſt is ſincerelie preached▪ and his Sacraments rightlie adminiſtred, according to Chriſt his inſtitution. Ioan. 10. I haue ſaide, ye are Gods: He called them Gods, vnto whome the worde of God was giuen, &c. Therefore there is the people or Church of God, where the worde of God is preached. Iohn. 15. Now you are cleane, through the worde, which I haue ſpoken to you. Therefore the worde of Chriſt, which is the Goſpell, doeth declare where that Church is, which is cleane in the ſight of God: Rom. 1. The Goſpell is the power of God to ſaluation, to euerie one that beleeueth. Therefore where the Goſpell is, which is acknowledged by faith, there God hath his Church, wherein he i
                        •
                      effectuall vnto eternall life. Chryſoſtome in his commentaries vpon Matthew, Cap. 24. hom. 49. ſaith. Therefore 
                           〈◊〉
                         this time all Chriſtians muſt goe to the Scriptures: becauſe that 
                           〈◊〉
                         this time, ſince hereſie poſſeſsed thoſe Churches, there can be no 
                           •
                        ria
                           •
                         of true Chriſtianitie, neither can there be anie other refuge for Chriſtians, that would willinglie know the truth of faith, but onelie the 
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        ine Scriptures. And a little after, Therefore he that will kn
                           ••
                        
                     
                     
                     which is the true Church of Chriſt, whence maie he know it, but onelie by the Scriptures? Auguſtine, Tom. 2. Epiſt. 166. ſaith. I
                           •
                         the Scriptures we haue learned Chriſt, in the Scriptures we hau
                           •
                         learned to know the Church: theſe Scriptures we haue in common: why doe we not in them ret
                           •
                        ine in common both Chriſt and the Church? And againe, Tom. 7. in Epist. contra Epiſt. Peti
                           •
                        iani Donatiſtae, cap. 2. 3. & 4. It is a queſtion betweene vp and the Donatiſtes, where the Church is. What then ſhall we does ſhall we ſeeke the Church in our owne wordes, or in the wordes of his head▪ in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt? I thinke that we ought to ſeeke it rather in his words, who is the truth, and doth beſt of all know his bodi
                           •
                        .
                  
                  Now that which is affirmed, that the Church hath author
                        •
                     ti
                        •
                      to beare witnes of the holie Scripture, to interprete the Scripture, and to iudge of all doctrines, it is not ſo to be vnderſtoode, that the Church hath abſolute authoritie to determine what ſhe liſteth, and alſo, if it pleaſe hir, to change the Scripture, and to feigne a new doctrine, and to appoint new worſhips of God; but that the Church, as the Spouſe of Chriſt, ought to know the voice of hir husband, and that ſhe hath receiued of hir husband a certaine rule, to wit, the Propheticall and Apoſtolical preaching, confirmed by miracles from heauen, according to the which ſhe is bounde to interprete thoſe places of the Scripture, which ſeeme to be obſcure, and to iudge of doctrines. Pſal. 119. Thy worde is a light vnto my feete. Rom. 3. Hauing giftes, that be diuers, according to the grace that is giuen vnto vs, whether we haue prophecy, according to the proportion of Faith, &c. 2. Pet. 1. We haue a more ſur
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        orde of the Prophets, to the which ye doe well that yee take heede, as vnto a light, that ſhineth in a darke place, &c. Origen vpon Ierem. Hom. 1. It is neceſsarie for vs to call the holie Scriptures to witnes: for our meanings and interpretations haue no creditte, without theſe witneſſes. Ierome vpon Math. 23. That which is ſpoken without authoritie of the Scriptures, is as eaſilie contemned, as it is ſpoken. And Auguſt. De Nupt. & Concup. Lib. 2. Cap. 23. ſaith, This contouerſie ſeeketh a Iudge. Therefore let Chriſt iudge, and let him ſhew, what thing it is that his death doth profit. This, ſaith he is my bloode, And a little after: Together with him let the Apoſtle iudge, becauſe that Chriſt himſelfe alſo ſpeaketh in the Apoſtle, he crieth out and ſaith touching God the Father. He which ſpared not his 
                           •
                        wn
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         &c. Wherefore the Church

hath ſo farre authoritie to iudge of doctrine, that notwithſtanding ſhee muſt keepe her ſelfe within the bondes of the holie Scripture, which is the voice of hir husband, from which voice it is not lawfull for any man, no not for an Angell, to departe.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFSSION OF SVEVELAND.
               Of the Church.
               
                  
                     Art. 15. FVrthermore we will ſhew, what is taught among vs, 
                     •
                  oth touching the Chriſtian Church, and alſo touching the holie Sacraments: and touching the Church, this is it that we teach. The Church or congregation of Chriſt, (which as yet is in this worlde as a ſtranger from god) is the fellowſhippe and companie of thoſe, which addict them ſelues to Chriſt, and doe altogether truſt and reſt in his protection: among whome notwithſtanding many ſhall be mingled, euen to the end of the worlde, who although they profeſſe the Chriſtian faith, yet they haue it not in deede. This hath our Lorde taught ſufficientlie, Math. 13. by the parable both of the cockle, and alſo of the Net caſt into the ſea, i
                        •
                      the which the bad fiſhes are caught with the good. Alſo, Math. 22. by the parable of the King, inuiting all men to the mariage of his Sonne, and afterward, caſting him out, beeing bound hand and foote, into vtter darkenes, which had not a wedding garment. Now theſe places of Scripture, wherin the congregation of Chriſt is commended, to be the Spouſe of Chriſt, for the which he hath giuen himſelfe. Eph. 5. The houſe of God, the pillar and ground of trueth. 1. Tim. 3. Alſo, The holie hill of Sion, the Citie of the liuing God, the heauenlie Ieruſalem, and the congregation of the firſt borne, which are written in heauen: I ſaie, all theſe places of Scripture doe properlie pertaine to them, who for their ſincere faith▪ are truelie, and in the ſight of God, reckoned among the children of God. For ſeeing that in theſe alone the Lorde doth fullie reigne, theſe onelie, if we will ſpeake properly, are called the Church of Chriſt, and the communion of Saints, in which ſenſe alſo the name of the Church is expounded, in the common Articles of faith, thoſe falſe Chriſtians beeing excluded, which are mingled amongeſt them. Furthermore, the holie Ghoſt himſelfe doth gouerne

this Church or congregation, & remaineth with it, as Chriſt doth euen to the ende of the world, and doth ſanctifie it, that at the length he may preſent it vnto himſelf without ſpo
                        •
                     or wrinckle, as it is ſaide, Eph. 5. Alſo, this is that Church which all men are commaunded to heare, and he that will not heare her, is to to be counted as an heathen and Publicane.
               And although that, to wit, faith it ſelfe, can not be ſeene, whereby this Congregation hath obteined, to be called the Church and companie of Chriſt, yet the fruites of that faith maie be ſeene and knowne, and of them a certaine Chriſtian coniecture be taken. Theſe fruites be cheeflie, a bolde profeſſion of Faith, a true loue offering it ſelfe to doe humble ſeruice to all men, a contempt of all things. Seeing therfore that theſe be the proper fruites, whereſoeuer the holie Goſpell and the Sacraments be exerciſed, thereupon it maie eaſilie be knowne, where, and who be the Chriſtian Church; ſo much as is neceſſary for vs to preſerue among vs the chriſtian communion, & that in the ſame we may be inſtructed, admoniſhed, and helpe one an other, according to the commaundement of Chriſt.
               Furthermore, ſeeing this congregation is the verie kingdome of God, wherein all things ought to be appointed in beſt order, ſhe hath all kinde of offices and miniſters: for 
                     •
                  he is the body of Chriſt himſelfe, compacted of many members, whereof euerie one haue their proper worke. Therefore whoſoeuer doe faithfullie diſcharge ſuch functions▪ and doe earneſtlie labour in the worde and doctrine, they doe repreſent the Church, and may doe all things in the name thereof, ſo that whoſoeuer ſhall either deſpiſe them, or refuſe to heare them, he may worthely be ſaide to deſpiſe the Church it ſelfe.
               Now with what ſpirit or with what ſpirituall authority we doe beleeue that they are▪ furniſhed, we haue declared before, out of moſt firme foundations of the Scripture, where we ſhewed, what we thought of the ſpirituall or Eccleſiaſticall offices, & dignitie. For they cannot by anie meanes repreſent the Church of Chriſt, or doe anie thing in the name thereof, which are not Chriſtes, and therefore propound no Chriſtian thinges, but whatſoeuer is contrarie to the doctrine of Chriſt. For although it maie be, that euen

the wicked maie teach ſome good thing, and maie alſo propheſie in the name of Chriſt (after their example, to whom the Lord himſelfe doth witnes that he will once in time to come ſay, That he neuer knew them) Yet it cannot be, that they can diſcharge the duetie of the Church of Chriſt, and are to be heard, in his ſtead, which doe not propound the voice of their husband Chriſt, although otherwiſe they ſhould thinke 
                     •
                  right of faith, and be counted amongſt the members of the Church, as it doth often times falout, when as the verie Children of God are wrapped in errours, and doe alſo publiſh the ſame. For the Church of Chriſt is whollie addicted to Chriſt himſelfe. Therefore that cannot be counted a doctrine, precept, or commaundement of the true Church, except it be the ſame with the doctrine, precept, and commaundement of Chriſt himſelfe. And whoſoeuer propoundeth anie other thing in her name (although he were an Angell from heauen) he is not to be heard: as alſo the Church in thoſe thinges doth repreſent nothing leſſe the
                     •
                   the Church of Chriſt.
            
         
         
            
            THE ELEVENTH SECTION. OF THE MINISTERS OF THE CHVRCH, AND OF THEIR CALLING AND OFFICE.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of the miniſters of the Church, their inſtitution, and Offices. CHAP. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  GOD hath alwaies vſed his miniſters, for the gathering or erecting vp of a Church to himſelfe, and for the gouerning and preſeruation of the ſame, and ſtill he doth, and alwaies will vſe them, ſo long as the Church remaineth on the earth. Therefore the firſt beginning, inſtitution, & office of the miniſters, is a moſte auncient ordinance of God himſelfe, not a new deuiſe appointed by men. True it is, that God can by his power, without anie meanes, take vnto himſelfe a Church amongſt men, but he had rather deale with men by the miniſterie of men. Therefore miniſters are to be conſidered, not as miniſters by themſelues alone, but as the miniſters of God, euen ſuch as by whoſe meanes god doth work the ſaluatiō of mankinde. For which cauſe we giue coūſel to beware, that we do not ſo attribute the things that pertaine to our conuerſion & inſtruction vnto the ſecret vertue of the holy ghoſt, that we make fruſtrate the eccleſiaſticall miniſtery. For it behoueth vs alwaies to haue in

                  Rom. 10. minde the words of the Apoſtle, How ſhall they beleue in him, of whom they haue not heard? and how ſhall they heare without a preacher? Therefore faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. 
                  Ioh. 3.And that alſo which the Lord ſaieth, in the Goſpell. Verelie, verilie I ſaie vnto you, he that receiueth thoſe that I ſhall ſende, receiueth me, and he that receiueth me, receiueth him that ſent me. Likewiſe that a man of Macedonia appeared in a viſion to Act. 16.Paull being then in Aſia, & ſaid vnto him, Come vnto Macedonia, and helpe vs. And in another place the ſame Apoſtle 1. Cor. 3.ſaith, We together are Gods labourers, and ye are his husbandry, and his building. Yet on the other ſide we muſt take heede, that we do not attribute too much to the miniſters and miniſterie, Ioan. 6.herein remembring alſo the wordes of our Lord in the Goſpell: No man commeth to me except the Father, which hath 
                  1. Cor. 3.
                  ſent me, draw him. And the wordes of the Apoſtle, Who then is Paull, and who is Apollo, but the miniſters by whome you beleeued? and as the Lorde gaue vnto euerie one. Therefore neither is he that planteth anie thing, nor he that watereth, but God that giueth the increaſe. Therefore let vs beleeue that God doth teach vs by his worde outwardlie by his miniſters, and doth inwardlie mooue and perſwade the heartes of his Elect vnto beliefe by his holie ſpirit: and that therefore we ought to render all the glorie of this wholl benefite vnto God. But we haue ſpoken of this matter in the 1. Chapter of this our declaration.
               God hath vſed for his miniſters, euen from the beginning of the world, the beſt and moſte excellent men in the world (for howſoeuer diuers of them were 
                     •
                  ut ſimple, for worldly wiſdom or Philoſophy, yet ſure in true diuinitie they were moſte excellent) namelie the Patriarkes, to whome he ſpake verie often by his Angells. For the Patriarks were the Prophets or teachers of their age, whome god for this purpoſe would haue to liue manie yeares, that they might be, as it were Fathers, and lights of the world. After them followed M
                     •
                  ſe
                     •
                   together with the Prophettes, that were moſt famous throughout the wholl world. Beſides after all theſe ou
                     •
                   heauenlie Father ſent his onelie begotten ſonne, the moſte abſolute and perfect teacher of the world, in whome is hidden the wiſedome of God, and from him deriued vnto vs by that moſte holie, perfect, and moſte pure doctrine of

all other. For he choſe vnto himſelfe Diſciples, whome he made Apoſtles. And they going out into the wholl worlde gathered together Churches in all places by the preaching of the Goſpell. And after they ordained paſtors and doctors in all Churches, by the commaundement of Chriſt, who by ſuch as ſucceeded them, hath taught and gouerned the Church vnto this day. Therfore God gaue vnto his auncient people the Patriarks, together with Moſes & the Prophets: ſo alſo to his people vnder the new couenant he hath ſent his onelie begotten Sonne, and with him the Apoſtles and teachers of his Church.
               Furthermore, the miniſters of the new couenant are termed by diuers names, for they are called Apoſtles, Prophets Euangeliſts, Biſhops, Elders, Paſtors, & doctors. The Apoſtles 1 Cor. 12. Epheſ. 4.remained in no certaine place but gathered together diuers Churches throughout the wholl world: which Churches when they were once eſtabliſhed, there ceaſed to be any more Apoſtles, & in their places were particular parſons appointed in euerie Church. The Prophe
                     •
                  tes in olde time did foreſee and foretel things to come, & beſides did interpret the ſcriptures looke the 1. obſeru. vp on this confeſſion.and ſuch are found ſome amongſt vs at this day. They were called Euangeliſts, which were the penners of the hiſtorie of the Goſpell, and were alſo Looke the 2 obſeruat.preachers of the Goſpell of Chriſt, as the Apoſtle Paull giueth in charge vnto Timothie, To fulfill the worke of an Euangelist. 
                  Looke the 3. obſeru.Biſhops were the ouerſeers & the watchmen of the Church, which did diſtribute foode and other neceſſities of the Church. The Elders were the auncients & as it were the ſenators and Fathers of the Church, gouerning it with the wholeſome counſell. The Paſtors did both keepe the Lords flocke, and alſo looke the 4. obſeru.prouide things neceſſarie for it. The Doctors doe inſtruct, and teach the true faith and godlines. Therefore the Church miniſters that now are, maie be called Biſhops, Elders, Paſtors and Doctors. But in proceſſe of times there where manie moe names of Miniſters brought into the Church. For ſome were created Patriarkes, others Archbiſhoppes, others ſuffragans, other Metrapolitanes, Archprieſts, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acol
                     •
                  thes, Exorciſts, Queriſters, Porters, & I know not what a rable beſides Cardinalls, Prouoſts, and Priors, Abbots greater and leſſer,

gouerners higher and lower. But touching all theſe we pa
                     •••
                   not a ruſh what they haue beene in time paſte, or what they are now. It is ſufficient for vs, that, foraſmuch as concerneth Miniſters, we haue the doctrine of the Apoſtles.
               We therefore knowing certeinelie that Monkes and the orders or ſortes of them are neither inſtituted of Chriſt, no
                     •
                   ofhis Apoſtles, we teach that they are ſo farre from being profitable, that they are pernicious and hurtfull vnto the Church of God. For although in former times they were ſomewhat tollerable (when they liued ſolytarilie, getting their liuings with their owne handes, were burdenſome to none, but did in all places obey their Paſtors, euen as laie men, yet what kind of men they be now, al the world ſeeth & perceiueth. They pretend, I know not what vowes, but they lead a life altogether diſagreeing from their vowes: ſo that the verie beſt of them may iuſtlie be numbred among thoſe, 
                     
                        •
                     . The
                        ••
                     . 
                        •
                     .of whome the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: We heare ſaie that there be ſome among you which walke inordinatelie and worke not at all, but are buſie bodies, &c. Therefore we haue no ſuch in our Churches: and beſides we teach, that they ſhould not be ſuffered to rout in the Churches of Chriſt.
               Furthermore, no man ought to vſurpe the honour of the Eccleſiaſtical miniſterie, that is to ſay, greedily to pluck it to him by bribes, or anie euill ſhiftes, or of his own accord. But let the miniſters of the Church be called and choſen by a lawfull and eccleſiaſticall election and vocation, that is to ſaie, let them be choſen religiouſlie of the Church, or of thoſe which are appointed thereunto by the Church, and that in due order, without anie tumult, ſeditions, or contention. But we muſt haue an eie to this, that not euerie one that wil be elected, but ſuch men as are fitte, & haue ſufficient learning, eſpeciallie in the Scriptures, and godlie eloquence, and wiſe ſimplicitie, to conclude, ſuch men as be of good reporte for a moderation and honeſtie of life, according to that Apoſtlike rule which Saint Paull giueth in the 1. to Timothie, 3. cap. and 1. to Titus. And thoſe which are choſen, let them be ordained of the Elders, with publike praier, and laying on of handes. We do here therfore condemne all thoſe, which runne of their owne accord beeing neither choſen, ſent, nor ordained. We do alſo vtterly

diſalow vnfit miniſters, & ſuch as are not furniſhed with giftes requiſite for a Paſtor. In the meane time we are not ignorant that the innocent ſimplicitie of certaine Paſtours in the primitiue Church, did ſometimes more profit the Church, then the manifolde, exquiſite, and nice learning of other ſome, that were ouer loftie and high minded. And for this cauſe we alſo at this daie do not reiect the honeſt ſimplicitie of certaine men, which yet is not deſtitute of all knowledge and learning.
               The Apoſtles of Chriſt doe terme al thoſe which beleeue in Chriſt, Prieſts, but not in regarde of their miniſterie, but Exod. 1
                        •
                     . 2. Pet. 1. Apoc. 
                        •
                     .becauſe that all the faithfull being made Kings and Prieſts by Chriſt, maie offer vp ſpirituall ſacrifices vnto God. The miniſterie then and prieſthood are thinges farre different one from the other. For prieſthood, as we ſaide euen now, is common to all chriſtians, ſo is not the miniſterie. And we haue not taken awaie the miniſterie from the Church▪ becauſe wee haue thruſt the popiſh prieſthood out of the Church of Chriſt. For ſurelie in the new couenant of Chriſt, there is no longer anie ſuch prieſthood, as was in the auncient Church of the Iewes, which had an externall annointing, Heb. 
                        •
                     .holie garments, and verie manie ceremonies, which were figures and tipes of Chriſt, who by his comming fulfilled and aboliſhed them. And he him-ſelfe remaineth the onelie prieſt for euer: and we doe not communicate the name of Prieſt to anie of the miniſters, leſt we ſhould detract anie thing from Chriſt. For the Lorde himſelfe hath not appointed in the Church anie Prieſts of the new Teſtament, who hauing receiued authoritie from the Suffragane maie offer vp the hoſte euerie daie, that is, the verie fleſh and the verie bloode of our ſauiour, for the quicke and the dead, but miniſters which maie teach, & adminiſter the ſacraments. Paull declaring plainelie and ſhortlie, what wee are to thinke of the miniſters of the new Teſtament, or of the Church of Chriſt, and what we muſt attribute vnto them, Let a man, ſaith he, thus account of vs, as of the miniſters 
                  1. Cor. 4.
                  of Chriſt, and diſpenſers of the myſteries of God. So that the Apoſtle his minde is, that we ſhoulde eſteeme of miniſters, as of miniſters. Now the Apoſtle calleth them as it were vnderrowers, which ſhoulde onelie haue an eie vnto their

maſter and chiefe gouernour, and be as men that liue not to themſelues, nor according to their owne will, but vnto others, to wit, their Maſters, at whoſe commaundement and beck they ought to be. For the miniſter of the Church is commaunded whollie and in all parts of his duetie, not to pleaſe himſelfe, but to execute that onelie, which he hath receiued in commaundement from his Lorde. And in this ſame place, it is expreſſelie declared, who is our Maſter, euen Chriſt, to whome the miniſters are in ſubiection in all the functions of their miniſterie. And to the ende that he might the more fullie declare their miniſterie, he addeth further that the miniſters of the Church are ſtewards and diſpenſers 
                  1. Cor. 4.
                  of the myſteries of God, Now the myſteries of God, Paull in manie places, and eſpeciallie in the 3. to the Epheſ. doth call the goſpell of Chriſt. And the Sacraments of Chriſt are alſo called myſteries of the auncient writers. Therefore for this purpoſe are the miniſters called, namelie to preach the goſpell of Chriſt vnto the faithfull, and to adminiſter the Sacraments, We reade alſo in another place in the goſpell, Luc. 1
                        •
                     .of the faithfull and wiſe ſeruant, that his Lorde ſet him ouer his familie, to giue foode vnto it in due ſeaſon. Againe, (in an other place of the goſpell) a man goeth into a ſtraunge countrie, and leauing his houſe, giueth vnto his ſeruants authoritie therein, committeth to them his ſubſtance, and appointeth euerie man his worke.
               This is now a fitte place to ſpeake ſomewhat alſo of the power and office of the miniſters of the Church. And concerning their power, ſome haue entreated and diſputed ouer Luc. 22. Mat. 18.buſilie, and would bring al things euen the verie greateſt vnder their iuriſdiction, and that againſt the commaundement of God who forbad vnto his all dominion, and highlie commended humility: In deed there is one kinde of power which is a meere and abſolute power, called the power of right. According to this power all things in the wholl worlde are ſubiect vnto Chriſt, who is Lorde of al: euen as he himſelfe Math. 28. 21 Apoc. 23. & 22.witneſſeth, ſaying: All power is giuen vnto me in heauen and in earth. And againe, I am the firſt, and the laſt, and beholde I liue for euer, and I haue the keies of hell, and of death. Againe, He hath the keie of Dauid, which openeth, and no man ſhutteth, ſhutteth, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      man openeth. This power the Lord reſerueth to himſelfe, and

doth not transferre it to anie other, that he might ſit idlie by, and looke on his miniſters while they wrought. For Iſaiah ſaieth, I will put the keie of the houſe of Dauid vpon his ſhoulder. And againe, Whoſe gouernement ſhall be vpon his ſhoulders. For he doth not lay the gouernement on other mens ſhoulders, but doth ſtill keepe, and vſe his owne power, thereby gouerning all things. Furthermore, there is an other power of duetie, or miniſteriall power limited 
                     •
                  ut by him, who hath ful and abſolute power and authoritie. And this is more like a miniſterie then dominion. For we ſee that ſome Maſter doth giue vnto the ſteward of his houſe authority▪ and power ouer his houſe, and for that cauſe deliuereth him his keies, that he may admit or exclude ſuch as his Maſter will haue admitted, or excluded. According to this power, doth the miniſter by his office, that which the Lord hath commaunded him to doe, and the Lord doth ratifie and confirme that which he doth, and will haue the deedes of his miniſters, to be acknowledged and eſteemed as his owne deedes vnto which ende are thoſe ſpeaches in the Goſpell: I will giue vnto 
                  Math. 16.
                  thee the keies of the Kingdome of heauen, and whatſoeuer thou bindeſt, or looſeſt in earth, ſhall be bound, and looſed in heauen. Againe, Whoſe ſinnes ſoeuer ye remit, they ſhal beremitted, and 
                  Ioh. 20.
                  whoſe ſinnes ſoeuer yea retaine, they ſhal be retained. But if the the miniſter deale not in all things as his Lorde hath commaunded him, but paſſe the limits and bondes of faith, then the Lord doth make voyd that which he doth. Wherfore the Eccleſiaſticall power of the miniſters of the Church, is that function whereby they doe indeed gouerne the Church of god, but yet ſo as they do al things in the Church as he hath preſcribed in his word: which things being ſo done the faithfull doe eſteeme them as done of the Lorde himſelfe: but touching the keies we haue ſpoken ſomewhat before.
               Now the Looke the 5. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.power that is giuen to the Miniſters of the Church is the ſame & alike in all: & in the beginning the Biſhops, or Elders, did with a common conſent & labour, gouerne the Church, no man lifted vp himſelfe aboue an other, none vſurped greater power or authority ouer his fellow Biſhops, for they remembred the wordes of the Lord, He which 
                  Luc 
                        ••
                     .
                  willbe the cheifeſt among you, let him be your ſeruant: they kept in themſelues by humilitie, and did mutuallie aid one another in the gouernement and preſeruation of the Church. Notwithſtāding,

for orders ſake, ſome one of the miniſters, called the aſſemblie together, propounded vnto the aſſemblie the matters to be conſulted of, gathered together the voices or ſentences of the reſt, and to be briefe, as much as lay in him, prouided that there might ariſe no confuſion. So did S. Peter, as we read in the Acts: who yet for all that was neither aboue the reſt, nor had greater authoritie then the reſt. Veri
                     •
                   true therefore is that ſaying of Cyprian the Martyr, in his book, De ſimpl. Cler. The ſame doubtles were the reſt of the Apostles that Peter was, hauing an equall fellowſhip with him both in hono
                        ••
                      and power, but the beginning hereof proceedeth from vnity, to ſignifie vnto vs that there is but one Church. Saint Ierom vpon the epiſtle of Paull to Titus hath a ſayingnot much vnlike this. Before that by the inſtinct of the deuil there was partaking in religion, the Churches were gouerned by the common aduiſe of the Prieſts: but after that euery one thought, that thoſe whome he had baptized, were his own & not Chriſts, It was decreed, that one of the prieſts ſhould b
                        •
                      choſen & ſet ouer the reſt, who ſhould haue the care of the whol church laide vpon him, and by whoſe meanes al ſchiſmes ſhould be remoued. Yet Ierom doeth not auouch this as an order ſet downe of God. For ſtraight waie after he addeth, Euen as, ſaith he, the prieſts knew by the continuall cuſtome of the Church, that they were ſubiect to him that is ſet ouer them: So the Biſhops muſt know that they are aboue the prieſts, rather by cuſtome, then by the preſcript rule of Gods truth, & they ſhould haue the gouernement of the Church in common with them. Thus farre Ierome. Now therefore no man can forbid by any right that we may returne to the olde appointement of God, and rather receiue that, then the cuſtome deuiſed by men.
               The offices of the miniſters are diuers, yet notwithſtanding moſte men doe reſtreine them to two, in which all the reſt are comprehended; to the teaching of the Goſpell of Chriſt, and to the lawfull adminiſtration of the Sacraments. For it is the duetie of the miniſters to gather together a holie aſſemblie, therein to expound the worde of God, and alſo to applie the generall doctrine to the ſtate and vſe of the Church, to the end, that the doctrine which they teach, maie profit the hearers, and maie build vp the faithfull. The miniſters duetie, I ſaie, is, to teach the vnlearned, and to exhort, yea and to vrge them to goe forward, in

the waie of the Lord, who do ſtand ſtil or linger, and go flowlie forwarde: moreouer to comfort, and to ſtrengthen thoſe, which are fainthearted, and to arme them againſt the manifold temptations of Sathan, to rebuke offenders, to bring home them that goe aſtraie, to raiſe vp them that are fallen, to conuince the gainſaiers, to chaſe awaie the wolfe from the Lordes flocke, to rebuke wickednes and wicked men, wiſelie and ſeuerelie, not to winke at, nor to paſſe ouer great wickednes, and beſides to adminiſter the ſacraments, & to commend the right vſe of them, & to prepare al men by holſome doctrine to receiue them, to keep together all the faithful in an holie vnity, & to meete with ſchiſmes. To conclude, to catechiſe the ignorant, to commend the neceſſitie of the poore to the Church, to viſit & inſtruct thoſe that are ſick or intangled with diuers temptations, & ſo to keep them in the way of life. Laſty, to looke diligently, that there be publike praiers, & ſupplications made in time of neceſſity, together with faſting, that is, an holy abſtinency, & moſt carefully to look to thoſe things which belong to the tranquillity, ſafe tie, and peace of the Church. And to the ende that the miniſter maie performe al theſe thinges the better, and with more eaſe, it is required in him that he be one that feareth God, prayeth diligentlie, giueth himſelfe much to the reading of the Scripture, and in all things, and at all times i
                     •
                   watchful, and doth ſhew forth a good example vnto al men of holines of life. And ſeeing there muſt needes be a diſcipline in the Church, and that among the auncient fathers excommunication was in vſe, & there were eccleſiaſticall iudgementes amongſt the people of God, wherein this diſcipline was exerciſed by godly men, it belongeth alſo to the miniſters duetie for the edifying of the church, to moderate this diſcipline, according to the condition of the time and publike eſtate, & according to neceſſitie: whereas this rule is alwaies to be holdē, that Al things ought to be done to edification, decentlie, honeſtlie, without any oppreſſion or tumult. For 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     .the Apoſtle witneſſeth, that power was giuen to 
                        〈◊〉
                      of God, to edifie, & not to deſtroie. And the Lord himſelfe for 
                        •
                     ad the cock
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      be plucked vp in the Lords field, becauſe there would be danger 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                     e wheate alſo ſhould be plucked vp with i
                        •
                     .
               
               But as for the errour of the Donatiſts▪ we do here vtterlie

dereſt it, who eſteemed and iudged the doctrine and adminiſtration of the ſacraments to be either effectuall, or not effectual, by the good or euil life of the Miniſters. For we know that the voice of Chriſt is to be heard, though it be out of the mouthes of euill miniſters foraſmuch as the Lorde himſelfe ſaid, Doe as they commaund you, but according to their 
                  Mat. 22.
                  workes doe ye not. We know that the Sacramentes are ſanctified by their inſtitution, and alſo by the word of Chriſt, and that they are effectuall to the Godlie, although they be adminiſtred by vngodlie miniſters. Of which matter Auguſtine, that bleſſed ſeruant of God, did reaſon diuerſlie out of the ſcriptures againſt the Donatiſts, yet notwithſtanding there ought to be a ſtreight diſcipline amongſt the miniſters. For their muſt be diligent enquirie in the Synodes touching the life and Doctrine of the miniſters.
               Thoſe that offend are to be 
                     •
                  ebuked of the ſeniours, & to be brought into the way, if they be not paſt recouerie, or elſe to be depoſed, and as wolues to be driuen from the Lordes flocke, by the true Paſtors, if they be E curable. For, if they once be falſe teachers, they are in no wiſe to be tollerated: neither doe we diſalow of generall councels if that they be taken vp according to the example of the Apoſtles, to the ſaluation of the Church and not to the deſtruction thereof.
               The faithfull miniſters alſo are worthie (as good worke men) of their reward, neither doe they offend when as they receiue a ſtipend and all thinges that be neceſſarie for themſelues and their familie. For the Apoſtle ſheweth that theſe thinges are for iuſt cauſe offered of the Church, and receiued of the miniſters, they are likewiſe of right. 1 Cor. 9. and 1. Tim. 5. & in other places alſo.
               The Anabaptiſts, likewiſe are confuted by this Apoſtolical doctrine, who condemne and raile vpon thoſe miniſters which liue vpon the miniſterie.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of the miniſterie of the word:
                  
                     
                        Art. 15. WE confeſſe that the Miniſters of the Church, are (as Paull tearmeth them) the fellow labourers

of God, by whome he doth diſpence both the knowledge of himſelfe, and alſo remiſſion of ſinnes, turne men to him ſelfe, raiſe them vp, comforte them, and alſo terrifie and iudge them: yet ſo, that notwithſtanding we doe aſcribe all the vertue and efficacie that is in them vnto the Lord, and giue a miniſterie onelie to the miniſters. For it is certaine that this vertue & efficacie is not to be tyed to any creature at all, but is to be diſpenſed by the free fauour of God, in what manner and to whome it pleaſeth him. For he that watereth is nothing, neither he that planteth, but God that giueth the increaſe.
                  
               
               
                  Eccleſiaſticall power.
                  
                     
                        Art. 16. ▪Looke the 1. obſeru. vp on this confeſſ. NOw the authoritie of the word, and feeding the flock of the lord (which properlie is the power of the keys) preſcribing to all, as well high as low, what to do, ought to be ſacred and inuiolable: and is to be committed onelie to thoſe that are choſen and fitte to diſcharge it, and that either by the diuine ſeruice of God, or by the certaine and aduiſed ſuffrage of the Church, or by their ſentence, to whome the Church hath aſſigned this charge.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Art. 17. The chooſing of Miniſters.
                  FOr this function is to be giuen to none, whom the miniſters, and they to whome this charge is committed by the Church, do not finde and iudge to be skilfull in the law of God, to be of a blameles life, and to beare a ſinguler affection to the name of Chriſt▪ which, ſeeing it is the true election of God, is rightlie allowed by the conſent of of the Church, Looke the 2. obſeru.and by the laying on of the handes of the Prieſt.
               
               
                  The head and ſhepheard of the Church.
                  
                     
                        Art. 1
                           •
                        . FOr Chriſt himſelfe is the true head of his Church, and he alone is the Shepheard, who giueth gouernours, Paſtours and Doctors, that by the outward adminiſtration of the keies, they maie rightlie and lawfullie vſe that authority. Wherfore we do not acknowledge thoſe that are Shepheardes, and that head of Rome, which haue the bare title and nothing els.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Art. 19. The dueties of Miniſters.
                  THe chiefe duetie of this function is, to preach repentance and remiſſion of ſinnes through Chriſte, without ceaſing to pray for the people, to giue them-ſelues verie diligentlie without wearines to holie ſtudies, and to the worde of God, and with the worde of God, as with the ſword of the ſpirit, and by all kinde of meanes to perſecute Sathan with deadlie hatred, and to weaken his force, to defend thoſe citizens of Chriſt which are ſound, and to admoniſh, reprehend, and puniſh thoſe that are infected and by a Godly conſent of them which are choſen out of the miniſters and the magiſtrate, by diſcipline to ſhut out, or by ſome other fitte meane to mulct thoſe, which proceed further in wickednes, till ſuch time as they do repent and may be ſaued. For that is the returning to the Church for a diſeaſed Citizen of Chriſt, if hauing changed his minde and endeauour (whereunto all this diſcipline doth tende) he acknowledge & confeſſe his errour, and doth now of his owne accord require holeſome diſcipline, and by his new endeuour of godlines doth reioyce all the godlie.
               
               
                  Out of the declaration of the ſame confeſſion, which Luther him▪ſelfe approoued by his letters, Anno 1537.
                  
                  WE beleeue and confeſſe, that mankinde, by the onelie mercie of God, is iuſtified by faith through Chriſt, and that the almightie God, by the outward preaching of the goſpell, and the holie ſeales, doth declare, and ſet before our eies that ſaluation and happines, which Chriſt, without anie worke or merit of ours, hath purchaſed for vs, and giuen frelie vnto vs. But we are vniuſtly ſuſpected of ſome as though we did attribute nothing to the preaching of the outward word, and to the ſacraments, or as though we did take that from them, which the Lord himſelfe doth attribute vnto them, & by this means ſhould ouerthrow and aboliſh the ordering and guiding of thoſe thinges wh ch perteine to the Church: whereas on the contrarie ſide we haue a chiefe regard vnto this that we neither

attribute too much nor too litle to theſe things. For we haue learned both out of the holy ſcriptures, & alſo out of the Catholike doctor Auſtine, That the ſoule is in miſerable ſeruitude if any man take or worſhip the ſignes in ſtead of the things which they ſignifie. And againe, That it is an errour, if anie man interpret them vnfruitfullie. We haue learned alſo that the externall giftes are not to be deſpiſed, becauſe of the internall giftes: knowing that Cornelius the Centurion was taught of God, and that yet notwithſtanding he was put ouer to to heare Peter the Apoſtle preach, & to be baptiſed of him. Therefore that we maie walke in the high and plaine waie, that is, that we maie detract nothing from the word and ſacraments, which the ſcripture doth attribute vnto them, and againe that we may not giue that to the creature, which is proper to the Creator, & that the ordinance of God may not be diſanulled, but al glorie maie be giuen to God alone: to conclude, leſt that by thoſe externall things inſtituted of God, we ſhould too much tie the mindes of the faithfull to thinges created, we ſo beleeue touching the miniſterie of the word and the Sacramentes, as wee haue profeſſed, which thing alſo we do thus declare by that which followeth.
               
               
                  Of the miniſtery of the worde of God.
                  ALthough the Lorde hath expreſſelie ſaide, No man commeth to me, except my Father which ſent me, doe drawe him: Yet it was his will, that the Goſpell of the kingdome ſhould be preached to all nations, and that Byſhops ſhould diſcharge this duetie of the miniſterie, with great care and diligence, and with ſpeciall watchfulnes, and be inſtant in ſeaſon, & out of ſeaſon, & by allmeanes, to gaine manie vnto Chriſt. For therfore when he was readie to depart hence into heauen in his bodie, he ſaide to his diſciples: Goe ye into the wholl worlde, and preach the Goſpell to euerie creature. After the which manner alſo Paul the Apoſtle ſaith, He that deſcended, is euen the ſame that aſcended farre aboue all heauens, that he might fill all thinges. And he gaue ſome to be Apoſtles, and ſome Prophets, and ſome Euangeliſts, and ſome Paſtours, and Teachers, for the gathering together of the Saintes, for the worke of the miniſterie, and for the edification of the bodie of Chriſt.
                  
                  
                     
Now the Lorde doth vſe theſe his Miniſters to inſtruct his Church, ſo as he vſeth meates to nouriſh vs, the ſower to ſowe ſeede, and Phiſitians to heale our bodies. For excepte he himſelfe do giue power and vertue, whereby both the meate maie be turned into nouriſhment, and the ſeede maie ſpring vp, and alſo the medicine maie be made effectuall, the outward worke doth nothing at all profit: So except the Lord doe giue increaſe in the heart of the hearer, the doctrine indeede in him which hath not faith, is as it were a watring and planting, but ſuch as is without efficacie and vnfruitfull: but being receiued by faith into good ground, and being trimmed by the inward huſband man the holie Ghoſt, doth worke marue
                        •
                     louſlie, and profitte. Notwithſtanding it hath ſo pleaſed the Lorde to moderate the affaires of men, that although by his owne power he doth all thinges in all men, yet he vouchſafeth to vſe the miniſters as workers together. For that ſaying of Paull is euident: For we together are Gods labourers, but he addeth: Ye are Gods husbandrie, and Gods building: to wit, that we might giue vnto God al the vertue, efficacie, accompliſhing and perfitting of the work, & to the miniſters a ſeruice onelie: wherevpon we doe truelie ſaie with Paull: Who is Paull then? and who is Apollos? but the miniſters by whome ye beleeued? and as the Lorde gaue to euerie man. I haue planted, Apollos watered, but God gaue the increaſe. So then, neither is he that planteth, anie thing, neither he that watereth, but God that giueth the increaſe. And in this ſenſe we doe knowe, and willinglie vſe theſe ſpeaches, and teſtimonies of the holie Scripture: I haue begotten you in Chriſt by the Goſpell; you are the epiſtle of Chriſt written by vs, not with inke, but with the Spirit of the liuing God. And, Whoſe ſinnes you remitte, they are remitted to them. Againe, Faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the worde of God. And againe, I ſend thee to the Gentiles, that thou maiſt open their eies. Alſo the Scripture ſaith of Iohn Baptiſt, He ſhall turne the hearts of the fathers to the children, &c. For when all theſe thinges be done (that is, when we are borne againe, when the holie Ghoſt is giuen to vs, when our ſinnes be forgiuen vs, when faith is giuen vs, and our eies opened, and our hearts turned) one and the ſelfe ſame Spirit (as the Apoſtle ſaith) worketh them all, who by his grace doth lighten their hearts, and

draw them vnto him, and that after a common order and meane, to wit, by the inſtrument or meane of his worde: and yet he might draw vs without all meanes, and without anie inſtrument, whether, as much, and whome 
                        •
                     t pleaſeth him, Therefore let no man glorie in me
                        •
                     , but in him that giueth the increaſe. Againe, let no man deſpiſe men, which are 
                        •
                     ent of the Lord, of whome he p
                        •
                     on
                        •
                     unceth, He that heareth you, heareth me: and he that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. This is our opinion touching the miniſterie of the word, agreeable, as we hope, to the Scripture and ſound writers: which alſo wee haue found often in Luthers, and in his friendes bookes.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  
                     Of thoſe that teach in the Church, and who they be that gouerne them. CHAP. 9.
                  IN the ninth place it is 
                        •
                     aught concerning the acknowledging of the ſhepheards of ſoules o
                        •
                      lawfull miniſters of ſacred functions in the holie Church: according to the degrees and orders of diuerſe cures, and firſt that theſe are eſpeciall members of the holie eccleſiaſticall communion, and Chriſt his looke the 1. obſeru. vp on this confeſſion. Mat. 10. Luc. 10. Io
                           •
                        n. 1
                           •
                        . 1. Cor. 4.vicegerentes that is, they who ſupplie his place, he that heareth them, heareth Chriſt, he that deſpiſeth them, deſpiſeth Chriſt, and his heauenlie father. For to theſe is the miniſtery of the word and ſacraments lawfully committed. But miniſters ought not of their owne accordto preaſe forward to that calling: but ought according to the example of the Lord and the Apoſtles, to be lawfullie appointed, Math. 10. Mar. 1. 6. & 3. Act. 1.and ordeined thereunto: and that after this manner, that from among a people that is ſound in religion and feareth God, ſuch men maie be choſen and called to the adminiſtration of holie functions, as are ſtrong & mightie in faith, fearing God, and hauing giftes requiſite for the miniſtery, and be of an honeſt and blameleſſe life. And againe, tha
                        •
                      aboue all thinges theſe be prooued and tried by examination 1. Tim. 2.whether they be ſuch, and ſo afterward, praiers and 
                        ••
                     
                     ſtings being made, they maie be confirmed or approoued of the elders, Looke the 2. obſeru. Heb. 
                           •
                        .by laying on of hands, Looke the 3. obſeruat.Hereof ſpeaketh the author of the epiſtle to the Hebrewes. Euerie high Prieſt is taken from among men (that is to ſaie) from among the faithful, &

ſuch as are a ſpirituall prieſtehood.) And Paull, laying before Timothie his own example, ſaith, What things thou haſt h
                           •••
                        d 
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Tim. 2.
                     of me before manie witneſses, the ſame deliuer to faithfull men, which ſhal be able to teach others alſo. Of ſuch Prieſts or miniſters & of 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1.making, ordeining & conſecrating them, & how the ordeining of them ought to be handled, the Apoſtle teacheth euidentlie and plainlie in his Epiſtles to Timothie and Titus.
                  Therfore it is not permitted to anie among vs to execute the office of the miniſterie, or to adminiſter holie functions of the Lords, vnleſſe, according to this cuſtome of the primitiue Church, and order appointed by God, he come to this function, and be called and aſſigned thereunto: which thing maie alſo maniefeſtlie appeare by the auncient Canons of the Church. Saint Cyprian hath in like ſorte ſet downe the manner of ordaining Prieſts. According to theſe things, the miniſters of lower degree, eſpecially they which are called Looke the 4. obſeruat.Deacons, are a long time deteyned with our Elders, and kept in exerciſe: and this thing they doe verie ſeriouſlie, making a ſtreight triall and examination of their faith and diligence, following herein the example of the primitiue Church, and alſo of Chriſt himſelfe, who kept his diſciples with him for the ſpace of three yeares. Alſo the Apoſtles dealt ſo by others, to the end that afterwarde godlie men and ſuch as were illuminated with the heauenlie light, might be taken and ordeined from among them to higher degrees, and to the executing of greater functions, and that they might haue teſtimonie as well from the common ſorre, as from their Elders, that they were fit
                        •
                     e men, and worthie of that place.
                  
                     Together with theſe things it is taught, that by the executing of that charge, wherin they be lawfully placed, they are bound to this, that they take care for the ſoules of men committed to their charge, and for their euerlaſting ſaluation, and faithfullie employ their ſeruice vnto them, by teaching of the word of God and adminiſtring the ſacraments according to Chriſt his meaning and ordinance, that they be an example and allurement to practiſe all vertue, make praiers for them, bring them out of ſinnes and errours, and inquire after the will of God, and ſearch the ſame in the holie ſcriptures, by diligent reading and continuall meditation:
                     
                     as the Apoſtles alſo exhort men to theſe thinges: Saint Peter writeth thus, Feede the flocke of God which dependeth 1. Pet. 5.vpon you, caring for it, not by conſtraint, but willinglie, not for fi
                        •
                     thie lucre, but of a readie minde. In like ſort Paull writeth to Timothie a Ruler, and Biſhop, But be thou ſober, and watch in 2. Tim. 4.all thinges, ſuffer aduerſitie, doe the worke of an Euangeliſt, make thy miniſterie fullie known, or with all diligence. Againe, Be thou 1. Tim. 4.an example to the faithful, in ſpeach, in con
                        ••
                     ſation of life, in loue, in the ſpirit, in faith, in purenes. Till I come be inſtant in reading, exhorting, and teaching. Deſpiſe not the gift of grace which is in thee, which was giuen to thee by prophecie with the laying on of the hands of the companie of the Elderſhip. Theſe thinges exerciſe, and giue thy ſelfe vnto them, that all men maie ſee how thou proſ
                        •••
                     ſt▪ take 2. Tim. 3.heede to thy ſelfe, and vnto learning, and abide in theſe thinges. For in doing this thou ſhalt ſaue both thy ſelfe, and them that heare thee. Such Miniſters ought alſo to deliuer ſound and wholſome doctrine ſuch as they haue receiued from Chriſt and the Apoſtles, out of holie ſcripture, and, being all alike minded, through one Spirit to teach the ſame in their ſermons, according to the ordinance of S Paull, who writeth thus, Keepe the true patterne of the wholſome wordes, which 1. Tim. 
                           •
                        .thou haſt heard of me, in faith and in loue, which is in Ieſus Chriſt. And againe, But abide thou in thoſe thinges, that thou h
                        •
                     ſt learned, and are committed vnto thee, knowing of whome thou haſt learned them, and that thou haſt knowen the holy Scriptures of a childe, which are able to make the wiſe vnto ſaluation, through the faith which is Ieſus Chriſt. And elſewhere: charge certaine ſaith he, that they teach no other thing.
                  But peculiar mention is made thereof, that they which haue the ſpirituall gouernment of Churches, and doe their endeuour in them, ought not themſelues, nor by others, to vſe ciuill power or conſtraint, to force men to beleeue, nor to exerciſe Lordlie authoritie ouer the faith and people of God, according to the doctrine of Chriſt and the Apoſtles. The Lord ſpake thus to the Apoſtles, and in them to all faithfull and true Preachers of the Goſpell, Ye know that they who are rulers of the people haue domination ouerthem 
                     Mat. 2
                           •
                        .
                     whoſe rulers they are, and they that are great Lordes exerciſe authoritie ouer the people that are ſubiect to them. But it ſhall not be ſo among you. But if anie man among you wilbe great, let him be your
                     
                     ſeruant, and he that wilbe chiefe among you or beare rule, let him be your miniſter. Eu
                           •
                        n as the Sonne of man came not to be 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      
                     1. Pet. 5.
                     vnto: but that he himſelfe might miniſter to others, and 
                           ••
                        ve hi
                           •
                         life, as a price, for the redemption of manie. Peter alſo ſaieth, N
                           ••
                         as being Lordes ouer the people, or the Lordes inheritance, but a
                           •
                         they 
                     2. Cor. 1.
                     whoe are an enſample to the flocke. And Paull, Not that we are Lordes ouer your faith, but becauſe we are helpers of your ioye. But the gainſaiers are with a quiet minde to be forborne, and by reaſons grounded on the trueth of holie ſcripture to be refuted and conuinced, and paines muſt be taken that they 2. Tim. 2. Tit. 3.maie ſuffer themſelues, to be bettered by wholſome doctrine as the Apoſtle giueth in charge touching this matter.
               
               
                  And after other thinges.
                  Beſides it is taught, that all the people ought to performe obedience (and that with a great affection of loue toward them) to ſuch lawfull, Godlie, and faithfull paſtors of ſoules and that they ought to aſſure and vndoubtedlie to perſ
                        ••
                     de themſelues verie well of them, obe
                        •
                     e them, 
                        •
                     ſe their helpe in matters pertaining to ſaluation, yeld them due honour, & performe all conuenient duties, towardes them, where
                        •
                      to they are bound by Gods worde and that according to the Math. 10. Lac 10. Ioh. 13. Heb. 13.Doctrine of Chriſt who ſaith, He that re
                           •
                        ei
                           •
                        eth you, receireth me, and he that heareth you, heareth me. And alſo in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, Obeie them that haue the ouerſight of you, and ſubmi
                           •
                         your ſelues, for they watch for your ſoules, as they that muſt giu
                           •
                        
                      
                     1. Tim. 5.
                     account for them. And the Apoſtle, Elders that rule well, are worthie double honour, eſpeciallie, they that are occupied in the word and Doctrine. Furthermore, they ought tobe prouided for, that they maie haue a competent liuing, and ſuch thinges as are needfull for the mantinance of the bodie, according to the Lordes ordinance, whereof Paull ſpeaketh 1. Cor. 9.after this ſorte, The Lord hath ſo appointed that they which preach the Goſpell ſhould liue of the Goſpell.
                  
                  And to the end that the daunger of an idle, ſecure, and Looke the 5. obſeruat vpon this confeſſ.Sodomiticall life maie be auoided, and ſo they maie be an example to the flocke, whereof they haue charge, and that by a feeling of the burdens of this common life, they maie learne to vnderſtand the miſerie of men, and may by this meanes be touched and haue compaſſion on the miſeries of others, for theſe cauſes, I ſaie, this is taught, that they,

whoſe abilitie of ſtrength is ſuch Looke 
                           〈◊〉
                         6. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ., eſpeciallie thoſe, on 
                        •••
                     me as yet the greateſt and painfulleſt charge of the people, is not laide, ſhould themſelues with their owne handes get their liuing, that they be not a burden to the Churches, eſpeciallie in the beginning of their buildinges, and reparations, or alſo intimes of long perſecution, or 2 Cor. 6. 1. Theſſ. 2. 2. Theſſ. 3.otherwiſe by reaſon of the weaker ſorce, and that they giue not place to vaine vol
                        •
                     ptu
                        •
                     us, and riotous ſloth, as thoſe who faithfullie follow Saint Pauls doctrine, and who haue the Lords ſpeach before their 
                        ••
                     es, ſaying, it is a more happie 
                     Act. 20.
                     thing to giue, then to take.
                  
                  And if ſo be that ſome one of theſe Paſ
                        •
                     ors ſlip into ſin or errors, or be ſomewhat neglig
                        •
                     n
                        •
                      in looking to this charge, hé ought by the ordinarie & lawfull diſcipline of the Church to be brought into the ware againe, and to be chaſtiſed, but if he will not repente, nor be healed▪ then he ought firſt to be remooued from the executing of his charge and from the miniſterie, and afterward as an vnprofitable ſeruant, as a member which cauſeth offence, a d
                        ••
                     e braun
                        •
                     h, and vnſauotie ſalt to be caſt out or baniſhed from the fellowſhip of the Church and inioying of ſaluation, of whome the Lord ſaith, that this ſalt is henceforth good for nothing, that which Math. 5. Ioan. 15. Mat 5. 1. Tim. 5.Paull alſo teacheth, when he ſaith, Thoſe that offend (meaning thoſe that are elders) reprooue or chaſtiſe before al men, that the reſt alſo m
                           •
                        ie ſtand in feare. But the people ought ſo to be haue themſelues toward ſuch teachers, either grown out of kinde, or entangled with errors, or toward other elders alſo not repenting, and excommunicated, as the holie ſcripture ſheweth, and firſt Chriſt ſaith. Take ye heede of falſe Prophers, 
                     Mat. 7.
                     which come to you in ſheepes clothing, but inwardlie are ra
                        
                           •
                        ening wolues, ye ſhall know ahem by their fruites, and Paull. Now 
                     Rom. 16.
                     I beſeech you breethren marke thoſe diligentlie which cauſe diuiſion and offences, contrarie to the doctrine which ye haue learned, and auoid them, for they that are ſuch ſerue not our Lord Ieſu Chriſt but their owne bellies.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Of the keies of Chriſt. CHAP. 14.
                  THe fourteenth Chapter of Eccleſiaſtical doctrine is of the Lords keies, of which he ſaith to Peter, I will 
                     Math. 16.
                     giue thee the keies of the kingdome of heauen, and theſe keyes are

the peculiar function or miniſterie and adminiſtration of Chriſt his power, and his holie ſpirit, which power is committed to the Church of Chriſt, and to the miniſters thereof, vnto the end of the world: that they ſhould not onelie by preaching publiſh the holie goſpel, although they ſhould do this eſpeciallie, that is, ſhould ſhew forth that word of true comfort, and the ioyfull meſſage▪ of peace, and new tidings of that fauour which god offereth: but alſo that to the beleuing and vnbeleeuing they ſhould publikelie or priuatelie denounce and make knowen, to wit, to them his fauour, to theſe his wrath, & that to al in general, or to euery one in particular, that they may wiſely receiue ſome into the houſe of God, to the communion of ſaintes and driue ſome out from thence, and maie ſo through the performance of their miniſterie, holde in their hand the ſcepter of Chriſt his kingdome, and vſe the ſame to the gouernment of Chriſt his ſheepe.
                  Therfore the condition, and proper office of the keies is, firſt to open and looſe, that is, in Chriſt to appeaſe and ſtill the conſcience of the faithfull ones, and of thoſe that turne againe by repentance: to make it knowne vnto them that their ſins be forgiuen, & to ſtrengthen thē in a ſure hope of ſaluation: & by this meanes to open the kingdome of heaué vnto them, to giue them courage againſt all temptations, & to ſtirre vp ſtedfaſtnes and chearefullnes in them. And all theſe thinges are done by the faithfull Shepheards of ſoules in the Lords ſtead, not dooing this of them ſelues, but vpon Chriſt his commaundement, not by their owne and proper vertue, but by Chriſtes, and by the efficacie of his word and ſacraments, as thoſe that are ſtewards and diſpenſers of the myſteries of God, and miniſters onelie. In the adminiſtration of which thinges, they maie vſe ſome ſemelie and indifferent ceremonies, that is which are no waie neceſſarie, ſuch as are looke the 6. obſeruat. 1. Cor. 4. 
                           •
                        . Co. 3. & 5.to lay on hands, or to reach out the right hand, or els they maie omit them.
                  On the other ſide the office and proper work of the keies of Chriſt is, to ſhut and binde, that is, by the commaundement of Chriſt, and the authoritie of this office giuen by him to the Church, which is his power and ſcepter, to denounce againſt all ſtubborne impenitent, vnbeleeuing, and

other ſuch like ſinners, Gods horrible iudgement and his intollerable wrath, which no nature can abide, and his ſeuere ſentence: and ſo by the word of Chriſt, according to the qualitie of the offence to reprooue ſinne, to ſeuer them from the fellowſhip of Chriſt our ſauiour, and from the fruit and participation of the ſacraments, and to caſt them out of the chriſtian Church, and in a worde to ſhut the kingdom of heauen vpon them, and at the length to deliuer them to Sathan.
                  This power of his ſcepter and ſpirit hath the Lord graunted and deliuered to the holie Apoſtles and in them to all miniſters of Churches, lawfullie ordained that they might exerciſe it in his ſtead: and he graunted it to them by theſe words, As the Father hath ſent me, ſo do I ſend you alſo. And by & Iohn 20.by he addeth theſe words, Rec
                           ••
                        ue ye the holie Ghoſt. If ye forgiue anie men their ſins, they are forgiuen them, and if ye 
                           〈◊〉
                         any mans ſinnes, they are retained. Moreouer a manifeſt example of vſing the power of the keies is laied out in that ſinner 1. Cor. 5.of Corinth and others, whome Saint Paull, together with the Church of that place, by the power and authoritie of our Lord Ieſ
                        •
                      Chriſt and of his ſpirit, threw out from thence and deliuered to Sathan: and contrariwiſe, after 2. Cor. 2.that God gaue him grace to repent, he abſolued him from his ſinnes, he toke him againe into the Church to the communion of ſaints and ſacraments, and ſo opened to him the kingdome of heauen againe. By this we maie vnderſtand that theſe keies, or this diuine function of the Lordes is committed and graunted to thoſe, that haue charge of ſoules and Looke the 7. obſeru.to each ſeuerall Eccleſiaſtic all ſocieties, whether they beſmal, or great. Of which thing the Lord ſaith to the Churches, Verely I ſaie vnto you, whatſoeuer thinges ye binde on earth, ſhal be bound in heauen. And ſtraight after: For where two or three 
                     Mat. 18.
                     be gathered together in my name, there am I in the middeſt of them. Moreouer this is likewiſe taught looke the 8. obſeru.that euerie Chriſtian, ſo often as he needeth theſe keies of the Lord, ought to require them particularly for himſelfe of the paſtors of ſoules of that Church or fellowſhip, of which himſelfe is a parte, & to which he belongeth, & that he vſe them with full confidence, no other wiſe then if he receiued them of Chriſt himſelfe, ſeeing that Chriſt hath deliuered them vnto the Paſtours and

that he by no meanes doubt, that by the miniſterie of theſe Ioh. 20. Luc. 10. Mat. 10. Ioh. 13.keies, through the vertue and power of Chriſt his ſinnes are forgiuen him, and that he is freed from them, according to Chriſt his owne ſaying, whoſe ſinnes you forgiue, &c. And, He that heareth you, heareth me: and he that receiueth you (in the be halfe, to wit, of the Eccleſiaſticall miniſterie, and in his time of neeed) receiueth me: and contrarilie, He that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me.
                  
                  This is alſo taught and handled, * that the Prieſts ought Looke the 
                           •
                        . obſeru.not to vſe theſe keies of the Lord otherwiſe, then according to the meaning and will of Chriſt, which is declared expreſſelie in his word, and according to the ſure, flat, and expreſſe determinations of his iudgement: and that they doe not any manner of waie, according to mens opinions, much leſſe after their owne minde or luſt, abuſe theſe keies: for ſo it would come to paſſe, that the keies ſhould ſwa
                        •
                     ue from their office. And this is to be taken heed of, that it be not by this meanes fulfilled in the miſuſing of them, which the Lorde hath ſaide by the Prophet: For you, ſaith he, is this commaundement, 
                     Mâlac. 2.
                     O ye Prieſtes, if you will not heare it, nor conſider it in your heartes, to giue glorie to my name, ſaith the Lorde of hoaſtes, I will ſend a curſe vpon you, and will curſe your bleſſings, as I haue curſed them alreadie, becauſe you regarde not in your heartes the feare of the Lorde.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               SEeing that we are not made partakers of Chriſt, but 
                     Art. 25.by the Goſpell, we beleeue that that good order, which by the authority of the goſpel is confirmed, ought to be kept ſacred and inuiolable: and that therefore Paſtours are neceſſarilie required in the Church, vpon whoſe ſhoulders the burden of teaching the worde, and adminiſtring of the Sacraments, doth lie, whome alſo we ought to honour and reuerentlie to heare, if ſo be that they being lawfullie called, doe diſcharge their duetie: not as though God did ſtand inneed of ſuch ſtaies & inferior helps, but therfore rather, becauſe that ſo it ſeemeth good to him to gouerne vs as it were by vſing this bridle. Therefore we deteſt all thoſe fanaticall ſpirites, who, as much as in them lieth, deſire that both

this ſacred miniſterie or preaching of the word and the adminiſtration of the Sacramentes, were vtterlie aboliſhed.
               
                  
                     Art. 29. We beleeue that this true Church ought to be gouerned by that regiment or diſcipline, which our Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath eſtabliſhed, to wit ſo, that there be in it Paſtours, Elders, and Deacons, that the puritie of Doctrine maie be retained, vices repre
                     •
                  ſed, the poore, and others that be in miſerie, according to their neceſſitie, maie be prouided for and that there maie be holie meetinges, for the edifying both of ſmall and great.
               
                  
                     Art. 30. We beleeue that all true Paſtours, in what place ſoeuer they be placed, haue the ſame, and equall authoritie among themſelues giuen vnto them, vnder Ieſus Chriſt the onelie heade, and the chiefe and alone vniuerſall Biſhop, and that therefore it is not lawfull for anie Church, to challenge vnto it ſelfe Dominion or ſoueraigntie ouer anie other Church.
               
                  
                     Art. 31. We beleeue that it is not lawfull for anie man, vpon his owne authoritie, to take vpon him the gouernment of the Church, but that euerie one ought to be admitted thereunto by a lawfull election, ſo neere as maie be, and ſo long as the Lorde giueth leaue. And this exception we doe expreſſelie adde, becauſe that ſometime (as it fell out alſo in our daies, the ſtate of the Church being diſturbed) it was neceſſarie, that ſome ſhould be raiſed vp of the Lorde extraordinarily, which ſhould repaire the ruines of the decaied Church. Neuertheles howſoeuer it be, we beleeue, that this rule is▪ Iwa
                     •
                  es to be followed, that all Paſtours and Elders ſhould haue a teſtimonie of their calling.
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               FVrthermore (we beleeue) that there be diuerſe degrees of Miniſters in the Church: whereof ſome be 
                     Art. 5.Deacons, ſome Prieſts, ſome Biſhops: to whom is committed the office to inſtruct the people, and the wholl charge, and ſetting forth of Religion. Yet notwithſtanding, we ſay, that there neither is, not can be any one man, which may haue the wholl ſuperioritie in this vniuerſall ſtate: for that Chriſt is euer preſent to aſſiſt his Church, and needeth not

any man, to ſupplie his roome, as his onelie heire to all his ſubſtance, and that there can be no one mortall creature, which is able to comprehend, or conceiue in his minde the Vniuerſall Church, that is to wit, all the partes of the world, much leſſe hable rightlie, and duelie to put them in order, and to gouerne them. For al the Apoſtles, as Cyprian ſaith, were of like power among themſelues, and the reſt were the ſame, that Peter was. And that it was ſaide indifferentlie to them all, Feede yee: indifferentlie to them all, Goe into the whole worlde. Indifferentlie to them all, Teach yee the Goſpel. And, as Hierome ſaith, All Biſhoppes whereſoeuer they be, be they at Rome, be they at Eugubium, be they at Conſtantinople, be they at Rhegium, be all of like preeminence, and of like prieſthood. And, as Cyprian ſaith, There is but one Biſhoprike, and a pee
                        •
                      thereof is perfitlie and wholly holden of euery particular Biſhop. And according to the iudgement of the Nicene Councell, we ſaie, that the Biſhop of Rome hath no more iuriſdiction ouer the Church of God, then the reſt of the Patriarkes, either of Alexandria, or of Antioche haue. And as for the Biſhop of Rome, who now calleth all matters before himſelfe alone, except he doe his duetie, as he ought to doe, except he miniſter the Sacraments, except he inſtruct the people, except he warne them and teach them, we ſaie, that he ought not of right once to be called a Biſhop, or ſo much as an Elder. For a Biſhop, as ſaith Auſtine, is a name of labour, and not of honour: that the man, that ſeeketh to haue preeminence, & not to profit, maie vnderſtande, himſelfe to be no Biſhop. And that neither the Pope, nor any other wordly creature can no more be head of the wholl Church, or a Biſhop ouer all, then he can be the Bridegroome, the light, the ſaluation, and life of the church▪ For theſe priuileges, and names belong onely to Chriſt, and be properlie, and onelie fit for him alone. And that no Biſhop of Rome did euer ſuffer himſelfe to be called by ſuch
                     •
                   proude name and title, before Phocas the Emperours time, (who, as we know, by killing his owne Soueraigne Mauritis the Emperour, did by a trayterous villany aſpire to the E
                     •
                  
                  pire.) Which was about the ſixth hundred and thirteent
                     •
                   yeare after Chriſt was borne. Alſo the Councell of Carthage did circumſpectlie prouide, that no Biſhop ſhoulde be called either the higheſt Biſhop, or chiefe Prieſt. And therefore, ſithenc
                     •
                  
                  
the Biſhop of Rome will now a daies ſo be called, and challengeth vnto himſelfe an Authoritie, that is none of his: beſides that, he doth plainlie contrarie to the auncient councells, and contrary to the olde fathers: We beleeue, that he doth giue to himſelfe, as it is written by his owne companion Gregorie, a preſump
                        •
                     uouſe, a prophane, a Sacrilegious, and an antichriſtian name: that he is alſo the King of pride, that he is 
                  looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ. Art. 6.
                  Lucifer, which preferreth himſelfe before his Brethren: that he hath forſaken the faith, and is the forerunner of Antichriſt.
               
               Further we ſaie, that the Miniſter ought lawfullie, duely, and orderlie to be preferred to that office of the Church of God, and that no man hath power to wreſt himſelfe into the holie Miniſterie at his owne pleaſure. Wherefore theſe perſons doe vs the greater wrong, which haue nothing ſo common in their mouthes, as that we doe nothing orderlie, and comelie, but all things troubleſomelie, and without order: And that we allow euerie man to be a prieſte, to be a teacher, and to be an Interpreter of the Scriptures.
               
                  
                     Art. 
                     
                        •
                     . Moreouer we ſay, that Chriſt hath giuen to his Miniſters power to binde, to looſe, to open, to ſhutte. And (we ſaie) that the office of looſing conſiſteth in this pointe: that the Miniſter, either by the preaching of the Goſpell, offereth the merites of Chriſt, and full pardon to ſuch as haue lowly and contrite heartes, & do vnfainedlie repent themſelues, pronouncing vnto the ſame a ſure, & an vndoubted forgiuenes of their ſinnes, and hope of euerlaſting ſaluation: Or elſe that the ſame miniſter, when any haue offended their brothers mindes with ſome great offence, or notable, and open crime, whereby they haue, as it were, banniſhed, and made themſelues ſtrangers from the common fellowſhip, and from the bodie of Chriſt, then after perfit amendment of ſuch perſons, doth reconcile them, and bring them home againe, and reſtore them to the companie, and vnitie of the faithfull. We ſaie alſo, that the miniſter doth execute the authoritie of binding and ſhutting, as often as he ſhutteth vp the gate of the kingdome of heauen againſt vnbeleuing, and ſtubborne perſons, denouncing vnto them Gods vengance, and euerlaſting puniſhment: Or elſe, when he doth quite ſhut thē out from the boſome of the church, Looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.by open excommunication. Out of doubte, what ſentence ſoeuer

the Miniſter of God ſhall giue in this ſorte, God himſelfe doth ſo well allow it, that whatſoeuer here in earth by their meanes is looſed, and bounde, God himſelfe will looſe, and binde, and confirme the ſame in heauen. And touching the keies, wherwith they may either ſhut or open the kingdome of heauen, we with Chryſoſtome ſaie, They be 
                        ••
                     e knowledge of the Scriptures: with Tertullian we ſaie, They be the interpretation of the Law: and with 
                     
                        •
                     uſehius we call them the worde of God. Moreouer that Chriſts Diſciples did receiue this authoritie, not that they ſhould heare the priuate confeſſions of the people, and liſten to their whiſperings, as the common maſſing prieſtes doe euery where now a daies, and doe it ſo, as though in that one pointe laie all the vertue, and vſe of the keies: but to the ende, they ſhould goe, they ſhould teach, they ſhould publiſh abroade the Goſpell and be vnto the beleeuing a ſweete ſauoure of life vnto life: and vnto the vnbeleeuing, and vnfaithfull, Looke the 2. obſeru. vpon this confeſſ.a ſauoure of death vnto death: and that the mindes of godly perſons being brought low by the remorſe of their former life and errours, after they once begonne to looke vp vnto the light of the Goſpell, and beleue in Chriſt, might be opened with the word of God, euen as a dore is opened with a key. Contrariwiſe, that the wicked and wilfull, and ſuch, as would not beleeue, nor returne into the right waie, ſhould be left ſtil as faſt locked, & ſhut vp, &, 2. Tim. 3.as S. Paul ſaith, wax worſe, and worſe. This take we to bethe meaning of the keis: & that after this ſort mens conſciences be either opened, or ſhut. We ſaie that the Prieſt in deede i
                     •
                   
                  * Looke the 3. obſeru.a iudge in this caſe, but yet hath no manner of right to challenge an authority or power, as Ambroſe ſaith. And therfore our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, to reprooue the negligence of the Scribes, and Phariſies in teaching, did with theſe words rebuke them, ſaying: Woe be vnto you Scribes, and Phariſeis, which 
                  Luc. 11. Mat. 21.
                  ha
                        •
                     e taken away the keis of knowledge, & haue ſhut vp the kingdome of heauen before men. Seing then the keie whereby the waie, & entry to the kingdome of God is opened vnto vs, is the word of the Goſpel, and the expounding of the law, & Scriptures, we ſaie plainlie, where the ſame word is not, there is not the keie. And, ſeeing one manner of worde is giuen to all and Mat. 16.one onelie keie belongeth to all, we ſaie, there is but one onelie power of all miniſters, as concerning opening, and

ſhutting. And, Looke the 4. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.as touching the Biſhop of Rome, for al that his flattering Paraſi
                     •
                  es ſing theſe words in his eares, To thee wil I giue the keies of the kingdom of heauen, (as though theſe keis were fitte for him alone, and for no bodie elſe) looke the 4. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.except he goe ſo to worke, as mens conſciences may be made pliaunt, and be ſubdued to the word
                     •
                   of God, we denie, that he doth either open, or ſhut, or hath the keies at all. And although he taught, and inſtructed the people (as would god he might once truelie doe, and perſwade himſelfe, it were at the leaſt any peece of his duetie) yet we thinke his keie to be neuer a whitte better, or of greater force, then other mens. For who hath ſeuered him from the reſt? Who hath taught him more 
                     •
                  unninglie to open, or better to abſolue, then his breethren?
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               
                  
                     Art. 30. WE beleeue, that this Church ought to be ruled and gouerned by that ſpirituall regiment, which God himſelfe hath deliuered in his worde, ſo that there be placed in it paſtours and miniſters purelie to preach, and rightly to adminiſter the holy Sacraments: that there be alſo in it ſeniours and Deacons, of whome the Senat of the Church might conſiſt, that by theſe meanes true religion might be preſerued, and ſincere doctrine in euery place retayned and ſpread abroade: that vicious and wicked men might after a ſpirituall manner be rebuked, amended, and as it were by the bridle of diſcipline kept within their compaſſe: that the poore in like manner, and thoſe that be afflicted, may be releeued either with aide or comfort, according to the ſeuerall neceſſitie of euerie one. For then ſhall all things in the Church be done in due & conuenient order, when faithfull and godlie men are choſen to haue the gouernement of the ſame, euen as Saint Paull hath preſcribed in the firſt to Timothie the 3. and the firſt to Titus.
               
                  
                     Art. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   We beleeue that the Miniſters, Seniours, and Deacons, ought to be called to thoſe their functions, & by the lawfull election of the Church to be aduaunced into thoſe roomes, earneſt praier beeing made vnto God, & after the order & manner, which is ſet downe vnto vs in the worde of God.

This eſpeciall
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   one ought to take diligent heede of, that he doe not b
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  lawfull meanes thruſt himſelfe into thoſe offices. For 
                     〈◊〉
                   muſt waite, vntill he be called of God himſelfe, that he 
                     〈◊〉
                   haue a certaine teſtimonie of his vocation, and may know 
                     〈◊〉
                   is from the Lorde. Yet in what place of the worlde 
                     〈…〉
                   the miniſters of the worde of God doe keepe, they haue 
                     〈◊〉
                   them the ſame and equall power and authoritie, beeing 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  hem equallie the miniſters of Chriſt the onelie vniuerſall 
                     〈…〉
                   and head of the Church. Moreouer, leſt that this holie 
                     〈…〉
                   of god be deſpiſed and brought into contempt, it is the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of all men to haue a verie honourable and reuerent opin
                     ••••
                   of all the Miniſters of the worde, and Seniours of the Church, euen for that workes ſake, wherein they doe labour: alſo to be at peace and vnitie with them, and as much as poſſiblie may be, to abſtaine from all manner of quarrelings and contentions one with another.
            
            
               
                  
                     Art. 14. OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               COncerning Eccleſiaſticall orders they teach, that no man ſhould publikelie in the Church teach or mininiſter the Sacraments, except he be rightlie called: according as Saint Paull giueth commaundement to Titus, To ordaine Elders in euerie Citie.
               
               
                  Out of the Articles concerning abuſes.
                  Of the power Eccleſiaſtical.
                  
                     
                        Art. 7. THere haue bin great controuerſies touching the power and authoritie of Biſhops, in which many haue incommodiouſly mingled together the eccleſiaſticall power, and the power of the ſword. And out of this confuſion there hath ſprong very great warres and tumults, while that the Popes, bearing themſelues bolde vpon the power of keies, haue not onlie appointed new kindes of worſhip & ſeruice of God, & burdened mens conſciences by reſeruing of caſes and by violent excommunications, but alſo haue laboured to transferre wordlie kingdomes from one to an other, and to ſpoile Emperours of their power and authoritie. Theſe faultes did

godlie and learned men long ſince, reprehended in the Church, and for that cauſe, our diuines were faine, for the comforte of mens conſciences, to ſhew the difference betwe
                        •
                     ne the Eccleſiaſtic all and ciuil powers. And they haue taught that either of them becauſe Gods commaundement is duetifullie to be reuerenced, and honoured, as the cheefeſt bleſſings of god vpon earth.
                  Now their iudgement is this, that the power of the keies, or the power of Biſhopps, by the rule of the Goſpel, is a power, or commaundement from God, of preaching the Goſpell, of remitting or retaining ſinnes, and of adminiſtring the Sacraments. For Chriſt doth ſend his Apoſtles with this charge, As the father hath ſent me, ſo ſend I you. Receiue yee the holic Ghoſt: whoſe ſins ye forgiue, they are forgiuen them, & whoſe ſins ye reteine, they are reteined. Mar. 16. Goe and preach the Goſpell to euerie creature, &c. This power is put in execution, onelie by teaching or preaching the Goſpell, and adminiſtring the ſacraments, either to many ioyntlie, or to ſeuerall perſons, according to their calling. For they be not corporall thinges but eternall, that are graunted vnto vs, as an eternal righteouſnes, the holie Ghoſt, life euerlaſting. Theſe things cannot begotten but 
                        •
                     y the miniſterie of the worde and Sacraments. As Paull ſaith, The Goſpell is the power of God to ſaluation to euerie one that beleueth. Seing then that the power eccleſiaſtical concerneth things eternall, & is put in vſe onelie by the miniſtery of the word, it hindreth not the politicall gouernement, looke the 1. obſeru.no more then doth the* skill of muſicke or ſinging For the ciuil gouernement is occupied about other matters, then is the Goſpell Looke the 2. obſeru.the Magiſtrate is to defend, not the mindes, but the bodies, and bodelie things, againſt manifeſt iniuries, he reſtreineth men by the ſworde and corporall puniſhment, that he may vpholde peace, and a ciuill iuſtice. Wherefore the Eccleſiaſticall and ciuill powers are not to be confounded. The Eccleſiaſticall power hath a peculiar commaundement to preach the Goſpel and adminiſter the Sacraments. Let it not by force enter into another charge, let it not tourne wordlie kingdomes from the right owners. Let it not abrogate the Magiſtrates lawes, let it not withdraw from them lawfull obedience, let it not hinder iudgements touching any ciuil ordinances and ſtatutes,

or contractes, let it not preſcribe lawes to the magiſtrate, touching the for me of a common wealth, as Chriſt ſaith, My kingdome is not of this world. Againe, Whoe made me a iudge or a di
                           •
                        id
                           •
                        r ouer you. And Paull to the Philip. 3. Our conuerſation is in heauen. 2. Cor. 
                        •
                     0 The weapons of our warfare are not carnall but mightie in god, to throw downe the imaginations, &c. Thus doe our diuines diſcerne and diſtinguiſh the dueties of each power one from the other, and doe warne all men to honour both powers and to acknowledge both to be the good gift and bleſſing of God.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the 
                           〈…〉
                         this 
                           〈…〉
                        . * If ſo 
                        •
                     e that the Biſhopes haue anie power of the ſword, they haue it not as biſhops by the commaundement of the Goſpell, but by mans law giuen vnto them of Kinges and Emperours, for the ciuil gouernment of their goods. Yet this is a kinde of function and charge diuerſe from the miniſterie of the Goſpell.
                  Therefore when as the queſtion is touching the iuriſdiction of Biſhoppes, rule and dominion muſt be diſtinguiſhed from Eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction. Againe, by the Goſpell, or as they t
                        •
                     ar
                        •
                     e it, by Gods lawe, Biſhops, as they be Biſhops, that is, ſuch as haue the adminiſtration of the word & ſacraments cōmitted to them, haue no iuriſdiction at all, but onlie to forgiue ſin, alſo to know what is true doctrine, & Looke the 
                           〈…〉
                        .to reiect ſuch doctrine as will not ſtand with the Goſpell, & * to debarre from the communion of the Church ſuch as are noto
                        •
                     iouſl
                        •
                     e wicked, not by humane force and violence, but by the worde of God. And * herein of neceſſitie the Churches ought by the law of God to performe obedience vnto them, according to the ſaying of Chriſt, he that heareth you, heareth me. But when as they teach or determine any thing contrary to the Goſpel, then haue the Churches a cōmaundement of God, which forbiddeth obedience to them. Mat. 7. Beware of falſe Prophets. Gal. 1. If an Angel from heauen preach any other Goſpell, let him be accurſed. 2. Cor. 13. We cannot do any thing againſt the truth, but for the truth. Alſo, This power is giuen vs to edifie, and not to deſtroie. So doe the Canons commaunde. 2. quaeſt. 7. Cap. Sacerdotes, & Cap. Oues. And Auguſtine in his treatiſe againſt Petilians Epiſtle ſaith, Neither 
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     muſt we ſubſcribe to Catholike Biſhops, if they chaunce to erre
                           ••
                         holde opinions which he againſt the Scriptures. If ſo be * that they

haue any other power or iuriſdiction, in hearing and vnderſtanding certaine caſes, as nam
                        •
                     lie of Ma
                        •
                     rin
                        •
                     ony & tithes, &c. They holde it by mans lawe: and that in ſuch places where the ordinarie iudges failing, the Princes are conſtreined, wil they, nil they, to miniſter iuſtice to their ſubiects for mainteining of peace.
               
               
                  And a few lines after.
                  So oft as we handle this place, by and by our aduerſaries cry out, that the Biſhops authority being ouerthrow
                        •
                     e, ther followethdiſorder, that the peoples behauiour cannot be ordered, that the common ſort was luſty & vnb
                        ••
                     dled, & in a word there followeth a helliſh life, ſuch a one as is painted out by Euripides in this verſe. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  They complaine alſo, that when as ſome lawes are abrogated, the common people taketh it as a pat
                        •
                     erne, how to deale with all the reſt. And ſo ſhaking of the boodes and reines of diſcipline and order, they take an exceſſiue lib
                        •
                     rlie to themſelues, which b
                        •
                     eedeth infinite offences, 
                        ••••
                     
                     ches be tweene Princes, ſcatrering of Churches. 
                        〈◊〉
                      warres, and deſolations. To co
                        •
                     clude, they 
                        〈◊〉
                      here, what an enimie to mankinde want of gouernment is, and how manie nices and calamities ariſing out of this fountaine, doe ouerſlow the 
                        〈…〉
                      of man.
                  They aduile therefore for the 
                        〈…〉
                      of theſe ſo great euills, to eſtabliſh the authoritie of Biſhoppes to 
                        〈…〉
                      the lawes that haue bene in vſe before, and alſo to beare with the inconueniences (if there be anie in them) in reſpect of the common weakenes of men, and for quietnes ſake to diſſemble them: eſpeciallie ſeing there can no ſtate or order be apppointed which is without all maner of faults. Here alſo they bring in that old ſaying. That an euill well couched, is not to be ſtirred. They rehearſe man
                        •
                     e examples, howe great ouerthrowes followed vpon the remoouing of lawes and the chaunge of the forme of gouernment, in the Cities of Athens, Sparta, Rome, and diuers others. At Rome how oft did the diſſentions of the Conſulles and the Tribunes ſtirre vp great ciuill warres?
                  Though theſe ſenatour like declamations be verie plauſible, and incenſe the mindes of manie againſt vs, yet they maie be confuted by moſte true and ſubſtantial arguments.

Firſt therefore wee deſire that theſe our accuſers woulde turne ouer the hyſtorie of the Church from time to time, and that they woulde not thinke that thoſe notable men, the Prophets and Apoſtles, were without common ſenſe and reaſon and ſo hard harted, that they cared not for the peace and quiet of their countrie, or ſo barbarous and cruell, that they made no great accompt of the diſcipline, lawes, and good order of the kingdome. For thoſe moſte wiſe, vertuous, and graue men, Eſaie, Ionas, Ieremie, Iohn Baptiſt. 
                     Looke the 
                           •
                        . obſeruat.
                     Chriſt, Peter, Iames, and Paull, Did both know what a great good ciuill concorde is, and loued their countrie and countriemen, and alſo were greatlie greeued to beholde the diſcords and renting a ſunder of thoſe notable common wealthes. How often did Chriſt weepe, when he ſpake of the diſcordes and Tu
                        ••
                     l
                        •
                     es of his nation, and the ſacking of the citie? Albeit therefore the Prophets and Apoſtles did verie wel know and greatlie like of thoſe ciuill duties. Yet were they conſtrained by the commaundement of God to wa
                        •
                     re againſt the deuils kingdome, to preach heauenlie doctrine, to collect a Church vnto God, and to imploye their ſeruice to the eternall ſaluation of a great number of men. Theſe are the firſt lawes that euer were giuen, and are to be preferred before all other. Th
                           ••
                         ſha
                           •
                         haue no other Gods. Thou ſhall not take the name of God in vaine. And this concerning the ſonne, This is my beloued ſonne, heare him. Theſe lawes muſt needes be obeyed, The true doctrine of God and his true worſhip muſt needes be embraced and receiued▪ and all errors, that 
                        •
                     end to the diſhonour of God, muſt be abhorred and forſaken, though all the worlde ſhould breake and fall downe. No humane thing muſt be preferred before Gods commaundement, not out life, nor friends, not the concorde and agreement of neighbours and countriemen. Moſes, a verie wiſe man, and no doubt a politicke man, laieth vpon the tribe of Leui the charge of teaching: and knowing what great conflicts and daungers teachers ſhal meete withal, he forewarneth them of that which he tooke to be moſte difficult of all other. And chargeth them that the defence of true doctrine be moſte deare vnto them, for ſo he ſaith, Deut. 33. Theſe ſhall keepe thy w
                           •
                        rde, and ſhall forget their parentes, children, and brethren.
                     
And hereof we haue experience, that it is no ſmall burden that is laide vpon the teachers of the worde Our men are cruellie dealt with in manie places. We are ſore oppreſſed, and the diſcord in our countrie bringeth no ſmall g
                        ••
                     efe vnto vs. But, as was ſaide before, the commaundement of God concerning the imbracing of the true doctrine of God and renouncing of errours, muſt be preferred before theſe great inconueniences, We are not ignorant what wife men haue written, of chaunging and altering lawes. We remember well the ſaying of Plato, that as the manners of doting parents, ſo the cuſtomes & faſhions of our countrie, though none of the wiſeſt, are to be borne with all. But theſe precepts haue their bounds and limits, within which they muſt b
                        •
                      reſ
                        •
                     rained. Bondage without 
                        〈◊〉
                      may be borne but idolatry is not to be borne with, nor the light of the Goſpell to be extinquiſhed.
                  Againe, whie doe our aduerſaries de
                        •
                     lame of ſuch a moderation, vnto vs, when as they in the meane while murder the Cytizens and members of Chriſt? They might eaſilie eſtabliſh peace, and mainteine the author of good order, if they world aboliſh ſuperſtition and vniuſt lawes. But now they contend not for the ſafty of the Church, but for their owne profi
                        •
                     tes and pleaſures. They would not haue the Idolatrie of the Maſſe nor praying to the deade ſpoken againſt: becauſe they cānot abide that their gaine ſhould decreaſe. They forbid wandring luſts, becauſe the vnm
                        •
                     ried ſtate is beſt for the keeping of their goodes. Theſe things are in all menseies. Therfore let them l
                        •
                     au
                        •
                      of their Senator like inuectiues, wherein, to vſe the olde Poets wordes vnder a faire colour they ſeeke to eſtabliſh ſha
                           •
                        eles factes. Hereto I ad
                        •
                     oine alſo the other parte of our defence both true and vnfeigned. We doe not ſhake of gouernment to bring in diſorder. We reach that the miniſterie of the goſpell is moſte highlie to be reuerenced and obeyed in thoſe things, which (according to the goſpel) do properlie belong to the miniſterie thereof. And he is a wicked and an accurſed wretch, that doth not with reuerence entertaine as mo
                           •
                        te beautifull the feete of ſuch is bring tidinges of peace. And as for the ciuill power, which be
                        •
                     reth the ſworde, it hath beene highlie commended and approoued in our writinges. Wherefore

it is a vile ſlaunder that they obiect againſt vs, that we be enemies of gouernment.
               
               
                  Hitherto alſo belongeth the ſs. in the end of this 7. Article.
                  THey alledge againſt vs alſo other ſayings which commaund obedience, Obeie thoſe that are ſet ouer you. How 
                        〈◊〉
                      muſt we anſwer, that obedience is moſt neceſſarie in ſuch things, as belong properly to this miniſtery ordained of god. For theſe ſayinges doe not allot vnto Biſhops a kingdome without the Goſpell. Chriſt gaue them certaine commaundements, and thoſe he will haue vs obeie. Againe he forbad that anie new found worſhip ſhould be ſet vp in the Church, and ſuch he will not haue vs yeald vnto. There are certaine bonds and limites prefixed, within which both the Paſtours authoritie & our obedience muſt conteine it ſelfe. But theſe limits doe thoſe Biſhops moſte malapertlie remooue, who proudlie challenge to themſelues a triple power, whereby they eſtabliſh moſt pernicious errours; to wit, a princelie and ſupreame power of interpreting the Scriptures. Secondlie a power of erecting new worſhip and ſeruice of god Thirdlie, a ſoueraigne power of making lawes. And thus they transforme the Church into an humane gouernment. They imagine, forſooth, that as the Prince or higheſt Iudge in a Realme is to interpret the law, and as the Prince hath power to make new lawes, ſo the Biſhopes muſt haue a power in the Church, not vnlike that. And they cannot abid
                        •
                      that the Church ſhould be gouerned by the dumbe writings (as they call them) of the Prophets and Apoſtles, which becauſe ſomtime they ſcarſe make the matters plaine inough, which they do ſet downe, the ambiguity bredeth diſſentions & diſcords. Here therfore there muſt needs be ſaie they a definitiue voice of ſome ſoueraigne or high Iudge, to interpret that which is ambiguous and doubtfullie written. And except all be tied to ſtand to their interpretation, there will be no end of ſtrife and controuerſies. Againe, vnleſſe they maie according as times and occaſions require make laws what a diſorder would there follow? Theſe things are ſet out with bigge wordes, and they carrie a ſhew of probabilitie in them, becauſe they are an imitation of the ciuill gouernement

And ſurelie ſuch conceites as theſe, haue in all ages, from the beginning of the worlde, hurte the Church greatly and ſtill will hurt it. The godlie are therefore to be admoniſhed, that they be not ouertaken with theſe ſubtilties and ſleights. God will haue his Church gouerned by his word, which Chriſt and his Apoſtles haue Ieſte vnto the Church, and he wil haue this his voice to ſound in the Church by the mouthes of his miniſters. And though it doe conteine a wiſdome, that is farre from reaſons teach, yet the word of the Prophets and Apoſtles is ſure and not doubtfull. Therefore Peter ſaith, Ye doe well in attending to the worde of the Prophets, as to alight in the darkenes Beſides the Church hath the gift of interpretation, that is, the vnderſtanding of the heauenlie doctrine, but that is not tied to the name or degree of Biſhops: and therefore it is no power of interpreting like to the power of a Prince or higheſt Iudge. But thoſe that are learned in the word of God & borne againe by his ſpirit in what place ſoeuer they be, they aſſent vnto the worde of God, and vnderſtand the ſame ſome more ſome leſſe. Men muſt therfore iudge wiſelie of thoſe huge Bulwarks of the peoples power. Touching laws, to be made by the Biſhops, Peterſaith in a word, Why doe yea tempt God, laying a yoke on them, &c.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               Of Order.
               
                  
                     Art. 2
                        •
                     . IT is euident by the holie Scriptures, that al they which are in deed Chriſtians, are conſecrated in baptiſme by Chriſt the ſonne of God, to be ſpiritual prieſts, and that they ought alwaies to offer vp to God ſpiritual ſacrifices Neither is it vnknowne, that Chriſt in his Church hath inſtituted miniſters, who ſhould preach his Goſpell, and adminiſter the ſacramentes. Neither is it to be permitted to euerie one, although he be a ſpirituall Prieſt, to vſurpe a publike miniſterie in the Church, without a lawfull calling. For Paull ſaith, Let all thinges be done honeſtlie and decentlie among you. And againe, Laie handes ſodenly on no man. Wherefore we doe not account it an vnprofitable thing, to prooue, as it were by certaine ſteppes, the faith of them that are to be admitted to the publike miniſterie of the Goſpell. And it ſeemeth not a litle to further concordand vnitie, to keep a

due order among the Miniſters of the Church.
               But the holie Scripture doth not teach vs, that Chriſt hath inſtituted in his Church ſuch Prieſtes, as ſhould be Mediatours betweene God and men, and pacifie the wrath of God towards men, by their ſacrifices, and apple the merit of Chriſt to the quicke and the dead, without the preaching of the Goſpell, and adminiſtration of the Sacramentes For if we will ſpeake of the great and true Mediatoure, There is but one Mediatour betweene God and men, Ieſus Chriſt the Sonne of God 
                  Looke the 2. obſeru. vppon this confeſſ.. If we will ſpeake of the Mediatour of praying euery godly man is made a Mediatour ech for other through Ieſus, becauſe that their duetie doth require, that they ſhould commend one anothers health to God in their praiers: the which dutie alſo then euery one doth performe, when they ſaie the Lordes prater in faith. If we ſpeake of the ſacrifices which do purge our ſinnes, and appeaſe the wrath of God, then is there one onelie ſacrifice, which doth purge vs, and reconcile God vnto vs, to wit, the ſacrifice of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, which was once made on the Croſſe. And as Chriſt doth die no more, death hath no more Dominios ouer him, ſo this ſacrifice of his ſhall neuer be made againe, but by his one oblation, as it is written in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, He hath made perfect for euer thoſe that be ſanctifie. If we ſpeake of the remembrance of this one ſacrifice, and of the applieng of the merit thereof, then the publike miniſters of the Church, which doe teach the Goſpell publikelie, and adminiſter the Sacramentes according to the inſtitution of Chriſt, doe not onelie make a true and right remembrance of this purging ſacrifice, but doe alſo applie, by their diſpenſation, the merit of this ſacrifice to all thoſe, that doe receiue the Goſpell and the Sacramentes by faith. Therefore we cannot ſee what vſe there is of thoſe kinde of men in the Church, which are ordained for this purpoſe, that they maie haue authoritie to ſacrifice for the quicke and the dead. Paull, when as in his Epiſtles to the Corinthians and Epheſians, he rehearſeth thoſe offices and miniſteries which are neceſſarie to the edifying & preſeruingof the Church, he reckoneth Prophettes, Apoſtles, Euangeliſts▪ Paſtours, Doctours, and ſuch like: but in this rehearſall he maketh no mention at all of priuat Prieſtes, of which ſorte

the world is now full▪ neither is it like that he world haue omitted this kinde of Prieſtes, if either Chriſt had appointed it, or if it had beene profitable and neceſſarie for the Church: And Paull writeth that a Biſhope ought to be ap
                        •
                     e to teach: And Ierome teacheth that A Prieſt and a Biſhoppe are all one. Therefore it is euident, that excepta Looke the 2 obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.Prieſt be ordeined in the Church to the miniſterie of teaching, he can not rightly take vnto him neither the name or a Prieſte nor the name of a Biſhoppe.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFSSION OF SVEVRLAND.
               Of the Office, dignitie, and power of Eccleſiasticall Perſons.
               
                  
                     Artic. 13. TOuching the miniſtery, and dignitie of the Eccleſiaſticalorder, we do thus 
                     〈…〉
                   that there is no power in the Church, but that which tendeth to edifying, 
                     •
                   Cor. 10. Secondlie that we muſt nor thinke otherwiſe or any man in this ſtate, then Paull would haue men to eſteeme, either of him ſelfe, or of Peter and Apollo and others, As of the ſeruantes of Chriſt, and the diſpenſers of the myſteries of God, in 
                        ••
                     ome this is chiefelie required, that they be faithfull For theſe be they which haue the keies of the kingdome of God, and the power to binde and looſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  o remit or retaine ſinnes▪ yet that power is ſo limited, that they be neuertheleſſe the miniſters of Chriſt, to whome alone the right and authoritie to open heauen, and forgiue ſinnes, doth properlie pertaine. For neither he which planteth, nor he that watereth, is anie thing, but God that giueth the increaſe. 1. Cor 3. Neither is anie man of himſelfe fitte to thinke anie of thoſe thinges as of himſelfe, but if anie man be found fitte thereunto, he hath it all of God. VVho giueth to whome it pleaſeth him, to be the miniſters, and preachers of the new Teſtament, to wit, ſo farre forth as he giueth them a minde, faithfullie to preach the meaning and vnderſtanding of the Goſpell, & vſeth them hereunto▪ that men maie be brought by a true faith to his new couenant of grace. Furthermore theſe be they, which doe miniſter vnto vs the dead letter (that is, ſuch a doctrine of trueth, as pearceth no farther then to humane reaſon) but

the ſpirit which quickneth, and doth ſo pearee into our ſpirit and ſoule, that it doth throughlie perſwade our heart of the trueth. Theſe are the true fellow▪labourers of the Lord, 1. Cor. 3. opening in deed heauen, and forgiuing ſinnes 
                     〈◊〉
                   thoſe, to whome they declare the doctrine of faith, 
                     〈◊〉
                   meanes of the grace and ſpirit of God. Whereupon Chriſt ſending out his Apoſtles to exerciſe this duetie, he breathed vpon them, ſaying, Take yee the holie Ghoſt. And further more he addeth, whoſe ſinnes ye remit, &c.
               
               Hereof it is manifeſt, that the true and fit miniſters of the Church (ſuch as be biſhops, Seniors, annointed and conſecrated (can doe nothing but in reſpect of this, that they be ſent of God. For how ſhall they preach (ſaith Paull) except they be ſent? That is, except they receiue of God both a minde, and power to preach the holie Goſpell aright and with fruit, and to feede the flocke of Chriſt. And alſo, except they receiue the holie Ghoſt, whoe maie worke together with them, and perſwade mens hearts. Other vertues wherwith theſe men muſt be endued are rehearſed, 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. Therfore they which are in this ſort, ſent, anointed▪ conſecrated and qualified▪ they haue an earneſt care for the flocke of Chriſt, and doe labour faithfullie in the worde and doctrine, that they maie feed the people more fruitfullie▪ and theſe are acknowledged and accounted, of our preachers for ſuch Biſhops, as the Scripture euerie where ſpeaketh of: and euery Chriſtian ought to obey their commaundements. But they which giue them ſelfes to other things they place them ſelfes in other mens ſeats, and do worthelie take vnto them ſelues other names. Yet notwithſtanding the life of any man is not ſo much to be blamed, as that therfore a Chriſtian ſhould refuſe to heare him, if peraduenture he teach ſomthing out of the chaire of Moſes or Chriſt (that is, either out of the law of God, or out of the holie goſpell) that maie ſerue for edification. They which bring a diuers or a ſtaunge voice, whatſoeuer they be, they are in no account or eſtimation, with the ſheepe of Chriſt. Ioh. 10. Looke before the 3. obſeru. vpō the Auguſt confeſ. Alſo after ſect. 17 3. obſern. vp on the ſame coufeſſ. of Auguſt.Yet they which haue a ſeculare power and ſoueraigntie, they haue it of God him ſelfe, howſoeuer they be called: therefore he ſhould reſiſt the ordinance of God, whoſoeuer ſhould oppoſe him-ſelfe to that temporall gouernment▪
               
               
                  
Theſe things doe our Preachers teach, touching the authoritie of Eccleſiaſticall perſons: ſo that they haue great iniurie offered to them in that they are blamed, as though they ſought to bring the authoritie of Eccleſiaſticall prelats to nothing, whereas they neuer forbad them that worldlie gouernement and authoritie, which they haue. But they haue often wiſhed, that they would come nearer to the Eccleſiaſticall commaundements, and that either they them ſelues would inſtruct and faithfullie feede the conſciences of Chriſtians, out of the holie Goſpell, or that at the leaſt wiſe they would admit others hereunto, and ordeine ſuch as were more fitte for this purpoſe. This is it, I ſaie, that out Preachers haue oftentimes requeſted of the Prelates them ſelues, ſo faire haue they beene from oppoſing themſelues at anie time to their ſpirituall authoritie.
               But wheras we could not either beare anie longer the doctrine of certaine Preachers, but beeing driuen thereunto by neceſſitie, we haue placed others in their roome: or els haue reteined thoſe alſo, which haue renounced that Eccleſiaſticall ſuperioritie; We did it not for anie other cauſe but for that theſe did plainlie and faithfullie declare the voice of our Lord Ieſus chriſt, the other did mingle therwith all mans inuentions. For ſo often as the queſtion is, concerning the holie Goſpell, and the doctrine of trueth, Chriſtians muſt whollie turne them ſelues to the Biſhop of their ſoules the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and not admit the voice of anie ſtraunger by any meanes, wherein notwithſtanding neither we, nor they do offer violence to anie man: for Paull ſaith, All thinges are yours, whether it be Paull, or Apollos, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Cephas, or the worlde, or life, or death, whether they be thinges preſent or thinges to come, euen all are yours, and ye Chriſtes, and Chriſt Gods. Therefore ſeeing that Peter and Paull are ours, and we are not theirs, but Chriſtes, and that after the ſame manner, that Chriſt himſelfe is his Fathers, to witte, that in all thinges, which we are, or maie be, we might liue to him alone. Furthermore, ſeing to this ende we haue power to vſe all thinges (yea euen men themſelues of what ſorte ſoeuer they be) as though they were our owne, and are not to ſuffer that anie man, or anie thing ſhould hinder vs therein, no Eccleſiaſticall

perſons maie iuſtlie complaine of vs, or obiect to vs, that we are not ſufficientlie obedient to them, or that we doe derogate any thing from their authority, ſuing that the thing it ſelfe doth witnes, that we haue attempted and done all thoſe thinges according to the will of God, which we haue attempted againſt the will of Eccleſiaſticall perſons. Theſe therefore be thoſe thinges, which we teach, touching the office, dignitie, and power of the Miniſters of the Church, whome they cal Spirituall: the which that we maie credit, wee are mooued thereunto by thoſe places of Scripture, which for the moſte part we rehearſed before.
            
         
         
            
            THE TWELFT SECTION. OF TRVE AND FALSE SACRAments in generall.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA▪
               
               
                  Of the Sacraments of Chriſt. CHAP. 19.
               
                  GOD euen from the beginning added vnto the preaching of the word his ſacraments or ſacramental ſignes in his church. And this doth the holie ſcripture plamlie teſtifie. Sacraments be myſticall ſignes or holie rites or ſacred actions ordained of God him ſelfe, conſiſting of his word, of outward ſignes and of things ſignified: wherby he keepeth 
                     •
                  o continuall memorie and eftſones calleth to minde in his Church his great benefits beſtowed vpon man, and wherby he ſealeth vp his promiſes and outwardly repreſenteth and as it weare offereth vnto our ſight thoſe things which inwardly he performeth vnto vs, and therewithall ſtrengthneth and increaſeth our faith through the working of Gods ſpirit in our hartes: laſtlie whereby he doth ſeparate vs from all other people and religions, and conſecrateth and bindeth vs wholly vnto himſelfe, and giueth vs to vndo ſtand that he requireth of vs.
               Theſe Sacraments are either of the olde teſtament or of

the new. The ſacraments of the olde teſtament were circumciſion, and the paſcall lambe, which was offered vp in ſacrifice and for that cauſe isreferred to the ſacrifices which were in vſe from the beginning of the world. The ſacraments of the new teſtament, are baptiſme and the ſupper of the Lord. Some there are which reckon ſeauen ſacraments of the newe teſtament. Of which number we graunt that repentance, matrimonie and the ordination of miniſters (we meane not the popiſh but the Apoſtolicall ordination) are verie profitable ordinances of God but no ſacraments. As for confirmation and extreame vnction, they are meere deuiſes of men, which the Church may verie well want without anie damage or diſcommoditie at all: and therefore we haue them not in our Churches, becauſe there be certaine things in them which we can at no hand allow of. As for that marchandiſe which the Romiſh prelates vſe in miniſtring their ſacraments we vtterlie abhor it. The author and inſtitutor of al ſacraments is not any man, but God alone, for men can by no meanes ordaine ſacramentes, becauſe they belong to the worſhip of God, and it is not for man to appoint and preſcribe a ſeruice of God, but to embrace and retaine that which is taught vnto him by the Lord. Beſides, the ſacramentall ſignes haue Gods promiſes annexed to them which neceſſarilie require faith, now faith ſtaieth it ſelfe onelie vpon the word of God. And the word of God is reſembled to writings or letters, the ſacraments to ſeales, which the Lord alone ſetteth to his owne letters: Now as the Lord is the author of the ſacraments, ſo he continually worketh in that Church, where they be right lie vſed, ſo that the faithfull when they receiue them of the miniſters do know that the Lord worketh in his owne ordinance, and therfore they receiue them as from the hand of God: and the miniſters faults (if there be anie notorious in them) can not hurt them ſeeing they do acknowledge the goodnes of the ſacraments to depend vpon the ordinance of the Lord. For which cauſe they put a difference in the adminiſtration of the ſacraments, betweene the Lord and the Lordes miniſters confeſſing that the ſubſtance of the ſacraments is giuen them of the Lorde, and the outward ſignes by the hands of the miniſters.
               
                  
Now the principall thing, that in all the Sacramentes is offered of the Lorde, and chieflie regarded of the godlie of all ages (which ſome haue called the ſubſtance and matter of the ſacraments) is Chriſt our ſauiour, That onely ſacrifice & the lambe of God ſlaine from the beginning of the world, the rocke alſo of which all our Fathers drank, by whome all the elect are circumciſed with circumciſion made without handes, through the holie ſpirit, and are waſhed from all their ſinnes, and are nouriſhed with the verie bodie and blood of Chriſt vnto eternall life.
               Now in reſpect of that, which is the cheife thing, and the verie matter and ſubſtance of the ſacraments, the ſacraments of both the teſtaments are equal. For Chriſt the only mediatour and ſauiour of the faithfull is the chiefe thing & ſubſtance in them both, one and the ſame God is author of them both. They were giuen vnto both Churches, as ſignes and ſeales of the grace and promiſes of God, which ſhould call to minde and renew the memorie of Gods great benefits to them, and ſhould diſtinguiſh the faithfull from althe religions in the world: laſtly, which ſhould be receiued ſpirituallie by faith, and ſhould binde the receiuers vnto the Church, and admoniſh them of their duetie: In theſe▪ I ſaie, & ſuch like things, the ſacraments of both Churches be not vnequall, although in the outward ſignes they be diuerſe.
               And in deede we do yet put a greater difference between them: for ours are more firme & durable, as thoſe which are not to be changed to the end of the world. Againe, ours teſtifie that the ſubſtance and promiſe is all readie fulfilled & performed in Chriſt, whereas the other did onelie ſignifie that they ſhould be performed. And ours are more ſimple, & nothing paineful, nothing ſo ſumptuous, nor ſo ful of ceremonies: Moreouer they belong to a greater people, that is diſperſed thorough the face of the wholl earth. Againe, becauſe they are more excellent, and do (by the ſpirit of God) ſtirre vp in vs a greater meaſure of faith, therefore a more plentifull meaſure of the ſpirite doth follow of them.
               But now ſince that Chriſt the true Meſſias is exhibited vn to vs, and the aboundance of grace is powred forth vpon the people of the new teſtament, the ſacraments of the olde law are ſurelie abrogated and ceaſed, and in their ſteed the ſacraments of the new teſtament are placed: namelie, for

circumciſion, Baptiſme, and for the paſcall lambe and ſacrifices, the Supper of the Lord.
               And as in the olde Church the ſacraments conſiſted of the word, the ſigne, & the thing ſignified, ſo euen at this day they ſtand as it were of the ſame parts. For the word of God maketh them Sacraments, which before were none: for they are conſecrated by the word, & declared to be ſanctified by him who firſt ordeined them. To ſanctify or conſecrate a thing, is to dedicate it vnto god & vnto holy vſes, that is, to take it frō the common and ordinarie vſe, and to appoint it to ſome holie vſe. For the ſignes that be in the Sacraments are drawne from common vſe, to thinges eternall and inuiſible. As in baptiſme the outwarde ſigne is the element of water, and that waſhing is viſible, which is done by the miniſter. The thing looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.ſignified is regeneration, & the clenſing from ſinne. Likewiſe in the Lordes Supper, the outwarde ſigne is breade and wine, taken from things commonlie vſed for meate and drinke. The thing ſignified is the bodie of Chriſt, which was giuen, and his bloode which was ſhed for vs, and the communion of the bodie and bloode of the Lorde: wherefore, the water, bread, and wine, conſidered in their owne nature, and out of this holie vſe & inſtitution of the Lord, they are onelie that which they are called, and which they were ſaide then to be▪ But let the word of God be once added to them together with inuocation vpon his holie name, and the renewing of their firſt inſtitution and ſanctification, & then theſe ſignes are conſecrated and declared to be ſanctified by Chriſt. For Chriſtes firſt inſtitution and conſecration of the ſacraments ſtandeth yet in force in the Church of God, in ſuch ſort that they which celebrate the ſacraments, no otherwiſe then the Lord himſelfe from the beginning hath appointed, haue ſtil euen to this daie the vſe and benefit of that firſt and moſt excellent conſecration. And for this cauſe in the adminiſtration of the ſacraments the verie wordes of Chriſt are repeated. And foraſmuch as we learne out of the word of God, that theſe ſignes were appointed vnto an other end and vſe, then commonlie they are vſed vnto, therefore we teach that they now in this their holie vſe doe take vpon them the names of the thinges ſignified, and are not ſtill called bare water, bread or wine, but water is called regeneration, and waſhing
                  
                  of the new birth, and the bread and wine the bodie and blood of the Lord, or the pledges and ſacraments of his bodie and blood, not that the ſignes are turned into the things ſignified, or ceaſe to be that which in their owne nature they are, (for then they could not be ſacraments, which ſhould conſiſt onelie of the thing ſignified, and haue no ſignes) but therefore do the ſignes beare the names of the things, becauſe they be myſticall tokens of holie things: and becauſe that the ſignes and the things ſignified are ſacramentallie ioyned together: ioyned together, I ſay, or vnited by a myſticall ſignification, and by the purpoſe and will of him, who firſt inſtituted them. For the water, bread and wine, are not common, but holie ſignes. And he that inſtituted water in baptiſme, did not inſtitute it with that minde and purpoſe, that the faithful ſhould onely be dipped in the water of baptiſme: and he which in the ſupper commaunded the bread to be eaten, and the wine to be drunke, did not mean that the faithfull ſhould onelie receiue bread and wine, without anie further myſtery, as they eat bread at home in their own houſes, but that they ſhould ſpiritually be partakers of the things ſignified, and by faith be truelie purged from their ſinne and be partakers of Chriſt alſo.
               And therefore we cannot allowe of them which attribute the conſecration of the Sacraments to I know not what ſyllables, to the rehearſall of certaine wordes pronounced by him that is conſecrated, and that hath an intent of conſecrating, or to ſome other accidentall thinges, which are not left vnto vs either by the word, or by the example of Chriſt or his Apoſtles. We doe alſo miſlike the doctrine of thoſe, that ſpeake no otherwiſe of the Sacramentes, then of common ſignes, not ſanctified, nor effectuall. We condemne them alſo, who becauſe of the inuiſible thinges doe deſpiſe the viſible ſignes, and thinke them ſuperfluous, becauſe they doe alreadie enioy the thinges themſelues: ſuch were the Meſſalians, as it is recorded. We doe diſallow their doctrine alſo, who teach that grace and the things ſignified are to be ſo tied and included in the ſignes, that whoſoeuer doe outwardlie receiue the ſignes, muſt needes inwardly participate the grace and the thinges ſignified, what manner of men ſoeuer they be.
               
                  
Notwithſtanding as we eſteeme not the goodnes of the ſacraments by the worthines or vnworthines of the miniſters, ſo likewiſe we doe not weigh them by the condition of the receiuers. For we knowe that the goodnes of the Sacraments doth depend vpon the faithfulnes or trueth and the meere goodnes of God. For euen as Gods worde remaineth the true worde of God, wherein not onelie bare words are vttered when it is preached, but therwithall the things ſignified by the words are offered of God, although the wicked and vnbeleeuers heare and vnderſtand the words, yet they enioy not the thinges ſignified, becauſe they receiue them not by a true faith: Euen ſo the ſacraments conſiſting of the worde, the ſignes, and the thinges ſignified, continue true and perfect Sacraments, not onlie becauſe they be holy things, but alſo for that God alſo offereth the things ſignified, howſoeuer the vnbeleeuers receiue not the thinges which are offered. This commeth to paſſe, not by anie fault in God, the author and offerer of them, but by the fault of men, who doe receiue them without faith, and vnlawfullie, whoſe vnbeleefe cannot make the truth of God of no effect.
               
               
                  Rom. 3. Now, foraſmuch as in the beginning, where we ſhewed what the ſacraments were, we did alſo by the waie ſet downe to what ende they were ordeyned, it ſhall not be neceſſarie to trouble our ſelues with repeating anie thing which hath beene alreadie handled. Next therefore in order it remaineth to ſpeake ſeuerallie of the ſacraments of the new Teſtament.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of the force, and efficacie of the Sacraments.
                  
                     
                        Art. 2
                           •
                        . THe ſignes, which in the Church of Chriſt be called Sacraments, are two, Baptiſme and the Lordes ſupper. Theſe being tokens of ſecret thinges, doe not conſiſt of bare ſignes, but of ſignes and thinges alſo. For in Baptiſme water is the ſigne, and Looke the 1. and 2. obſeru. vpvpon this confeſſ.the thing it ſelfe is regeneration, and to be taken by adoption to be the people of God. In the Lords Supper, bread and wine be the ſignes, * but the thing is the communication of the bodie of Chriſt, ſaluation purchaſed for vs, and the remiſſion of ſinnes. Theſe thinges

are receiued by faith, as the ſignes be receiued with the corporall mouth, & the wholl fruit of the Sacraments is in the thing it ſelfe. Whereupon we affirme that Sacraments are not onelie tokens of humane ſocietie, but alſo pledges of the grace of God, by which the miniſters do worke together with the Lord (to that end, which he doth promiſe, offer, and bring to paſſe) yet ſo (as we ſaid before of the miniſterie of the word) that all the ſauing power is to be aſcribed to the Lord alone.
               
               
                  Out of the declaration of the ſame confeſſion.
                  Of holie ſignes.
                  SAcraments are viſible paterns, inſtituted of god, of the grace, good will, and promiſes of God towardes vs, ſure teſtimonies, and holie remembrances, the which vnder earthlie ſignes doe repreſent vnto vs, and ſet before our eies heauenlie giftes, and doe withdrawe the minde from earthlie to heauenlie thinges: moreouer, they be tokens of Chriſtian brotherhood and fellowſhippe. Therefore a ſacrament is not onelie a ſigne, but it is made of two thinges, to wit, of a viſible or earthlie ſigne, and of the thing ſignified, which is heauenlie: the which two although they make but one Sacrament, yet it is one thing which is receiued with the bodie, another thing which the faithfull minde, being taught by the ſpirit of god, doth receiue. For the ſignes and the thinges ſignified by the ſignes doe cleaue together onlie by a certaine myſticall meane, or, as others ſpeake, by a Sacramentall vnion: neither be they ſo made one, that one in nature is made the other, or that one is contained in the other. For either of them (the which thing alſo holie Gelaſius did acknowledge) doth keepe it owne proprietie. Therefore the outward ſignes are not the ſelfe ſame thing, ſubſtantiallie and naturallie, which they doe ſignifie, neither do they giue it of themſelues, and by their owne power, no more then the miniſter doth, but the Lord vſeth the miniſter, and the ſignes, and the word, to this ende, that of his meere grace, when, and ſo much as pleaſeth him, he maie repreſent, declare, looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſ.viſibilie ſhew, and ſet before our eies his heauenlie giftes, and all this according to his promiſe.
                  Now, as it doth derogate nothing from the miniſterie of the worde, when it is ſaide, that the outwarde preaching of

the worde doth profit nothing, except the inwarde husband man giue the increaſe, (for Paull ſaith, He that planteth, and he that watereth, is nothing, but god that giueth the increaſe,) ſo he doth not make the Sacraments of no effect, which ſaith, that not they, but God himſelfe doth purge vs, that is, which doth attribute the force of the ſacrament to the Creator. For Peter ſaide, Baptiſme doth ſaue vs: but he addeth, Not whereby the filth of the fleſh is waſhed away, but in that a good conſcience maketh requeſt vnto God. For as in other creatures, as in the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres, fire, pretious ſtones, hearbes, and ſuch like things, which God doth vſe as inſtrumentes towarde vs, we ought not to put any confidence, nor admire them as the cauſes of any benefit: ſo our truſt ought not to reſt in outwarde ſignes, nor the glorie of God be transferred vnto them, as they be outwarde ſignes (howbeit the Lord doth vſe their helpe toward vs, and they be holie ordinances) but by them our truſt muſt lift vp it ſelfe to him, beeing both the author of the ſacramentes, and the Creator of all thinges. And ſeeing that the Sacraments are the inſtitution and worke of the Lord himſelfe, the faithfull doe receiue them, not as certaine ſuperfluous inuentions of men, as at the hand of men, but as his heauenlie giftes, and that at the hand of the Lorde. For as touching the word of the Goſpell, which he preached, the Apoſtle writeth thus▪ 
                     When yee receiued of vs the word, whereby ye learned God, yee did not receiue it as the word of men, but, as it was indeed, as the worde of God, who alſo worketh in you that beleeue. The like reaſon is there of the Sacramentes. Therefore as a little before we teſtified, that we doe, and alwaies did receiue theſe ſentences and ſpeaches of Scripture, touching the Miniſterie of the worde, Looke the 2 obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.the Miniſter doth conuert, remit ſinnes, open the eies and heartes of men, giue faith and the ſpirit▪ ſo, being well vnderſtood, we doe acknowledge alſo theſe ſpeaches, touching the Sacramentes, the Miniſter through Baptiſme doth regenerate, and waſh awaie ſinnes: he doth diſtribute, and giue the bodie and bloode of the Lord: For Ananias ſaide to Paull, Ariſe and be baptiſed, waſh awaie thy ſinnes, by calling on the name of Ieſus. Alſo, Ieſus tooke breade, gaue it to his Diſciples, and ſaid, this is my bodie. Alſo it is manifeſt, that the auncient Fathers, did vſe ſuch kinde of ſpeaches,

becauſe that by this meanes they would propound and commend more royallie the giftes of God. Moreouer, ſeeing that the inſtitution and worke of the word and of the Sacraments proceedeth not from men, but from God, we do here reiect the errour of the Donatiſtes, and of the Anabaptiſts, who eſteemed the holie giftes of god according to the worthines, or vnworthines of the miniſter.
                  Now in that heauenlie giftes are repreſented vnto vs by earthlie things, it commeth ſo to paſſe by a certaine ſingular goodnes of God, who by this meane would helpe our weakenes. For the weakenes of mans wit doth vnderſtande all things the better, if they be reſembled by viſible things. Therefore the Lord would by Sacramentes ſet before the eies of mortall men his heauenlie gifts and his promiſes, as it were a linelie picture in a certaine table: that is, thoſe things, which are perceiued by the minde, he deliuered to vs in ſenſible things.
                  Whereupon we doe gather, that the Sacramentes doe apperteine to them which are in the Church. For prophane men do ſcoffe at our Sacramentes, inſomuch as they eſteeme them according to the externall things onely. But they which haue faith, vnderſtand the myſteries of the Sacraments: and they which receiue them in a true and liuely faith, receiue them with fruit: if they be receiued without faith, they doe hurt: not that the good giftes of God doe hurte of themſelues, but becauſe that they being not receiued aright, doe hurte, through our default. Furthermore, the Sacraments are badges of the people of God. For by theſe we are gathered together into a holie companie, and we profeſſe our faith. For it pleaſed the Lord by this meane to gather his people to himſelfe, and as it were to marke them with this ſigne, whereby alſo he might put euerie one in minde of his duetie.
                  Now of this kinde there be two Sacramentes in the Church of Chriſt, Baptiſme, which is called the font of regeneration: and the ſupper of the Lord, which is called the bodie and blood of the Lord, or the communion of the bodie and blood of the Lord. And now we will ſpeake ſeuerallie of them: for hitherto we haue diſcourſed of the Sacraments in generall, as before God we do beleeue, and wherein we hope that Luther will

not think anie thing wanting.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
               
                  
                     Art. 5. THe ſame Sacraments are vſed in the Church, to 
                     〈◊〉
                   Baptiſme at our entrance into the Church, and the ſupper of the Lord in due time when we are come to typer yeares, Looke the 1. obſeru vppon this confeſſ.to teſtifie our faith and brotherlie charitie, as in baptiſme was promiſed.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               Of Sacraments in genrall.
               CHAP. II.
               AS touching the Sacraments, we teach that they be externall, earthlie (as they which conſiſt of the elements) and viſible ſignes, conſecrated by the word of God, and by his owne mouth appointed hereunto, to ſignifie and witnes to vs that ſelfe ſame ſpirituall and inuiſible grace and trueth, whereof they haue the name, and which they are alſo ſacramentallie. Theſe ſacraments no man either did, or can inſtitute, but the Lord and God himſelfe Chriſt Ieſus, into whoſe handes the Father hath deliuered al things. And Ioh. 13.he hath inſtituted and appointed them for great and ſauing cauſes, and ſuch as are neceſſarie for this Church and all thoſe that beleeue: to wit, that like as by the preaching of the word, ſo by the adminiſtration of the viſible Sacraments and the myſteries thereof, faith might be helped and furthered, and that there might be an aſſured teſtimonie and confirmation of the fauourable and well pleaſed will of God towards vs, and that they might giue witnes to that trueth which is ſignified by them, and ſhould reach it out (as doth the word) to be apprehended by faith, and that the mindes of the faithfull, in the receiuing of them, ſhould by faith receiue the grace and trueth whereof they be witneſſes, and applying it vnto them-ſelues, ſhoulde make it their owne, and confirme themſelues therein, and on the other ſide, by giuing themſelues to God, ſhould conſecrate, and as it were by an othe religiouſlie binde them ſelues, to ſerue him alone, and as it were be ioyned together among themſelues, by the ioyning and knitting, as of one ſpirit, ſo alſo

of one body, to wit, of the Church, of the fellowſhip of ſaints, Eph. 4.and of loue.
               And according to theſe thinges, the Sacraments (as in times paſt Circumciſion was) may be called the holie couenants Gen. 17.of god with his Church, and of the Church with God, the minſters of faith and loue, by which the ioyning and vnion of God and Chriſt, our Lord with theſe beleeuing people, and theirs againe with Chriſt, is made and perfited, and that among themſelues in one ſpirituall bodie of the Church: by which alſo, euen as by the word, Chriſt, and his ſpirit do cauſe in the faithfull, that is, in thoſe that vſe them worthelie, a pretious participation of his excellent merit, neither doth he ſuffer them to be onelie bare and naked miniſters and ceremonies, but thoſe things that they ſignifie and witnes outwardlie, that doth he worke inwardlie, to ſaluation, profitablie, and effectuallie: that is, he clenſeth, nouriſheth, ſatisfieth, looſeth, payeth, remitteth, & confirmeth.
               They therefore which contemne theſe Sacraments, and through ſtubbornnes will not ſuffer them to be of anie force with themſelues, and making ſmall account of them, do eſteeme them as trifles, or do otherwiſe abuſe them, contrarie to the inſtitution, will, or commaundement of Chriſt, all theſe do greeuouſlie ſinne againſt the author thereof, who hath inſtituted them, and make a verie great hazarde of their ſaluation. But if ſome man would willinglie vſe theſe ſacraments according to the inſtitution of Chriſt, and yet cannot haue leaue looke the 1. obſeru. vp on this confeſſion.either entirelie, or withourt deceit, ſo to do as he would, as if peraduenture one that is taken be kept in priſon, or if one ſhould be hindred by ſicknes, or ſhould liue in ſtrange countries among the enemies of the trueth: ſuch a man, in ſuch a caſe, if he do whollie and truelie beleeue the holie Goſpell, maie by that faith be ſaued, although he haue not the vſe of the Sacramentes: whereof Auguſtine vpon Iohn. cap. 16. hath this worthie ſaying, Beleeue, and thou haſt eaten: ſeeing that the Sacraments are not neceſſarie to ſaluation, but onelie by the addition of a certaine condition.
               Alſo we teach this, that the ſacraments of themſelues, or by their owne vertue, for the workes ſake, or for the onelie outward action, that is, for the bare participation, receiuing,

and vſe thereof, can not giue grace, nor a iuſtifying or quickening faith to any, which before was not inwardlie quickened by the holie ghoſt, and hath no good motion within him-ſelfe: I ſaie, the Sacraments can not giue to anie ſuch either grace, or iuſtifying and quickening faith, and therefore they can not iuſtifie anie man, nor inwardlie quicken or regenerate anie mans ſpirit: for faith muſt goe before, whereby the holie ghoſt doth inwardlie quicken, and lighten man, and ſtirre vp or cauſe good motions in the heart. Without this faith there is neither anie iuſtification nor ſaluation: neither do the Sacraments of, or by themſelues, helpe anie whit hereunto, as in the holy ſcripture manifeſt examples of this matter are found in manie places, eſpecially in Iudas, who receiued the ſacrament of the Lord Iohn. 13.Chriſt him-ſelfe, did alſo execute the function of a preacher, and yet he ceaſed not to remaine a Deuill, an hypocrite, and the loſt ſonne: neither was he made better by the Sacrament, or by the vſe thereof, neither did this profit his Act. 5.anie thing to ſaluation. Alſo in Ananias and his wife, who had beene baptized of the Apoſtles, and had alſo without doubt receaued the Lords ſupper, and yet notwithſtanding they did continue in their wickednes, iniuſtice, and lies againſt the holy ghoſt, the ſacramētes did neither take away their wickednes, nor giue thē the ſauing or iuſtifying faith, which maketh the heart the better by repenting, & giueth it to God an vpright and obedient heart, and doth appeare the conſcience. Therefore the Sacramentes did not giue this conſcience and this faith vnto them: as Circumciſion, and the Sacrifices of the olde teſtament, did not giue a liuelie and iuſtifying faith, without the which faith thoſe thus auailed nothing to eternall ſaluation or iuſtification. And ſo doth Saint Paull ſpeake of all theſe thinges in his Epiſtle. Rom. 4.to the Romanes, and bringeth in the example of Abraham and doth witnes, that he had faith and righteouſnes, which is auaileable with God, before that he was circumciſed. 
                     〈◊〉
                   like ſorte he writeth of the people of Iſrael, that they alſo wer
                        •
                      baptized, and they all did eat one and the ſame ſpirituall meat and did all drinke the ſame ſpirituall drinke: but with manie of the God was not pleaſed. And therfore, euen in the aboundance of all theſe thinges, they were thought vnworthie to be

receiued, & they were reiected of God. For if a dead man, or one that is vnworthie, do come to the Sacraments, certainlie they do not giue him life and worthines, but he that is ſuch a one doth load himſelfe with a far greater burthen of fault, and ſinne, ſeeing that he is vnworthie: the which thing the Apoſtle doth expreſſelie declare in the doctrine touching the Supper of the Lord, where he ſaith▪ 
                  whoſoeuer 
                  1. Cor. 10.
                  doth eate of this bread, or drinke of this cup of the Lord vnworthely, he is guiltie of the bodie and blood of the Lord: Alſo, He doth eate and drinke iudgement to him-ſelfe.
               
               Laſtlie, this alſo muſt be knowne, that the veritie of the Sacraments doth neuer faile them, ſo that they ſhoulde become not effectuall at anie time: but in the inſtitution of Chriſt Looke the 2. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.they doe alwaies exerciſe their vertue and efficacie, in witneſſing, ſealing, confirming, vnto the worthie receiuers, preſent grace and ſaluation, but vnto the vnworthie, their fault and condemnation, whether they be adminiſtred by a good and honeſt Prieſt, or by a cloſe ſinner. For ſo long as the ouerthwartnes of ſuch wicked hypocrites is not as yet publiquelie knowne, neither puniſhed more gentlie or ſeuerelie by the Eccleſiaſticall Diſcipline, neither they which haue behaued themſelues more ſtubbornelie haue bin excommunicated, thoſe Sacraments which they doe adminiſter, maie be receiued of them, if ſo be that they do adminiſter them, according to the will, minde, and inſtitution of Chriſt, the which thing alſo the conſtitutions of the auncient Church doe confirme. For the vertue and efficacie of the Sacraments, doth neither conſiſt in him, nor depend on him, who doth either adminiſter them, whoſoeuer he be, or doth receiue them, but it conſiſteth in the inſtitution, and in the commaundement that was moſte abſolute and mightie in authoritie, and in the worde of the author of the Sacraments, to wit, of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, on which one thing they doe relie, and haue from thence whatſoeuer they are able to doe. Neuertheles the miniſters muſt throughlie looke to it, and take good heede, leſt whileſt by their labour they be ſeruiceable to others, They themſelues become reprobates, or worthie to be reiected: 1 Cor. 9. Mat. 7.and alſo leſt they giue holie thinges to dogges, or caſt pearles before ſwine. Alſo the people muſt endeuour by all meanes to

take heede, that they doe not in anie caſe receiue the Sacraments with the offence of the Church, and the proper daunger of the ſaluation of their ſoules, that is to there own fault and iudgement, wherof we made mention before▪
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               WE beleeue that there be Sacraments adioyned to 
                     Art. 34.the word, for the more ample confirmation therof▪ to wit, that they may be pledges & tokēs of the grace of god, wherby our weake & rude faith may be helped. For we confesth at theſe outwarde ſignes be ſuch, that God▪ by the power of his holie Spirit, doth work by them, that nothing may there be repreſented to vs in vaine: yet we thinke that the wholl ſubſtance and truth of them is in Chriſt Ieſus, from whome if they be ſeparated, they be nothing elſe but vaine ſhadowes and ſmokes. Alſo Artic. 35. We acknowledge that there be onelie two Sacramentes, common to the wholl Church, &c. That which followeth, pertaineth to the 13. Sect▪
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               MOreouer we allow the Sacramentes of the Church, 
                     Art. 10.that is to ſaie, certaine holie ſignes, and Ceremonies, which Chriſt would we ſhould vſe, that by them he might ſet before our eies, the Myſteries of our Saluation, and might more ſtrongly confirme the Faith, which we haue in his bloode, and might ſeale his grace in our hartes▪ And theſe Sacramentes, together with Tertullian, Origen, Ambroſe, Auguſtine, Hierome, Chryſoſtome, Baſill, Dionyſius, and other Catholike Fathers, we do call Figures, Signes, Markes, Badges, Prin
                        •
                     s, Copies, Fourmes, Seales, Signettes, Similiu
                        •
                     des, paternes, Repreſentations, Remembrances, and Memories, and we make no doubt together with the ſame Doctoures, to ſaie that theſe be certaine viſible words, Seales of Righteouſnes, and Tokens of Grace. And we doe expreſſelie pronounce, that in the Lordes Supper there is truely giuen vnto the Beleeuing the bodie and blood of our Lord, the Fleſh of the Sonne of God, which quickeneth our Soules, the meate that commeth from aboue, the Food of Immortalitie, of Grace, Trueth, and Life, and that the ſame Supper is the communion of the Body and Bloode of Chriſt: by the partaking whereof we be reuiued, ſtrengthned,

and fed vnto Immortalitie: and whereby we are ioyned, vnited, and incorporated vnto Chriſt, that we maie abide in him, and he in vs. Beſides this, we acknowledge, that 
                     Art. 11.there be two ſacraments, which, we iudge, properlie ought to be called by this name: that is to ſaie, Baptiſme, and the Sacrament of thankeſgiuing. For thus manie we ſee were deliuered and ſanctified by Chriſt, and well allowed of the olde Fathers, Ambroſe, and Auguſtine, and ſuch others.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               
                  
                     Art. 33. WE beleeue, that God hauing regard to our dulnes and infirmitie, did inſtitute Sacramentes for vs, that by them his promiſes might be ſealed to vs, and that they might be moſte certaine pledges of his heauenlie loue towards vs, and of his giftes beſtowed vpon vs, for the cheriſhing and ſuſtaining of our faith. Theſe Sacraments he added to the worde of the Goſpel, that he might more liuelie ſet before our externall ſenſes, both thoſe thinges which he declareth vnto vs in his worde, and thoſe alſo which he worketh inwardlie in our hartes: and to confirme more and more in vs that ſaluation, which he vouchſafeth to communicate vnto vs. For the Sacraments are ſignes and viſible tokens of internall and viſible thinges, by the which, as by certaine meanes, God himſelfe worketh within vs, by the power of the holie Ghoſt. Therefore they be not vaine or idle ſignes, neither yet ordeined of God to deceiue or fruſtrate vs of our hope. For the trueth of our Sacraments is Ieſus Chriſt, without whome they are of no value. Moreouer, that number of Sacraments ſufficeth vs, which Chriſt himſelfe our true and onelie Doctor, hath inſtituted: and thoſe are onelie two, to wit, the Sacrament of baptiſme, and the Sacrament of the holie ſupper of our Lord and ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               
                  Art. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   SEeing that in this life manie euill ones and hypocrites are mingled with the Church, and haue fellowſhippe with it in the outward ſignes and pleadges, the Sacraments adminiſtred by ſuch as are euill, maie lawfullie be vſed, according

to the ſaying of Chriſt, The Scribes and Phariſies ſit 
                        〈◊〉
                      Moſes chaire, &c. For the ſacramentes, and the word of God are effectual, by reaſon of the inſtitution and commaundement of Chriſt, though they be deliuered by wicked and euil men. They condemne the Donatiſts and ſuch like, whoe ſaide it was not lawfull for the people to vſe the miniſter▪ of euill men in the Church, and helde opinion, that the miniſterie of euill men was quite without fruit and effect.
               
                  The beginnining of this 8. Article is elſe where thus ſet downe.
                  THough the Church, to ſpeake properlie, be a congregation of Saintes and true beleeuers, yet ſeeing that in this life manie hypocrites and euill men be mingled with it, it is a lawfull thing, to vſe the ſacramentes, miniſtered by the hands of euill men, &c.
                  Touching the vſe of the ſacraments they teach, that they were inſtituted, not ſo much to be notes of profeſſion amongſt men, as to be ſignes and pleadges of Gods good 
                        〈◊〉
                      towardes vs, ſet before the eies, to ſturre vp and confirme faith in them which vſe them. Therefore we muſt vſe ſacramentes ſo, as we muſt ioyne faith with them, which maie beleeue the promiſes that are offered and declared vnto 
                        〈◊〉
                      by the Sacramentes. By this faith we receiue both the grace promiſed, which is repreſented by the ſacraments, and alſo the holie Ghoſt. Therefore they condemne that Phariſaicall opinion of the Papiſtes, which ſuppreſſeth the doctrine of faith, and doth not teach that faith, which beleeueth that grace is freelie giuen vs for Chriſtes ſake, is neceſſarie in the vſe of the ſacraments, but imagineth that men are iuſt▪ for the verie vſe of the ſacraments, euen by the worke done, and that without any good affection of him that vſeth it.
               
               
                  This article we finde thus in another Edition.
                  COncerning the vſe of the Sacramentes, they teach that they were ordained, not ſo much to be mar
                        •
                     es and badges of profeſſion amongſt men, as that they ſhould

be ſignes or teſtimonies of the will of God towards vs, ſet forth vnto vs, to ſtirre vp and confirme faith in ſuch as vſe them. Whereupon they condemne thoſe that teach, that the ſacraments do iuſtifie by the work done, and doe not teach that faith to beleeue remiſſion of ſinnes is requiſite in the vſe of ſacraments.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFSSION OF SAXONIE.
               
                  
                     Art. 12. Of the ſacraments.
               THe Church alſo is diſcerned from other Gentiles by by certaine rites or ceremonies inſtituted of God, & vſuallie called Sacraments, as are Baptiſme, and the Lords Supper: which notwithſtanding are not onelie ſignes of a profeſſion, but much more (as the auncient Fathers ſaide) ſignes of grace: that is, they be ceremonies added to the promiſe of the Goſpell touching grace, that is, touching the free remiſſion of ſinnes, and touching reconciliation, and the wholl benefit of our redemption: the which are ſo inſtituted, that euerie man maie vſe them, becauſe they be pledges & teſtimonies, which declare that the benefits promiſed in the Goſpell doe appertaine to euerie one. For the voice of the Goſpell is generall: this vſe doth be are witnes that this voice doth appertaine to euerie one which vſeth the Sacraments.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               Of the Sacramentes.
               
                  Art. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   THe worde Sacrament, as alſo the worde Myſterie (which interpreters do expounde Sacrament) is very large. But becauſe ſome haue thought it good to reſtraine it to the number of ſeauen Sacraments, we wil briefly runne ouer euerie one, that we may ſhew what we finde wanting in the doctrine that ſome haue broched, and what maie ſeeme to be repugnant to the meaning of that Church, which is in deede Catholike or orthodoxe.
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               Of the Sacraments.
               
                  
                     Art. 16. SEeing that the Church of Chriſt doth liue here in the fleſh (howbeit not according to the fleſh) it pleaſed the Lord alſo to teach, admoniſh, and exhort it by the outwarde worde. And that this might be done the more commodiouſlie, he would alſo haue his to make much of an externall ſocietie among them ſelues. For which cauſe he gaue vnto them holie ſignes, among which theſe are the chiefeſt, Baptiſme, and the Lords Supper: the which we doe not onelie think therfore to haue had the name of Sacraments among the Fathers, becauſe they are viſible ſignes of inuiſible grace (as Saint Auguſtine doth define them) but alſo for that purpoſe, becauſe that by them we doe conſecrate our ſelues vnto Chriſt, and doe binde our ſelues as it were by the othe or Sacrament of faith.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRTEENTH SECTION.
            OF THE SACRAMENT OF Holie Baptiſme.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of holie baptiſme. CHAP. 20.
               
                  BAptiſme was inſtituted, and conſecrated by God, and the firſt that baptized was Iohn, who dipped Chriſt in the water in Iorden. From him it came to the Apoſtles, whoe alſo did baptize with water. The Mat. 28.Lord in plaine words commaunded them To preach the Goſpel, and to baptize in the name 
                  Act. 2.
                  of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt. And Peter alſo, when diuers demaunded of him what they ought to doe, ſaid to them, in the Acts, Let euerie one of you be baptized in the name of Ieſus Chriſt, for the remiſſion of ſinnes, and you ſhall receiue the gift of the holy Ghoſt. Whereupon Baptiſme is called of ſome a ſigne of in
                     •
                  tiation of Gods people, as that whereby the elected of God are conſecrated vnto God
               There is but one Baptiſme in the Church of God▪ for it is ſufficient to be once baptized or conſecrated vnto God. For baptiſme once receiued doth continue all a mans life, and is a perpetuall ſealing of our adoption vnto vs. For to be baptized in the name of Chriſt, is to be enrolled, entered, and

receiued into the couenant, and familie, and ſo into the inheritance of the ſonnes of God, yea & in this life to be called after the name of God, that is to ſaie, to be called the Sonne of god, to be purged alſo from the filthines of ſins, & to be indued with the manifolde grace of God, for to lead a new and innocent life. Baptiſme therefore doth call to minde, and keepe in remembrance the great benefit of God performed to mankinde: for we are al borne in the pollution of ſinne, and are the Sonnes of wrath. But God, who is rich in mercie, doth freelie purge vs from our ſinnes, by the blood of his Sonne, and in him doth adopte vs to be his ſonnes, and by an holie couenant doth ioyne vs to himſelfe, and doth inrich vs with diuers giftes, that we might liue a new life. All theſe thinges are ſealed vp vnto vs in Baptiſme. For inwardlie we are regenerated, purified, and renued of God through the holie Spirit: and outwardlie we receiue the ſealing of moſte notable gifts, by the water, by which alſo, thoſe great benefites are repreſented, and, as it were, ſet before our eyes to be looked vpon. And therefore are we baptized, that is, waſhed and ſprinckled with viſible water. For the water maketh cleane that which is filthie, refreſheth things that faile and faint, and cooleth the bodies. And the grate of God dealeth in like manner with the ſoule, and that inuiſible, and ſpirituallie.
               Moreouer by the Sacrament of Baptiſme God doth ſeperate vs from all other religions and people, and doth conſecrate vs a peculiar people to himſelfe. We therefore by being baptized, doe confeſſe our faith, and are bound to giue vnto God obedience, mortification of the fleſh, and newnes of life, yea and we are billed ſouldiers for the holie warfare of Chriſt, that all our life long we ſhoulde fight againſt the worlde, Sathan, and our owne fleſh: Moreouer, we are baptized into one bodie of the Church, that we might well agree with all the members of the Church in the ſame religion and mutuall duties.
               We beleue that looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſion.that of al other is the moſt perfect manner of baptiſme, wherin Chriſt was baptized, and which the reſt of the Apoſtles did vſe in baptiſme. Thoſe things therfore which by mans deuiſe were added afterwards, & vſed in the Church, Looke the 2. obſeru.we thinke them nothing neceſſary to the perfection

of Bapriſme. Of which kinde is exorciſme, and the vſe of lightes, oyle, ſalte, ſpattle, and ſuch other things, as namelie that baptiſme is twiſe euerie yere conſecrated with diuerſe ceremonies. For we beleeue that the baptiſme of the Church, which is but one, was ſanctifed in Gods firſt inſtitution of it, and is conſecrated by the word, and is now of full force, by; and for the firſt bleſſing of God vpon it.
               We teach that baptiſme ſhould not be miniſtred in the Church by women or midwiues. For Paul ſecludeth women from Eccleſiaſticall callings: but Baptiſme belongeth to Eccleſiaſticall offices. We condemne the Anabaptiſts, who denie that young infants, borne of faithfull parents, are to be baptized. For according to the doctrine of the goſpell theirs is the kingdome of God. And they are writen in the couenant of God. And why then ſhoulde not the ſigne of the couenant be giuen to them? Why ſhould they not be conſecrated by holy baptiſme, who are gods peculiar people, & in the Church of God? We condemne alſo the Anabaptiſts in the reſt of their opinions, which they peculiarlie doe holde againſt the worde of God. We therfore are not Anabaptiſts, neither doe we agree with them in any point that is theirs.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  
                     
                        Art. 21. Of Baptiſme.
                  BAptiſme, according to the inſtitution of the Lorde, is the fonte of Regeneration, the which the Lorde doth giue to his choſen in a viſible ſigne, by the miniſterie of the Church, in ſuch ſorte, as we haue declared before. In which holy fonte we do therfore dippe our infants, becauſe that it is not lawfull for vs to reiect them from the companie of the people of God, which are borne of vs (who are the people of God) ſo long as they be not pointed out by the voice of God, eſpeciallie ſeeing that we ought godlie 
                        〈◊〉
                      preſume of their election.
               
               
                  Out of the Declaration of the ſame Confeſſion, ſent vnto Luther.
                  Of Baptiſme.
                  BAptiſme is a Sacrament, wherin the Lord by a viſible ſigne doth teſtifie his grace vnto vs, whereby he doth

regenerate vs, and clenſe vs from our ſinnes, and alſo receiue vs to be his people, that we may liue to Chriſt, die to the olde Adam, & be partakers of the good things of Chriſt. For we all are borne ſinners, whereupon we haue neede of regeneration, and the purging of our ſinnes, which commeth to paſſe by the free mercie of God, whereby alſo we are receiued into the couenant, that beeing buried into his death, we may riſe againe in newnes of life, the which thing is taught more at large in the Apoſtles writings. But the goodnes of God doth in deede giue vuto vs theſe heauenlie gifts, and alſo vſeth a ſigne hereunto, that it may declare theſe things vnto vs, and by pouring them into our ſenſes, might allure vs to more excellent thinges, that ſo the wholl glory might be proper to God, & yet the holie inſtitution of the ſigne might not be made fruſtrate. For it is moſt truelie ſaide, Baptiſme doth ſaue vs: but it is added of Peter, Not that which waſheth awaie the filth of the bodie. And the Baptiſt ſaith, I in deede doe baptiſe you with water, but he (that is▪ Chriſt) ſhall baptize you with the holie Ghoſt, and with fire. Whereunto the holie Councell of Nice hauing reſpect, did ſaie, Our Baptiſme is to be conſidered, not with ſenſible eies, but with the eies of the minde.
                  
                  Alſo Baptiſme is a badge: for it ſerueth to our confeſſion. For this we doe plainlie confeſſe in the Church, that we together with our children and al our familie doe profeſſe the Chriſtian religion, that the members of that bodie whereof Chriſt is the head, to whome we haue giuen our names, are receiued of him into the number of thoſe ſouldiers, who by the good guiding of Chriſt doe through al their life exerciſe a warfarre againſt the worlde, Satan, and the fleſh.
                  Hitherto alſo apperteineth the 5. Art. ſſ. 2. of the confeſſion of Baſill, which before was placed in the 12. Sect.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  Of holie Baptiſme. CHAP. 12.
               TOuching holie Baptiſme it is taught, that men muſt beleeue and profeſſe, that this is a Sacrament or holſome miniſterie of the new Teſtament▪ inſtituted of Chriſt the Lorde, concerning which the faithful miniſters haue in

charge, that by the adminiſtration hereof, they benefit the holie Church. This Sacrament conſiſteth of an outwarde waſhing, that is done with water, with calling on the name of the holie Trinitie (that of the element and word may ariſe Auguſt. 
                        〈◊〉
                      in Ioan. cap▪ 
                     13.
                  and be ioyntlie withall made a Sacrament) and that waſhing is vſed both to ſignifie, and to witnes a ſpirituall waſhing, and inwarde clenſing of the holie Ghoſt from the diſeaſe of hereditarie ſinne, and from other ſinnes, the guilt of which is here forgiuen and taken awaie, and to the atteining of a new manner of birth, or regeneration: wherupon it is called the ſacrament of the new birth, that is, of regeneratiō, or a waſhing with water in the word of life▪ For we beleue Act. 2. & 22.that whatſoeuer by▪ Baptiſme, as by a Sacrament added to the worde of the Goſpell, is in the outward ceremony ſignified and witneſſed, all that doth the Lord God worke and performe inwardlie: that is, that he waſheth awaie ſinne, Iohn. 3. Tit. 3. Epheſ. 5. Galat. 3. Rom 6. 1. Pet. 3▪
                  begetteth a man againe, and beſtoweth ſaluation vpon him, and through the waſhing of water, clenſeth by the word the ſocietie of his Church, cloatheth and appareleth it with his Sonne, burieth and taketh awaie ſinne, and giueth teſtimonie to, and ſealeth the peace of a good conſcience. For Baptiſme is not a waſhing awaie of the outward filth of the fleſh, but the ſtipulation or promiſe that a good conſcience maketh vnto God. For the beſtowing of theſe excellent fruites was holie Baptiſme giuen and graunted to the Church, which the faithful ſhepheards of ſoules ought to adminiſter, and which the faithful people of Chriſt, touching the receiuing thereof, ought to vſe lawfully but once onelie: yet, in deede and truth, troughout their wholl life.
               And although Baptiſme in the primitiue Church was for the moſt part miniſtred to ſuch, as were well growne and of diſcretion, after a confeſſion of faith made by them, according to Chriſts commaundement: yet this is taught, that yong children alſo, who are reckoned in the number of gods people, in like ſort are by this miniſterie to be beneficed towarde the attaining of ſaluation, that they likewiſe may be conſecrated and dedicated to Chriſt, according to this commaundement, when he ſaith, Suffer ye the little ones to come to 
                  Mat. 1
                        •
                     .
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      and forbid them not: becauſe vnto ſuch belongeth the kingdome of God. Therefore according to the worde of the Lord, and

many other teſtimonies and other promiſes made to this beloued age of Children, eſpeciallie when as alſo there is extant an example of that auncient myniſterie ordeined of God, to wit, circumciſion, which by reaſon of the couenant belonged not onelie to thoſe of diſcretion, but therewithall Gen. 17.alſo to young children. For theſe cauſes doe our miniſters without any doubt, and boldly, baptiſe children in the name of the holie Trinitie, applying vnto them a ſigne of moſte effectual vertue, and a moſt ſure witnesbearing of that thing which by Chriſts owne words is aſſigned to this age, and is imparted vnto it. For ſo Chriſt in generall, and without exception, giueth in charge, not touching ſome, but touching all, Teach ye all nations, and baptiſe them, in the name of the father, 
                  Math. 28. Act. 4.
                  the Sonne, and the holie Ghoſt. And ſo ouer children this moſt holie name is called vpon, in which alone there is ſaluation.
               This is further alſo taught, that they who are once lawfullie and truely baptized, when they come to yeares, ought to do their endeuour, that they may learne to acknowledge and know what holie Baptiſme is, and therewithall the Catholike and Chriſtian faith (without which Baptiſme auaileth nothing) to the end that afterward when they do deſire to be partakers of the Lord his Supper, they may with their owne mouthes, and of their owne accorde, make profeſſion of their faith, and may renew their ſanctification, by which they were conſecrated to the Lord. And ſuch, that is, which are thus inſtructed, our miniſters receiue vnto this couenant of holie Baptiſme, and Looke the 1. obſeru. vppon this confeſſ.by the laying on of hands do teſtify to them, that grace is conteined in baptiſme to ſtrengthen them to the warfarre of faith, and ſo after a conuenient and godlie manner, and with vſe of pure ceremonies, and ſuch as are profitable to edifying, they bring them to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, without any reiteration of Baptiſme, as there are euident tokens and examples to be ſeene of this matter in the primitiue Church, which is the true and beſt maiſtreſſe of the poſterie, and goeing before leadeth vs the waie. For if ſo be that a man ſhould euen after a true manner enioy the Baptiſme of Chriſt, and ſhould by meanes hereof be buried with Chriſt into his death to newnes of life, if afterward, his life beeing prolonged, he

ſhould not, according to the doctrine of the holie Goſpell, ſhew forth a true and liuelie faith in Ieſus Chriſt, brotherlie loue towardes all thoſe, that are conſecrated to the Lorde, and ſo ſhould leade a life vnworthie his place or calling, and vnworthy of God and his neighbour, and ſhould not in baptiſme conceiue a liuelie hope of life euerlaſting; ſuch a one ſhould aſſuredlie giue certaine teſtimonie of himſelfe, that he had in vaine receiued grace in holie Baptiſme, wherein the name of the holie Trinitie was called on ouer him, Exod 2
                        •
                     .the which thing God the Lord, as his worde declareth, ſuffereth by no meanes to eſcape vnreuenged or vnpuniſhed.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               
                  
                     Art. 35. WE acknowledge that there be two onelie Sacraments common to the wholl Church▪ whereof the the firſt is Baptiſme, the which is giuen to vs to teſtifie our adoption, becauſe that therein we are ingrafted into Chriſts bodie, that being waſhed in his bloode, we maie alſo be renued to holines of life by his Spirit. This alſo we ſaie, Although we are baptized but once, yet the fruit of Baptiſme doth pertaine to the wholl courſe of our life, that this promiſe, to wit, that Chriſt wil alwaies be vnto vs ſanctifi ation & iuſtification, maie be ſealed vp in vs with a ſure and firme ſeale. Further more, although Baptiſme be a ſacrament of faith and repentance, yet ſeeing that God doth together with the Parentes account their poſteritie alſo to be of the Church, we affirme, that infantes, being borne of holie parents, are by the authoritie of Chriſt to be baptized.
               
                  
                     Art. 38. We ſaie therefore that the element of water, be it neuer ſo fraile, doth notwithſtanding truelie witnes or confirme vnto vs the inward waſhing of our ſoules in the bloode of Ieſus Chriſt, by the vertue and efficacie of the holie ghoſt.
            
            
               
                  
                     Art. 1
                        •
                     . OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               WE ſaie, that baptiſme is a ſacrament of the remiſſion of ſinnes, and of that waſhing, which we haue in the blood of Chriſt▪ and that no perſon, which will profeſſe Chriſtes name, ought to be reſtrained, or kept backe

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
there from: no not the verie babes of Chriſtians: forſomuch as they be borne in ſinne, and pertaine vnto the people of God.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               
                  
                     Art. 
                     
                        •
                     4. WE beleeue and confeſſe, that Ieſus Chriſt, which is the ende of the law, hath by his owne blood ſhedding made an ende of all other propitiatorie ſacrifice for ſinnes. Alſo that Circumciſion, which was done by blood, being aboliſhed, he hath inſtituted Baptiſme in the place therof, whereby we are receiued into the Church of god, and ſeparated from all other nations, and all kinde of ſtraunge religions, being conſecrated vnto him alone, whoſe badge and cogniſance we weare. Finallie, Baptiſme is a token vnto vs, that he wilb our God for euer, whoe alſo is our gratious father. Therefore the Lord hath commaunded all his to be baptized with pure water, In the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the holie Ghoſt, To ſignifie that the bloode of Chriſt doth internallie, through the operation of the Spirit, performe & effect that in the ſoule, which water doth externallie worke in the bodies. For as water being poured vpon vs, and appeering in the bodie of him that is baptized, moiſtning the ſame doth waſh awaie the filthines of the body, ſo the blood of Chriſt, waſhing the ſoule, doth clenſe it from ſinne, and doth make vs the ſonnes of God, which before were the children of wrath. Not that this materiall water doth theſe things, but the ſprinckling of the precious blood of the Son of God▪ which is vnto vs as the read ſea, where though we muſt paſſe, that we may depart from the tyranny of Pharoh, that is, the Deuill, and enter into the ſpirituall lande of Canaan. Therfore the miniſters verilie doe deliuer vnto vs the ſacramentes, and the viſible thing, but it is the Lorde himſelf that giueth it vnto vs, that is repreſented by the ſacrament, namelie▪ the giftes and inuiſible graces, waſhing, purifying▪ and clenſing our ſoules from all ſpottes and iniquiries, renuing in like manner, and filling our heartes with all comforte, and, to conclude, giuing vnto vs a certaine perſuaſion of his Fatherlie goodnes, clothing vs with the new man, and putting of the old man, with all his deeds.

For theſe cauſes doe we beleeue, that euerie one, that deſireth to obtaine eternall life, ought to be baptized with one baptiſme, ▪and that once alone, which neuer afterwardes is to be iterated, ſeeing that we cannot be borne twiſe.
               Neither doeth this baptiſme profit vs onelie at that moment, when the water reſteth vpon vs, & when we are ſprinckled with it, but it is auaileable throughout the wholl time of our life Therefore here we doe det
                     •
                  ſt the errour of the Anabaptiſtes, whoe are not onelie content with one only baptiſme, and that once receiued, but doe alſo condemne the Baptiſme of infants, yea of thoſe that be borne of faithfull Parentes: but we by the ſame reaſon doe beleeue that they ought to be baptized and ſealed with the ſigne of the couenant, for the which in time paſt the infants amongſt the Iſraelites were circumciſed, that is, by reaſon of the ſame promiſes made vnto our infantes, that were made vnto others. And verilie Chriſt hath no leſſe ſhed his blood to waſh the infantes of the faithfull, then he did for the waſhing of thoſe that are of riper yeres. Therefore it is meet that that they ſhould receiue the ſigne or ſacrament of the thing which Chriſt hath wrought for their ſakes, as in the law the Lord commaundeth, that the ſacrament of the death and Leuit. 12. 6.paſſion of Chriſt ſhould be communicated to children new borne, by offering vp the lambe, for them, which was a ſacrament of Chriſt to come. Furthermore, that which circumciſion did performe to the people of the Iewes, the ſame doth Baptiſme performe to the children of the faithfull. For the which cauſe Paull calleth Baptiſme, The circumciſion of Chriſt.
               
            
            
               OVC OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               
                  
                     Art. 
                     
                        •
                     . COncerning baptiſme they teach▪ that it is looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confſſe.neceſſarie to ſaluation, as a ceremonie ordeined of Chriſt. Alſo, that by baptiſme the grace of God is offered. And that young infantes are to be baptized, and that they being by baptiſme commended vnto God, are receiued into Gods fauour, and are made the ſonnes of God, as Chriſt witneſſeth, ſpeaking of litle children in the Church▪ Mat. 18. It is not the will of your heauenlie father, that anie of theſe litle ones ſhould periſ
                        •
                     . They condemne the Anabaptiſtes, which allow

not the baptiſme of infantes, and Looke the 1. obſeru vp vpon this confeſſ.holde that infantes are ſaued, though they die without baptiſme, & be not within the Church of God.
               
                  This in another edition is ſet downe in this ſort.
                  TOuching baptiſme they teach, that it is Looke the 2. obſeru.neceſſary to ſaluation, and that by baptiſme the grace of God is offered. That children are to be baptized, and ſuch as by baptiſme be preſented to God, are receiued into his fauour. They condemne the Anabaptiſtes, that allow not of childrens Baptiſme, and holde that Children are ſaued without baptiſme.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
               
                  
                     Art. 1
                        •
                     . BAptiſme is an entire action, to wit, a dipping, and the pronouncing of theſe wordes, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holie Ghoſt. We doe often expound the ſumme of the doctrine of the Goſpell comprehended in theſe wordes. I baptiſe thee, that is, I doe witnes, that by this dippin thy ſinnes be waſhed awaie, and that thou art now receiued of the true God, who is the Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who hath redeemed thee by his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, and doth ſanctifie thee by his holie Spirit. I baptiſe thee into the name, that is, inuocating of this true god, whome thou ſhalt acknowledge, and inuocate and diſtinguiſh from all other feigned gods, and ſhalt aſſure thy ſelfe, that thoſe benefits are giuen to thee, which he promiſed in the goſpell: that thou art a member of the Church of God, which is redeemed by the Sonne, and ſanctified by the holie Ghoſt. Let them remember this meaning of this couenant, who by reaſon of their age are capable of doctrine, and being confirmed by this teſtimonie, let them beleeue that their ſinnes be forgiuen them, and that they are in deede members of the Church of God, and let them in a true faith inuocate the true God: as Abraham conſidedering of circumciſion, did beholde the promiſe of the ſeed to come, vnderſtand that he was a member of the Church of God, and that the curſſe was taken awaie from him alſo,

by that ſeede, of whome it was ſaid in the promiſe, Gen. 12. In thy ſeed ſhall all nations be bleſſed. So alſo doth Peter teach 1. Pet. 3. That Baptiſme is a ſtipulation or promiſe that a good conſcience maketh vnto God, by the reſurection of Ieſus Chriſt, which is at the right hand of God He doth namelie call it a ſtipulation, whereby God doth make a couenant with thee, and receiueth thee unto fauour, the woundes of thy conſcience being healed, and thou in like ſorte doeſt make a couenant with God, to inuocate this true God, and to beleeue that thou art ſaued by the Sonne of God, who is raiſed vp from death, and now doth raigne. So this Sonne of God, ſitting at the right hand of the eternall Father, is effectuall in thee, as alſo Paull ſaith to the Gal. You that are baptized, haue put on Chriſt. And Looke the 1. obſeru. vp on this confeſſ.that the holie Ghoſt is giuen in Baptiſme, Paull affirmeth it in his Epiſtle to Titus, ſaying: By the waſhing of the new birth, and the renuing of the holie Ghoſt. And in Iohn it is ſaid, Except a man be borne againe of water and of the ſpirit, he can not enter into the kingdome of heauen. Therefore we teach Looke the 2. obſeru.that Baptiſme is neceſſarie: and we do once onelie baptize euerie one, as euerie one was but once onelie Circumciſed: but we do often make mention of the moſt profitable doctrine, touching the ſignification thereof, and the mutuall couenant.
               We do alſo baptiſe infants, becauſe it is moſt certeine that the promiſe of grace doth perteine alſo of infants, Looke the 3. obſeru.and to thoſe onely, which are ingrafted into the Church: becauſe that of theſe it is ſaid, Suffer little ones to come vnto me, becauſe that to ſuch apperteineth the kingdom of heauen. And Origen writeth vpon the ſixth to the Romanes, That the Church receiued the cuſtome of baptizing infants from the Apoſtles. Neither do we thinke that this cuſtome is onelie an idle ceremonie, but that the infants are then in deede receiued and ſanctified of God, becauſe that then they are grafted into the Church, and the promiſe perteineth to ſuch. And of this matter there be manie thinges written and publiſhed in our Churches, whereby the Anabaptiſtes are refuted.
               
                  Alſo out of the 19. Art.
                  
                  Of Confirmation.
                  IT is well knowne, that the manner of conſecrating oile was magicall and execrable: and therefore theſe annointings,

wherein there is vſe of oile, are not to be tollerated, and in old time they vſed theſe ceremonies otherwiſe then now they be vſed. In the ceremonie of confirmation there was a triall of doctrine, wherin euery one did rehearſe the forme of doctrine, and did openlie profeſſe that they did miſlike the madnes of the Heathen, and of Heretikes, and that they would be and remaine members of the true Church, and neuer forſake that true opinion which they did then profeſſe. This cuſtome was profitable to inſtruct men, and to keep them in the true knowledge of god. And in out Churches the like thinges be done in Catechizing the younger ſorte, Looke the 
                           •
                        . obſeruat. vpon the confeſſ. of Bohem. Sect. 8.and in priuate confeſſion, wherein the Paſtoures do examine the doctrine of the people. But as touching the ceremonie of confirmation, which the Biſhoppes doe now reteine, what elſe is it, but a vaine ſhadowe?
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               
                  
                     Of Baptiſme. CHAP. 10.
                  WE acknowledge that Baptiſme is to be miniſtred, as well to infants, as to thoſe that are growne to full age, and that it is to be vſed in the Church, euen to the end of this worlde, in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holie Ghoſt, according to Chriſt his inſtitution.
                  Alſo we beleeue and confeſſe, that Baptiſme is that ſea, into the bottome whereof, as the Prophet ſaith, God doth caſ
                           •
                         all our ſinnes, and forgiue them for Chriſt his Sonnes ſake, thorough faith. But whereas ſome affirme, that ſinne remaining in man after baptiſme, is not indeed ſinne of it owne nature, we think it to be a more pernitious errour, then the common ſort of men doth iudge it to be: For, although wee doe not doubt, but that ſinne which remaineth after baptiſme, is forgiuen to the faithfull for Chriſt, and, by the free mercie of God, is not imputed anie longer before the tribunall ſeate of God; yet if a man weigh and conſider the nature thereof, it is in deede in it ſelfe ſinne, by reaſon wherof, as Auguſtine ſaide before, No man liuing is iuſtified in the fight of God▪ and, there is not a iuſt man in the earth, which doth good,
                     
                     and ſinneth not. Rom. 7. I ſee another law in my members, rebelling againſt the law of my minde, and leading me captiue vnto the lawe of ſin, which is in my members. Here Paull ſpeaketh of ſin, which remaineth after baptiſme, & he affirmeth, that it doth rebell againſt the law of his minde, that is, againſt the affection of the holy Ghoſt. Now, that which rebelleth againſt the holy Ghoſt, vndoubtedly it is neceſſary, that it be very ſin indeede. For this is the nature of ſinne, that it ſtriue againſt the holie Ghoſt. And Galat. 5. it is ſaid: The fleſh luſteth againſt the ſpirit, and the ſpirit againſt the fleſh: and theſe are contrarie one to the other, ſo that ye cannot doe the ſame thinges that ye would. Here againe Paull ſpeaketh of ſinne remaining after baptiſme: and doth manifeſtlie attribute to it the nature of ſinne, to wit, to luſt againſt the Spirit, to be contrarie to the Spirit, and to hinder, that righteouſnes maie not be perfect in man. Therefore ſinne remaining after baptiſme, of it nature is indeed ſinne, although it be not imputed to him that beleeueth, but is forgiuen for Chriſt. And therefore Auguſtine in his booke, De Nupt. & Concup. ad Valer. Lib. 1. Cap. 25. ſaith, It is anſwered, that the concupiſcence of the fleſh is forgiuen in Baptiſme, not that there ſhould be no concupiſcence, but that it ſhoulde not be imputed to ſinne. For although the guilt be alreadie diſcharged▪ yet the ſinne remaineth, till all our infirmitie be healed, &c. And againe, De Baptiſ. paru
                           •
                        lorum, & de Conſ. Diſt. 4. Cap. Per Baptiſmum: Through Baptiſme it is brought to paſse, that the fleſh of ſinne be made voide, yet it is not ſo made voide, that ingendered concupiſcence ſhould not remaine in the fleſh, but that it ſhould not hurte.
                  
                  Moreouer wee teach, that he which is baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holie Ghoſt, is ſprinckled with a ſpirituall anointing, that is, is made a member of Chriſt through faith, and endued with the holie Ghoſt, that the eares of his minde maie be opened, and the eies of his heart lightened, to receiue and vnderſtand heauenlie things. And it is euident, that the vſe of outwarde annointing was lawfull in that gouernement which Moſes inſtituted, and that outward annointing was vſed alſo in the Church, after that the Goſpell was publiſhed. But it is alſo euident, that in the law of Moſes, there

was a time for ſhadowes, but now, Chriſt being reuealed, it is the time of truth, and the vſe of externall annointing pertaineth to the rudiments of the world. Concerning the abrogating of theſe rudiments, Paul ſaith, Col. 2. If ye be de
                           •
                        d with Chriſt from the rudiments of the world, why, as though ye 
                           〈◊〉
                         in the worlde, are ye burdened with traditions. And Dyoni
                           •
                        i
                           ••
                        , 
                     In Caeleſt. Hierar. De Baptiſ.whome they call Areopagita, and whom they thinke to haue written out the ceremonies, which the Apoſtles deliuered to the Church, doth inſinuate, that an outward anointing was vſed in the Church, but with all he doth inſinuate, and that not obſcurelie, that this ceremonie was taken, partlie from the heathniſh annointings which wreſtlers did vſe, & partlie out of the law of Moſes. But by what authoritie, or with what profitte, we maie take examples of the Heathen, how to worſhip God, and to adminiſter his Sacraments, that ſaying of Moſes, Deut 12 doth witnes, Take heede that thou do not imitate the heathen, and enquire after their ceremonies, ſaying, As theſe nations worſhipped their Gods, ſo will I doe likewiſe. Ye ſhall not doe ſo vnto the Lorde your God. And that ſaying of Chriſt, Mat. 15. In vaine doe they worſhip me, teaching for doctrine, the precepts of men. And it is not to be doubted, that the ceremonies of Moſes, whereof one parte is the vſe of externall anointing, doe pertaine to the rudiments of this world, to whoſe decrees Paull ſaid before that we are not tied: and whereof he ſaith in another place, Seeing th
                           ••
                         ye know God, yea, rather are knowne of God, how turne ye againe vnto impotent and beggerlie rudiments, whereunto, as from the beginning, ye will be in bondage againe? Furthermore, how can it truelie be affirmed, as Fabianus writeth, that the making or ceremonie of the outward anointing, ſhould be taught of the Apoſtles, ſeeing that the Acts of Councells doe witnes, that this Ceremonie was inſtituted of Sylueſter? And the Eccleſiaſticall hyſtorie doth ſh
                        •
                     we, that the Apoſtles had no purpoſe to make lawes concerning holie daies, but to teach men true godlines, and an vpright conuerſation: how muchleſſe did they purpoſe, to inſtitute externall annointings in the Church, and to bring in ſhadowes, where the ſunne doth ſhine moſt clearely.
                  There were added vnto Baptiſme certaine other ceremonies alſo, of ſalte, durte, apparell: but becauſe theſe

are not thought neceſſarie, no not of themſelues, amongeſt whome they are vſed, and are in ſome ſort an idle imitation of thoſe ceremonies, which Chriſt ſometime vſed in doing miracles, there is no cauſe why we ſhould take anie care for them, whileſt we are conuerſant in ſo manie neceſſarie thinges.
               
               
                  
                     Of confirmation. CHAP. 11.
                  WE doe not doubt, but that the Apoſtles in the beginning, when the Goſpell was reuealed, and confirmed in the daie of Pentecoſt, did by the laying one of hands, giue vnto the beleeuers in Chriſt that wounderfull gift of the holie Ghoſt, to wit, that they might ſpeake with tongues. But of a perſonall and temporall fact of the Apoſtles, a generall and temporall ſacrament can not be ordained in the Church, without the ſpeciall commaundement of God. And it is a horrible thing to be heard, that the Sacrament of confirmation (ſuch as the Biſhoppes Suffragans vſe to giue vnto Children) ſhould excell in dignitie the Sacrament of Baptiſme. For thus ſome of them are not In decret. epiſt. Mel
                           •
                        iadis. To. 1. in Act is Concil.aſhamed to write of the ſacrament of Confirmation: As one thing, ſaie they, is done of the greater, that is, of the chiefe Biſhoppes, which cannot be done of the leſſer: ſo is it to be worſhipped, and embraced with greater reuerence. For to the Apoſtles it was commaunded of God, that by the laying on of handes, they ſhould giue, to thoſe that beleeue in Chriſt, the giftes of the holie Ghoſt. Now we muſt not vnderſtand this properlie of thoſe priuat giftes of the holie Ghoſt, which are neceſſarie to euerie one vnto ſaluation (for thoſe the faithfull receiue by the preaching of the Goſpell, and by baptiſme) but we muſt vnderſtand it of the publique giftes of the holie Ghoſt, to wit, ſpeaking with diuers tounges, and other giftes, which then were neceſſarie for the publique confirmation of the Goſpell touching Chriſt. Therefore after that the authority of the Goſpell was ſufficientlie confirmed by ſuch miracles, as that wounderfull gift of tongues did ceaſe, ſo alſo the ceremone of laying on of handes, whereby that gift was giuen, did altogether, as touching this thing, ceaſe. Otherwiſe of a ſhadowe we muſt make a general Sacrament

of the Church, and thoſe that are ſicke, muſt be ſhadowed ouer, becauſe that manie were healed by the ſhadowe of Peter. In like ſort we muſt make a generall Sacrament of the laying one of napkines, becauſe that manie were healed of their diſeaſes, when Paulls napkins were layde vpon then: and we muſt 
                        •
                     e vpon the dead, becauſe that Paule by ſtret
                        •
                     ching himſelfe vpon a young man, did raiſe him vp from death. And yet the Paſtours of Churches muſt not haue libertie, to haue no regard to inſtruct children and youth i
                        •
                      that doctrine which is in deede Godlie, but they muſt be forced hereunto, to teach the Catechiſme verie diligently.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               
                  Of Baptiſme. CHAP. 17.
               AS touching Baptiſme we confeſſe, that which the Scripture doth in diuerſe places teach thereof, that Rom. 6. 1. Cor. 12. Gal. 3. Tit. 3. Act. 22. 1. Pet. 3.we by it are buried into the death of Chriſt, made one body, and doe put on Chriſt: that it is the fonte of regeneration▪ waſheth awaie ſinnes, and ſaueth vs. But all theſe thinges we do ſo vnderſtand, as Saint Peter hath interpreted them, where he ſaith, To the figure whereof, Baptiſme, that now is, 
                        ••
                     
                     ſwering, doth alſo ſaue vs, not by putting awaie of the filthe of the fleſh, but the profeſſion of a good conſcience toward God. For without faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God. And, we are ſaued by grace, and not by our workes. And ſeeing that Baptiſme is a Sacrament of that couenant, which God hath made with thoſe that be his, promiſing that he will be their god, & the god of their ſeede, and that he will be a reuenger of wronges, and take them for his people; to conclude, ſeeing it is a token of the renuing of the Spirit, which is wrought by Chriſt: therfore our Preachers do teach, that it is to be giuen to Infants alſo, as well as that in times paſt vnder Moſes they were circumciſed: For we are in deed the Children of Abraham, and therefore that promiſe, I will be thy God, and the 
                  Gal. 3.
                  God of thy ſeed, doth no leſſe perteine vnto vs, then it did to that auncient people.
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTENTH SECTION. OF THE HOLIE SVPPER OF the Lord.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of the holie Supper of the Lord. CHAP. 21.
               
                  THE Supper of the Lord (which is alſo called the Lords table, and the Euchariſt, that is, a thankſgiuing) is therefore commonlie called a ſupper, becauſe it was inſtituted of Chriſt in that his laſt ſupper, and doth as yet repreſent the ſame, and in it the faithfull are ſpirituallie fed and nouriſhed: For the author of the ſupper of the Lord, is not an Angell or man, but the verie ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who did firſt of all conſecrate it to his Church. And the ſame bleſſing & conſecration doth ſtil remaine amongſt all thoſe who celebrate no other ſupper, but onelie that, which the Lord did inſtitute, & at that do recite the words of the ſupper of the Lord, and in all things looke vnto Chriſt onelie by a true faith, at whoſe hands as it were they doe receiue that which they do receiue, by the miniſterie of the miniſters of the Church. The Lord by this ſacred rite would haue that great benefit to be kept in freſh remembrance, which he did for mankinde, to weet, that by giuing vp his bodie to death, and ſhedding his blood, he hath forgiuen vs all our ſinnes and redemed vs from eternall death and the power of the deuill, and doth now feede vs with his fleſh and giueth vs his blood to drink, which things being apprehended

hended ſpirituallie by a true faith, doe nouriſh vs vp to life euerlaſting. And this ſo great a benefit is renued, ſo oft as the ſupper is celebrated. For the Lord ſaid, Doe this in remembrance of me.
               
               By this holy Supper alſo it is ſealed vp vnto vs, that the very body of Chriſt was truelie giuen vp for vs, and his blood was ſhed for the remiſſion of our ſinnes, leſt that our faith might ſomewhat wauer. And this is outwardlie repreſented vnto vs, by the miniſter, in the ſacrament, after a viſible manner, and as it were laid before our eies to be ſeene, which is inwardlie in the fonte muiſiblie performed by the holie Ghoſt. Outwardlie bread is offered by the miniſter, and the wordes of the Lord are heard, Receiue, eate, this is my bodie, take it, and deuide it amongeſt you: drink ye all of this, this is my blood. Therefore the faithfull do receiue that which is giuen by the miniſter of the Lord, & do eat the bread of the Lord, & drinke of the Lordes cuppe. But yet by the working of Chriſt through the holy ghoſt, they receiue alſo the fleſh & blood of the Lord, and do feede on them to life euerlaſting. For the fleſh & blood of Chriſt is true meat & drink vnto euerlaſting life, yea Chriſt himſelfe, in that he was deliuered for vs, and is our ſauiour, is that ſpecial thing and ſubſtance of the ſupper, and therefore we ſuffer no thing to be put in his place.
               But that it maie the better and more plainlie be vnderſtood, how the fleſh and blood of Chriſt are the meat and drink of the faithfull, and are receiued by the faithfull to life euerlaſting, we will adde moreouer theſe four things. Eating is of diuerſe ſortes: for there is a corporall eating, whereby meat is taken into a mans mouth chewed with the teeth, and is ſwallowed downe into the bellie. After this manner did the Capernaits in times paſt think, that they ſhould eat the fleſh of the Lord, but they are confuted by him, Iohn. 6. For as the fleſh of Chriſt can not be eaten bodilie, without great wickednes & crueltie, ſo is it not meat for the belly, as all men do confeſſe. We therfore diſalow that Canon in the Popes decrees, Ego Berengarius, de conſecrat. Distinct. 2, For neither did godlie antiquitie beleeue, neither yet doe we beleeue, that the bodie of Chriſt can be eaten corporallie, and eſſentiallie, with a bodilie mouth.
               There is alſo a ſpirituall eating of Chriſts bodie, not ſuch

a one, whereby it maie be thought, that the verie meat is changed into the ſpirit, but wherby (the Lords body & blood remaining in their own eſſence and propriety) thoſe things are ſpiritually communicated vnto vs, not after a corporall, butafter a ſpiritual manner through the holy Ghoſt, who dothapply and beſtow vpon vs thoſe things (to wit, remiſſion of ſinnes, deliuerance, and life euerlaſting, which are prepared for vs by the fleſh and blood of our Lord, which were giuen for vs: ſo as Chriſt doth now liue in vs, and we liue in him, and doth cauſe vs to apprehend him by a true faith, to this end, that he maie become vnto vs ſuch a ſpirituall meat and drink, that is to ſaie, our life. For euen as corporal meat and drinke do not onelie refreſh and ſtrengthen our bodies, but alſo do keepe them in life, euen ſo the fleſh of Chriſt deliuered, & his blood ſhed for vs, do not only refreſh & ſtrengthen our ſoules, but alſo do preſerue them aliue, not becauſe *Looke the 1 obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.they be corporallie eaten & dronken, but for that they are communicated vnto vs ſpirituallie by the ſpirit of God, the Lord ſaying, The bread which I wil giue is my fleſh, which I wil giue for the life of this world: alſo, my fleſh (to wit, corporally eaten) profiteth nothing, it is the ſpirit which giueth life. And, the words which I ſpeake to you, are ſpirit and life. And as we muſt by eating receiue the meat into our bodies, to the end that it maie work in vs, and ſhew his force in our bodies, becauſe while it is without vs, it profiteth vs not at all; euen ſo it is neceſſarie, that we receiue Chriſt by faith, that he maie be made ours, and that he maie liue in vs, and we in him. For he ſaith, I am the bread of life, he that commeth to me, ſhall not hunger, and he that beleeueth in me, ſhall not thirſt anie more. And alſo, He that eateth me, ſhall liue through me, and he abideth in me, and I in him. By all which it appeareth manifeſtlie, that by ſpirituall meat we meane not, an Imaginarie, but the verie bodie of the Lord Ieſus, giuen to vs, which yet is receiued of the faithfull, not corporallie, but ſpiritually, by faith: in which point we do wholie follow the doctrine of our Lord and ſauiour Chriſt, In the 6. of Iohn. And this eating of the fleſh, & drinking of the blood of the Lord, is ſo neceſſary to ſaluation, that without it no man can be ſaued. This ſpiritual eating & drinking is alſo without the ſupper of the Lord, euen ſo often as, & wherſoeuer a man doth beleeue in Chriſt. To which

purpoſe that ſentence of S. Auſtin doth happilie belong▪ 
                  why doſt thou prepare thy teeth & belly? Beleeue, & thou haſt eaten.
               
               Beſides that former ſpirituall eating, there is a ſacramentall eating of the bodie of the Lord, whereby the faithfull man is partaker, not onelie ſpirituallie and internallie, of the true bodie and blood of the Lord, but alſo outwardlie, by comming to the table of the Lorde, doeth receiue the viſible ſacrament of the bodie and blood of the Lord True it is, that a faithfull man by beleeuing did before receiue the food that giueth life, and ſtil receiueth the ſame, but yet when he receiueth the ſacrament, he receiueth ſomething more. For he goeth on in continuall communication of the bodie and blood of the Lord, and his faith is dailie more and more kindled, more ſtrengthened, and refreſhed, by the ſpirituall nouriſhment. For while we liue, faith hath continuall encreaſings: and he that outwardlie doth receiue the ſacraments with a true faith, the ſame doth receiue not the ſigne onely, but alſo doth enioy (as we haue ſaid) the thing it ſelfe. Moreouer, the ſame man doeth obey the Lordes inſtitution and commaundement, and with a ioyfull minde giueth thankes for his and the redemption of all mankinde, and maketh a faithfull remembrance of the Lordes death, and doth witnes the ſame before the Church, of which bodie he is a member. This alſo is ſealed vp to thoſe which receiue the ſacraments, that the body of the Lord was giuen & his blood ſhed, not onelie for men in generall, but particularlie for euerie faithfull communicant, whoſe meat and drink he is to life euerlaſting. But as for him that without faith commeth to this holy table of the Lord, he is made partaker of the ſacrament only, but the matter of the ſacrament, from whence commeth life & ſaluation, he receiueth not at all: And ſuch men doe vnworthilie eat of the Lords table. Now they which do vnworthelie eat of the Lords bread and drink of the Lordes cuppe, they are giltie of the bodie and blood of the Lord, and they eat and drink it to their Iudgement. For when as they do not approch with true faith, they reproach & deſpite the death of Chriſt, and therefore eat and drink condemnation, to themſelues.
               We doe not then ſo ioyne the bodie of the Lorde and his bloode with the bread and wine, as though we thought, that the bread is the body of Chriſt, more then after a ſacramentall

manner, or that the bodie of Chriſt doth lie hid corporallie vnder the bread, ſo as it ought to be worſhipped vnder the formes of bread, or yet that he which receiueth the ſigne, receiueth the thing it ſelfe. The bodie of Chriſt is in the heauens, at the right hande of his Father. And therefore our hearts are to be lifted vp on high, & not to be fixed on the bread, neither is the Lorde to be worſhipped in the bread, though notwithſtanding the Lord is not abſent from his Church, when as they celebrate the Supper. The Sonne being abſent from vs in the heauens, is yet not withſtanding preſent amongſt vs effectuallie. How much more Chriſt the ſonne of righteouſnes, though in bodie he be abſent from vs in the heauens, yet is preſent amongſt vs, not corporallie, but ſpirituallie, by his liuelie operation, and ſo, he himſelfe hath promiſed in his laſt ſupper to be preſent amongſt vs. Iohn. 14. 15. & 16. Wherupon it followeth, that we haue not the Supper without Chriſt, and yet haue an vnbloodie and myſticall Supper, euen as all antiquitie called it.
               Moreouer we are admoniſhed, in the celebration of the ſupper of the Lord, to be mindeful of the body wherof we are made members, and that therfore we be at concord with all ourbrethren, that we may liue holily, & not pollute our ſelues with wickednes, and ſtraunge religions, but perſeuering in the true faith to the ende of our life, giue diligence to excell in holines of life. It is therefore verie requiſite, that purpoſing to come to the ſupper of the Lord, we do trie our ſelues, according to the commaundement of the Apoſtle, firſt with what faith we are indued, whether we beleeue that Chriſt is come to ſaue ſinners, and to call them to repentance, and whether each man beleeue that he is in the number of them, that being deliuered by Chriſt, are ſaued, and whether he haue purpoſed to chaunge his wicked life, to liue holilie, and perſeuére through Gods aſſiſtance in true religion, and in concord with his brethren, and to giue worthie thankes to God for his deliuerie, &c.
               We think that rite, manner, or forme of the Supper to be the moſte ſimple and excellent, which commeth neareſt to the firſt inſtitution of the Lorde, and to the Apoſtles doctrine. VVhich doth conſiſt, in declaring the worde of God, in godlie prayers, the action it ſelfe that the Lorde vſed, and

the repeating of it, the eating of the Lordes body and drinking of his blood, the wholſome remembrance of the Lords death, and faithfull giuing of thanks, and in an holie fellowſhip in the vnion of the bodie of the Church. We therefore diſalow them, which haue taken from the faithfull one part of the ſacrament, to wit, the Lordes cuppe. For theſe doe verie grieuouſlie offend againſt the inſtitution of the Lorde, who ſaith, drinke you all of this, which he did not ſo plainlie ſaie of the bread. VVhat manner of Maſſe it was, that the Fathers vſed, whether it were tollerable, or intollerable, we doe not now diſpute. But this we ſaie freelie, that the Maſſe (which is now vſed throughout the Romiſh Church) for manie and moſte iuſt cauſes, is quite aboliſhed out of our Churches, which particularlie we will not now recite for breuities ſake. Truelie we could not like of it, becauſe that of a moſte wholſome action, they haue made a vaine ſpectacle, alſo becauſe it is made a meritorious matter, and is ſaid for monie: likewiſe becauſe that in it the Prieſt is ſaide to make the verie bodie of the Lorde, and to offer the ſame reallie, euen for the remiſſion of the ſinnes, of the quicke and the dead. Adde this alſo, that they doe it for the honor, worſhip, and reuerence of the ſainctes in heauen, &c.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  
                     
                        Art. 22. Of the Lords Supper.
                  WE ſaie that the ſupper is a myſtical thing, wherein the Lord doth in deede offer, vnto thoſe that are his, his body, & blood, that is, himſelfe, to this end, that he may more & more liue in them, and they in him: not that the bodie & blood of the Lord are either naturallie vnited to bread and wine, or be locallie here incloſed, or be placed here by anie carnall preſence, but that bread and wine, by the inſtitution of the Lord, are ſignes, whereby the true communication of his bodie and blood is exhibited of the Lord himſelfe, by the miniſterie of the Church, not to be meate for the bellie, which doth periſh, but to be nouriſhmet vnto eternal life. We doe therefore vſe this holie meat oftentimes, becauſe that beeing admoniſhed hereby, we doe with the eies of faith beholde the death and bloode of Chriſt crucified, and meditating

vpon our ſaluation, not without a taſte of heauenlie life, and a true ſenſe of life eternall, we are refreſhed, with this ſpirituall, liuelie, & inward foode, with an vnſpeakeable ſweetnes: and we doe reioyce with a ioye that cannot be expreſſed in wordes, for that life which we haue found, and 
                        •
                     e doe whollie, and with al our ſtrength, powre out thankeſgiuing for ſo wonderfull a benefit of Chriſt beſtowed vpon vs. Therfore we are moſt vnworthelie charged of ſome, who think that we do attribute very l
                        ••
                     le to theſe holy ſignes. For theſe thinges looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſ.be holie, and to be reuerenced, as thoſe which were inſtituted & receiued, of our high Prieſt Chriſt, exhibiting vnto vs, after their manner, as we haue ſaid, the things ſignified, giuing witnes of the things done, repreſenting verie difficult things vnto vs, and by a certaine wonderfull Analogie of thinges ſignified, bringing light to thoſe moſte euident myſteries. Moreouer, they miniſter aide & helpe euen to faith it ſelfe: and, to conclude, they doe ſerue in ſtead of an othe, to binde him that is entered into the profeſſion of Chriſtianitie. Thus holilie doe we thinke of the ſacred ſignes. But we doe alwaies attribute the force and vertue of quickning and ſanctifying to him, whoe is life it ſelfe, to whome be praiſe for euer.
                  Amen.
               
               
                  Out of the declaration of the ſame confeſſion. Of the holie Supper of the Lord.
                  THe Supper of the Lord is a Sacrament, to wit, the holie inſtitution of the Lorde, whereby he doth renue and witnes vnto vs his bountifullnes, to wit, the communion of his bodie and bloode, and that by a viſible ſigne. For by bread and wine he doth declare vnto vs what he giueth, namelie himſelfe, to be the nouriſhment of our life: for he by his bodie and bloode doth feede vs to life eternall. Therefore the verie gift of God (that is, the bodie and bloode of the Lord, to wit, the bodie of the Lord deliuered vnto death for vs, and his blood ſhed for the remiſſion of ſinnes) is the chiefeſt parte of this Sacrament. For the bodie and bloode of Chriſt is thus made or prepared to be the liuelie meate of our ſoules. The Sonne of god doth die in the fleſh for vs, that he might quicken vs, he poureth out his bloode, that he might clenſe vs from our ſinnes. To conclude, he raiſeth vp

his bodie from the dead, that our bodies maie receiue hope, and ſtrength to riſe againe. Thus therfore doth the Lorde offer himſelfe to be eaten and poſſeſſed of vs, and not a certaine falſe imagination of a man, or an idle picture, in his ſteade. For, beſide him there is nothing in heauen, or in earth, that maie feede and ſatiate our ſoules. Now we do indeed eat the bodie, and we do indeed drink the blood of our Lorde, but not ſo rawlie, as the Papiſtes haue hitherto taught, to wit, the breade being chaunged into naturall fleſh, ſubſtantiallie (that is, corporallie, or carnallie) or the bodie being included in the bread, but ſpirituallie, that is after a ſpirituall manner, and with a faithfull minde. The Lorde is eaten indeed, and with fruite, by faith, that now he maie liue wholie in his, and his in him.
                  Moreouer, theſe holie gifes of God (which are not giuen of anie other, then of the Lorde himſelfe) according to the inſtitution of the Lord, are repreſented vnto vs by viſible ſignes, to wit, breade and wine, and offered to our ſenſes, not that we ſhould reſt in them, but that our weakenes maie be helped, and we maie lift vp our heartes vnto the Lorde, knowing that here we muſt thinke vpon greater thinges, to wit, not of eating bread, or drinking wine, but of receiuing the Lord himſelfe, with all his giftes, by a faithfull minde. Therefore when the gueſtes ſee the bread on the borde, they ſet their 
                        〈◊〉
                      vpon the bodie of Chriſt, when they ſee the cuppe, they ſet their mindes vpon the bloode of Chriſt: when they ſee the breade broken, and the wine poured out, they conſider how that the bodie of Chriſt was tormented, and his bloode poured out for their ſakes: as by breade the bodies are nouriſhed and ſtrengthened, as by wine the mindes are made merie; ſo the godlie doe beleeue, that by the bodie of the Lorde, deliuered vnto death for them, they are fed to euerlaſting life alſo, that by his blood poured out vpon the croſſe, their conſciences are renewed: to conclude, they do feel the quickning power of Chriſt, which doth confirme them. In this ſorte is the ſupper of the Lord, accompliſhed ſpirituallie, thus are the bread and wine a ſacrament vnto vs, and not bare and naked ſignes. Hereupon now ariſeth a verie great reioycing, and thankeſgiuing, for ſo great benefits, alſo apraiſing, and confeſſing of the name

of God: here thoſe workes, which the Lorde once finiſhed, are renued, and repreſented: but eſpeciallie the death of the Lorde is repeated, which although it once hapned, and now is paſt, yet vnto the faithfull it is as yet freſh and preſent. For the remembrance of the death of Chriſt, which we make in the Supper, is farre more noble and holie, then theirs, whoe in ſome prophane banquet are mindfull of their companion, when they drinke the wine that he gaue them. For among theſe, he that is abſent worketh nothing: but in this holie ſupper of the faithfull the Lorde is preſent, and doth worke effectuallie by the ſpirit in the heartes of them, as he, whoe, according to his promiſes, is in the middeſt of them.
                  By theſe things it is moſt euident, that in the holie ſupper we doe not take awaie our Lorde Chriſt from his Church, nor denie that his bodie and bloode is there receiued to be our nouriſhment vnto life eternal: but we together with our predeceſſours, and the chiefe Prelates of our Religion, did, and as yet to this daie, doe denie, that the verie bodie of Chriſt is eaten carnallie, or that it is preſent euerie where corporallie, and after a naturall manner. For we doe openlie confes, according to the Scriptures, and with al the holy Fathers, that Ieſus Chriſt our Lord left this world, & went to his Father: and that he now ſitteth at the right hande of his Father in heauenlie glorie, from whence he ſhall neuer deſcend, or be drawne downe into this earthlie and tranſitorie world. For the true preſence of Chriſt in the ſupper, is heauenlie, not earthlie, or carnall. Alſo we denie that the bread is turned into the bodie of Chriſt miraculouſly, ſo that the bread ſhould become the verybody of Chriſt naturallie, and ſubſtantially, yet after a ſpiritual manner. To conclude, we denie that the bodie of Chriſt is vnited with the ſignes, by anie other then a myſticall meane, whereof we haue ſpoken ſufficientlie in the generall conſideration of a ſacrament. Seeing therefore we haue expreſſelie ſaide and written with the holie Fathers, Tertullian, Hierome, Ambroſe, and Auguſtine, that the bread is a figure, token, and ſigne of the bodie of Chriſt; and alſo, that by bread and wine the bodie and blood of the Lord are ſignified, This is it which we would make manifeſt, to wit, that the bread is not the verie bodie of the Lord, but a token, or a ſacrament of his bodie. And yet we

doe not therefore ſpeake theſe thinges, as though we did ſimplie denie all kinde of the preſence of Chriſt in the ſupper: for that kinde of preſence which now we haue confeſſed, doth remaine true, without anie preiudice to theſe kinde of ſpeaches. Morouer, the word This, in this ſentence This is my bodie, doth not onelie ſhew bread vnto our corp
                        •
                     
                     rall eies, but therewith alſo it ſheweth the verie bodie 
                        〈◊〉
                      Chriſt vnto the eies of our minde.
                  Alſo we confeſſe, that this vſe of the ſupper is ſo holy, a
                        ••
                      profitable, that whoſoeuer ſhall worthelie, that is, with 
                        •
                      true faith, eate of this bread, and drinke of this cuppe of th
                        •
                      Lorde, he doth receiue heauenlie giftes from the Lord: 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Whoſoeuer ſhall eate of this breade, and drinke of this cuppe, 
                           ••
                        
                        worthelie, that is, without faith, (by which alone we are made partakers of the Lord, and of ſaluation) He doth 
                           〈◊〉
                         and drinke iudgement vnto himſelfe, as Paull wrote to the Corinthians. Wherefore we doe often put this diligentlie i
                        •
                     
                     to the heades of our people, that they take heede, that none of them abuſe the Lordes table, but that euerie one examine himſelfe, and then eate of that breade, and drinke of th
                           ••
                         cuppe. Alſo, the Lords Supper is a badge vnto vs; for as one lofe, and one wine, are made of manie graines and grapes, ſo we, being the wholl multitude of the faithfull, are gathered together to be one bread, and one bodie. By this we teſtifie in an outward profeſſion, that we are redeemed by the bloode of Chriſt, and made the members of Chriſt, to whome we giue thankes, in whome we are confederates, and doe promiſe to performe mutuall dueties one toward another.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASILL.
               Of the Supper of the Lorde.
               WE confeſſe that the Lord Ieſus did inſtitute his 
                     Art. 6.holie Supper, that his holie paſſion might be remembred with thankeſgiuing, his death declared, and Chriſtian charitie and vnitie, with true faith teſtified. And as i
                     •
                   Baptiſme (wherin the waſhing away of our ſins is offered by the Miniſter of the Church, and yet is wrought onelie by the Father, the Sonne, and the holie Ghoſt,) true water remaineth; ſo alſo in the Supper of the Lord (wherein together

with the breade and wine of the Lord, the true bodie and the true blood of Chriſt is offered by the Miniſter of the Church) breade and wine remaineth. Moreouer, we doe firmelie beleeue, that Chriſt himſelfe is the meate of faithfull ſoules vnto life eternall, and that our ſoules by faith in Chriſt crucified, are fedde and moiſtned with the fleſh and Iohn. 11. Eph. 1. 4. & 5. Col. 1.bloode of Chriſt; ſo that we, being members of his bodie, as of our onelie head, doe liue in him, and he in vs, wherein at the laſt daie, through him, and in him, we ſhall riſe againe to eternall ioye and bleſſednes.
               And in the marginall note, vpon theſe wordes, Our ſoules.
               For it is a ſpirituall meate, and therefore it is receiued of a faithfull ſoule, that is, the ſoules are made full, ſtrong, mightie, peaceable, quiet, merie, and liuelie to all thinges, as the bodie is by the corporall meate. Alſo vpon thoſe wordes. The members of the heade. And ſo man is made a ſpirituall member of the bodie of Chriſt. And in the margent vpon theſe wordes, To be preſent: to wit, Sacramentallie, and by a rememberance of faith, which lifteth vp a mans minde to heauen, and doth not pull downe Chriſt, according to his humanitie, from the right hande of God.
               Now we doe not include into the bread and drinke of the Lord, the natural, true, and ſubſtantial body of Chriſt, which was borne of the pure Virgine Mary, ſuffered for vs, & aſcended into heauen. Therefore we doe neither worſhip Chriſt Col. 3. Heb. 1. & 10.in the ſignes of bread and wine, which we doe commonlie call the Sacraments of the bodie and bloode of Chriſt: but Act. 3. 2. Tim 4.in heauen, at the right hand of god the Father, from whence he ſhall come to iudge the quicke and the deade.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFSSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  Of the holie Supper of the Lord. CHAP. 13.
               IN the thirteenth place we teach, touching the Supper of the Lord inſtituted in the new Teſtament, that we muſt beleeue with the heart, and profeſſe with the mouth, that it is a Sacrament inſtituted of Chriſt our Lord, in his laſt Supper, and that in expreſſe forme of wordes; that is,

that concerning breade and wine, he hath pronounced, tha
                     •
                   
                  Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.they be his bodie, and his bloode, and that they were deliuered to his Apoſtles, and ſo in like ſort to the whol vniuerſall Church, for a monument of his death, and that all men ſhould lawfullie vſe the participation thereof, euen to the ende of the worlde. Of this Sacrament the Euangeliſts doe write, and eſpeciallie Saint Paull, whoſe wordes euen t
                     •
                   this daie are thus read in the Church: I haue receiued of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  1. Cor. 11.
                  Lord, that which I alſo haue deliuered vnto you, to wit, that the 
                        〈◊〉
                      Ieſus, in that night, wherein he was betraied, tooke bread, &c. A
                     ••
                   a little after, When ye come together (to wit, to the Supper 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Lord) Let one tarie for an other. Therefore according 
                     〈◊〉
                   theſe thinges, wee beleeue with the heart, and confe
                     •
                  e with the mouth, that this breade of the Lords Supper is the bodie of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, deliuered for vs: and th
                     ••
                   this Cuppe, or the wine in the Cuppe, is likewiſe ſhed for vs for the remiſſion of ſinnes. And this we affirme according to the expreſſe wordes of Chriſt, wherein he ſaith, This is my bodie, This is my blood. Which words may not be taken or vnderſtood of any other thing, nor be otherwiſe referred, then onelie to the bread, and cuppe of the Lord: and the bodie & bloode of the Lord can not be vnderſtood of any other, then of the onelie true and proper bodie of Chriſt (which he made meate by his torments) and of his bloode, which beeing largelie poured out of his bodie, he appointed to be drinke for his Church: for he had not a naturall bodie, and another bloode. Therefore our Miniſters doe teach, that to theſe certaine wordes pronounced by Chriſt our Lorde, (wherein he doth peculiarlie pronounce, witnes, and inſtitute bread to be his bodie, and wine to be his bloode) I ſay, to theſe wordes no man maie adde any thing, no man may detract any thing from them: but euerie man in theſe words is to beleeue Looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſ.that, which of them ſelues they ſignifie, an
                     •
                   that no man ought to turne from them, either to the right hand, or to the left.
               Yet to expound the meaning of this faith, we doe further teach, that although the bread be the bodie of Chriſt, according to his inſtitution, and wine be his bloode, yet neither of theſe doe leaue it nature, or chaunge or loſe it ſubſtance, but that the bread is, and doth remaine breade, and

that the wine is, and doth remaine wine, as alſo the holie August. I
                        •
                      Ioan. Tract. 80. & Epiſt. 23. ad Bonifa.Scripture doth giue this it owne name to either of them. Otherwiſe, if it ſhould ceaſe to be an element, it ſhould not be a Sacrament, ſeeing that a Sacrament is then made, when the worde is added to the element. Neither could it ſignifie, or beare witnes, if it had nothing in ſteade of that thing, whereof it is a Sacrament, or if the thing ſignified ſhould haue any other manner of preſence, then that which is Sacramentall. Wherefore this ſpeach, Bread is the bodie, and, wine is the bloode of Chriſt, is a Sacramentall ſpeach, to wit, that theſe two diſtinct thinges, doe remaine the ſelfe ſame thing, which in their owne nature they be, and yet by reaſon of a Sacramentall vnion, or Sacramentallie, they be that alſo, which they doe ſignifie, and whereof they doe teſtifie, & yet not in their owne nature, or after a naturall manner, but by the inſtitution, pronouncing, or witneſſing of the author, as Paull doth excellentlie expound this, where he thus writeth, The cuppe which we bleſſe, is it not the communion of the 
                  1 Cor. 10.
                  bloode of Chriſt? the bread which we breake, is it not the communion of the bodie of Chriſt?
               
               Now, both the good, and the wicked doe vſe this Sacrament, and yet the true beleeuers doe receiue it to life, and thoſe which doe not beleeue, doe receiue it to iudgement and condemnation. And although either of them doe receiue this Sacrament, and Looke the 2. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.the trueth thereof Sacramentallie and outwardlie, yet the beleeuers doe receiue it ſpirituallie, and ſo to their ſaluation: without which ſpirituall receiuing, there is no worthie receiuing in the Sacramentall vſe. For by this meane we are ingrafted into Chriſt, and into his bodie, and by this meane is that true vnion, and communion of Chriſt with his Church, made▪ and in like ſorte by this meane is the communion of the holy Church, which is a certaine ſpirituall bodie, made amongſt and with them ſelues, whereof the Apoſtle writeth, There is one bread, and we beeing many are one bodie, ſeeing we are all made partakers of one bread. 
                  1. Cor. 10▪
                  
               
               Moreouer, we are further taught, that with this miniſterie, or Sacrament of the Lord, no other thing ought to be done, or taken in hand, then that one thing, which was ſhewed, ordeined, and expreſſelie commaunded of Chriſt himſelfe,

as when he reached bread, ſeuerallie, and peculiarlie to his Diſciples, and in expreſſe wordes, ſaide, Take, eat, th
                        •
                      is my bodie: and in like ſort, when he reached to them the 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſeuerallie, and peculiarlie, ſaying, Drinke ye all of this, Th
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      my bloode: Thus therefore, according to this commaundement, the bodie and bloode of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt muſt be diſtributed onelie, and be receiued in common of the faithfull, or beleeuing Chriſtians: but it muſt not be ſacrificed, 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſet before them, or lifted vp, or ſhewed forth, to this end, th
                     •
                   there it may be worſhipped, or kept, or caried about. A
                     ••
                   both theſe muſt be receiued in ſeuerall elements, the bodie peculiarlie and ſeuerallie, and alſo his holie bloode ſeuerallie, as either of them were of the Lord inſtituted, reache
                     •
                   forth, and giuen in common to all his Diſciples, ſeuerallie. And this doctrine was vſed in the firſt holie Church, an
                     •
                   this Sacrament was whollie diſtributed in both partes, and ſo receiued. But he that beſide, or contrarie to theſe commaundements, and inſtitution of Chriſt, dare bring in any other thing, or ſomewhat more, and vſe it with this Sacrament, or wantonelie inuent therein at his pleaſure, he doth manifeſtly, and malapertly againſt our Lord, who inſtituted this Sacrament, and committeth a thing cleane contrarie to his holie Teſtament, and laſt will, which was declared in his owne wordes, and that expreſſelie.
               Alſo this Sacrament ought to be receiued and adminiſtred, without adoration, and without that worſhip which is due to God alone: yet with a due kinde of religion, and reuerence, and chieflie with that, which is the chiefeſt of all, namelie with faith and examination of himſelfe, which in this action is moſte acceptable to Chriſt our Lorde, and moſte profitable for men, which alſo Saint Paull taught the 1. Cor. 11.firſt Church, and exhorted it hereunto, ſaying, Let euerie man trie or examine himſelfe, and ſo let him eateof that breade, and drinke of that cuppe. For he that eateth, and drinketh vnworthelie, doth eate and drinke his owne iudgement, or condemnation, becauſe he diſ
                        •
                     erneth not the Lordes bodie. And in another place, 
                     
                        •
                     . Co
                        •
                     . 13.
                  Prooue your ſelues, whether ye are in the faith: examine your ſelues: know ye not your owne ſelues, how that Ieſus Chriſt is in you, except ye be reprobates? Now I praie vnto God, that ye doe no euill. If ſo be that anie man approch to this table, without ſuch a tryall,

and not making himſelfe worthie, who hath not firſt examined himſelfe, what manner of faith he hath, with what purpoſe he came to this ſacrament, or how he had prepared himſelfe hereunto: I ſaie, ſuch a man ſhould greatlie prophane and reproch this ſacrament, yea the wholl inſtitution hereof appointed by Chriſt. For which cauſe the Miniſters of our Churches doe admitte none to this Sacrament, neither giue it vnto anie, but to ſuch as are noted to come vnto it ſeriouſlie, and doe, ſo much as in them lyeth, prepare them-ſelues hereunto after ſuch a manner, as becommeth Chriſtian godlines.
               Now when the congregation doth come together to celebrate the vſe of the Lordes Supper, and be partakers therof, then according to the example of the primitiue Church, our miniſters doe teach in their holie Sermons concerning Chriſt, and concerning the grace, which through him, and in him is giuen to ſinners, and eſpeciallie concerning his death, the ſhedding of his blood, and the redemption and ſaluation purchaſed thereby. After that the wholl Church doth ioyne together in faithfull prayers vnto God, to obtaine this, that they may indeed vſe this Sacrament worthelie. Loo kethe 3. obſeur.Moreouer, in the next place abſolution from ſinnes is lawfullie adminiſtred, the wordes of the inſtitution are rehearſed, and the people by exhortation is ſtirred vp, to a reuerent conſideration of this myſterie, and to a cheerefull and ſerious contemplation of the benefits of God, the ſacrament is reuerentlie with al godlines diſtributed▪ and the people of the faithfull, Looke the 4. obſeruat.moſt commonlie falling downe on their knees, doe receiue this ſacrament with thankſgiuing, with gladnes, with ſinging of hymnes, or holie ſonges, and they ſhew forth the death of the Lord, and admoniſh themſelues of all his benefits, to the confirmation of their faith, in a true communion with Chriſt, and his bodie. And all this we do, according to the meaning of thoſe things, which are commaunded in the holie Scripture, eſpeciallie according to the ſaying of Chriſt, Do this in remembrance of me: and Paul Luc 2
                        •
                     . 1. Cor. 11.ſaith, So often as ye ſhall eat of this bread, and drinke of this cup, ye ſhall ſhew forth the death of the Lord, till he come.
               
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               
                  
                     Art. 36. WE affirme that the holie Supper of the Lorde, to wit, the other Sacrament, is a witnes to vs of 
                     〈◊〉
                   vniting with our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, becauſe that he is not onelie once deade, and raiſed vp againe from the deade for vs, but alſo he doth in deede feede vs, and nouriſh 
                     〈◊〉
                   with his fleſh and bloode, that we beeing made one wi
                     ••
                   him, maie haue our life common with him. For although▪ he be now in heauen, and ſhall remaine there, till 
                     〈◊〉
                   come to iudge the worlde; yet we beleeue, that by the ſecret and incomprehenſible vertue of his Spirit, he do
                     ••
                   nouriſh, looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.and quicken vs with the ſubſtance of his bodie and blood being apprehended by faith. But we ſaie, that this is done ſpirituallie, not that we maie counterfeit an imagination or thought in ſteade of the efficacie and truth, but rather, becauſe this myſterie of our vnion with Chriſt is ſo high a thing, that it ſurmounteth all our ſenſes, yea and the wholl order of nature: to conclude, becauſe that it being diuine and heauenlie, cannot be perceiued nor apprehended, but by faith.
               
                  
                     Art. 37. We beleeue, as was ſaide before, that as well in the Supper, as in Baptiſme, God doth in deed, that is, truelie and effectuallie giue, whatſoeuer he doth there ſacramentallie repreſent: and therefore with the ſignes we ioyne the true profeſſion and fruition of that thing, which is there offered vnto vs: Therefore we affirme, that they which do bring pure faith, as it were a certaine veſſell, vnto the holie ſupper of the Lord, doe indeed receiue that, which there the ſignes doe witnes, namelie, that the bodie and blood of Ieſus Chriſt, are no leſſe the meate and drinke of the ſoule, then bread and wine are the meate of the bodie. Alſo out of the 38. Art. a litle after the beginning. And alſo that that bread and wine, which is giuen vs in the ſupper, is indeed made vnto vs ſpirituall nouriſhment, in as much as they doe offer vnto our eies to beholde, that the fleſh of Chriſt is o
                     ••
                   meat, and that his bloode is our drinke. Therefore we reiect all thoſe fantaſticall heades, which doe refuſe theſe ſignes and tokens, ſeeing that Chriſt our Lorde hath ſaide, This is my bodie: and, This cuppe is my blood.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     Art. 12. OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               WE ſaie, that Euchariſtia, that is to ſaie, the Supper of the Lord, is a Sacrament, that is, an euident Repreſentation of the bodie, and blood of Chriſt, wherein is ſet, as it were, before our eies, the death of Chriſt, and his Reſurrection, and whatſoeuer he did, whileſt he was in his Mortall Bodie: to the ende we maie giue him thankes for his death, and for our deliuerance: and that by the often receiuing of this Sacrament, we maie dailie renew the remembrance thereof, to the intent, we being fedde with the bodie, and blood of Chriſt, maie be brought into the hope of the Reſurrection, and of euerlaſting life, and maie moſte aſſuredlie beleeue, that, as our bodies be fedde with bread, and wine, ſo our ſoules be fedde with the bodie, and blood of Chriſt. To this Banquet we thinke the people of God ought Chryſoſt. ad Eph. 
                        ••
                     rm. 
                        •
                     . cap. 
                        •
                     .to be earneſtlie bidden, that they maie all communicate among themſelues, and openlie declare, and teſtifie both the godlie ſocietie, which is among them, and alſo the hope which they haue in Chriſt Ieſu. For this cauſe, if there had De conſecr. Diſt▪ 
                     1. cap. omnes.beene anie, which would be but a looker on, and abſtaine from the holie Communion, him did the olde Fathers, and Biſhops of Rome in the primitiue Church, before priuate Maſſe came vp, excommunicate, as a wicked perſon, and as a Pagane. Neither was there anie 
                     〈◊〉
                   at that time which did communicate alone, whiles other looked on. For Diſtinct. 
                        •
                     . cap. ſecul
                        •
                     
                     res.ſo did Calixtus in times paſt decree, That after the conſecration was finiſhed, all ſhould communicate, except 
                        〈◊〉
                      had rather ſtande without the Church doores. For th
                        ••
                     
                   (ſaith 
                     •
                  e) did the Apoſtles 
                  De conſecr. Diſt. 2. cap. Peract.
                  appoint, and the ſame the holie Church of Rome k
                        •
                     ep
                        ••
                     h ſtill. Moreouer, when the people 
                     〈◊〉
                   to 
                     •
                  he holie Communion, the Sacrament ought to be giuen them in both kindes: for ſo both Chriſt hath commaunded, and the Apoſtles in euerie place haue ordeined, and all the auncient Fathers and Catholique Byſhops haue followed the ſame. And who ſo doth contrarie to this, he (as Gelaſius ſaith) committeth Sacrilege. 
                  De conſ. di
                        ••
                     . 
                        •
                     . cap. 
                        〈…〉
                     .And therefore we ſaie, that our aduerſaries at this daie, who hauing violentlie thruſt out, and quite forbidden the holie Communion, doe without the worde of God, without the authoritie of anie auncient Councell, without anie Catholique

Father, without any example of the primitiue Church, yea and without reaſon alſo, defend, and maintaine their priuate Maſſes, and the mangling of the Sacraments, and doe this, not onelie againſt the plaine expreſſe commaundement of Chriſt, but alſo againſt all antiquitie, doe wickedlie therein, and are verie Churchrobbers.
               We affirme, that the bread, and wine are the holie, and heauenlie myſteries of the bodie, and blood of Chriſt, and that by them Chriſt himſelfe, being the true bread of eternall life, is ſo preſentlie giuen vnto vs, as that by Faith we verilie receiue his bodie, and blood. Yet ſaie we not this ſo, as though we thought, that the nature, and ſubſtance of the bread and wine, is clearelie chaunged, and goeth to nothing, as manie haue dreamed in theſe latter times, and yet could neuer agree among themſelues vpon their owne dreames. For that was not Chriſtes meaning, that the wheaten bread ſhoulde laie aparte his owne nature, and receiue a certaine new diuinitie: but that he might rather chaunge vs, and (to vſe Theophilactes wordes) might transforme vs into his bodie. For In Ioa. ca. 6.
                  what can be ſaide more plainelie, then that, which Ambr
                        •••
                     
                   
                  De ſacra. lib. 4. cap. 4.
                  ſaith, Bread and wine remaine ſtill the ſame, they were before: and yet are chaunged into another thing: Or rhat which Gela
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                     
                   ſaith, The ſubſtance of the bread, or the nature of the wine ceaſeth 
                  
                     In Dialogi
                           •
                        
                      1. & 2.
                  not to be: Or that which Theodor
                        •
                     tus ſaith, After the conſecration, the myſticall ſignes doe no
                        •
                      caſt of their owne proper nature: for they remaine ſtill in their former ſubſtance, fourme, or kinde: Or that which Auguſtine ſaith, That which ye ſee, is the Bread, and 
                  In ſerm. ad Infantes. Deconſ. diſt. 2. cap. Qui man
                        ••
                     caſti. In Mat. 15.
                  
                  Cuppe, and ſo our eies doe tell vs: but that which your Faith requireth to be taught, is this: The bread is the bodie of Chriſt, and the cuppe is his blood: Or that which Origen ſaith, The bread, which is ſanctified by the word of God, as touching the materiall ſubſtance thereof, goeth into the bellie, & is caſt out into the priuie: Or that which Christ himſelfe ſaid, not onlie after the bleſſing Luc. 22.of the cup, but alſo after he had miniſtred the communion: I will drink no more of this fruit of the Vine. It is wel known, that the fruit of the vine is wine, & not blood. And in ſpeaking thus, we meane not to abaſe the Lordes Supper, or to teach, that it is but a colde ceremonie onlie, and nothing to be wrought therein: (as manie falſely ſlaunder vs, we teach) For we affirme, that Chriſt doth truelie, and preſentlie giue

himſelfe wholly in his ſacraments: In Baptiſme, that we maie put him on: and in his Supper, that wee maie eate him by Faith, and Spirit, and maie haue euerlaſting life by his Croſſe and blood. And we ſaie not, this is done ſleightlie, or coldelie, but effectuallie, and trulie For although we doe not touch the bodie of Chriſt with teeth and mouth, yet wee holde him faſt, and eate him by faith, by vnderſtanding, and by Spirit. And it is no vaine faith, that comprehendeth Chriſt: neither is it receiued with colde deuotion, that is receiued with vnderſtanding, Faith, and the Spirit. For Chriſt himſelfe altogether is ſo offered, and giuen vs in theſe myſteries, that we maie certainelie know we be fleſh of his fleſh, and bone of his bones: and that Chriſte continueth in vs, and wee in him.
               
               And therefore in celebrating theſe myſteries, the People are to good purpoſe exhorted, before they come to receiue the holie communion, to lift vp their hearts, and to direct their 
                  De 
                        ••
                     nſ. di
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ 
                     1. cap. 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     o.
                  mindes to heauen warde: becauſe he is there, by whome wee muſt be fedde, and liue. Cyrillus ſaith, when we come to receiue theſe myſteries, all groſſe Imaginations muſt quite be baniſhed. The Councell of Nice, as it is alledged by ſome in Greeke, plainelie forbiddeth vs to be baſelie affectioned, or bent toward the bread and wine, which are ſet before vs. And, as Chryſoſtome verie aptelie writeth, we ſaie, That the bodie of Chriſt is the dead carkaſſe, and we our ſelues muſt be the Egles: meaning thereby, that we muſt flie on high, if we will come to the body of Chriſt. For this Table, as Chryſoſtome ſaith, is a table of Egles, and not of Iaies. Cyprian alſo: This bread, ſaith he, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Dom
                        •
                     ni.
                  is the foode of the ſoule, and not the meate of the b
                        •
                     llie. And Saint Auguſtine ſaith; How ſhall I hol ie him, being abſent? How ſhall I reach my hande vp to heauen, to laie hol
                        ••
                      vpon him ſitting there? 
                  In Ioan. 
                        •
                     ract. 5
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                  He anſwereth, Reach thither thy Faith, and then thou haſt laide holde on him.
               
               Neither can we awaie in our Churches with theſe ſhews, and ſales, and markettes of Maſſes, nor with the carrying about, and worſhipping of the bread, nor with ſuch other Idolatrous and Blaſphemous ſondnes: which none of them can prooue, that Chriſt, or his Apoſtles euer ordeined, or left vnto vs. And we iuſtlie blame the Biſhops of Rome, who without the worde of God, without the authoritie of

the holie Fathers, without anie example of antiquitie, after a new guiſe, doe not onelie ſet before the people the ſacramentall breade to be worſhipped as God, but doe alſo carrie the ſame about vpon an ambling Palfraie, whither ſoeuer themſelues 
                     •
                  ourney: in ſuch ſorte, as in olde times the Perſians 
                        ••
                     re, and the Reliques of the Goddeſſe Iſis were ſolemnlie carried about in proceſſion: and haue brought the ſacraments of Chriſt to be vſed now as a ſtage plaie, and a ſolemne ſight: to the end, that mens eies ſhould be fedde with nothing elſe, but with madde gaſinges, and fooliſh gaudies, in the ſelfe ſame matter, wherein the death of Chriſt ought diligentlie to be beaten into our heartes, and wherein alſo the myſteries of our Redemption ought with all holines, and reuerence, to be executed. Beſides, where they ſaie, and ſometime doe perſwade fooles, that they are able by their Maſſes to diſtribute, and applie vnto mens commoditie all the merites of Chriſts death, yea, although manie times the parties thinke nothing of the matter, and vnderſtand full litle what is done, this is a mockerie, a heatheniſh fanſie, and a verie toie. For it is our faith, that applieth the death, and croſſe of Chriſt to our benefite, and not the act of the Maſſing Prieſt. Faith had in the ſacraments 
                  Ad Rom. ca. 3. lib. 3.
                  (ſaith Auguſtine) doth iuſtiſie, and not the ſacramentes. And Origen ſaith: Chriſt is the Prieſt, the Propitiation, and Sacrifice: which propitiation commeth to euerie one by meane of Faith. And ſo, by this reckoning, we ſaie, that the Sacraments of Chriſte, without Faith, doe not once profitte thoſe, that be aliue▪ a great deale leſſe doe they profitte thoſe that be deade.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               
                  
                     Art. 3
                        •
                     . WE beleeue and confeſſe, that Ieſus Chriſt our Lord & Sauiour hath inſtituted the holie Sacrament of his ſupper, that in it he might nouriſh & ſuſtaine thoſe, whom he hath regenerated and engrafted into his family, which is the Church. But thoſe which are regenerate, haue in them a double life, the one carnall & temporal, which they brought with them from their firſt natiuity, the which is common vnto all: the other ſpirituall & heauenlie, beſtowed vpon them

in their ſecond natiuitie, which is wrought in them by the worde of the Goſpell, in the vnion of the bodie of Chriſt, the which is peculiar to the elect alone. And as god hath appointed earthlie and materiall bread, fi
                     •
                  e and conuenient for the preſeruation of this carnall life, which, euen as the life it ſelfe, is common vnto all: ſo for the conſeruation of that ſpirituall and heauenlie life, which is proper to the faithfull, God hath ſent liuelie bread, which came downe from heauen, euen, Ieſus Chriſt, who nouriſheth and ſuſtaineth the ſpirituall life of the faithfull, if he be eaten, that is, applied and receiued by faith, through the Spirit. But to the intent that Chriſt might figurate & repreſent vnto vs this ſpirituall and heauenlie bread, he hath ordeined viſible and earthlie bread and wine for the Sacrament of his bodie and 
                     ••
                  ode: whereby he teſtifieth, that as truelie as we doe receiue and holde in our handes this ſigne, eating the ſame with our mouthes, whereby afterwardes this our life is ſuſtained; ſo truelie we doe by faith (which is in 
                     ••
                  e
                     •
                  de of our ſoule▪ hand, and mouth) receiue the verie bodie and true blood of Chriſt our onelie Sauiour, in our ſelues▪ vnto the conſeruation and cheriſhing of a ſpirituall life within vs. And it is moſte certaine, that Chriſt, not without good cauſe, doth ſo carefullie commend vnto vs this his Sacrament, as one that doth indeede worke that within vs, whatſoeuer he repreſenteth vnto vs by theſe his holie ſignes: although the manner it ſelfe, beeing farre aboue the teach of our capacitie, can not be comprehended of any: becauſe that all Looke the 1. obſeru. vppon this confeſſ.the operations of the holie Ghoſt are hidden and incomprehenſible. Neither ſhall we erre in ſaying, that, Looke the 2 obſeru.that which is eaten, is the verie natural body of Chriſt, and that which is drunk
                     •
                  , is the verie bloode of Chriſt: yet the inſtrument or meanes▪ whereby we doe eate and drinke them, is not a corporall mouth, but euen our ſoule and ſpirit, & that by faith. Chriſt therefore ſitteth alwaies at the right hand of his Father in heauen, and yet for al that doth not any thing the leſſe communicate himſelfe vnto vs by faith. Furthermore, this Supper is the ſpiritual table, wherein Chriſt doth offer himſelfe to vs, with all his benefites, to be participated of vs, and bringeth to paſſe, that in it we are partakers, as well of himſelfe, as of the merit of his death and paſſion. For he himſelfe,

                  looke the 
                        •
                     . obſeruat. by the eating of his fleſh, doth nouriſh, ſtrengthen, & comfort, our miſerable, afflicted, and comfortles ſoule, and in like manner, by the drinking of his bloode, doth refreſh and ſuſtaine the ſame. Moreouer, Looke the 4. obſeruat.although the ſignes be coupled with the things ſignified, yet both of them are not receiued of all. For an euill man verely receiueth the Sacrament vnto his owne condemnation, but the thing or truth of the Sacrament he receiueth not. As for example, Iudas, and Simon Magus, both of them did receiue the Sacramentall ſigne, but as for Chriſt himſelfe ſignified thereby, they receiued him not. For Chriſt is communicated to the faithfull onelie. Laſt of al, we with great humilitie and reuerence doe communicate the holie Sacrament in that aſſemblie of Gods people, celebrating the memoriall of our Sauiour Chriſts death with thankeſgiuing, and making there a publique confeſſion of Chriſtian faith and religion. No man therefore ought to preſent himſelfe at this holie Supper, which hath not firſt examined himſelfe, leſt that eating this bread, and drinking of this cuppe, he doe eat and drinke his owne damnation. Moreouer, by the vſe of this Sacrament, a moſt ardent loue is kindled within vs, both towardes God himſelfe, and alſo towardes our neighbour. Therefore we doe here worthelie reiect, as a meere prophanation, all the toies, and damnable deuiſes of men, which they haue preſ
                     •
                  med to adde and mingle with the Sacramentes: affirming that all the godlie are content with that onelie order and rite, which Chriſt and his Apoſtles haue deliuered vnto vs, and that they ought to ſpeake of theſe myſteries after the ſame manner, as the Apoſtles haue ſpoken before.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               
                  The 2 Article, out of the edition of Wirtemberge Anno. 1531.
                  
                  TOuching the Supper of the Lord, they teach, that the bodie and bloode of Chriſt are there preſent Looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.in deede, and are diſtributed to thoſe that eate of the Lord 
                        〈◊〉
                      Supper, and they condemne thoſe that teach otherwiſe.
               
               
                  The ſame 10. article in the edition newlie corrected, anno 1540. is thus ſet downe.
                  
                     
TOuching the Supper of the Lorde they teach, that together with the bread and the wine the bodie and blood of Chriſt are trulie exhibited to them that eate of the Lords Supper.
               
               
                  Hitherto alſo pertaineth the firſt article, of the abuſes, which are chaunged in the outward rites and ceremonies. This article is, of the Maſse
                  OVr Churches are wrongfullie accuſed, to haue aboliſhed the Maſſe. For Looke the 2. obſeru.the Maſſe is retained ſtill among vs, & celebrated with great reuerence. Yea & almoſt all the ceremonies that are in vſe, ſauing that, with the ſonges in Latine we mingle certein Pſalmes in Dutch here and there, which be added for the peoples inſtruction. For therfore we haue need of ceremonies, that the may teach the vnlearned, & that the Preaching of Gods word maie ſtirre vp ſome vnto the true feare, truſt, and inuocation of God. This is not onlie commaunded by S. Paul, to vſe a tongue that the people vnderſtand, but mans law hath alſo appointed it. We vſe the people to receiue the ſacrament together, if ſo be anie be found fit thereunto. And that is a thing that doth increaſe the reuerence and due eſtimation of the publike ceremonies. For none are admitted, except they be firſt prooued, and tried. Beſides we vſe to put men in minde of the worthines and vſe of a ſacrament, what great comforte it offereth vnto them, which repent, to the ende that men maie learne to feare God, and beleeue in him, and to vſe praier & ſupplication vnto him, looking for all good thinges at his hands. This is the true worſhippe of Chriſtians. Theſe ſeruices, of feare, faith, praier, hope, &c. God doth like of. When therfore theſe ſeruices are performed, and exerciſed in the vſe of ceremonies, then doth the vſing of the ſacramentes pleaſe God. So that when as the people is vſed to the ceremonie, and aduertiſed of the true vſe thereof, the Maſſes are ſaide with vs after meet and godlie manner. And thus all things are ordered in the Church with greater grauitie and reuerence, then in times paſt. It is not vnknowen that theſe manie ages paſt there hath beene common and open complaint made by good men, of the abuſe and prophaning of Maſſes. For it is eaſie to be ſeene, how farre this abuſe hath ſpread it ſelfe in all temples and Churches, what kinde

of men they are that ſaie the Maſſes, flat contrarie to the preſcript of the Canons. Alſo how ſhamefullie they are turned 
                        〈◊〉
                      a matter of curſed lucre. For manie there be that ſay Maſſes, without repentance, onelie for the bellies ſake. The
                        •
                      thinges are too open and manifeſt to be kept anie longer 
                        •
                      hugger mugger. Surelie it ſemeth that neuer anie religion thing ſince the world began was ſo commonlie turned 
                        〈◊〉
                      gaine, as the Maſſe. But Saint Paull doth fearefullie threaten them, which deale otherwiſe with the ſacraments, thee is beſeeming the dignitie of them, where he ſaith, He that 
                           ••
                        
                        
                        
                           •
                        th this bread and drinketh this cup vnworthely, is guiltie of the b
                           ••
                         & blood of the Lord. And in the 10. cōmaundements, it is written, He that abuſeth Gods holie name, ſhall not eſcape vnpuniſhed As therefore the worlde hath oft heretofore beene iuſtlie puniſhed for 
                        •
                     dolatrie, ſo doubtles this ſhameles profani
                        ••
                      of Maſſes wil be fearefully reuenged with greeuous plagues And it maie well be that the Church in theſe latter times i
                        •
                      puniſhed with blindenes, diſcord, and warres, and manie other plagues, chiefelie for this one cauſe. And yet theſe o
                        ••
                      and groſſe abuſes haue the Biſhoppes (whoe cannot be ignorant of them) not onelie borne with all, but alſo ſmoth
                        ••
                      laughed at them. And now, all to late, they beginne to complaine forſooth of the calamitie of the Church, when as 
                        〈◊〉
                      other thing hath beene the occaſion of the broiles of theſe times, but the abuſes themſelues, which were now become too open and euident, that modeſt men coulde no longer beare them. I would to God that the Biſhoppes had (as by their office they might haue) long before this brideled, & reſtrained the couetouſnes or impudencie, whether of Monks, or of ſome others, whoe chaunging the manner of the olde Church, haue made the Maſſe a monie matter.
                  But it ſhall not be amiſſe now to ſhew, whence theſe abuſes did ſpring at the firſt. There is an opinion ſpread abroad in the Church, that the Supper of the Lord is a worke, which being once done by the Prieſt, deſerueth remiſſion of ſinnes both of the fault, and of the puniſhment, not onelie for hi
                        •
                      that doeth it, but alſo for others: and that becauſe of the worke done, although it be done without anie good intent of the doer. Likewiſe, that if it be applied in the behalfe of the dead, it is ſatisfactorie, that is, it deſerueth

remiſſion of the paines of purgatorie. And in this meaning they take the worde Sacrifice, when they call the 
                        〈◊〉
                      a ſacrifice, namelie a worke, that being done in the behal
                        •
                     e of ſome others, doth merit for them both remiſſion of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      & of the puniſhmentes, and that becauſe of the verie worke done, euen without any good intent of him that 
                        〈…〉
                      they meane, that the Prieſt in the Maſſe doth offer a ſacrifice for the quicke and the dead. And after this perſwaſion was once receiued, they taught men to ſeeke forgiuenes of ſinnes, and all good thinges, yea & that the dead were f
                        •
                     eed from puniſhmentes, by the benefit of the Maſſe. And it made no matter, what kinde of men they were, that ſ
                        ••
                     ed the Maſſes: for they taught that they were verie auaileable for others, without any good motion of the vſer. Afterwarde a queſtion aroſe, whether one Maſſe ſaid for many, was as auaileable, as ſeueral Maſſes for ſeueral perſons. And this diſputation did augment the number of Maſſes, and the gaine that came in by them, out of meaſure. But we diſpute not not now of the gaine, we onelie accuſe the impietie of them. For our Diuines doe prooue planlie, that this opinion, of the meriting & applying of the Maſſe, is both falſe and impious. This is the ſtate of this controuerſie betweene vs and them.
                  And it is no hard matter for the godlie to iudge of this point, if a man wil but weigh the arguments that folow Firſt, we haue prooued before, that men doe obtaine remiſſion of ſinnes freelie by faith, that is, by ſure truſt to obtaine mercy for Chriſtes ſake. It is then impoſſible for a man to ob
                        •
                     aine remiſſion of ſinnes for another mans work, and that without anie good motion, that is, without his owne faith. This reaſon doth very euidentlie ouerthrowe that monſtrous and impious opinion, touching the merit and application of the Maſſe.
                  Secondly, Chriſtes paſſion was an oblation & ſatisfaction not onelie for originall ſinne, but alſo for all other ſinnes, as it is written, in the epiſtle to the Hebr. We are ſanctified by the oblation of Chriſt once offered. Againe, By one oblation he hath made perfect for euer thoſe that are ſanctified. To conclude, a good part of the Epiſtle to the Heb. is ſpent in confirming this point, that the onelie ſacrifice of Chriſt did merit remiſſion of ſinnes, or reconciliation, for others. Therfore (ſaith he)

                     the Leuiticall ſacrifices were oft times offered in one manner, becauſe they could not take awaie ſinnes. But Chriſt by his ſacrifice hath 
                           〈◊〉
                         once ſatisfied for the ſinnes of all men. This honour of Chriſts ſacrifice muſt not be transferred from him to the worke of a Prieſt. For he ſaith expreſſelie, that by one oblation the Saints are made perfect. Beſides, it is a wicked thing to place that truſt in the work of a prieſt, which ſhould onelie leane and ſtaie it ſelfe vpon the oblation and interceſſion of Chriſt the high Prieſt.
                  Thirdlie, Chriſt in the inſtitution of the Lordes ſupper, doth not commaund the Prieſtes to offer for others, either quick or dead: vpon what ground then or authoritie was this worſhip ordeined in the Church, as an offering for ſins, without anie commaundement of God? But that is yet more groſſe & far from al reaſō, that the maſſe ſhould be applied to deliuer the ſoules of ſuch as are dead. For the maſſe was ordeined for a remembrance, that is, that ſuch as receiued the ſupper of the Lord, ſhould ſtirre vp and confirme their faith, and comfort their diſtreſſed conſciences, with the remembrance of Chriſtes benefits. Neither is the maſſe a ſatiſfaction for the puniſhment, but it was inſtituted for the remiſſion of the fault, to wit, not that it ſhould be a ſatisfaction for the fault, but that it might be a ſacrament, by the vſe whereof, we might be put in minde of the benefit of Chriſt, and the forgiuenes of the fault. Seing therefore that the applying of the Supper of the Lord for the deliuerance of the dead, is receiued without warrant of ſcripture, yea quite contrarie to ſcripture, it is to be condemned, as a new and vngodlie worſhip or ſeruice.
                  Fourthlie, a Looke the 3. bſetu. bpon this con
                        
                           ••••
                        ion.Ceremonie, in the new couenant, without faith meriteth nothing, neither for him that vſeth it, nor for others. For it is a dead worke, according to the ſaying of Chriſt, The true worſhippers ſhall worſhip the father in ſpirit and trueth. The ſame doth the 11. Chap. to the Heb. throughout prooue. By faith Abell offered a better offering vnto God. Alſo, without faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God. Therfore the maſſe doth not merit remiſſion of the fault, or of the puniſhment, euen for the verie workes ſake performed. This reaſon doth euidentlie ouerthrow the merit, as they cal it, which ariſeth of the verie worke that is done.
                  
                     
Fiftlie, the applying of the benefit of Chriſt is by a mans owne faith, as Paull witneſſeth, Rom 3. Whome God hath ſet forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood, & this applying is made frelie: And therefore it is not made by another mans work, nor for another mans work. For when we vſe the ſacrament, this application is made by our owne work, & by our owne faith, & not by another mans work. For ſurely if we could haue no remiſſion, but by applying of maſſes, it ſhould be very vncertaine, and our faith & truſt ſhould be transferred from Chriſt vnto the work of a Prieſt, & ſo is it come to paſſe, as all men ſee. Now faith placed in the work of a man is whollie condemned. Theſe arguments with ſundry other do witnes for vs, that the opinion of the merit, and applying of the maſſe for the quick and the dead, was for good cauſes miſliked and reprooued. Now if we would ſtand to conſider, how farre this error is ſpread in the Church, how the number of maſſes increaſed, and how through this ſacrifice, forgiuenes both of the fault, and of the puniſhment, is promiſed to the quick and the dead, it wil appeare that the Church is disfigured with ſhameful blots by this prophanation. Ther neuer fell out a waightier cauſe in the Church, O noble Emperour, or more worthy for good and learned men to debate of; it is the dutie of all the Godlie, with moſt feruent praiers to craue at gods hand, that the Church might be deliuered from theſe foule enormities. All Kings and Biſhops muſt with all their might endeuour, that this wholl matter maie be rightlie laid forth, and the Church purged.
                  Sixtlie, the inſtitution of a ſacrament is contrarie to that abuſe. For there is not a word ſet downe of anie oblation for the ſinnes of the quick and the dead, but a commaundement to receiue the bodie and bloood of Chriſt: and, to doe it in the remembrance of the benefit of Chriſt. This remembrance doth ſignifie, not a bare repreſenting of the hiſtorie, as it were in a ſhew, as they dreame that are the Patrons of merit, by reaſon of the worke wrought, but it ſignifieth by faith to remember the promiſe & benefit, to comfort the conſcience, and to render thankes for ſo great a bleſſing. For the principall cauſe of the inſtitution was, that our faith might then be ſtirred vp and exerciſed, when we doe receiue this pledge of Gods grace. Beſides, the inſtitution

ordeineth, that there ſhould be a communication, that is, that the miniſters of the Church ſhould giue vntoothers, the bodie and blood of the Lord. And this order was obſerued in the primitiue Church. Saint Paull is witnes to the Corinths: when as he commaundeth, That one ſhould ſt
                           ••
                         for another, that there might be a common partaking of the Sacrament.
                  Now that the abuſes of the priuate Maſſe be diſcouered▪ for as much as they all for the moſt part were vſed for the application for the ſinnes of other men, and do not agree with the inſtitution of Chriſt, therefore they are left of 
                        〈◊〉
                      our Churches. And there is one common Maſſe appointed according to the inſtitution of Chriſt, wherein the Paſtors of the Churches looke the 4. obſeru.do conſecrate themſelues, and giue vnto others, the ſacrament of the bodie and blood of Chriſt: and this kinde of maſſe is vſed euerie Looke the 5 obſeru.holie daie, and other daies alſo, if anie be deſirous to vſe the ſacrament. Yet none are admitted to the communion, except they be firſt tried, and examined. We adioyne moreouer godlie ſermons, according as Chriſt commaunded, that there ſhould be ſermons, when this ceremonie is vſed. And in ſuch ſermons, men are both taught diligentlie in other articles and precepts of the Goſpel, and alſo put in minde, for what vſe the ſacrament was inſtituted, to weet, not that this ceremonie could merit for them remiſſion of ſinnes, by the work done, but that the ſacrament is a teſtimonie and a pledge whereby Chriſt witneſſeth vnto vs, that he performeth his promiſes. And in our ſermons as men are taught diligently concerning other articles and precepts of the goſpell, ſo are they alſo put in minde, for what vſe the ſacraments were inſtituted, to weete, not that the ceremonie ſhould merit remiſſion of ſinnes by the bare work wrought: but that the ſacrament ſhould be a teſtimonie and a pledge, wherby Chriſt doth teſtifie, that he performeth his promiſe, and that his promiſes pertaine vnto vs, that Chriſt giueth vs his bodie, to teſtifie that he is effectuall in vs, as in his members, and his blood, for a witnes vnto vs, that we are waſhed with his blood. The ſacrament therefore doth profit them, that do repent, and ſeeke comfort therein, and being confirmed by that teſtimonie, do beleue that remiſſion of ſinnes

is giuen them indeede, and are thankfull vnto Chriſt for ſo great a benefit. And ſo the application of the benefit of Chriſt is not by an other mans work, but by euery mans own faith, and his owne vſe of the ſacrament. For when we in in our owne perſons vſe the Sacrament, Chriſtes inſtitution of it doth belong vnto vs. This kinde of vſe of the ſacrament is holie, and to be taught in the Churches, which doth giue light vnto the doctrine of faith, and of the ſpirituall exerciſes, and true worſhip, and bringeth vnto the conſciences of the godlie verie great comfort and ſtrength of faith, Before theſe daies the Church hath beene farre otherwiſe taught, touching the vſe of the ſacrament, there was no word of anie thing, but that this work was to be done. But no man ſpake anie thing of faith, or the comfort of conſciences. And mens conſciences were racked with ouer great care & paines of confeſſing themſelues. This they tooke to be the puritie which the goſpell requireth, whereas the goſpell doth require true feare, true faith, and truſt, comforteth vs by the vſe of this ſacrament, that they which do truelie repent maie aſſuredlie beleeue, that God is become merciful vnto them by Chriſt, though that our nature be fraile and vncleane, and though that this our imperfect obedience be farre from the perfection of the law.
                  By all this that hath bene ſaid, it is cleare that the maſſe that is in vſe amongſt vs, doth a gree with the inſtitution of Chriſt, and the manner of the primitiue Church. And beſides it doth notably lay open the true vſe of the ſacrament, Such a common work was there in the Church of old time▪ as Chryſoſtome doth witnes, who ſaith, that the Prieſt did ſtand at the aultar, & cal ſome vnto the communion, & put back others. And by the decrees of the Nicen Synode it is euident, that ſome one did celebrate the Li
                        •
                     urgie, as the Grecians cal it, and did miniſter the bodie and blood of the Lord to allthe reſt. For theſe are the words of the decree. Let the Deacons in their order after the Prieſtes receiue the holy communion of a Biſhop, or of a Prieſt. Here he doth expreſſelie ſay, that the Prieſtes did receiue the ſacrament of ſome one, that miniſtred it. And before Gregories time there is no mention of anie priuate Maſſe. But as oft as the olde writers ſpeake of a Maſſe, it is euidēt that they ſpeak of a Maſſe,

that was common. Seeing therefore that the rite and manner of the maſſe vſed with vs hath authority out of ſcripture, example from the olde Church, and that we haue onelie reiected certaine intollerable abuſes, we hope that the vſe of our Churches cannot be miſliked. As for other indiffer
                        ••
                      rites and ceremonies, they are for the moſt parte obſerued according to the vuſal manner. But the number of Maſſes i
                        •
                      not alike. Neither was it the vſe in the old times, in the Churches wherunto was greateſt reſort, to haue maſſe euerie daie, as the Tripartite hiſtorie. lib. 9. cap. 38. doth witnes. Againe (ſaith he) in Alexandria eueri fourth and ſixth daie of the weeke the ſcriptures are read, and the Doctours do interpret them, and all other things are done alſo, except onelie the ſolemne manner of oblation 
                           〈◊〉
                         offering.
                  
                  This Article we finde elſe where placed in the third place, among thoſe wherin the abuſes that be changed are reckoned vp in this manner.
               
               
                  Of the maſſe. Art. 3.
                  
                  OVr Churches is wrongfullie accuſed, to haue aboliſhed the Maſſe. For Looke the 2. obſeruat.the Maſſe is retained ſtil among vs, & celebrated with great reuerence. Yea & almoſt all the ceremonies that are in vſe, ſauing that, with the ſonges in Latine we mingle certein Pſalmes in Dutch here and there, which he added for the peoples inſtruction. For therfore we haue need of ceremonies, that the may teach the vnlearned, & that the Preaching of Gods word maie ſtirre vp ſome vnto the true feare, truſt, and inuocation of God. This is not only, commaunded by S. Paull, to vſe a tongue that the people vnderſtand, but mans law hath alſo appointed it. We vſe the people to receiue the ſacrament together, if ſo be any be ſound fit thereunto. And that is a thing that doth increaſe the reuerence and due eſtimation of the publike ceremonies. For none are admitted, except they be firſt prooued, and tried. Beſides we vſe to put men in minde of the worthines and vſe of a ſacrament, how great comforte it bringeth to fearefull conſciences, that they may learne to beleeue God, and to looke for and craue al good things at his hands. This worſhip doth pleaſe God, ſuch an vſe of the Sacrament doth nouriſh pietie towardes God. Therfore it ſeemeth not

that Maſſes be more religiouſlie celebrated among our aduerſaries, then with vs. But it is euident, that of long time this hath bin the publike, & moſt greeuous complaint of al good men, that Maſſes are filthilie prophaned, beeing vſed for gaine. And it is not vnknowen, how farre this abuſe hath ſpread it ſelfe in all Churches, of what manner of men Maſſes are vſed, onelie for a reward, or for wages, and how many doe vſe them, againſt the prohibition of the Canons. Aud Paull doth greeuouſlie threaten thoſe, which handle the Lords Supper vnworthelie, ſaying, He that ſhall eate this bread, or drinke the cuppe of the Lord vnworthelie, ſhall be guiltie of the bodie and bloode of the Lord. Therfore, when we admoniſhed the Prieſtes of this ſinne, priuate Maſſes were laide aſide among vs, ſeeing that for the moſt part, there were no priuate Maſſes, but onelie for lucres ſake. Neither were the Biſhops ignorant of theſe abuſes, who if they had amended them in time, there had now beene leſſe diſſenſion. Heretofore, by their diſſembling, they ſuffered much corruption to creepe into the Church: now they begin, though it be late, to complaine of the calamities of the Church, ſeeing that this hurlie burlie was raiſed vp by no other meane, then by thoſe abuſes, which were ſo euident, that they could no longer be tolerated. There were many diſſentions, concerning the Maſſe, and as touching the Sacrament. And peraduenture the world is puniſhed, for ſo long a prophaning of Maſſes, which they, who both could, and ought to haue amended it, haue ſo many yeares tolerated in their Churches. For in the ten commaundements it is written, He that abuſeth the name of the Lord, ſhall not eſcape vnpuniſhed. And from the beginning of the worlde, there neither was, nor is any diuine thing, which might ſeeme ſo to be imployed to gaine, as is the Maſſe.
                  There was added an opinion, which did increaſe priuate Maſſes infinitelie, to wit, that Chriſt by his paſſion did ſatisfie for Originall ſinne, and appointed Maſſe, wherein an oblation ſhould be made for dailie ſinnes, both mortall, and veniall. Hereupon a common opinion was receiued, that Maſſe is a worke, that taketh awaie the ſinnes of the quicke and the dead, and that for the doeing of the worke. Here m
                        •
                     n beganne to diſpute, whether one Maſſe ſaide for many,

were of as great force, as particular Maſſes ſaide for particular men. This diſputation hath brought forth an in finite multitude of maſſes. Concerning theſe opinions our preachers haue admoniſhed vs, that they do diſagree from the holie Scriptures, and hurt the glorie of the paſſion of Chriſt. For the paſſion of Chriſt was an oblation and ſatisfaction, not onelie for Originall ſinne, but alſo for all other ſinnes, as it is written in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes: We are ſanctified by the oblation of Ieſus Chriſt once made. Alſo, By one oblation he hath made perfit for euer thoſe that are ſanctified. Alſo the Scripture teacheth, that we are iuſtified before God through faith in Chriſt, when we beleeue that our ſinnes are forgiuen for Chriſt his ſake. Now, if the Maſſe doe take awaie the ſinnes of the quicke and the deade, euen for the workes ſake that i
                        •
                      done, then iuſtification commeth by the worke of Maſſes, and not by faith, which the Scripture can not aware withall. But Chriſt commaundeth vs to doe it in remembrance of himſelfe: therefore the Maſſe is inſtituted, that faith, in them which vſe the Sacrament, may remember what benefites it receiueth by Chriſt, and that it may raiſe vp, and comforte a fearefull conſcience. For this is to remember Chriſt, to wit, to remember his benefites, and to feele and perceiue, that they be in deede exhibited vnto vs. Neither is it ſufficient to call to minde the hiſtorie, becauſe that the Iewes alſo, and the wicked can doe that. Therefore the Maſſe muſte be vſed to this ende, that there the Sacrament may be reached vnto them, that haue neede of comforte, as Ambroſe ſaith, Becauſe I doe alwaies ſinne, therefore I ought alwaies to receiue a medicine. And ſeeing that the Maſſe is ſuch a communion of the Sacrament, we doe obſerue one common Maſſe euery holidaie, and on other daies, if any wil vſe the Sacrament, when it is offered to them, which deſired it. Neither is this cuſtome newlie brought into the Church. For the auncient Fathers before Gregories time make no mention of any priuat Maſſe: of the common Maſſe they ſpeake much. Chryſoſtome ſaitth, That the Prieſt did dailie ſtand at the aultar, and call ſome vnto the Communion, and put backe others. And by the auncient Canons it is euident, that ſome one did celebrate the Maſſe, of whome other Prieſts and Deacons did receiue the bodie of the Lord. For

ſo the words of the Nicen canon do ſounde: Let the deacons in their order after the Prieſts receiue the holy communion of a Biſhop, or of a prieſt. And Paul concerning the cōmunion commaundeth, that one tarie for another, that ſo there maie be a common participation. Seeing therefore that among vs the Maſſe hath the example of the Church out of the Scripture, and the Fathers, we hope that it cannot be diſliked, eſpeciallie for that our publike ceremonies are kept of vs for the moſte parte alike vnto the vſual ceremonies: onelie the number of Maſſes is not alike, the which, by reaſon of verie great and manifeſt abuſes, it were certainelie farre better to be moderated. For in times paſt alſo in the Churches, whreunto was greateſt reſort, it was not the vſe to haue maſſe ſaide euerie daie, as the Tripartite hiſtorie. lib. 9. cap. 38. doth witnes. Againe (ſaith he) in Alexandria euery fourth and ſixth day of the weeke the ſcriptures are read, and the Doctours do interpret them, and all other things are done alſo, except onelie the ſolemne manner of oblaion 
                           〈◊〉
                         offering.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Art. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      Of both kindes of the Sacrcament.
                  ANd becauſe that we doe celebrate the common maſſe, that the people maie vnderſtand, that they alſo are ſanctified through the blood of Chriſt, and learne the true vſe of this ceremonie, either part of the Sacrament in the Supper of the Lorde is giuen to the Laitie, becauſe the Sacrament was inſtituted, not onelie for a part of the Church, namelie for Prieſts, but alſo for the reſt of the Church. And therefore the people doth vſe the Sacrament, as Chriſt appointed it. And certainelie Chriſt ſaieth, Math. 26. Drinke, yee all of this, where he ſaieth manifeſtlie, concerning the cuppe, that all ſhould drinke. And that no man might cauill, that it doth onlie appertaine to the Prieſts, the ordinance of Paul to the Corinthians doth witnes, that the wholl Church did in common vſe either parte. This cuſtome remained a long time euen in the latter Churches, neither is it certaine, when, or by what author it was chaunged. Cyprian in certaine places doth witnes, that the bloode, was giuen to the people: for thus he writeth to Cornelius the Pope: How do we teach, or prouoke them, to ſhed their bloode, in the confeſſion of his name, if we denie the bloode of Chriſt to them, which 
                           〈◊〉
                         in this warfare? or how ſhall we make them fit for the cuppe of
                     
                     Martyrdome, if we doe not firſt admit them, by the right of communication, to drinke in the Church the cuppe of the Lorde? And Ierome ſaith, The Prieſtes doe miniſter the Euchariſt, and deuide the blood of the Lord to the people. In the Decrees there is a Canon of Pope Gelaſius, which forbideth the Sacrament to be deuided: theſe be the wordes: We do vnderſtand, that certaine men, hauing receiued the portion of the holie bodie onelie, do abſtaine from the Cuppe of the holie bloode: whoe, becauſe that I know not by what ſuperſtition they are taught to be tied hereunto, either let them vnfeignedlie receiue the wholl Sacramentes, or let them be put backe from the wholl Sacramentes, becauſe that one, and the ſelfe ſame myſtery cannot be deuided, without great ſacriledge. In the Tripartite Hiſtorie it is written, in the reprehenſion of Theodoſius the Emperour (whome Ambroſe would not admit to the communion, without repentance, becauſe that at Theſſalonia he had too grieuoſlie reuenged the death of a few Souldiers which were ſlaine in an vprour, and had murthered ſeauen thouſand Citizens) here, ſaith Ambroſe, How canſt thou with theſe hands receiue the holybody of the Lord? with what raſhnes can
                           ••
                         thou take into thy mouth the Cuppe of that holy blood? &c. Therefore it is euident, that it was the cuſtome of the auncient Church, to geue either parte of the Sacrament, to the people: onelie a new ſtart vp cuſtome doth take awaie one parte from the people. Here we will not diſpute, what men are to think, concerning a receiued cuſtom, contrarie to the authoritie of the Apoſtolique Scripture, contrarie to the canons, and contrary to the example of the Primitiue Church. For all godlie men doe vnderſtand, that, touching Chriſtian doctrine, conſciences are to aske counſell at the word of the Lord, & that no cuſtom is to be alowed, which is contrary to the word of God. And although in the Latine Church cuſtome hath chaunged the auncient manner, yet it doth not diſalowe, or forbid it: neither in deed ought humane authority to forbid the ordinance of Chriſt and the moſt receiued cuſtome of the auncient Church. Therefore we haue not thought it good, to forbid the vſe of the wholl Sacrament: and in that ceremonie, which ought to be the co
                        •
                     enant of mutual loue in he Church, we woulde not, contrary to charitie, be hard to other mens conſciences, which had rather vſe the wholl Sacrament, neither did we thinke, that

any crueltie ſhould be vſed in that matter: but ſo much as in vs lieth, together with the ceremony, we haue reſtored the holy doctrine touching the fruit of the ceremonie, that the people may vnderſtand, how the Sacrament is laid before them, to comfort the conſciencies of them that do repent. This doctrine doth allure the godly to the vſe and reuerence of the Sacrament. For not onelie the ceremony, was before maimed, but alſo the chief doctrine, touching the fruit therof, was vtterlie neglected. And peraduenture the maiming of the ceremonie did ſignifie, that the Goſpell touching the bloode of Chriſt (that is, the benefit of Chriſt his death) was obſcured. Now, by the benefit of God, the pure Doctrine concerning faith, together with this ceremonie, 
                        〈◊〉
                      renued, and reſtored.
               
               
                  This Article we finde placed elſe where in the firſt place, amongſt thoſe, wherein the abuſes, which are chaunged, are reckoned, after this manner.
                  EIther kinde of the Sacrament in the Lordes Supper is giuen to the laitie, becauſe that this cuſtome hath the commaundement of the Lord, Math. 26. Drinke ye all of this: where Chriſt doth manifeſtlie commaunde, concerning the cuppe, that all ſhould drinke. And that no man might cauill, that it doth onlie appertaine to the Prieſts, the example of Paul to the Corinthians doth witneſſe, that the wholl Church did in common vſe either part. This cuſtome remained a long time euen in the latter Churches, neither is it certaine, when, or by what author it was chaunged. Cyprian in certain places doth witnes, that the blood, was giuen to the people: The ſame thing doth Hierome teſtify: ſaying, The prieſts do miniſter the Sacrament, and diſtribute the blood of Chriſt to the people. Yea, Gelaſius the Pope commaundeth, that the ſacrament be not deuided, Diſt. 2. de conſecr. cap. Comperimus. Onelie a new cuſtome, brought in of late, doth otherwiſe. But it is manifeſt, that a cuſtome brought in, contrarie to the commaundements of God, is not to be allowed, as the Canons do witnes, Diſt. 8. Cap. Veritate, with that which followeth. Now this cuſtome is receiued, not onely againſt the Scripiure, but alſo againſt the true Canons, and the examples of the Church. Therefore if anie had rather vſe both

partes of the Sacrament, they were not to be compelled to do otherwiſe with the offenſe of their conſcience. Looke the 
                           •
                        . obſeru.And becauſe that the parting of the Sacrament doth not agre with the inſtitution of Chriſt, we vſe to omit that proceſſion, which hitherto hath beene in vſe.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
               
                  Of the holy Supper of the Lord.
                  BOth Baptiſme and the ſupper of the Lord are pledges▪ and teſtimonies of grace, as was ſaide before, which doe admoniſh vs of the promiſe, and of our whole redemption, and doe ſhew, that the benefites of the Goſpell doe pertaine to euery one of thoſe, that vſe theſe ceremonies. But yet here is the difference: by Baptiſme euerie one is ingrafted into the Church: but the Lord would haue the ſupper of the Lord to be alſo the ſinew of the publique congregation, &c.
                  
                     The reſt that followeth, pertaineth to the 15. Sect. till you come to theſe words that folow. Euen as alſo in the very words of the ſupper there is a promiſe included, ſeing he commaundeth that the death of the Lord ſhould be ſhewed forth, and this ſupper diſtributed, till he come. That the rore we maie vſe this ſacrament with the greater reuerence, let the true cauſes of the inſtitution thereof be well weighed, which pertaine to the publique Congregation, and to the comforte of euerie one. The firſt cauſe is this: The Sonne of God will haue the voice of his goſpell to ſound in a publique congregation, and ſuch a one as is of good behauiour: the bond of this congregation he will haue this receiuing to be, which is to be done with great reuerence, ſeeing that there a teſtimonie is giuen of the wonderfull coniunction betwixt the Lorde and the receiuers: of which reuerence Paull ſpeaketh, 1. Cor. 
                        •
                     1. ſaying. He that receiueth vnworthelie, ſhallbe guiltie of the bodie and blood of the Lorde. Secondlie, God will haue both the ſermon, and the ceremonie it ſelfe to be profitable, bo
                        ••
                      for the preſeruation, and alſo for the propagation of the memorie of his paſſion, reſurrection, and benefits. Thirdlie, He will haue euerie receiuer to be ſingularlie confirmed by this teſtimonie, that he maie aſſure himſelfe

that the benefittes of the Goſpell doe pertaine to him, ſeeing that the ſermon is common: and by this teſtimonie, and by this receiuing he ſheweth that thou are a member of his, and that thou art waſhed in his blood, and that he doth make this couenant with thee. Ioh. 15. Abide in me, and I in you. Alſo, I in them, and they in me. Fourthlie, he will haue this publique receiuing, to be a confeſſion, whereby thou maiſt ſhew, what kinde of doctrine thou doeſt imbrace, and to what companie thou doeſt ioyne thy ſelfe. Alſo he will haue vs to giue th
                        •
                     nkes publiquelie, and priuatelie in this verie ceremonie, to God the eternall Father, and to the Sonne, and to the holie Ghoſt, both for other benefits, and namelie for this infinite benefit of ou
                        •
                      redemption and ſaluation. Alſo he will that the members of the Church ſhould haue a bonde of mutuall loue among themſelues. Thus we ſee that manie endes doe meete together. By the remembrance of theſe weightie cauſes, men are inuited to the reuerence and vſe of the ſacrament: and we teach how the vſe maie be profitable. We doe plainlie condemne that monſtrous errour of the Monkes, who haue written, that the receiuing doth deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, and that for the workes ſake, without anie good motion of him that vſeth it. This Phariſaicall imagination is contrarie to that ſaying, Habac. ca. 2. The iuſt ſhall liue by his faith. Therefore wee doe thus inſtruct the Church, that they which will approch to the Supper of the Lorde, muſt repent or bring conuerſion with them, and hauing their faith now kindled, they muſt here ſeek the confirmation of this faith, in the conſideration of the death, and reſurrection, and benefits of the Sonne of God: becauſe that in the vſe of this ſacrament, there is a witnes beating, which declareth that the benifits of the Sonne of god doe pertaine to thee alſo: alſo there is a teſtimonie, that he ioyneth thee as a member to himſelfe, looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſ.and that he is in thee, as he ſaide. Ioh. 17. I in 
                           •
                        hem, &c. Therefore we giue counſell, that men, doe not thinke, that their ſinnes be forgiuen them for this workes ſake, or for this obedience, but that in a ſure confidence they beholde the death and merit of the Sonne of God, and his reſurrection, and aſſure themſelues that their ſinnes are forgiuen for his ſake, and that he will haue this faith to

be confirmed by this admonition, and witnes bearing: when as faith, comforte, the ioye of conſcience, and thankſgiuing doe after this ſorte increaſe, the receiuing is profitable. Neither are anie Looke the 
                           〈◊〉
                         obſeru.admitted to the Communion, except they be firſt heard, and abſolued of the Paſtour, or his fellow miniſters. In this triall the ruder ſorte are asked, and oftentimes inſtructed, touching the wholl doctrine, and then is abſolution publiſhed.
                  Alſo men are taught, that Sacraments are actions, inſtituted of God, and that without the vſe whereunto they are ordeined, the thinges themſelues are not to be accounted for a Sacrament: but in the vſe appointed, Chriſt is preſent in this communion, Looke the 
                           •
                        . & 4. obſer.trulie and ſubſtantiallie, and the bodie and blood of Chriſt is in deed giuen to the receiuers: 
                        •
                      that Chriſt doth witnes that he is in them, and doth make them his members, & that he doth waſh them in his blood, as Hilarie alſo ſaith, Theſe things being eaten and drunke, 
                           〈◊〉
                         cauſe, both that we may be in Christ, and that Chriſt may be in 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      Moreouer in the ceremonie it ſelfe we obſerue the vſuall order of the wholl auncient Church, both Latine & Greeke. We vſe no priuate Maſſes, that is, ſuch wherein the bodie▪ and blood of Chriſt was not diſtributed; as alſo the auncient Church, for many yeres after the Apoſtles times, had no ſuch Maſſes, as the old deſcriptions, which are to be found in Dyo
                           ••
                        ſius, Epiphanius, Ambroſe, Auguſtine, and others, doe ſhew. And Paul 1. Cor. 11. Doth commaund, that the Communion ſhould be celebrated when many do meet together. Therfore in the publique congregation, & ſuch as is of good behauiour, prayers, and the creede, are rehearſed or ſung, and Looke the 5. obſeruat.leſſons appointed vſualllie for holie daies, are read. After that there is a ſermon of the benefits of the Sonne of God, and of ſome part of doctrine; as the order of time doth miniſter an argument. Then the Paſtour doeth rehearſe a thankſgiuing, & a praier for the whol Church, for them that are in authoritie, & as the preſent neceſſitie requireth: & he prayeth to God, that for his Sonnes ſake, whome he woul
                        •
                      haue to be made a ſacrifice for vs, he would forgiue vs ou
                        •
                      ſinnes, and ſaue vs, and gather, and preſerue a Church. Then he rehearſeth the words of Chriſt, concerning the inſtitution of the Supper, and he himſelfe taketh, and diſtributeth

to the receiuers, the wholl Sacrament: who come reuerentlie thereunto, beeing before examined and abſolued, and there they ioyne theirs with the publique prayers. In the ende they doe againe giue thankes. All men, which are not altogether ignorant of antiquitie, doe know that this rite, and this Communion, doth for the moſt part agree with the writinges of the Apoſtles, and with the cuſtome of the auncient Church, euen almoſte to Gregories time: which thing being ſo, the cuſtome of our Churches is to be approoued, not to be diſalowed: but our Aduerſaries miſliking our cuſtome, doe defend manie errours, ſome more foule and groſſe, others coloured with new deceites.
                  Manie heretofore haue written, that in the maſſe there is an oblation made for the quick and the dead, and that it doth deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, both for him that maketh it, and for others, euen for the workes ſake. And thus were moſt of them perſuaded, and as yet are like vnto the Phariſies, and the heathen. For after the ſame manner the Phariſies and the Heathen did dreame, that they for the workes ſake, did deſerue, for them ſelues, and for others, remiſſion of ſinnes, peace, and manie other good thinges Or although thoſe, which were not ſo blinde, did ſpeake more modeſtlie, and ſaide, that they did deſerue, but not without the good intention of the ſacrificer, yet they imagined that thoſe ſacrifices were merits, & a raunſome. By reaſon of this opinion there were a multitude of ſacrifices, and the craftie meanes of gaine were increaſed. Such is the marchandiſe of Maſſes, and the prophanation of the Lordes Supper, almoſt throughout the wholl world. But God will haue corrupt kindes of worſhip to be reprooued, and aboliſhed. Therefore we 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     implie and in deede propound the voice of God, which doth condemne thoſe errors, and with all our heart we affirme before God, and the wholl Church in heauen and in earth, that there was one onelie ſacrifice propitiatorie, or whereby the wrath of the eternall Father againſt mankinde is pacified, to wit, the wholl obedience of the Sonne of God, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who was crucified, and raiſed vp againe. This is that onelie Lambe, which taketh awaie the ſinnes of the world. Ioh. 1. Of th
                        ••
                      onelie ſacrifice mention is made. Heb. 10. By one onely
                     
                     ſacrifice he made perfect for euer thoſe that are ſanctified. And this ſacrifice is applied to euerie one, by their owne faith, when they heare the Goſpell, and vſe the ſacraments, as Paull ſaith, Rom. 3. Whome God hath ſet forth to be are conciliation through faith in his blood. And Habac. 2. The iuſt ſhall liue by his faith. And 1. Pet. 1. Being ſanctified in the ſpirit, vnto obedience, and ſprinkling of the blood of Ieſus Chriſt. Other ſacraments in the old Teſtament were typicall: wherof we ſhal ſpeake more at large in their place, & they did not deſerue anie remiſſion of ſinnes: and all the righteouſnes of holie men at all times, were, are, and ſhall be ſacrifices of praiſe, which do not deſerue remiſſion, either for them that did offer them, or for others. but they are ſeruices which euerie one ought to performe: and are acceptable to God for the Mediatours, and our high prieſt the Sonne of God his ſake, as it is ſaid, Heb. 13. By him we offer the ſacrifice of praiſe alwaies to God.
                  
                  That this is an vnchangeable and eternal truth, it is moſt manifeſt. And whereas certaine fragments, which they call the Canons of the maſſe, are alledged againſt this ſo cleare light of the trueth, it is alſo manifeſt that the Greeke and Latine Canons are verie vnlike the one to the other, and that the Greeke Canons do diſagree among themſelues in a moſt waightie matter: and it appeareth that in the Latine Canon manie iagges & peeces were by litle & litle patched together of ignorant authors. The auncient Church doth vſe the names of Sacrifice and oblation: but therby it vnderſtandeth the whole action, prayers, a taking of it, a remembrance, faith, a confeſſion, and thankſegiuing. This wholl inward and outward action, in euerie one that is turned to God, and in the wholl Church, is indeede a ſacrifice of praiſe, or thankeſgiuing and a reaſonable ſeruice. And when the Lord ſaith, Ioh. 4. The true worſhippers ſhall worſhip the lord in ſpirit and in trueth, he affirmeth that in the new teſtament outward ſacrifices are not commaunded, which of neceſſitie ſhould be made, although there were no motions of the holie ghoſt in the heart, as in the law it was neceſſarie, that the ceremonie of the Paſſe ouer ſhould be kept. But touching the ſupper of the Lord it is ſaid, 1. Cor. 11, Let euerie man examine him-ſelfe, &c. So the ſupper of th
                        •
                     
                     
Lord doth profit him that vſeth it, when as he bringeth with him repentance and faith, and another mans work doth nothing at all profit him.
                  Furthermore, concerning the dead, it is manifeſt, that all this ſhew is repugnant to the wordes of the inſtitution of the Supper, wherein it is ſaid, Take ye, eat ye, &c. Doe ye this in remembrance of me. What doth this apperteine to the dead, or to thoſe that be abſent? and yet in a great part of Europe manie maſſes are ſaid for the dead: alſo a great number not knowing what they do, do read Maſſes for a reward. But ſeing that all theſe things are manifeſtlie wicked, to wit, to offer, as they ſpeake, to the end that they maie deſerue for the quick and the dead: or for a man to do he knoweth not what, they do horriblie ſinne, that retaine and defend theſe miſchieuous deeds. And ſeeing that this ceremony is not to be taken for a ſacramēt, without the vſe wherunto it was ordeined, what manner of Idolworſhip is there vſed, let godlie and learned men conſider. Alſo it is a manifeſt prophanation, to carie about parte of the Supper of the Lord, and to worſhip it: where a parte is vtterlie transferred to an vſe cleane contrarie to the firſt Inſtitution, whereas the text ſaith, Take, eat: and this ſhew is but a thing deuiſed of late. To conclude, what be the manners of manie Prieſtes and Monks in all Europe, which haue no regard of this ſaying, 1. Cor. 11, Let euerie man examine him-ſelfe? Alſo, Whoſoeuer taketh it vnworthelie, ſhall be guiltie of the bodie and bloode of the Lord. Euerie man of him-ſelfe doth know theſe things.
                  Now, although the chiefe Biſhopes and hypocrites, who ſeeke deluſions to eſtabliſh theſe euills, doe ſcoffe at theſe complaintes, yet it is moſt certaine, that God is greeuouſlie offended with theſe wicked deeds, as he was angrie with the people of Iſraell for their prophanations of the ſacrifices. And we do ſee euident examples of wrath, to wit, the ruines of ſo many kingdomes, the ſpoile and waſte that the Turkes doe make in the worlde, the confuſions of opinions, and many moſte lamentable diſſipations of Churches. But O Sonne of God, Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, which waſt crucified and raiſed vp againe for vs, thou which art the high prieſt of the Church, with true ſighes we beſeech the, that for thine, and thy eternall Fathers glorie, thou wouldeſt take awaie Idolls, errours, and abominations▪ and,
                     
                     as thou thy ſelfe didſt praie, Sanctifie vs with thy trueth, and kindle the light of thy Goſpell, and true inuocation, in the heartes of many, and bowe our heartes to true obedience, that we may thankefullie praiſe thee in all eternitie. The greatnes of our ſinnes, which the prophanation of the Supper of the Lorde theſe many yeares hath brought forth, doth ſurpaſſe the eloquence of Angells and men. We are herein the ſhorter, ſeeing that no words can be deuiſed ſufficient, to ſet out the greatnes of this thing, and in this great griefe we beſeech the Sonne of God, that he would amend theſe euills, and alſo for a further declaration, we offer our ſelfes to them, that wil heare it. But in this queſtion we ſee that to be chieflie done, which Salomon ſaith, He that ſingeth ſonges to a wicked heart, is like him that powreth vineger vpon nitre.
                  
                  Our aduerſaries know, that theſe perſwaſions of their ſacrifice, are the ſinewes of their power and riches: therefore they will heare nothing that is ſaid againſt it. Some of them doe now learne craftelie to mitigate theſe things, and therfore they ſay, The oblation is not a merit, but an application: they deceiue in wordes, and retaine ſtill the ſame abuſes. But we ſaide before, that euerie one doth by faith applie the ſacrifice of Chriſt to himſelfe, both when he heareth the Goſpell, and then alſo, when he vſeth the Sacraments: and it is written, 1. Cor. 11. Let euerie man examine himſelfe. Therefore Paull doth not meane, that the ceremonie doth profitte another that doth not vſe it. And, the Sonne of God himſelfe did offer vp himſelfe, going into the holie of holies, that is, into the ſecret counſell of the Diuinitie, ſeeing the will of the eternall Father, and bearing his great wrath, and vnderſtanding the cauſes of this wonderfull counſell: theſe weightie things are meant, when the text ſaith, Heb. 9. He offered himſelfe. And when Eſaie ſaith, Cap. 53. He will make his ſoule an offering for ſinne. Now therefore what doe the Prieſtes meane, who ſaie, that they offer vp Chriſt? and yet antiquitie neuer ſpake after this manner. But they doe moſt grieuouſlie accuſe vs. They ſaie, that we doe take awaie the continuall ſacrifice, as did Antiochus, who w
                           ••
                         a type of Antichriſt. We anſwered before, that we doe reteine the wholl ceremonie of the Apoſtolike Church: and this is the eontinuall ſacrifice, That the ſincere doctrine of the

Goſpell ſhould be heard, that God ſhould be truelie inuocated: to conclude, as the Lord ſaith, Ioh. 4. It is to worſhip the Father in Spirit and trueth: we doe alſo herein comprehende the true vſe of the Sacraments. Seeing that we retaine all theſe things faithfullie, we doe with great reuerence reteine the continuall ſacrifice, they doe aboliſh it, who many waies doe corrupt true inuocation, and the verie Supper of the Lord, who commaund vs to inuocate dead men, who ſet out Maſſes to ſale, who boaſt, that by their oblation they doe merit for others, who doe mingle many miſchieuous errours with the doctrine of Repentance and remiſſion of ſinnes, who will men to doubt, when they repent, whether they be in fauour, who defile the Church of God with filthie luſtes, and Idols. Theſe men be like vnto Antiochus, and not we, whoe endeuour to obeie the Sonne of God, who ſaith, Ioh. 4. If any man loueth me, he will keepe my wor
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of the vſe of the wholl Sacrament.
                  LEt Sophiſtrie be remooued from the iudgements of the Church. All men know, that the Supper of the Lorde is ſo inſtituted, that the wholl Sacrament may be giuen to the people, as it is written, Drinke ye all of this. Alſo the cuſtome of the auncient Church, both Greeke and Latine, is well knowne. Therefore we muſt confeſſe, that the forbidding of one part is an vniuſt thing. It is greate iniurie to violate the lawfull Teſtaments of men: Why then doe the Biſhopes violate the Teſtament of the Sonne of God, which he hath ſealed vp with his owne bloode? But it is to be lamented, that certeine men ſhould be ſo impudent, as to feigne ſophiſtrie againſt this ſo weightie an argument, that they may eſtabliſh their prohibition; the refutation of whome, the matter beeing ſo cleere and euident, we doe omitte.
                  
                     In an other place this Article is not diſtinguiſhed from that which went before, but is thus ioyned with it: To conclude, wee muſt alſo ſpeake in few things of the vſe of the wholl Sacrament. Let ſophiſtrie be remooued, &c.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               Of the Euchariſt. CHAP. 9.
               
               WE beleeue and confeſſe that the Euchariſt (for ſo it pleaſed our forefathers to call the Supper of the

Lord) is a Sacrament, inſtituted of Chriſt himſelfe, and that the vſe therof is commended to the church, euen to the latter end of the world. But becauſe the ſubſtance is one thing and the vſe thereof an other thing, therefore we will ſpeak
                     •
                   of theſe in order. Touching the ſubſtance of the Euchar
                     •••
                   we thus thinke and teach. Looke the 
                        •
                     . obſeruat vpon this confeſſ▪
                  that the true bodie of Chriſt, 
                     〈◊〉
                   his true bloode is diſtributed in the Euchariſt: and we refute them that ſaie, that the bread and wine of the Euchariſt, Looke the 2. obſeru.are ſignes of the body and blood of Chriſt beeing onelie abſent. Alſo we beleeue that the omnipotencie of Go
                     •
                   is ſo great, that in the Euchariſt he may either annihilate
                     ••
                   ſubſtance of bread and wine, looke the 3. obſeru▪
                  or elſe change them into 
                     〈◊〉
                   bodie and bloode of Chriſt: but that God doth exerciſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   his abſolute omnipotencie in the Euchariſt, we haue no certeine worde of God for it, and it is euident, that the auncient Church was altogether ignorant of it. For as in Ezech where it is ſaid of the Citie of Hieruſalem, deſcribed on the out ſide of a wall, This is Hieruſalem, it was not neceſſarie that the ſubſtance of the wall ſhould be changed into the ſubſtance of the Citie of Hieruſalem; ſo when it is ſaid of the bread, This is my bodie, it is not neceſſary that the ſubſtance 
                     〈◊〉
                   bread ſhould be changed into the the ſubſtance of the bod
                     •
                   of Chriſt: Looke the 4. obſeruat.but for the truth of the ſacrament it is ſufficient▪ that the bodie of Chriſt is in deed preſent with the bread and in deede the verie neceſſitie of the trueth of the Sacrament doth ſeeme to require, that true breade ſhould remaine, with the true preſence of the bodie of 
                     〈◊〉
                   For as to the trueth of the Sacrament of Baptiſme it is neceſſarie, that in the vſe thereof there ſhould be water, and that true water ſhould remaine; ſo it is neceſſarie in the Lords Supper, that there ſhould be bread in the vſe thereof, and that true bread ſhould remaine, whereas if the ſubſtance of bread were changed, we ſhould haue no proofe of the trueth of the Sacrament. Whereupon both Paull, and alſo the auncient Eccleſiaſticall writers doe call the bread of the Euchariſt, euen after con
                     •
                  ecration, bread. 1. Cor. 11. Let
                        •
                      man examine himſelfe, and ſo let him eate of that bread, &▪ And, Whoſoeuer ſhall eate this bread, and drinke this cuppe of the Lord vnworthely, &c. And Auguſtine in his Sermon to young children ſaith▪ 
                  That which y
                        •
                     u haue ſeene, it i
                        •
                      the bread, and the
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the which thing alſo your eies doe witnes vnto you: but that which your faith deſireth to learne, is this: the bread, is the bodie of Chriſt, the cup, is his blood.
               
               Now as touching the vſe of the Euchariſt, firſt, although we do not not denie, Looke the 5. obſeru.but that whol Chriſt is diſtributed, as well in the breade, as in the wine of the Euchariſt: yet we teach, that the vſe of either part ought to be common to the wholl Church. For it is euident, that Chriſt beeing nothing at all terrified by any dangers, which afterward humane ſuperſtition inuented, or by other deuiſes, gaue vnto his Church both partes to be vſed. Alſo it is euident, that the auncient Church did vſe both partes for many yeares. And certaine writers doe clearelie witnes, that they which doe receiue bread alone, doe not receiue the wholl Sacrament Sacramentallie (for ſo they ſpeake) & that it is not poſſible to d
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     ide one and the ſelfe ſame myſtery, without great ſacriledge. Wherfore we thinke that the vſe of both partes is in deede Catholike & Apoſtolike, & that it is not lawful for any man, at his pleaſure to change this inſtitution of Chriſt, and a ceremony of ſuch continuance in the auncient and true Church, and to take awaie from the laitie, as they call them▪ one part of the Euchariſt. And it is to be marueiled at, that they who profeſſe themſelues to defend the ceremonies of the auncient church, ſhould ſo farre ſwarue from the auncient church in this point. Moreouer, ſeeing that the worde Sacrifice i
                     •
                   verie large, and doth generally ſignifie a holie worſhip, we doe willinglie graunt, that the true and lawfull vſe of the Euchariſt maie in this ſenſe be called a Sacrifice: howbeit the Euchariſt, according to the inſtitution of Chriſt, is ſo celebrated, that therein the death of Chriſt is ſhewed forth, and the ſacrament of the bodie and bloode of Chriſt is diſtributed to the Church, and ſo it is truely called an appliing of the meritte of the paſſion of Chriſt, to wit, to them, which receiue the Sacrament.
               Neither doe we condemne godlie leſſons, and praiers, which vſe to goe before, and to follow conſecration, as they call it, and the diſpenſation of the Euchariſt: yet in the meane time it is not lawfull for vs, to diſſemble, or to alow of thoſe errours, which haue bene added to this holie 
                     〈◊〉
                   rather by the ignorance of priuate men, then by

                  
                     •
                  nie lawfull conſent of the true Catholike Church. One 
                     〈…〉
                   this, that of the worſhip, which ought to be common 
                     〈…〉
                   Church, there is made a priuate action of one Prieſt, 
                     〈…〉
                   doeth alone to himſelfe mumble vp the wordes of 
                     〈…〉
                   Supper, ſo alſo he alone doeth receiue the bread 
                     〈…〉
                   For Chriſt did inſtitute the Euchariſt, not that i
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   priuate action of one man, but that it ſhould be a 
                     〈…〉
                   of the Church. 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     .Therefore to the right action of the Euchariſt, two thinges at the leſt are requiſite, to wit, the miniſter of the Euchariſt, whoe bleſſeth, & he, to whom the Sacrament of the Euchariſt is diſpenſed. For when Chriſt did inſtitute this Sacrament, he did not eat thereof alone, but he did diſpenſe it to his Church, which then was preſent with him, ſaying, Take ye, eate ye, &c. And, Drinke ye all of this, &c. This inſtitution of Chriſt the auncient and true Catholique Church did ſo ſeuerelie obſerue, that it excommunicated them, which being preſent whileſt this holy Sacrament was adminiſtred, would not communicate with others. Anacl
                        ••
                     us in his firſt Epiſtle ſaith, After that conſecration is finiſhed, let a
                        ••
                      communicate, except they had rather ſtand
                        •
                      without the Church doores. And he addeth, For ſo both the Apostles appointed, and the holy Church of Rome keepeth is ſtill. Alſo, the Antiochian Councell, cap. 2. ſaieth: All thoſe which come into the Church of God, and heare the holy Scriptures, but doe not communicate with the people in praier, and can not abide to receiue the Sacrament of the Lord, according to a certaine proper diſcipline, theſe men must be caſt out of the Church. Dionyſius in his booke, De Eccleſ. Hierarc. ſaieth, The Biſhoppe, when he hath praiſed the diuine giftes, then he maketh the holie, and moste excellent myſteries▪ and thoſe thinges which before he had praiſed, being couered and hid vnder reuerent ſignes, he bringeth into ſight, and reuerentlie ſh
                        •
                     wing forth the diuine giftes, both he himſelfe doth turne to the holy participation thereof, and doth exhort the others to participate them: to conclude, when the holie communion is receiued, and deliuered to all, he rendering thankes, doth make an end of theſe myſteries. Therefore we thinke it neceſſarie▪ to the retayning of the inſtitution of Chriſt in the celebration of the Euchariſt, and that we maie follow the example of the auncient and true Catholique Church, that the priuate Maſſes of the Prieſtes maie be abrogated, and that the

publique communion of the Lords Supper maie be reſtored.
               Another errour is this, that the Euchariſt is ſuch a ſacrifice, as ought to be offered daielie in the Church, for the purging of the ſinnes of the quicke and the dead, and for the obtaining of other benefites, both corporall and ſpiritual. This error is euidently contrary to the Goſpel of Chriſt, which witneſſeth, That Chriſt, by one oblation, once onelie made, hath made perfect for euer thoſe that be ſanctified. And, becauſe that Chriſt by his paſſion and death, hath purchaſed remiſſion of ſinnes for vs, which alſo is declared vnto vs by the Goſpell in the new Teſtament, therefore it is not lawfull to ſacrifice anie more for ſinne: for the Epiſtle to the Hebrews ſaith, Where there is remiſſion of ſinnes, there is no further oblation for ſinne. For whereas Chriſt ſaieth, Doe this in remembrance of me, he doth not commaund to offer his bodie and and bloode in the Supper vnto God, but to the Church▪ that the Church, by eating the bodie, and drinking the bloode of Chriſt, and by ſhewing forth the benefit of his death, may be admoniſhed of that oblation of the bodie and bloode of Chriſt, which was made once onelie on the Croſſe for the purging of our ſinnes. For ſo Paull doeth interpret this ſaying of Chriſt, ſaying, So often as ye ſhall eate (he doth not ſaie, offer) this breade, and drinke this cuppe, ſhew ye forth the death of the Lord, till he come. And truelie we confeſſe, that the auncient Eccleſiaſticall writers did call the Euchariſt, a ſacrifice, & an oblation: but they expounde themſelues, that by the name of Sacrifice they meane a remembrance, a ſhewing forth or a preaching of that Sacrifice▪ which Chriſt did once offer vpon the Croſſe: as alſo they call the memoriall of the Paſſeouer, and of Pentecoſt, the Pa
                     •
                  ſeouer and Pentecoſt it ſelfe.
               The third error is this, that manie do thinke, that the oblation (as they cal it) of the Euchariſt, is not of it ſelfe a propitiation for ſinnes, but that it doth apply the propitiation and merit of Chriſt to the quick, and the dead. But we haue alreadie ſhewed, that the Euchariſt properlie is not an oblation, but is ſo called, becauſe it is a remembrance of the oblation, which was once made on the croſſe. Moreouer, the application of the merit of Chriſt, is not made by anie other outward inſtrument, then by the preaching of the goſpell

of Chriſt, and by diſpenſing thoſe ſacraments, which Chriſt hath inſtituted for this vſe: & the merit of Chriſt being offered, & applied, is not receiued but by faith. Marc. 16. Preach the Goſpel to euery creature. For by the miniſterie of the Goſpell the benefits of Chriſt be offered, & applied to creatures, that is, either to the Iewes, or to the Gentiles. And it followeth, He that ſhall beleeue, and be baptized, he ſhall be ſaued: becauſe that by the receiuing of the ſacraments, and by faith, the benefits offered, and applied, be receiued Rom. 1. The goſpell is the power of God to ſaluation, to euerie 
                        〈◊〉
                      that beleeueth▪
                   that is, the miniſterie of the goſpell is the inſtrument ordeined of God, whereby God is able and effectuall, to ſaue all thoſe, which beleeue the goſpell. Therefore the Preaching of the goſpell doth offer, or, if it liketh anie man ſo to ſpeake, doth applie ſaluation to all men, but faith doth receiue ſaluation offered and applied. Now in the priuate Maſſe, bread and wine are ſo handled, that the Prieſt doth neither publiquely declare the Goſpel of Chriſt, but doth ſoftlie mumble vp to him▪ſelfe certaine words, and eſpecialie the wordes of the Supper, or of conſecration
                     •
                   neither doth he diſtribute bread and wine to others, but he alone taketh them: therefore there can be no applying 
                     〈◊〉
                   the merit of Chriſt in the priuate Maſſe. This did our true Catholique Elders well perceiue, who, as we haue declared before, did ſo ſeuerelie require, that they which wer
                     •
                   preſent at the Maſſe, and did not communicate, ſhould b
                     •
                   excommunicated.
               The fourth error is this, which we haue already touched▪ in that they do require, that the wordes of the Supper, or o
                     •
                   conſecration, maie be rehearſed ſoftlie in the Euchariſt, ſeing that theſe words are a part of that goſpell, which according to the commaundement of Chriſt, is to be preached to all creatures. For although our ancetors did ſometimes cal
                     •
                   the Euchariſt a myſterie, yet they did not ſo call it with thi
                     •
                   purpoſe, that they would not haue the wordes of the Suppe
                     •
                   to be rehearſed before the Church in the Euchariſt publike▪lie, and in a tongue commonlie knowne, but becauſe th
                     ••
                   in the Euchariſt one thing is ſeene, and another thing vnderſtood. For Chriſt him-ſelfe alſo is called a myſterie, who neuertheles is not to be hidde▪ but to be preached to al
                     •
                  
                  
creatures. And becauſe that in the receiuing of the Sacrament it is neceſſarilie required, that we ſhould haue faith, and faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, it is moſt neceſſarie, that in the Euchariſt the word of the ſupper, that is, the word▪ of the Sonne of God, ſhould be publiquely rehearſed: for this word is the preaching of the Goſpell, and the ſhewing forth of the death of Chriſt. Therefore that the Church maie vnderſtand what is done in the Euchariſt, and what is offered vnto her to be receiued, and that ſhe ma
                     •
                  e confirme hir faith, it is neceſſarie, that in the Euchariſt 
                     •
                  he wordes of the Lordes Supper ſhould be rehearſed publiquelie.
               The 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  rror is this, that one part of the Euchariſt is vſed in 
                     〈…〉
                   a ſingular worſhip of God, to be caried about, and to 
                     〈…〉
                   vp. But the holie Ghoſt doth forbid, that anie worſhip of God ſhould be appointed without the expreſſe commaundement of god. Deut. 12. You ſhal not do euery one of you, that which ſemeth good in his owne eies. And again, That which I commaund thee, that onelie ſhalt thou do to the Lord: ſee that thou adde nothing thereunto, nor detract anie thing from it. And Math 1
                     •
                  . In vaine doe they worſhip me, teaching for doctrines the preceptes of men. Clemens in his ſecond Epi
                     ••
                  le to Iames, and in three Chapters, De Conſecr. Diſt. 2. ſaith: Certeinlie ſo great bu
                        •
                     nt offerings are offered on the altar, as may be ſufficient for the people: if ſo be that any thing remaine till the next 
                        •
                     aie, let them not be kept, but with feare and trembling, by the diligence of the Clearkes, let them be conſumed. We are not ignorant, how they vſe to delude theſe wordes of Clemens, by feigning a difference betwixt the worke of thoſe that are readie to die, and thoſe that be readie to conſecrate. But it is euident, that the bread, which vſeth to be caried about, and to be laide vp to be adored, is not reſerued for thoſe that be weake, but in the ende is receiued of them that doe conſecrat. Cyrill, or, 
                     •
                  . others thinke, Origen, vpon the 7. Chap. of Leuit. ſaith. For the Lord concerning that breade, which he gaue to his Diſciples, ſaide vnto them, Take it, and eat it, &c. He did not differ it, neither did he commaund it to be reſerued till the next daie. Peraduenture there is this M
                        •
                     ſteri
                        •
                      alſo conteined therein, that he doth not commaund the bread to be caried in the high waie, that thou maiſt alwaies bring forth the freſh loaues of the worde of God, which
                  
                  thou carieſt within thee, &c.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               
                  
                     Of the Euchariſt. CHAP. 18.
                  AS touching this reuerent Sacrament of the bodie & bloode of Chriſt, all thoſe things, which the Euangeliſts, Paul, and the holie Fathers haue left in writing therof, our men doe ſincerelie teach, commend, and inculcate: and thence they doe with a ſingular indeauour alwaies publiſh this goodnes of Chriſt towardes his, whereby he doth no leſſe at this day, then he did in that his laſt ſupper, vouchſafe to giue, by the Sacraments, his true bodie, and his true bloode, to be eaten, and to be drunke, in deede, as the meate and drinke of their ſoules, whereby they may be nouriſhed vnto life eternall: he giueth it, I ſaie, to all thoſe, who from their heartes haue giuen their names, to be reckoned among his diſciples, when as they doe receiue this Supper, according to his inſtitution: ſo that now he may liue and abide in them, and they in him, and be raiſed vp by him in the laſt day, to a new, and immortall life, according to thoſe wordes of eternall trueth. Take, and eate, This is my bodie, &c. Drinke ye all of this, This 
                           •
                        uppe is my bloode, &c. Now, our preachers doe moſt diligentlie withdraw the mindes of the people▪ both from all contention, and alſo from all ſuperfluous and curious inquirie, vnto that which onelie is profitable, & whereunto onely Chriſt our Sauiour had reſpect: to wit, that beeing fed with him, we may liue in him, and through him, and leade ſuch a life, as is acceptable to God, holie, and therefore euerlaſting & bleſſed: and with all, that we among our ſelues may be one bread, and one bodie, which are partakers of one bread in that holie Supper. Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that we doe verie religiouſlie, and with a ſingular reuerence both adminiſter, and receiue the diuine ſacraments, that is, the holie Supper of Chriſt. By theſe things which are thus in deede, as we haue ſet them downe, your ſacred Maieſtie, O moſt gratious Emperour, doth know, how falſelie our aduerſaries doe boaſt, that our men doe change the wordes of Chriſt, and teare them in peeces by humane

gloſſes, and that in our Suppers nothing is adminiſtred but meree bread, and meere wine, and alſo that among vs the Supper of the Lord is contemned, and reiected. For our men doe verie carefullie teach and exhort, that euerie man doe in a ſimple faith imbrace theſe wordes of the Lorde, reiecting all deuiſes of men, and falſe gloſſes, and remoouing awaie all kinde of wauering, doe wholly addict their minde to the true meaning thereof: and to conclude, doe oftentimes, with as great reuerence as they may, receiue the Sacraments, to be the liuelie foode of their ſoules, and to ſtirre vp in them a gratefull rememberance of ſo great a benefit: the which thing alſo vſeth now to be done among vs, much more often and reuerentlie, then heretofore was vſed. Morouer, our Preachers haue alwaies hitherto, and at this daie do offer themſelues with al modeſtie and trueth, to render a reaſon of their faith and doctrine, touching all thoſe things which they beleeue and teach, as wel about this Sacrament, as about other things, and that not onelie to your Sacred Maieſtie, but alſo to euerie one that ſhall demaunde it.
               
               
                  
                     Of the Maſſe. CHAP. 19.
                  FVrthermore, ſeeing that after this manner, Chriſt hat
                        •
                      inſtituted his Supper, which afterward beganne to be called the Maſſe, to wit, that therein the faithfull being fed with his bodie and bloode, vnto life eternall, ſhould ſhew forth his death, whereby they are redeemed; our Preachers by this meane giuing thankes, and alſo commending this ſaluation vnto others, could not chuſe but condemne it, that theſe things were euerie where neglected. And on the other ſide, they which do celebrate the maſſes, do preſume to offer vp Chriſt vnto his Father, for the quicke and the deade, and they make the Maſſe, to be ſuch a worke, as that by it alone almoſt, the fauour of God and ſaluation is obteined, howſoeuer they doe either beleeue, or liue. Whereupon that moſt ſhamefull, & twiſe & thriſe impious ſale of this Sacrament hath crept in, and thereby it is come to paſſe that nothing at this daie, is more gainefull then the Maſſe. Therefore they reiected priuate Maſſes, becauſe the Lorde did commende this Sacrament to his Diſciples to be vſed in common. Whereupon Paul commandeth the Corinthians, when they are to celebrate the holie Supper, to ſtaie one for 
                     1. Cor. 11.
                     
                     another, and denieth that they doe celebrate the Lordes Supper, when as euerie man taketh his owne Supper whileſt they be eating. Moreouer, whereas▪ they boaſt, that they doe offer vp Chriſt in ſteade of a ſacrifice, they are therefore condemned of our men, becauſe that the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes doth plainlie witnes, that as men doe once die, ſo Chriſt was once offered, that he might take awaie the ſinnes of many, and 
                     Heb. 9.
                     that he can no more be offered againe, then he may die againe: and therefore hauing offered one ſacrifice for ſinnes, he ſitteth for euer at 
                     Heb. 10.
                     right hand of God, waiting for that which remaineth, to wit, that his enemies, as it were a footeſtoole, may be troden vnder his feete. For with one oblation hath he conſecrated for euer them, that are ſanctified.
                  
                  And whereas they haue made the Maſſe to be a good worke, whereby any thing may be obteined at Gods handes, our Preachers haue taught, that it is repugnant to that, which the Scripture doth teach in euerie place, that we are iuſtified, and receiue the fauour of god by the ſpirit of Chriſt and by faith▪ for which matter we alledged before manie teſtimonies out of the Scriptures. So, in that the death of the Lorde is not commended to the people in the Maſſe, our Preachers haue ſhewed that it is contrarie to that, that Chriſt commaunded, to receiue theſe Sacraments, in remembrance of himſelfe: and Paul, that we might ſhew forth the death of Chriſt, till he come. And whereas many doe commonlie celebrate the Maſſes, without all regard of godlines, onelie for this cauſe, that they may nouriſh their bodies, our Preachers haue ſhewed, that that is ſo execrable a thing before god, that if the Maſſe of it ſelf ſhould nothing at al hinder godlines, yet worthely & by the commaundement of God, it were Iſa. 2.to be aboliſhed▪ the which thing is euident euen out of Eſay onely. For our God is a Spirit, and trueth, & therfore he cannot abide to be worſhiped, but in Spirit, and trueth. And how greeuous a thing this vnreaſonable ſelling of the Sacraments is vnto the Lord, our Preachers would haue men thereby to coniecture, that Chriſt did ſo ſharplie, and altogether againſt his accuſtomed manner, taking vnto himſelfe an external kinde of reuengement, caſt out of the Temple thoſe that bought & ſolde, wheras they might ſeme to exerciſe marchandize, onely in this reſpect, that they might further thoſe ſacrifices, which

were offered according to the law.
                  Therefore, ſeeing that the 
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     e of the Maſſe, which was wont to be celebrated, is ſo manie waies contrarie to the Scripture of God, as alſo it is in euerie reſpect diuers from that, which the holie Fathers vſed, it hath bene verie vehementlie condemned amongſt vs out of the pulpit, and by the worde of God it is made ſo deteſtable, that manie of their owne accorde haue altogether forſaken it: and elſewhere, by the authoritie of the Magaſtrate, it is abrogated. The which thing we haue not taken vpon vs for anie other cauſe, then for that throughout the whol Scripture, the Spirit of God doeth deteſt nothing ſo much, neither commaund it ſo earneſtlie to be taken awaie, as a feigned and falſe worſhip of himſelfe. Now, no man that hath anie ſparke of religion in him, can be ignorant, what an in
                        •
                     u
                        ••
                     able neceſſitie is laid vpon him that feareth God, when as he is perſwaded, that God doth require a thing at his handes. For anie man might eaſilie foreſee, how many would take it at our hands, that we ſhould chaunge a
                        •
                     y thing about the holie rite of the Maſſe, neither were there anie, which would not rather haue choſen in this point, not onelie not to haue offended your ſacred Maieſtie, but euen anie Prince of the loweſt degre. But when as herewithal they did not doubt, but by that common rite of the Maſſe, God was moſte grieiouſlie prouoked, and that his glorie, for the which we ought to ſpend our liues, was darkened, they could not but take it awaie, leſt that they alſo, by winking at it, ſhould make themſelues partners with them in diminiſhing the glorie of god. Trulie, if god is to be loued, and worſhipped aboue all, godlie men muſt beare nothing leſſe, then that which he doth hate and deteſt: And that this one cauſe did conſtraine vs to chaunge certaine things in theſe points, we take him to witnes, from whome no ſecet is hidde.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFTEENTH SECTION. OF ECCLESIASTICAL MEETINGES.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  
                     Of holie and Eccleſiaſticall meetings. CHAP. 22.
                  
                     ALthough it be lawfull for all men, priuatelie at home to reade the holie Scriptures, and by inſtruction to edifie one another in the true religion; yet that the word of God maie be lawfullie preached to the people, and prayers and ſupplications publiquelie made, & that the ſacraments maie be lawfully miniſtred, that collectiō may be made for the pore, and to defray al neceſſary charges of the Church, or to ſupply the wantes, it is very needful there ſhould be holy meetings & Eccleſiaſtical aſſemblies. For it is manifeſt that in the Apoſtolike & primitiue Church there were ſuch aſſemblies frequented of godly men. So many then as do deſpiſe them, and ſeparate themſelues from them, they are contemners of true religion, & are to be compelled by the Paſtours & godly▪ Magiſtrates, to ſurceaſe ſtubbornelie to ſeperate and abſent themſelues from ſacred aſſemblies. Now Eccleſiaſticall aſſemblies muſt not be hidden and ſecret, but publique, and common, except perſecution by the enimies of Chriſt & the Church will not ſuffer them to be publique. For we know what manner aſſemblies the primitiue Church had heretofore

in ſecret corners, being vnder the tyrannie of Romane Emperours. Let thoſe places where the faithfull meet together be decent, and in al reſpects fit for gods Church. Therfore let houſes be choſen for that purpoſe, or Churches that are large & faire, ſo that they be purged from al ſuch things, as doe not beſeeme the Church. And let all things be ordered, as is moſte meete for comelines, neceſſitie, and godlie decency, that nothing be wanting which is requiſite for rites and orders, and the neceſſarie vſes of the Church.
                  And as wee beleeue that God doth not dwell in temples made with handes, ſo we know that by reaſon of the worde of god, & holy exerciſes therin celebrated, places dedicated to God and his worſhip are not prophane, but holie, and that therefore ſuch as are conuerſant in them, ought to behaue themſelues reuerentlie and modeſtlie, as they which are in a ſacred place, in the preſence of God and his holie Angells. All exceſſe of apparell therefore is to be abandoned from Churches and places where Chriſtians meete in praier, together with all pride, and whatſoeuer elſe doth not beſeeme Chriſtian humilitie, decencie, & modeſtie. For the true ornament of Churches doth not conſiſt 
                        •
                     n Iuorie, golde, and precious ſtones, but in the ſobrietie, godlines, and vertues of thoſe, which are in the Church. Let all thinges be done comelie and orderlie in the Church: to conclude, Let all thinges be done to edifying. Therefore let all ſtraunge tongues keepe ſilence in the holie aſſemblies, and let all thinges be vttered in the vulgare tongue, which is vnderſtood of all men in the companie.
               
               
                  
                     Of prayer, ſinging, and Canonicall houers. CHAP. 23.
                  TRue it is, that a man maie lawfullie praie priuatelie in anie tongue that he doth vnderſtand: but publique praiers ought in the holie aſſemblies to be made in the vulgare tongue, or ſuch a language as is knowne to all. Let all the prayers of the faithful be powred forth to God alone through the mediation of Chriſt only, out of a true faith & pure loue. As for inuocation of Saints, or vſing them as interceſſors, to intreat for vs, the prieſthod of our Lord Chriſt & true religion wil not permitte vs. Prayer muſt be made for Magiſtracie, for Kings and all that are placed in authoritie,

for Miniſters of the Church, and for all neceſſities of Churches in anie calamitie, and ſpeciallie in the calamitie of the Church, prayer muſt be made both priuatellie, and publiquelie, without ceaſing. Moreouer wee muſt praie willinglie, and not by conſtraint, nor for anie reward: neither muſt we ſuperſtitiouſlie tie prayer to anie place, as though it were not lawfull to praie but in the Church. There is no neceſſitie, that publique praiers ſhould be in fo
                        ••
                     e & time the ſame or alike in all Churches. Let all Churches vſe their libertie. Socrates in his hyſtorie ſaith, In anie countrie or nation whereſoeuer, you ſhall not finde two Churches which doe whollie agree in prayer: The authors of this difference I thinke were thoſe which had the gouernment of the Ch
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     hes in all ages. If ſo be anie doe agree, it deſerueth great commendation, and is to be imitated of others.
                  Beſides this, there muſt be a meane and meaſure, as in euerie other thing, ſo alſo in publique prayers, that they be not ouerlong, and tedious: let therefore the moſt time be giuen to teaching of the goſpell, in ſuch holie aſſemblies: and let there be diligent heede taken, that the people in the aſſemblies be not wearied with ouerlong praiers, ſo as when the preaching of the goſpell ſhould be heard, they through weariſomnes either deſire to go 
                        〈◊〉
                      themſelues, or to haue the aſſemblie wholly diſmiſſed. For vnto ſuch the ſermons ſeeme to be ouerlong, which otherwiſe are briefe inough. Yea and the Preachers ought to keepe a meane. Likewiſe the ſinging in ſacred aſſemblies ought to be moderated, where it is in vſe. That long, which they cal Gregories ſong, hath manie groſſe thinges in it. Wherefore it is vpon good cauſe reiected of ours, and of all other reformed Churches. If there be any Churches which haue faithful praier in good manner, and no ſinging at all, they are not therefore to be condemned for all Churches haue not the commoditie and opportunitie of ſinging. And certaine it is by teſtimonies of antiquitie, that as the cuſtome of ſinging hath bene verie auncient in the Eaſt Churches, ſo it was long or it was receiued in the Weſt Churches.
                  In Auncient time there were Canonicall houres, that is, knowne prayers framed for certeine houres in the daie, and chaunted therein, oft repeated, as the Papiſts manner is:

which maie be prooued by manie of their leſſons appointed in their houres and diuers other arguments. Moreouer they haue manie abſurde things (that I ſaie no more) and therfore are well omitted of our Churches, that haue brought in their ſtead matters more wholſome for the whol Church of God.
               
               
                  Hitherto alſo perteineth the beginning of the 25. Art.
                  
                  Of Catechizing.
                  THe Lord inioyned his ancient people to take great care and diligence in inſtructing the youth well, euen from their infancie, and moreouer commaunded expreſſely in his Law, that they ſhould teach them, and declare the myſterie of the Sacraments vnto them. Now for as much as it is euident by the writings of the Euangeliſts and Apoſtles, that God had no leſſe care of the youth of his new people, ſeeing he ſaith, Suffer litle Children to come vnto me, for of ſuch is the kingdome of heauen; Therefore the Paſtours do verie wiſelie, which doe diligentlie and betimes Catechiſe their youth, laying the firſt groundes of faith, and faithfullie teaching the principles of our religion, by expounding the ten commaundements, the Apoſtles Creed, the Lordes praier, and the doctrine of the ſacramentes, with other like principles and chiefe heads of our religion. And here let the Church performe her faithfullnes and diligence in bringing the Children to be catechized, as beeing deſirous and glad to haue her children well inſtructed. That which followeth in this Article, is conteined in the ſixteenth ſection.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Alſo, CHAP. 28.
                  Of the goodes of the Church, and right vſe of them.
                  THe Church of Chriſt hath riches through the bountifulnes of princes, and the liberalitie of the faithful, who haue giuen their goods to the Church: for the Church hath need of ſuch goods: and hath had goods from auncient time, for the manteinance of thinges neceſſarie for the Church. Now the true vſe of the Church goods, was, and now is, to manteine learning in ſchooles, and in holie aſſemblies, with all the ſeruice, rites, and buildinges of the

Church: finallie to manteine teachers, ſchollers, and miniſters, with other neceſſarie things, and chieftelie for the ſuccour and reliefe of the pore. But for the lawfull diſpenſing of theſe Eccleſiaſticall goods, let men be choſen that feare God, wiſe men, and ſuch as are of good reporte for gouernement of their families. But if the goods of the Church by iniurie of the time, and the boldnes, ignorance, or couetouſnes of ſome be turned to anie abuſe, let them be reſtored againe, by godly & wiſe men, vnto their holy vſe: for they muſt not winke at ſo impious an abuſe. Therefore we teach that Schooles and Colledges, whereinto corruption is crept in doctrine, in the ſeruice of god, and in manners, muſt be reformed, that there muſt order be taken, godly, faithfully, and wiſelie, for the reliefe of the poore.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA
               
                  Holie meetings.
                  WE think that holie meetings are ſo to be celebrated, 
                        Art. 23.that aboue all things the word of God be propounded Looke the 1. obſetu. vpon this confeſſion.to the people euerie day publiquely, in a publique place, and appointed for holie excerciſes: alſo that the hidden thinges of the Scripture maie dayly be ſearched out and declared▪ by thoſe that are fit thereunto: that the faith of the godlie maie be exerciſed, and that we maie continuallie be inſtant in praier, according as the neceſſitie of all men requireth. As for other vnprofitable and innumerable circumſtances of ceremonies, as veſſells, apparell, vailes, torches or candelles, altars, golde and ſiluer, ſo farre forth as they ſerue to peruert religion; but eſpecially Idolls, which are ſet vp to be worſhipped, and giue offence, and all prophane things of that ſort, we do remooue them far from our holie meeting.
               
               
                  Of Heretikes and Schiſmatiks.
                  
                     
                        Art▪
                         24. ALſo we remooue from our holie meetings all thoſe, who forſaking the propertie of the holie Church, do either bring in, or follow ſtrange, and wicked opinions, with which euill the Catabaptiſtes are chiefelie infected: who, if they do obſtinatelie refuſe to obey the Church and

Chriſtian inſtruction, are in our iudgement to be bridled by the Magiſtrate, leſt by their contagion they infect the flocke of Chriſt.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  Of Catechizing. CHAP. 2.
               IN the ſecond place they teach the Chriſtian Catechiſme, that is, a Catholike doctrine, and an inſtruction made with the mouth, which agreeth in Chriſtianiſme, with the auncient Church and holie fathers: and this doctrine or inſtruction is the inward or ſecret thing, and the marrow, and the keie to the wholl holie Scripture, and conteineth the ſumme thereof: It is comprehended in the 10. commaundements, in the Catholike, Chriſtian, and Apoſtolique Creed, wherein be 12. Articles, which are expounded and confirmed, by the Nicen, and Athanaſius his creed, and by godlie, Catholike, and generall Councells: alſo, in the forme of praiers, to wit, of that holie praier which the Lord appointed, and in a ſummarie doctrine touching the ſacraments, and ſuch dueties, as we owe, or be proper, regarde being had to euerie mans place and order, in diuers and diſtinct kindes of life, whereunto he is called of God: and there is an open confeſſion and profeſſion made, that this Chriſtian doctrine is that true, full, perfect, and well pleaſed wil of God, neceſſarie to euery faithful Chriſtian vnto ſaluation.
               This Catechiſme, which doth conteine in it the ful & Catholike doctrine of Chriſtianiſme, & the knowledge of moſt weighty things ſpokē of before, our preachers do vſe in ſtead of a ſure rule, method, & table of al thoſe things which they teach, & of all their ſermons & writings: & this they do faithfully care for, and beſtowe all their labour therein, that this wholl ordinarie doctrine of the principles of true faith, and Chriſtian godlines, and the doctrine of the foundation, may be imprinted in the bottome of the heartes of Chriſtians, & throughlie ingrafted in the mindes and life of the hearers, and that after this manner. Firſt that all maie know, that they are bound to yeelde an inward and outward obedience

to the law: and therefore they muſt endeuour to performe and fulfil the commaundements of God, both in their heart, ſeeing that the law is ſpirituall, and in their deedes, by louing God aboue all things, and their neighbour as themſelues.
               Secondlie, they muſt well learne and beare in minde, and be able readilie to rehearſe, & to beleeue from the heart, to keepe, and to profeſſe with the mouth, the chiefe points of the Catholike, Chriſtian, and Apoſtolike Creed, and to teſtifie a chriſtian pietie by actions, or manners, & a life which maie beſeeme it. Therefore they do alſo in their ſermons, by expounding it, laie open the true and ſound meaning, and euerie myſterie, which is neceſſarie to true and eternall ſaluation, and is comprehended in the Articles of faith, and in euerie parte thereof, and confirme it by teſtimonies taken out of the holie ſcriptures, and by theſe holie ſcriptures, they doe either more largelie or brieflie declare, expound, and laie open the meaning, and the myſteries. And in all theſe things they do ſo behaue them ſelues, that concerning the order which the Apoſtles brought in and propounded, they labour to inſtruct not onelie thoſe which be of riper yeares, who being come to lawfull age, are able preſently to vnderſtand; but alſo ſo to teach litle children, that they being exerciſed, euen frō their childood, in the chiefe points of the couenant of god, may be taught to vnderſtand the true worſhip of god. For this cauſe, there be both peculiar Eccleſiaſticall aſſemblies with children, which doe ſerue for the exerciſe of catechizing▪ and alſo the parents, & thoſe that are requeſted of the parents, & vſed for witneſſes (who are called Godfathers, and Godmothers) at Baptiſme, are put in minde of the dutie, and faith, which they owe, that they alſo Eph. 6. Col. 3.may faithfully inſtruct their beloued children, train them vp in the diſcipline of the Lord, and from the bottome of their heartes, praie vnto God for theſe, and all other the children of the faithfull of Chriſt. But chiefelie they which are newlie inſtructed, before they be lawfullie admitted to the Supper of the Lord, are diligentlie taught the chriſtian catechiſme, and the principles of true religion, and by this meanes they are furthered towards the obtaining of ſauing repentance, vertue, and the efficacie of faith. Afterward, all

the reſt are alſo inſtructed, that all together being lightned with the knowledge of God, and of the Sainctes, euerie man maie walke, with all honeſtie and godlines, in his place, and in that order, whereunto he is called of God, and ma
                     •
                  e by this meanes ſanctifie the name of God, and adorne the true doctrine.
               Thirdlie, in the catechiſme theſe thinges are taught, to inuocate one true God in a ſure confidence, in the name of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, to praie, and that not for themſelues onelie, and their priuate affaires, but alſo for the whole Chriſtian Church, in all countries, for the miniſters of the Church, and alſo for the ciuill Magiſtrate, whoe is ordained of God, and chiefelie for the Emperours and your Princely Maieſtie, for his moſte noble children, and wholl poſteritie, for his counſellers, and all thoſe that be ſubiect to his gouernment, praying, that it would pleaſe our gratious God to graunt and to giue vnto your Princelie and his Royall Maieſtie, a long life, heaped with al good things, and a happie gouernement, and alſo a bening, gentle, and fatherlie minde & affection of the heart toward al thoſe that behaue themſelues vprightlie, are well affected, do humblie obaie, doe ſhew themſelues faithfull and louing ſubiectes, and thoſe that doe in trueth worſhippe God the Father, and his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt. And, to be briefe, we teach, that prayers maie be made faithfullie for all men, for our friends and enimies, 1. Tim 2.as the Doctrine of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt and his Apoſtles doth commaund vs, and as examples doe ſhew, that the verie firſt and holie Church did. For which cauſe, we are alſo inſtant with the people, that they would diligentlie and in great numbers frequent the holie aſſemblies, and there be ſtirred vp, out of this worde of God, to make earneſt and reuerent praiers.
               Now whatſoeuer is contrarie to this Catholike and Chriſtian kinde of catechizing, all that we doe forſake and reiect, & it is ſtronglie confuted by ſure reaſons, and ſuch as do leane vnto the foundations of the holy Scripture, ſo farre forth as God doth giue vs grace hereunto, and the people is admoniſhed to take heed of ſuch.
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               VVE beleeue becauſe Ieſus Chriſt is the onelie Aduocate 
                     Art. 24.giuen vnto vs, whoe alſo commaundeth vs to come boldlie vnto the Father in his name, that it is not lawfull for vs to make our praiers in anie other forme, but in that which God hath ſet vs downe in his worde: and that whatſoeuer men haue forged of the interceſſion of Saints departed, is nothing but the deceites and ſleightes of Satan, that he might withdrawe men from the right manner of praying.
               Theſe thinges were alſo ſet downe in the 2. Section but for an other purpoſe and the other parte of this Article is to be founde in the 16. Section.
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               VVE make our praiers in that tongue, which all our 
                     Art. 1
                        •
                     .people, as meete is, maie vnderſtand, to the ende they may (as S. Paull counſelleth vs) take common commoditie by common praier: euen as all the holie Fathers, and Catholike Biſhoppes, both in the olde and new Teſtament, did vſe to praie them ſelues, and taught the people to pray too: leſt, as Saint Auguſtine ſaieth, Like Parotes, and Oules we ſhould ſeeme to ſpeake that we vnderſtand not.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
               
                  Article 14. which is intituled, of the Supper.
                  GOd will haue the miniſterie of his Goſpell to be publique, he will not haue the voice of the Goſpell to be ſhut vp in corners onely, but he will haue it to be heard, he will haue himſelfe to be knowen and inuocated of all mankind. Therfore he would that there ſhould be publique and well ordered meetings, and in theſe he will haue the voice of the Goſpell to ſound, there he will be inuocated, and praiſed. Alſo he will that theſe meetings, ſhould be witneſſes of the confeſſion and ſeuering of the Church of God from the

ſects & opinions of other nations. Iohn aſſembled his flocke at Epheſus, and taught the Goſpell: and by the vſe of the Sacraments, the wholl companie did declare, that they imbraced this doctrine, and did inuocate this God, whoe deliuered the Goſpell, and that they were ſeperated from the worſhippers of Diana, Iupiter, and other Idoles. For God will be ſeen, and haue his Church heard in the worlde, and haue it diſtinguiſhed by many publike ſignes from other nations. So no doubt the firſt Fathers, Adam, Seth, Enoch▪ Noe, Sem, Abraham, had their meetinges: and afterward the ciuill gouernment of Iſrael had manie rites, that their ſeparation from the Gentles might be more euident. Alſo God gaue a peculiar promiſe to his congregation, Math. 18. Whereſoeuer two or three be gathered together in my name, I will be in the middeſt of them. Alſo, What ſoeuer they agreeing together, ſhall deſire, it ſhall be done to them. And in the 149. Pſalme, His praiſe is in the Church of the Saintes. And the promiſes, wherein God doth affirme that he will preſerue his Church, are ſo much the ſweeter, becauſe we knowe that he doeth preſerue, and reſtore the publike miniſterie in wel ordered meetinges: as alſo in the verie wordes of the Supper this promiſe is included, where he commaundeth, that The death of the Lorde ſhould be ſhewed forth, and this Supper diſtributed, till he come, &c.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Hitherto alſo pertaineth the laſt parte of the 12. artilce of this confeſſion, where theſe thinges are founde, touching the reuenues of Monaſteries.
                  
                  IN manie places the Churches want Paſtours, or elſe Paſtours want liuing. Theſe men ought chiefelie to be relieued, out of the reuenues of rich Monaſteries: then the ſtudies of thoſe which be poore muſt thereby be furthered, and in ſome places Schooles maie be erected, eſpeciallie ſeing that it is neceſſary that the church ſhould diſcharge the expences of manie poore, that they might learne, that ſo out of that number Paſtours and miniſters may be choſen, to teach the Churches. Alſo hoſpitals are thence to be relieued, wherein it is neceſſarie, that the poore, which haue beene ſicke along time, ſhould be nouriſhed. A great parte of the reuenues in theſe countries is by the goodnes of god transferred to ſuch vſes, which are indeede godlie, to wit, to

nouriſh Paſtors, the poore, and Schollers, to erect Schooles, and to relieue hoſpitales: that wich remaineth is beſtowed in euerie Monaſterie vpon the guiding & ordering of thinges partaining to their houſes: and to think that this is not verie ſumptuous, it is but fooliſhnes. As for the richer Abbotes in theſe daies, vpon what vſes they lauiſh out the reuenues, the examples of manie doe declare▪ whome we could name, who doe both hate learning, Religion, and vertue, and doe waſte th
                        •
                     ſe almes rauenouſlie▪ and either ſet no Paſtours ouer their Churches, or if they haue anie, they ſuffer them to ſtatue.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               
                  Hitherto pertaineth firſt the 11. Article, Of this confeſſion.
                  WE thinke that it is moſte profitable, that children and young men be examined in the Catechiſme by the Paſtors of their Church, and that they be commended, if they be godlie and well inſtructed, and that they be amended, if they be ill inſtructed. The reſt is to be ſeene in the 14. ſect. where the confirmation vſed in Papiſticall Baptiſme is handled.
                  
               
               
                  Hitherto alſo perteineth the 16. Art. ſſ. 2.
                  
                  Of Praier.
                  BY praier god is inuocated, and true inuocation is a work of faith, and can not be done without faith. Now faith doth behold Chriſt, and relie vpon his merites onelie. Wherefore, except thou ſhalt applie vnto thy ſelfe the merit of Chriſt by faith, praier wil ſtand thee in no ſtead before God. Now praier is neceſſarilie required for this purpoſe, that by a due conſideration of the promiſes of God, faith may be ſtirred vp & kindled in vs. Therfore it is not abſurdly ſaide, that ſinnes are cleane taken away by praier: yet muſt it not ſo be vnderſtoode, as though the verie worke of praier, of it owne merit, were a ſatisfaction for ſinnes befor God; but that by praier faith is ſtirred vp and kindled in vs, by which faith we are made partakers of th
                        •
                      merit of Chriſt, and haue our ſinnes forgiuen vs, onelie for Chriſt his ſake. For before that we doe by praier inuocate God, it ſhall be neceſſarie,

to haue the merit of Chriſt applied to vs, and receiued by faith. Therefore it can not be, that praier ſhould be ſuch a worke, as that for the merit thereof we might obteine remiſſion of our ſinnes before God. Pſalme. 108. Lette his praier be turned into ſinne. But it is not poſſible that praier ſhould be turned into ſinne, if of it ſelfe it were ſo worthie a worke, as that ſinne thereby ſhould be purged. Iſa. 1. When you ſhall ſtretch out your hands, I will turne my eies from you: and when you ſhall multiplie your praiers, I will not heare you. But God would not turne awaie is eies from praier, it of it owne worthines it were a ſatisfaction for our ſinnes. Auguſtine vpon the 108. Pſal. ſaith: That praier which is not made through Chriſt, doth not onelie not take awaie ſinne, but alſo it ſelfe is made ſin. Bernard de Quadrageſ. Ser. 5. ſaith: But ſome peraduenture doe ſeeke eternall life, not in humilitie, but as it were in confidence of their owne merites. Neither doe I ſaie this, let grace receiued giue a man confidence to praie: but no man ought to put his confidence in his praier, as though for his praier he ſhould obteine that which he deſireth. The giftes which are promiſed doe onelie giue this vnto vs, that we maie hope to obteine euen greater things, of that mercie which giueth theſe. Therefore let that praier, which is made for temporall things, be reſtreined to theſe wants onelie: alſo let that praier, which is made for the vertues of the ſoule, be free from al filthy, & vncleane behauiour: & let that praier, which is made for life eternal, be occupied about the onelie good pleaſure of God, and that in all humilitie preſuming, as is requiſite, of the onelie mercie of God.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Of Almes. CHAP. 18.
                  WE doe diligentlie commend almes, and exhort the Church, that euerie man helpe his neighbour, by euerie duetie that he may, and teſtifie his loue. But whereas it is ſaide in a certaine place, That almes doe take away ſinne, as water doth quench fire, we muſt vnderſtand it according to the analogy of faith. Eor what neede was there, to the taking away of our ſinnes, of Chriſt his paſſion and death, if ſinnes might be taken awaie by the merit of almes? And what vſe were there of the miniſterie of the Goſpell, if almes were appointed of God for an inſtrument, whereby the death of Chriſt might be applied to vs? Therefore, that Chriſt his honour may not be violated, and the miniſterie of the Goſpell may reteine it lawfull vſe, we teach, that almes doth

thus take away ſinne, not that of it ſelfe it is a worthie worke, whereby ſinne may either be purged, or the merit of Chriſt applied, but that it is a worke and fruite of charitie toward our neighbour, by which worke we doe teſtifie our faith and obedience, which we owe vnto God Now where faith is, there Chriſt alone is acknowledged to be the purger of ſins. Therfore, ſeing that almes doth teſtifie, after their manner, that Chriſt doth dwell in the Godlie, it doth alſo teſtifie that they haue remiſſion of ſinnes. For except almes be a worke of charitie, which may beare witnes to faith in Chriſt, it is ſo farre from ſignifying, that man hath remiſſion of ſins through Chriſt, that it doth euen ſtinke in the ſight of God, If I ſhall diſtribute (ſaith Paull) all my ſubſtance, that it may be meate for the poore, and ſhall not haue loue, it profiteth me nothing. Therfore we teach, that good workes muſt be done neceſſarilie, that God is to be inuocated, and that almes is to be giuen, that we may teſtifie our faith and loue, and obeie the calling of God. But in true repentance, we teach, that we obteine remiſſion of ſinnes, onelie for the Sonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt his ſake, through faith, according to that which Peter ſaith, To him doe all the Prophets beare witnes, that through his name, euerie one that beleeueth in him doth receiue remiſſion of ſinnes.
                  
               
               
                  Of Canonicall howres. CHAP. 27.
                  
                  AVguſtine writeth in a certaine place, that Ambroſe the Biſhop of Millane▪ did ordaine, that the aſſemblies of the Church ſhould ſing Pſalmes, whereby they might mutuallie comfort themſelues, whileſt they looked for aduerſitie, and ſtirre vp them ſelues to beare the croſſe: leſt the people, ſaith he, ſhould pine awaie with the yrckeſomnes of mourning. This ſinging, becauſe it was vſed in a tongue commonly known, it had both a godlie vſe, & deſerued great praiſe. And by the Canonical decree it appeereth, that thoſe houres, which they call Canonicall, were an appointment of certeine times, wherin the wholl holie Scripture ſhould be publikelie ouerrunne euerie yere, as in the ſchooles there be certain houres appointed for interpreting of authors. Such a diſtribution of houres was peraduenture not vnprofitable for that time, & in it ſelf it is not a thing to be condemned. But to appoint a ſpecial kinde of prieſts, to chaunt out thoſe Canonicall hours, & to ſing them in a ſtrange

tongue, which commonlie is not known to the Church, or is not our countrie tongue, & that in ſome place in the night, & in the day time without any intermiſſion, new ſingers very often taking one an others courſe, & to make hereof a worſhip, not to this ende, that by patience, and the comforte of the ſcripture we might haue hope, as Paul ſaith, but that by the merit of this worke a man might mitigate the wrath of God, and purge the ſins of men before God; this is it that is contrary to the meaning of that Church, which is in deede Catholike. 1. Cor. 14. When ye come together, according as euery one of you hath a pſalm, or hath doctrine, or hath a tongue, or hath reuelation, or hath interpretation, let all things be done vnto edifying. Hierom vpon the Epiſt. to the Eph. Cap. 5. ſaith, Singing and making melody to the Lord in your heartes. Let yong men heare theſe things, let them heare, whoſe office it is to ſing in the Church, that we muſt ſing to God, not with the voice, but with the heart, and that the throate and the iawes are not to be greaſed with ſome ſweete liquore, as they vſe to doe, that play in Tragedies, &c.
                  
                  Now that which was ſpoken, touching the vſe of a tongue that is commonlie knowne, it muſt be vnderſtoode, nor onlie of the ſinging of Pſalmes, but alſo of all the partes of Eccleſiaſticall miniſterie. For as Sermons and praiers are to be made, in a well knowne tongue to the Church, ſo alſo muſt the Sacramentes be diſpenſed in a ſpeach that is knowne. For, although it be lawfull at ſome time to vſe a ſtrange tongue, by reaſon of the learned, yet the conſent of the Catholique Church doth require this, that the neceſſarie miniſteries of the Church be executed in our countrie ſpeache. 1. Cor. 14. I had rather in the Church to ſpeake fiue words with my vnderſtanding, that I mayalſo inſtruct others, then ten thouſand wordes in a ſtrange tongue. Innocentius the third, De offi. Iud. Ord. C. Quoniam, ſaith: Becauſe that in many partes within one Citie and Dioceſſe, there be people of diuers languages mingled together, hauing vnder one faith diuers rites and cuſtomes, we doe 
                           ••
                        reictlie commaund, that the Biſhops of ſuch Cities, or Dioceſſes, doe prouide fit men, who, according to the diuerſitie of ceremonies, and language, may execute among them the diuine dueties, and miniſter the Eccleſiaſticall Sacraments, inſtructing them both by the worde, and by their example. Therefore they are to be ſaid to doe godly and Catholiquelie, who doe ſo appoint the diſpenſation

of the Sacraments, the ſinging of Pſalmes, and the reading of holy Scripture, that the Church may vnderſtand that which is ſaid, read, or ſung, and the ſpirit may receiue fruit, therby to comfort the minde, & to confirme the faith, and to ſtirre vp loue.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               
                  Of the ſinging and praiers of Eccleſiaſticall men. CHAP. 21.
               ANd for that cauſe, to wit, that men ſhould not wincke at that offending of God, which might be committed vnder a colour of his ſeruice, then which nothing can offend him more greeuouſlie, our Miniſters haue condemned the moſt of thoſe things, which were vſed in the ſingings and praiers of Eccleſiaſticall men. For it is too too manifeſt that theſe haue degenerated from the firſt appointment & vſe of the Fathers. For no man, which vnderſtandeth the writings of the auncient Fathers, is ignorant of this, that it was a cuſtome among them, wiſely to rehearſe, alſo to expound a few Pſalmes with ſome Chapter of the ſcripture, whereas now adaies many Pſalmes are chaunted, for the moſt parte without vnderſtanding, and of the reading of the Scripture, there be onelie the beginnings of Chapters left vnto vs, and innumerable things are taken vp one after an other, which ſerue rather for ſuperſtition, then for godlines. Therefore our miniſters did firſt of all deteſt this, that many things, which were contrarie to the Scriptures, are mingled with holie praiers and ſongs: as that thoſe things are attributed to Saints, which are proper to Chriſt alone; namelie to free vs from ſinne, and other diſcommodities, and not ſo much to obteine, as to giue vs the fauour of God, and all kinde of good things. Secondlie, becauſe they are increaſed ſo infinitely, that they cannot be ſung, or rehearſed with an attentiue minde. Now it is nothing but a mocking of God, whatſoeuer we doe in his ſeruice without vnderſtanding. Laſtlie, becauſe that theſe things alſo were made meritorious works, & to be ſold for no ſmal price, that we may ſay nothing hereof, that againſt the expreſſe commanndement of the holy ghoſt, al things are there ſaid and ſung in that tongue which not onely the people doth not vnderſtand, but many times alſo, not they themſelues, which do liue of thoſe kinds of ſinging and praiers▪
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SIXTEENTH SECTION. OF HOLIE DAIES.
            FASTES, AND THE CHOISE OF MEATES, AND OF THE VISITATION OF THE SICKE, AND THE CARE THAT is to be had for the dead.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  
                     Of Holiedaies, Faſtes, and choiſe of meates. CHAP. 24.
                  
                     ALthough religion be not tied vnto time, yet can it not be planted and exerciſed, without a due diuiding & allotting out of time vnto it. Euery Church therfore doth chooſe vnto it ſelfe a certaine time, for publique praiers, and for preaching of the Goſpell, and for the celebration of the Sacramentes: and it is not lawfull for euerie one to ouerthrowe this apointment of the Church at his owne pleaſure. For except ſome due time & leaſure were alotted to the outward exerciſe of religion, out of doubt men would be quite drawne from it by their own affaires. In regard hereof we ſee that in the auncient Churches, there were not onelie certaine ſet howers in the weeke appointed for meetinges, but that alſo euen the Lordes daie, euer ſince the Apoſtles time▪ was conſecrated to the religious exerciſes, and

vnto a holie reſt, which alſo is now verie well obſerued of our Churches, for the worſhippe of God, and increaſe of charitie. Yet herein we giue no place vnto the Iewiſh obſeruation of the daie, or to anie ſuperſtitions. For we doe not account one day to be holier then an other, nor thinke that reſting of it ſelfe is liked of God. Beſides we do celebrate and keepe the Lords daie, and not the Saboth, and that with a free obſeruation.
                  Moreouer, if the Churches doe religiouſlie celebrate the memorie of the Lordes natiuitie, curcumciſion, paſſion and reſurrection, and of his aſcenſion into heauen, and ſending the holie ghoſt vpon his diſciples, according to chriſtian libertie, we doe verie well allow of it. But as for feſtiual daies ordeined to men, or the ſaintes departed, we cannot alow of them. For indeede ſuch feaſtes, muſt be referred to the firſt table of the lawe, and be long peculiarlie vnto God. To conclude, theſe feſtiuall daies which are appointed to ſaints, and abrogated of vs, haue in them many groſſe things, vnprofitable, and not to be tolerated. In the meanetime we confeſſe, that the remembrance of ſaintes, in due time and place, may be to good vſe and profit commended vnto the people in ſermons, and the holie examples of holie men ſet before their eies, to be imitated of all.
                  Now, the more ſharpelie that the Church of Chriſt doeth accuſe ſurfeting, drunkennes, al kinde of Iuſtes andintemperancie, ſo much the more earneſtlie it doth commend vnto vs Chriſtian faſting. For faſting is nothing els but an abſtaining and temperancie of the godlie, and a watching and chaſtiſing of our fleſh, taken vp for the preſent neceſſitie, whereby we are humbled before God, and withdrawe from the fleſh thoſe thinges, whereby it is cheriſhed, to the e
                        •
                     de it maie the more willinglie and eaſilie obaie the ſpirit. Wherefore they doe not faſt at all, that haue no regarde of thoſe thinges, but doe imagine that they faſte, if they ſtuffe their bellies on a daie, and for a ſet or preſcribed time doe abſtaine from certaine meates, thinking that by this verie worke wrought they ſhall pleaſe God, and doe a good work. Faſting is a helpe of the praiers of the ſaintes, and of all vertues. But the faſtes, wherein the Iewes faſted from meate, and not from wickednes, pleaſed God nothing at all,

as we maie ſee in the booke of the Prophetes.
                  Now faſting is either publike or priuate. In olde time they celebrated publike faſtes in troubleſome times, and in the affliction of the Church. Wherin they abſtained altogether from meate vnto the euening, and beſtowed all that time in holy praiers, the worſhippe of God, and repentance. Theſe differed litle from mourninges, and lamentations, and of theſe there is often mention made in the Prophetes, and eſpeciallie in the ſecond chapter of Ioell. Such a faſt ſhould be kept at this daie, when the Church is in diſtreſſe. Priuate faſtes are vſed of euerie one of vs, according as euery one feleth the ſpirit weakned in him. For ſo far forth he withdraweth that which might cheriſh and ſtrengthen the fleſh. All faſtes ought to proceed from a free & willing ſpirit, and ſuch a one as is truly humbled, & not framed to win applauſe and liking of men, much leſſe to the end that a man might merit righteouſnes by them. But let euerie one faſt to this ende, that he maie depriue the fleſh of that which would cheriſh it, and that he maie the more zealouſlie ſerue God.
                  
                     The faſt of Lent hath teſtimony of antiquity, but none out of the Apoſtles writings: and therfore ought not nor cannot be impoſed on the faithfull. It is certaine that in olde time there were diuers manners and vſes of this faſt, whereupon Ireneus, a moſt auncient writer, ſaieth, Some think that this faſt ſhould be obſerued one daie onelie, others two daies, but others, more, and ſome fourtie daies. Which varietie of keeping this faſt began not now in our times, but long before vs, by thoſe, as I ſuppoſe, which not ſimplie holding that, which was deliuered them from the beginning, fell ſhortly after into another cuſtome, either through negligence, or ignorance. Moreouer, Socrates, the writer of the hiſtorie, ſaieth, Becauſe no auncient record is founde, concerning this matter, I thinke the Apoſtles left this to euerie mans owne iudgement, that euery one might worke that which is good, without feare, or conſtraint.
                  Now as concerning the choiſe of meates, we ſuppoſe that in faſting▪ all that ſhould be taken from the fleſh, whereby it is made more luſtie and vntamed and wherin it doth moſt immoderately delight, wherby the fleſh is moſt of al pampered, whether they be fiſh, ſpices, dainties, or excellent wines. Otherwiſe we knowe that all the creatures of God were for

                     Gen. 2. Tit. 1. the vſe and ſeruice of men. All thinge which God made are good, and are to be vſed in the feare of God, and due moderation, without putting any difference between them. For 1 Cor. 11.the Apoſtle ſaieth, To the pure, all thinges are pure. And alſo, whatſoeuer is ſolde in the ſhambles, eate ye, and aske no queſtion, 
                     1. Tim. 4.
                     for conſcience ſake. The ſame Apoſtle calleth the Doctrine of thoſe which teach to abſtaine from meates, The doctrine of Deuils, His reaſons be theſe, that God created meates to be receiued of the faithful & ſuch as know the truth, with thankeſgiuing: becauſe that whatſoeuer God hath created, it is good, and is not to be refuſed, if it be receiued with giuing of thankes. The ſame Apoſtle to the Colloſſ. reprooueth thoſe, which by an ouer much abſtinence wil get vnto themſelues an opinion of holines. Therefore we doe altogether mislike the Tatians, and the Encratites, and all the Diſciples of Euſtathius, againſt whome the Councell of Gangrya was aſſembled.
               
               
                  Alſo out of the 25. Chapter towardes the ende.
                  Of Comforting and viſiting the ſicke.
                  SEing that men do neuer lie open to more greeuous temptations, then when they are exerciſed with infirmities, or elſe are ſicke and brought low with diſeaſes, it behooueth the Paſtours of the Churches, to be neuer more vigilant and carefull for the ſafetie of the flock, then in ſuch diſeaſes and infirmities. Therefore let them viſite the ſicke betimes, and let them be quicklie ſent for of the ſicke, if the matter ſhal ſo require. Let them comforte and confirme them in the true faith. Finally, let them ſtrengthen them againſt the daungerous ſuggeſtions of ſatan: In like manner let them praie with the ſicke perſon at home in his houſe, and if neede be, let them make praiers for the ſicke, in the publike meeting. And let them be carefull, that they may haue a more happie paſſage out of this life. As for popiſh viſiting with the extreame vnction, we haue ſaid before, that we do not like of it, becauſe it hath manie abſurde things in it, and ſuch as be not approoued by the Canonicall ſcriptures.
               
               
                  
                  Of the buriall of the faithfull and of the care which is to be had for ſuch as are dead, of purgatorie, and the appearing of ſpirites.
                  THe ſcripture willeth that the bodies of the faithful, as being temples of the holie ghoſt, which we truelie beleeue ſhall riſe againe at the laſt daie, ſhould be honeſtly without anie ſuperſtition committed to the earth, & beſides that we ſhould make honourable mention of them which haue godlilie died in the Lord, & performe al duties of loue to ſuch as they leaue behinde them, as their widowes and fatherles children. Other care to be taken for the dead, we teach none. Therfore we do greatly miſlike the Cynikes, who neglected the bodies of the dead, or did verie careleſſelie and diſdainfullie caſt them into the earth, neuer ſpake ſo much as a good word of the deade, nor anie whit regarded thoſe whome they left behinde them. Againe, we condemne thoſe which are too much and prepoſterouſlie officious towarde the deade, whoe like Ethnikes doe greatlie lament and bewaile their dead (we do not diſcommend that moderate mourning, which the Apoſtle doth allow, 1. Theſſ. 4. but iudge it an vnnaturall thing, to be touched with no ſorrow) & do ſacrifice for the dead, & mumble certein praiers, not without their pennie for their paines, thinking by theſe their dueties, to deliuer theſe their friendes from torments, wherein they being wrapped by death, they ſuppoſe they maie be ridde out of them againe by ſuch lamentable ſongs. For we beleeue, that the faithfull, after the bodilie death, do go directlie vnto Chriſt, and therefore do not ſtand in neede of the helpe or praiers for the dead, or any other ſuch duty of them which are aliue. In like manner we beleue, that the vnbeleeuers be caſt headlong directlie into hell, from whence there is no returne opened to the wicked, by any duties of thoſe which liue.
                  But as concerning that which ſome teach concerning the fire of Purgatorie, it is flat contrarie to the Chriſtian faith, (I beleeue the remiſſion of ſinnes, and life euerlaſting) and to the abſolute purgation of ſinnes made by Chriſt: and to theſe ſayings of Chriſt our Lord: Verilie, verilie I ſaie vnto 
                     Iohn. 5.
                     you, he that heareth my word, and beleeueth in him that ſent me, hath euerlaſting life, and ſhall not come vnto condemnation: but
                     
                     Ioh. 1
                           •
                        . 
                     hath paſſed from death vnto life. Againe, He that is waſhed, needeth not ſaue to waſh his feete, but is cleane euerie whitte, and ye are cleane. Now that which is recorded of the ſpirits or ſoules of the dead, ſometime appearing to them that are aliue, and crauing certaine duties of them, whereby they maie be ſet free, we count thoſe apparitions among the deluſions, crafts and deceits of the deuill, who as he can transforme himſelfe into an Angell of light, ſo he laboureth tooth and naile either to ouerthrow the true faith, or elſe to call it Deut. 18.into doubt. The Lord in the olde Teſtament forbad to enquire the truth of the dead, and to haue any thing to do with Spirits. And to the glutton, being bound in torments, as the trueth of the goſpell doeth declare, is denied anie returne to his brethren. The Lord by his worde pronouncing and ſaying. They haue Moſes and the Prophets, let them heare them▪ if they 
                     Luc. 16.
                     heave not Moſes and the Prophets, neither will they beleeue, if one ſhall ariſe from the dead.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
               
                  
                     Art. 
                     
                        •
                     . THe Church of Chriſt doth herein labour all that ſhe can, to keepe the bondes of peace and loue in vnitie. Therefore ſhe doth by no meanes communicate with ſectes, and the rules of orders, deuiſed to make a difference of daies, meates, apparell, and ceremonies.
               
                  
                     Art. 10. ſſ. 1. & 
                        •
                     . No man can prohibit that, which Chriſt him ſelfe hath not prohibited. For this cauſe we know that auricular confeſſion, holy daies dedicated to ſaints, and ſuch like thinges, had there beginning of men, and were not commaunded of God, as on the other ſide we know, that the mariage of miniſters was not forbidden,
               And againe, No man can forbid thoſe thinges which 
                     Art 10. ſſ. 4. 
                        •
                     c.God hath permitted: therefore we thinke, that it is not by anie meanes forbidden to receiue meates with thankeſgiuing.
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  Hitherto perteine, firſt, thoſe thinges which are to be found in the 15. Chap. about the middeſt, concerning the keeping of hole daies and faſtes.
                  IN like ſorte manie of the auncient ceremonies, and ſuch as were brought in by cuſtome, ſo neere as may be, are reteined among vs euen at this daie: Looke the 1 obſeru. v▪pon this confeſſ.of this ſort be certein daies appointed for feaſtes and holie daies, the mattens, that is, morning ſermons, euening aſſemblies, the Lords daies, which be holie daies, and ſpeciall feaſt daies added thereunto, which are conſecrated to the celebrating of the workes of Chriſt, as to his natiuitie, his Paſſion, reſurrection, &c. Looke the 1. obſeru.and ſuch as be dedicated to the remembrance of holie men, as of the Virgine Marie, of the Apoſtles, and of other Saints, and chiefely of thoſe ſaints, of whome there is mention in the holy ſcriptures: and all theſe thinges be done of vs, that the word of God may be taught, that God maie be worſhiped and ſerued, and that he may be glorified among vs.
               
               
                  That which followeth, and is to be referred, to this place, is taken out of the 17. Chap.
                  
                  IN like ſort alſo our miniſters (as it is meete for chriſtian men to do) to the glory and praiſe of God, do celebrate holie daies conſecrated to the Virgine, & the remembrance of hi
                        •
                     , Looke the 2. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ and the wholl 2. Sect. where in is intreated of the lawfull ho▪nour of Saints.do make and ſing godly and chriſtian ſongs of hir, & with pleaſure both diligentlie, and that they maie confirme them-ſelues, rehearſe thoſe great thinges wherewith God hath adorned hir aboue al other women, and they al reioyce one with another, and ſhew them-ſelues moſte thankfull for the ſaluation which is purchaſed to mankinde, and with all Chriſtian people they confeſſe & profeſſe, that ſhee is happie, and they praiſe God for all theſe things: and ſo much as lieth in them, they do faithfullie follow and imitate the holy life and good manners of that Virgin, and they do indeed execute that, which ſhe commaundeth to them that miniſtred in the Marriage at Cana, and doe alwaies deſire to

be in heauen with her. And all theſe things they do according to the meaning of the holie ſcriptures.
               
               
                  And a litle after.
                  And thus do we teach that the Saints looke the 
                           •
                         obſeruat.are truely worſhipped, when the people on certaine daies, at a time appointed, do come together to the ſeruice of God, and do call to minde and meditate vpon the benefits of God, which he hath beſtowed vpon holie men, and through them vpon his Church, and therewithall doth admoniſh it ſelfe, concerning their calling, or place which they held, their doctrine faith, life, and exerciſes of godlines, and the laſt end of their life, to the end that it maie be as it were built vp in the ſame trueth by the word of God, and maie praiſe God, and giue him thankes for thoſe men, and in their name, and may ſing Looke the 
                           •
                        . obſeruat.profitable ſongs, and ſuch as are free from ſuperſtition, and maie raiſe and ſtirre vp themſelues to the like obedience, imitation of their faith, workes, and deedes, godlines, holines, and honeſtie: and that they maie call vpon God, that he would vouchſafe to giue vnto them, to enioy their companie and fellowſhip, as well here in the time of grace, as hereafter in eternall glorie. All which things are in few wordes comprehended in the epiſtle to the Hebrewes where it is ſaid. Remember them which haue the ouerſight ouer 
                     
                        
                           •
                        eb. 13.
                     you, which haue declared vnto you the word of God: whoſe faith follow, conſidering what hath bene the end of their conuerſation.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Of Faſting. CHAP. 18.
                  TOuching true and Chriſtian faſting, we teach, that it is an outward work of faith, comprehending in it worſhip, which is done by exerciſing the bodie to abſtinencie, Math. 6.ioyning therewithal praiers, and giuing of almes, and that it is due to God alone: and that among Chriſtians, according as their ſtrength will ſuffer, and their affaires and buſines deſire and permit, at what time ſoeuer they vſe it, in anie ſocietie either generall, or particular, it muſt be done without hypocriſie or ſuperſtition, as the holie ſcriptures do witnes: and Paull among other thinges, doth thus write . Cor. 6. Luc. 5. 1. Co
                           •
                        . 7.of it, Let vs approoue our ſelues as the miniſters of God, by faſting &c. And Chriſt ſaith. Then they ſhall faſt. And againe Paull ſaith in another place, That ye maie giue your ſelues to faſting & praier. Now faſting doth not conſiſt in the choiſe of meat,

which a man vſeth, but in the moderate vſe of meat, and in exerciſing, chaſtiſing, and bringing vnder the vnrulie fleſh before god: and chiefelie the matter conſiſteth in the ſpirit and in the heart, to wit, how, for what cauſe, with what intent and purpoſe a man doth faſte, and how, and by what meane the godlie maie exerciſe a wholſome and acceptable faſte vnto God: and on the other ſide, to know when they ſhould not faſte, but rather take heede that they do not faſte, Iſa. 56. Math. 6.it is expreſſed in the Prophet, and manifeſtlie taught of Chriſt himſelfe.
                  
                     What is to be thought of the choiſe and difference of meates, euerie man ought to learne out of the doctrine of Chriſt, that by this meane what doubt ſoeuer is in this pointe, it maie be taken awaie, and decided. Then Chriſt called the multitude vnto him, and ſaid: Heare, and vnderſtand. Math. 15. Mar. 7.That which goeth into the mouth defileth not the man, but that which commeth out of the mouth, that defileth the man, that is, maketh him guiltie. Alſo, out of the doctrine of the Apoſtle, whoſe wordes are thus: I am perſwaded through the Lord Ieſus, that nothing Rom. 14.is vncleane of it ſelfe, but vnto him, that iudgeth anie thing to be vncleane, to him it is vncleane. But if thy brother be grieued for the meat, now walkeſt not thou charitablie: Deſtroy not him with thy meat, for whome Chriſt died. For the kingdome of God is not meate nor drinke, but righteouſnes, and peace, and ioy in the holie Ghoſt. Chriſtians indeed are not tyed to anie law in this caſe, yet ſo, that they be not an offence to the weaker ſorte: therefore the Apoſtle addeth: All things indeed are pure, but it is euill for the man which eateth with offence: And in 
                     1. Cor. 8.
                     another place he writeth: Meat doth not make men acceptable to God: for neither if we eate, haue we the more; neither if we eate not, haue we the leſſe.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               
                  Art 
                        〈◊〉
                     . TO conclude, we thinke that Purgatorie is a feigned thing, comming out of the ſame ſhoppe▪ whence alſo Monaſticall vowes, Pilgrimages, the forbidding of mariage, the vſe of meates, a ceremoniall obſeruation of certaine daies, auricular confeſſion, indulgences, and ſuch like thinges haue proceeded, by which things certaine men

haue thought that they doe deſerue fauour, and ſaluation▪ But we doe not onelie reiect all thoſe thinges, for a falſe opinion of meritte added thereunto, but alſo becauſe they are the inuentions of men, and a yoke laide vpon the conſciences of men, by mens authoritie.
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               ANd as for their bragges, they are wonte to make of 
                     Art. 14.their Purgatorie, though wee know, it is not a thing ſo verie late riſen amongſt them▪ yet is it no better then a blockiſh, and an olde wiues deuiſe. Auguſtine indeed ſometime ſaith, there is ſuch a certaine place: ſometime he denieth not, but there may be ſuch a one: ſometime he doubteth: ſomtime againe he vtterlie denieth, that there is anie at al, and thinketh, that men are therein deceiued by a certaine naturall good will, they beare their friends departed. But yet of this one errour hath their growne vp ſuch a harueſt of thoſe Maſſemongers, that the Maſſes being ſolde abroad commonlie in euerie corner, the Temples of God became ſhoppes, to get monie: and ſeelie ſoules were borne in hand, that nothing was more neceſſarie to be bought. In deede there was nothing more gaine full for theſe men to ſell.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               Of Abuſes that be taken awaie.
               
                  Of putting difference betweene meates, and ſuch like Popiſh traditions.
                  IN this corporall life, we haue neede of traditions, that 
                        Art. .is, of the diſtinctions of times and places, that all things maie be done orderlie in the Church, as Paull willeth: Let all thinges he done in order, and ſo as is meete and decent. Therefore the Church hath her traditions, that is, ſhee appointeth at what times, and where, the Church ſhall come together. For this ciuill end it is lawfull to make traditions. But men that are not acquainted with the doctrine of Chriſt, are not content with this end▪ but they ioyne ſuperſtitious opinions vnto traditions, and by ſuperſtition multiplie

traditions out of meaſure. Of this there hath beene complaint made in the Church not onelie by late writers, as Gerſon, and others, but alſo by Saint Auguſtine. Wherefore it is needfull to admoniſh the people, what to thinke of the traditions which are brought into the Church by mans authoritie. For it is not without cauſe, that Chriſte and Paull doe ſo often ſpeake of traditions, and admoniſh the Church to iudge wiſelie of traditions. There was a common opinion, not of the common ſort alone, but alſo of the teachers in the Church, that the difference of meates and ſuch like workes, which the Eccleſiaſticall traditions doe commaund, are ſeruices of God, which deſerue remiſſion of ſins: Alſo that ſuch kindes of worſhip, are Chriſtian righteouſnes, and as neceſſarie, as the Leuiticall ceremonies in the olde Teſtament euer were; and that they cannot be omitted without ſinne, no not then, when they might be omitted without daunger of giuing offence. Theſe perſuaſions haue▪ brought forth many diſcommodities. Firſt the doctrine of the Goſpell is hereby obſcured, which teacheth, that ſinnes are forgiuen freely by Chriſt. This benefit of Chriſt is transferred vnto the worke of man. And by reaſon of this opinion, traditions were eſpeciallie encreaſed, becauſe that theſe workes were ſuppoſed to deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, to be ſatisfactions, and to be Chriſtian righteouſnes. Moreouer, for this cauſe eſpeciallie doth S. Paull ſo often, and ſo earneſtlie giue vs warning, to beware of traditions, leſt that Chriſtes benefit ſhould be transferred to traditions, leſt the glorie of Chriſt ſhould be obſcured, leſt that true and ſound comforte ſhould be withheld from mens conſciences, and in a worde, leſt that faith, that is, truſt of the mercie of Chriſt, ſhoulde be quite ſmothered. Theſe daungers Saint Paull would haue auoided. For it is greatlie needfull that the pure doctrine of the benefit of Chriſt, of the righteouſnes of faith, and of the comforte of conſciences, ſhould be continued in the Church.
                  Secondlie, theſe traditions haue obſcured the Commaundemenss of God: for this kinde of ſchooling was thought to be ſpirituall, and the righteouſnes of a Chriſtian man. Yea, the traditions of men were ſet aloft aboue the commaundements of God. All Chriſtianitie was placed in

the obſeruation of certaine feſtiuall daies, rites, faſtes, and forme of apparell. Theſe beggerlie rudiments caried goodlie titles, namelie, that they were the ſpirituall life, and the perfection of a Chriſtian. In the meane while, the commaundements of God touching euerie calling were of ſmall eſtimation: that the Father brought vp his children, that the Mothet bare them, that the Prince gouerned the common wealth, theſe workes were litle ſet by. They were not taken to be any ſeruice of God. The mindes of many ſtoode in a continuall mamering, whether mariage, magiſtracie, and ſuch like functions of a ciuill life, did pleaſe God or no. And this doubtfullnes did trouble manie verie much. Manie forſaking their callings, leauing the common welth, did ſhut vp themſelues in monaſteries, that they might ſeeke that kinde of life, which they thought did more pleaſe God, yea which they ſuppoſed, to merit remiſſion of ſinnes.
                  Thirdlie, the opinion of neceſſitie did much vexe and diſquiet the conſciences. Traditions were thought neceſſary. Al this matter of the ceremonies and traditions in general doth properlie belong to the 17. ſection next folowing: but for aſmuch as here is intreated of daies, meates, & faſts, it was requiſite that it ſhould be brough in this ſect. becauſe the generals cannot well 
                           •
                        e ſeuered from particulars.And yet no man, though neuer ſo diligent, did euer obſerue them al, eſpecially for that the number of them was infinite. Gerſon writeth, That manie fell into deſperation, ſome murthered themſelues, becauſe they perceiued wel, that they could not obſerue the traditions. And all this while they neuer heard one comfortable worde of grace & of the righteouſnes of faith.
                  We ſee that the Summiſts & diuines gather together the traditions, and ſeeke out qualifications of them, for the vnburdening of mens conſciences: but euen they cannot ſatisfie themſelues, nor winde themſelues out: and ſometimes alſo their verie interpretations themſelues doe ſnare men
                        •
                      conſciences. The ſchooles alſo and pulpits were ſo buſied in numbring vp the traditions, that they had no leaſure to handle the Scripture, or to ſearch out more profitable doctrine of faith, of the Croſſe, of hope, of the excellencie of ciuill affaires, or of the comfort of mens conſciences in ſore tentations. Wherfore manie good men haue oft complained, that they were hindered by theſe contentions about traditions, that they could not be occupied in ſome better kinde of doctrine. When as therefore ſuch ſuperſtitious opinions did cleaue faſt vnto the traditions, it was neceſſarie to admoniſh the Churches, what they were

to iudge of traditions, to free godlie mindes from errour, to cure wounded conſciences, and to ſet out the benefit of Chriſt. We doe not go about to weaken the authoritie of Eccleſiaſticall power, we detract nothing from the Looke th
                           •
                         3. & 5. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ. in the 11. Sect.dignitie of Biſhops: we do not diſturbe the good order of the church. Tradititions rightlie taken, are better liked: but we reprooue thoſe Iewiſh opinions onelie.
                  Thus therefore we teach, touching ceremonies brought into the Church by mans authoritie. Firſt, touching traditions, which are oppoſed to the commandement of God, or can not be kept without ſinne, the Apoſtles rule is to be followed▪ 
                     We muſt obey God rather then men. Of this ſort is the tradition of ſingle life. Secondlie, touching other ceremonies, which are in their owne nature thinges indifferent, as Faſtes, Feſtiuall daies, difference of apparell, and the like, we muſt know that ſuch obſeruations do neither merit remiſſion of ſins, neither yet are they the righteouſnes or perfection of a Chriſtian, but that they are things indifferent, which, where is no daunger of giuing offence, maie welbe omitted.
                  This iudgement of ours hath theſe euident and cleare teſtimonies in the Goſpell, to the ende that it maie admoniſh the Church, that the Goſpell be not oppreſſed and obſcured by ſuperſtitious opinions. Rom. 14. The kingdome of God is not meat and drinke, but righteouſnes, peace, and ioy in the holie Ghoſt. Here Paull teacheth plainelie, that a Chriſtians righteouſnes is the ſpirituall motions of the hearr, and 
                        •
                     ot the outwarde obſeruation of meates and daies, &c. Colloſſ. 2. Let no man iudge you in meate, drinke, or a parte of a a holie daic. He forbiddeth that their conſciences ſhould be iudged, that is, that their conſciences ſhoulde be condemned in the vſe of ſuch thinges: but will haue them counted altogether indifferent thinges, and ſuch as pertaine not to the righteouſnes of the Goſpell. Then there followeth along and a weightie ſpeach, both of the rites of Moſes, and of the ceremonies appointed by the authoritie of man. For Paull ſpeaketh namelie of both kindes, denying them to be the righteouſnes of a Chriſtian, and forbidding to burden the conſciences with ſuch traditions. If ye be dead with Chriſt from the rudiments of the world: why, as though ye liued in the world, are ye burdened with traditions? Touch
                     
                     not, taſte not, handle not. Mat. 15. All that entreth into the mouth, defileth not the man. And in that place Chriſt excuſeth his diſciples, that had broken a tradition, that was in vſe among them, & he addeth a notable ſaying, They worſhip me in vaine with the commaundements of men. He denieth mans precepts to be true duties, auaileable vnto righteouſnes before God. Wherefore they are not the righteouſnes of a Chriſtian, nor yet neceſſarie duties.
                  Yet for all that it is apparant, how wonderfullie the ſeruices inuented by man haue multiplied and increaſed in the Church vnto this daie. The Monks did dailie heape vp ceremonies both with new ſuperſtitions, & alſo with new waies to bring in monie. And theſe trifles were thought to be the chiefeſt worſhip of God, and the greateſt godlines, whereas Chriſt doth by a moſte graue and weightie oracle forbid, that ſuch ceremonies ſhould be accounted for ſeruiuices of God. For he doth not forbid the appointing of traditions vnto a ciuill ende and vſe, that is, for good orders ſake, but he denieth that anie ſuch be anie worſhip of God, in ſaying, In vaine doe they worſhippe me. And he teacheth that true worſhippes be workes commaunded of God, as feare, faith, loue, patience, chaſtitie, walking in ones calling, doing of ones duety, &c. Act. 15. Peter ſaith, Why doe ye tempt God, laying a yoke on the diſciples necke, which neither we, nor ou
                           •
                         Fathers were able to beare
                           •
                         but by the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt we beleeue to be ſaued, as doe alſo they. Here Peter ſheweth, that remiſſion of ſinnes and ſaluation commeth to vs by Chriſt and not by the rites of Moſes, or the law; and doth alſo giue vs to vnderſtand, that ſuch doe greiuouſlie ſinne, which doe burden mens conſciences with ſuch ordinances. For it is no ſleight reproofe, when he ſaith, Why tempt ye God? And, 1. Tim. 4. He tearmeth the forbidding of meates, mariages, and ſuch like traditions, doctrines of Deuils. But why doth he vſe ſuch a ſharpe ſpeach? His meaning was not that there ſhould be no ordinances at all, or that no differences of places and times ſhould be obſerued: but then he accounteth them to be doctrines of deuils, when as the benefit of Chriſt is attributed vnto them, when they are reputed for righteouſnes, and for neceſſarie ſeruices of God, when an opinion of neceſſirie is faſtned to them, and mens

conſciences are racked, and faith made of no force by them. Theſe diſcommodities Chriſt and his Apoſtles would haue to be diligentlie auoided, and for that cauſe they crie out ſo often, and ſo earneſtlie againſt traditions. And it is a wonder, that the patrones of ſuch ſuperſtitious opinions about traditions, are no whitte mooued with ſuch thundering ſpeaches.
                  Now as for vs, we teach that thoſe traditions are not to be condemned, which commaund nothing againſt the lawes of God, and haue a ciuill vſe and end, namelie, ſuch as are ordained to this ende, that thinges might be done orderlie in the Church. Of which ſorte are the traditions about holie daies, the Lordes dare, the Natiuitie, Paſſeouer, and the reſt: alſo about the holie readings and leſſons, and ſuch like. Now all rites of this kinde we reteyne verie willinglie in our Churches. And yet the Church is taught, to know, what to thinke of ſuch cuſtomes, to witte, that they doe not merit remiſſion of ſinnes, that they are not the righteouſnes of a Chriſtian, nor neceſſarie duties vnto chriſtian righteouſnes, but indifferent things, which a man maie omitte, where there is no daunger of giuing offence. This qualifying of traditions doth ſet free the conſciences from ſuperſtitious opinions, and from that olde torture and racking. And ye
                        •
                      it bringeth great commendation to traditions, becauſe it ſheweth the true vſe of them. All modeſt men will more willinglie obey the tradititions, after they vnderſtand that their conſciences are ſet free from daunger in priuate, & that they muſt ſo farre obey, as that the common peace be not diſturbed, nor the weake ones hurte. Againe, this interpretation doth defend and preſerue publique good manners and diſcipline, becauſe it commaundeth to auoid offences. Alſo to obſerue publike holie daies, the meetings in the Churches, readinges, &c. doe ſerue for examples, and to accuſtome the youth, and the common ſorte thereto. Therefore ſuch ordinances are not to be broken, but rather with common care and trauell to be furthered.
                  Theſe be the true and meete commendations of traditions, which no doubt doe greatlie ſtirre vp ſuch as are godlie and ſtaied, to loue, defend, and adorne the publique orders. The Goſpell teacheth to thinke reuerentlie, not onelie of

other ciuill lawes and orders, but alſo of Eccleſiaſticall, and ſeeketh the true vſe of them. Yet notwithſtanding it appointeth degrees, and will haue the doctrine touching Chriſt, and thinges that are heauenlie and euerlaſting, diſcerned from the ſchooling, or Pedagogie of the Church. This libertie, whereof we ſpeake now, was not vnknowne to the Fathers. For Auguſtine ſaith, This whol kinde of thinges hath free obſeruations; and to this purpoſe he diſcourſeth at large. Irenaeus ſaith, The diſagreement in Faſting doth not breake of the agreement in Faith. The Tripartite hiſtory gathereth together manie examples of rites diſagreeing one from the other, and in the end addeth a notable ſaying, It was not the Apoſtles minde, to preſcribe anie thing touching holie daies, but to preach godlines, and a good conuerſation. But in ſo manifeſt a matter, it is needles to heap vp manie teſtimonies.
                  But our aduerſaries doe here make great outcries, That by this doctrine publike diſcipline and order is ouerthrowne, and diſorder and anarchie brought in. Likewiſe, that good workes and mortification of the fleſh are aboliſhed, according to Iouinians ſurmiſe▪
                      Theſe ſlaunders we haue partlie refuted alreadie: there is no confuſion or anarchie brought in, nor the publique diſcipline ouerthrowne, when as wee teach, that traditions, which haue a ciuill end and vſe, ought to be obſerued. And we teach alſo that offences muſt be foreſeene and auoided. But touching mortification, we anſwere thus: True and vnfeigned mortification is to beare the croſſe, to indure daungers, troubles, and afflictions. This kinde of obedience is the worſhip of God, and a ſpirituall worke, as the Pſal. teacheth: A ſacrifice to God is a troubled ſpirit, &c. We teach moreouer that another kinde of exerciſe is neceſſarie. It is the dutie of euerie Chriſtian to bridle his fleſh, euen by bodelie diſcipline, labours, temperancie, meditation of heauenlie thinges, and ſuch other exerciſes, fitte for his age. The neereſt and proper end whereof muſt be this, that fulnes and idlenes doe not prick him forward to ſinne, and that his minde maie be ſtirred vp, and made more apt for heauenlie affections. It is not to be thought, that theſe exerciſes are a worſhip of God, that deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, or that they be ſatisfactions, &c. And this diſcipline muſt be continuall: neither can certaine daies be ſette and

appointed equallie for all. Of this diſcipline Chriſt ſpeaketh: Beware that your bodies be not oppreſſed with ſurfeting. Againe, This kinde of Deuills doth not goe out, but by faſting and praier. And Paull ſaith, I chaſtice my bodie, and bring it in bondage. Wherefore we do not miſlike faſtings, but ſuperſtitious opinions, which be ſnares for mens conſciences, that are put in traditions. Moreouer, theſe exerciſes, when as they are referred vnto that ende, that we maie haue our bodies fitte for ſpirituall thinges, and to doe our duties, according to a mans calling, &c. they are good in the godlie, and Looke th
                           •
                         1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſ.meritorious workes, as the example of Daniell doeth teſtifie. For they be works, which God requireth to this end, that they maie ſubdue the fleſh,
                  This former article we found placed elſewhere in the fift place amongſt thoſe, wherein the abuſes, that are changed, are reckoned vp.
               
               
                  Of the difference of meates.
                  IT hath beene a common opinion, not of the common 
                        Art. 5.ſorte alone, but alſo of ſuch as are teachers in the Churches, that the differences of meates, and ſuch like humane traditions, are workes auaileable to merit remiſſion both of the faulte, and of the puniſhment. And that the world thus thought, it is apparant by this, that dailie new ceremonies, new orders, new holie daies, new This treatis of ceremonies repeated generally doth prope
                           •••
                        e pert
                           •••
                         vnto the 
                           〈…〉
                         here 
                           〈…〉
                         in the 
                           〈◊〉
                         article.faſtes, were appointed: and the teachers in the Churches, did exacte theſe workes, at the peoples handes, as a ſeruice neceſſarie to deſerue iuſtification by, and they did greatlie terrifie their conſciences, if aught were omitted. * Of this perſwaſion of traditions manie diſcommodities haue followed in the Church. For firſt the doctrine of grace, is obſcured by it, and alſo the righteouſnes of faith, which is the moſte eſpeciall point of the Goſpell, and which it behoueth moſte of all to be extant, and to haue the preheminence in the Church, that the merit of Chriſt maie be well knowen, and faith, which beleueth that ſinnes are remitted through Chriſt, and not for anie workes of ours, maie be exal
                        •
                     ed farre aboue workes. For which cauſe alſo Saint Paull laboureth much in this point: he remooueth the law and humane traditions, that he may ſhew that the righteouſnes of Chriſt i
                        •
                      a farre other thing, then ſuch workes as theſe be, namelie, a faith, which beleeueth that ſinnes are freely remitted

through Chriſt. But this doctrine of Saint Paull is almoſt wholie ſmothered by traditions, which haue breade an opinion, that by making difference in meates and ſuch like ſeruices, a man muſt merit remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification. In their doctrine of repentance there was no mention of faith: onelie theſe ſatisfactorie works were ſpoken of: Repentance ſeemed to ſtand whollie in theſe.
                  Secondlie, theſe traditions obſcured the Commaundements of God, that they could not be knowne, becauſe that traditions were preferred far aboue the commaundementes of God. All Chriſtianitie was thought to be an obſeruation of certeine holie daies, rites, faſtes, and attire. Theſe obſeruations caried a goodlie title and name, that they were the ſpirituall life, and the perfect life. In the meane ſeaſon Gods commaundements touching euerie mans calling, were of ſmall eſtimation. That the father brought vp his children, that the mother bare them, that the prince gouerned the common wealth, theſe were reputed worldly affaires, and vnperfect and farre inferior to thoſe gliſtering obſeruations & orders. And theſe errors did greatly torment good mindes, which were grieued that they were hande-faſted to an vnperfect kinde of life, in mariage, in Magiſtracy, and in other ciuill functions. They had the Monkes and ſuch like men in admiration, and falſelie imagined, that their orders did more deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification.
                  Thirdlie, traditions brought great daunger to mens conſciences, becauſe it was not poſſible to keepe them all, and yet men thought the obſeruation of them to be neceſſarie duties. Gerſon writeth, that manie fell into deſpaire, and ſome murthered themſelues, becauſe they perceiued that they could not keepe the traditions: and all this while they neuer heard the comforte of the righteouſnes of faith, or of grace. We ſee the Summiſtes and diuines gather together the traditions, and ſeeke qualifications of them; to vnburden mens conſciences: and yet all will not ſerue, but ſom times they bring more ſnares vpon the conſcience. The ſchooles and pulpits haue bene ſo buſied in gathering together the traditions, that they had not leiſure once to touch the ſcripture, and to ſeeke out a more profitable doctrine, of

faith, of the croſſe, of hope, of the dignitie of ciuill affaires, of the comfort of conſciences in perilous aſſaultes. Wherfore Gerſon and ſome other diuines haue made grieuous complaints that they were hindered by braules about traditions, that they could not be occupied in ſome better kinde of doctrine. And Saint Auguſtine forbiddeth that mens conſciences ſhould be burdened with ſuch kinde of obſeruations, & doth verie wiſelie warne Ianuarius to know, that they are tobe obſerued indifferentlie: for ſo he ſpeaketh: Wherefore our miniſters muſt not be thought, to haue touched this matter vnaduiſedlie for hatred of the Biſhops, as ſome do falſelie ſurmiſe. There was great need to admoniſh the Churches of thoſe errours, which did ariſe from miſtaking of traditions: for the Goſpell driueth men to vrge the doctrine of grace, and of the righteouſnes of faith, in the Church: which yet can neuer be vnderſtord, if men ſuppoſe that they can merit remiſſion of ſinnes, and iuſtification, by obſeruations of their owne choice. Thus therefore they haue taught vs, that we can neuer merit remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification, by the obſeruation of mans traditions: and therefore that we muſt not thinke, that ſuch obſeruations are neceſſarie dueties. Hereunto they adde teſtimonies out of the ſcriptures. Chriſt excuſeth his diſciples, Math. 15. which kept not the receiued tradition, which yet ſeemed to be about a matter not vnlawfull, but indifferent, and to haue ſome affinitie with the waſhings of the lawe, and ſaith, They worſhippe me in vaine with the precepts of men. Chriſt therefore requireth no vnprofitable worſhip: and a litle after, he addeth, All that entreth in at the mouth de
                           •
                        ileth not the man. Aagine, Rom. 14. The kingdome of God is not meat and drinke. Col. 2. Let no man iudge you in meate, or drinke, in a Sabboth, or in an holie daie. Againe, If ye be dead with Chriſte, from the rudiments of the world, why, as though yee liued in the world, are ye burdened with 
                           •
                        raditions, Touch not, taſt not, handle not? Act. 15. Peter ſaith, why tempt ye God, laying a yoke vpon the ne
                           •
                        ks of the diſciples which neither we, nor our fathers were able to beare? but by the grace of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, we hope to be ſaued, as did alſo they. Here Peter forbiddeth to burthen the conſciences with manie rites, whether they be of Moſes, or of anie others appointing: and 1. Tim. 4. he calleth the forbidding of meates, a doctrine of deuills: becauſe that it is flat againſt the goſpel, to appoint or

do ſuch workes, to the end that by them we maie merit remiſſion of ſinnes or iuſtification, or becauſe that there could be no Chriſtianitie without them.
                  Here our aduerſaries obiect againſt vs, that our miniſters hinder al good diſcipline and mortification of the fleſh, as Iouinian did. But the contrarie maie be ſeene by our mens writings. For they haue alwais taught, touching the croſſe, that Chriſtians muſt ſuffer afflictions. This is the true, earneſt, and vnfeigned mortification, to be exerciſed with diuerſe afflictions, and to be crucified with Chriſt. Moreouer they teach, that euerie Chriſtian muſt ſo by bodilie diſcipline, or bodely exerciſes and labour, exerciſe and keepe vnder himſelfe, that fulnes and ſlouth do not prick him vp to ſinne, nor that he maie by ſuch exerciſes merit ſuch remiſſion of the fault, or of eternall death: and this corporall diſcipline muſt alwaies be plied, not onelie in a few, and thoſe ſette daies, according to the commaundement of Chriſt, Take heede that your bodies be not oppreſſed with ſurfeting. Againe. This kinde of deuill is not caſt out but by fasting and praier: And Paul ſaith, I chast
                           ••
                        e my bodie, and bring it vnder ſubiection. Where he plainlie ſheweth, that he did therefore chaſtice his bodie, not that by diſſcipline he might merit remiſſion of ſinnes, but that his body might be apt, and fit for ſpirituall things, & to do his dutie, according to his calling. Therfore we do not condemne faſts themſelues, but the traditions, which preſcribe certeine daies and certeine meates, with daunger to the conſciences, as though ſuch workes as theſe were neceſſary duties.
                  Yet many of the traditions are obſerued among vs, which tend vnto this end, that things may be done orderlie in the Church, as namelie the Looke the 1. obſeru. vppon this confeſſ.order of leſſons in the Maſſe, and the chiefeſt holie daies. But in the meane time men are admoniſhed, that ſuch a ſeruice doth not iuſtifie before god, and that there is no ſinne to be put in ſuch thinges, if they be left vndone, ſo it be without offence This libertie in humane rites & ceremonies was not vnknowne to the fathers. For in the Eaſt Church they kept Eaſter at another time then they did in Rome: and when as they of the Church of Rome accuſed the Eaſt Church of ſchiſme for this diuerſity▪ they were admoniſhed by others, that ſuch faſhions ſhould not be alike euerie where. And Ireneus ſaith: the diſſagreement about faſting
                     
                     doth not breake of the agrement of faith. Beſides, Pope Gregorie in the 12. diſtinction inſinuateth, that ſuch diuerſitie doth not hurt the vnitie of the Church: and in the Tripartite hiſtorie, lib. 9. many examples of different rites are gathered together, and theſe words are there rehearſed, The minde of the Apoſtles was, not to giue precepts of holie daies, but to preach godlines and a good conuerſation.
                  
                  What is then to be thought of the Lords day, and of ſuch like rites vſed in Churches? Hereunto they anſwer, that it is lawful for the Biſhops or Paſtors to appoint ordinances, wherby things may be done in order in the Church, not that by them we ſhould merit remiſſion of ſinnes, or ſatisfie for ſinnes, or that mens conſciences ſhould be bound to eſteme them as neceſſarie ſeruices, and thinke that they ſinne, when they violate any one of them, though it be without the offence of others. So Paull ordeined, that weomen ſhould couer their heads in the congregation, that the Interpreters of ſcripture ſhould be heard in courſe or order in the Church.
                  
                  Such like ordinances it behooueth the Churches to kepe for charitie, and quietnes ſake, ſo farre forth, that one offend not another, that all thinges maie be done in order, and without tumult in the Church: but yet with this caution, that mens conſciences be not burdened, ſo as they ſhould account them as things neceſſarie to ſaluation, and thinke they did ſinne, when they break anie one of them without offence of others: as no man would ſaie that a woman doth offend, if ſhe come abroade with his head vncouered, without the offence of anie.
                  Of this ſort is the obſeruation of the Lords day, of Eaſter, of Pentecoſt, and ſuch like holie daies, and rites. For they that thinke, that the obſeruation of the Lords daie was appointed by the authoritie of the Church in ſtead of the Sabboth, as neceſſarie, they are greatlie deceiued. The ſcripture requireth that the obſeruation of it ſhould now be free: for it teacheth that the Moſaicall ceremonies are not needful after 
                        •
                     he goſpel is reuealed. And yet becauſe it was requiſite to appoint a certeine daie, that the people might know when to come together, it ſeemeth that the Church did for that purpoſe appoint the Lords daie: which daie for this cauſe alſo ſemed to haue better liked the Church, that in it

men might haue an example of Chriſtian liberty, and might know, that the obſeruation, neither of the Sabboth, nor of any other daie, was of neceſſitie.
                  There are extant certeine monſtrous diſputations, touching the chaunging of the law, and the ceremoies of the new law, and of the change of the change of the Sabboth, which did al ſpring vp of a falſe perſuaſion, that there ſhould be a worſhip in the Church, like to the Leuiticall worſhip: and that Chriſt gaue the charge of deuiſing new ceremonies, which ſhould be neceſſarie to ſaluation, to the Apoſtles and Biſhops. Theſe errors crept into the Church, when as the doctrine of faith was not plainly inough taught. Some diſpute, that the obſeruation of the Lords daie is not in deed of the law of God, but as it were of the lawe of God: and touching holie daies, they preſcribe, how farre it is lawfull to worke in them. What elſe are ſuch diſputations, but ſnares for mens conſciences.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
               
                  Of Anointing.
                  MOre ouer, that which now is called, Extreame anointing, 
                     
                        Art. 19. ſſ. 2.was in times paſt a kinde ofhealing, as it is euident out of the Epiſt. of Saint Ieames, cap. 5. Now it is become a ſhew full of ſuperſtition. They ſaie that ſinnes be forgiuen through theſe anointinges, and they adde there-unto inuocation of the dead, which alſo muſt of neceſſitie be diſliked. Therefore theſe ceremonies are not kept in ou
                        •
                      Churches neither in times paſt did the Church thinke tha
                        •
                      they were neceſſarie. But for the ſicke we doe make godlie praiers, publiquelie, and priuatlie: as alſo the Lorde hath promiſed that he will aſſwage euen corporall griefes in the
                        •
                      that aske it of him, according to that ſaying, Pſalme 49▪ 
                     Call vpon me in the daye of trouble, and I will deliuer thee. Alſo we vſe burialles, hauing there at a decent aſſemblie, godlie admonitions, and ſonges, &c.
               
               
                  
                  
                     The firſt part of this .19. Article, which is of confirmation. was placed in the thirteenth Section. Hitherto alſo pertaineth the beginning of the 20. Article ſo farre as it ſpeaketh of a certaine time appointed for the ſeruice of God.
                  
                  NAtural reaſon doth know that there is an order, and the vnderſtainding of order, is an euident teſtimony of god: neither is it poſſible that men ſhould liue without any order, as we ſee that in familes there muſt be diſtinct times of labour, reſt, meate, and ſleepe: and euerie nature, as it is beſt, ſo doeth it chiefelie loue order throughout the whole life. Alſo Paull commaundeth, That all things in the Church be done decently and in order. Therefore there hath beene at al times, euen from the beginning of mankinde, a certaine order of publique meetinges, there hath beene alſo a certaine diſtinction of times, and certaine other ceremonies, and that without doubt full of grauitie, and elegancie, among thoſe excellent lightes of mankinde, when as in the ſame garden or cottage there ſatte together, Sem, Abraham, Iſaac, and their families▪ and when as that Sermon which Sem made, concerning the true God, the Sonne of God, the diſtinction of the Church, and other nations, being heard, afterwarde they together vſed inuocation.
                  That which followeth, becauſe it treateth of indifferent Traditiditions in generall, is placed in the next Section.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               
                  Of Faſting.
                  
                     
                        Art. 1
                           •
                        . WE think that Faſting is profitable, not to this end, that either by the merit of it worke it might purge ſinnes before God, or applie the merit of Chriſt to him that doth Faſt; but that, by ſobrietie it maie bridle the fleſh, leſt that man being hindered by ſurfeting, and dronkennes, he be the leſſe able to obeie the calling of God, and diſcharge his duetie negligentlie. But we ſhall haue a fitte place hereafter to ſpeake of Faſting.
               
               
                  
                  Alſo, Article 28. Of faſting.
                  FAſting hath it praiſe and vſe, But now we do not ſpeake either of neceſſarie faſting, when as a man muſt needs faſt for want of meat, or of an allegoricall faſting, which is to abſtaine from all vices: but we are to ſpeake of two vſuall kindes of faſting, whereof the one is a perpetuall faſte, and this is a ſobrietie, which is alwaies to be kept, in meate and drink, throughout the wholl courſe of a mans life. for it is neuer lawfull for vs to rauine, and to follow ſurfeting, and dronkennes. There is another faſt, which is for a daie, when as ſometimes we abſtaine from meate the wholl daie, ſuch as was vſed in the olde Teſtament, Leuit. 16. Alſo the examples of Ioſaphat, of the Niniuites, and others, doe witnes the ſame thing. This kinde of faſting was alſo vſed after the publiſhing of the Goſpell, as appeereth, Act. 13. and 14. But afterward there folowed a great difference in Churches touching the obſeruation of ſuch a kinde of faſting: and as this difference brought no diſcommoditie to the Church, ſo it teſtified, that the vſe of this faſting was free. And there is a worthie ſaying among the auncient fathers, touching this varietie: The difference, ſaie they, of faſtings doeth not break of the agreement of faith.
                  
                  Now although ſome men doe thinke, that Chriſt by his example did conſecrate, the faſt of Lent, yet it is manifeſt, that Chriſt did not commaunde this faſt, neither can the conſtitution of our nature abide it, that we ſhould imitate the example of Chriſt his faſting, who did abſtaine full 40. dates, and 40. nightes, from all meate and drinke. Alſo Euſebius doth declare, and that not obſcurelie, That the vſe of this Lenten faſt was very free in the Church. Moreouer Chryſoſtome, in Gen. cap. 2. Hom. 11. ſaith, If thou canſt not faſt▪ yet thou maist abſtaine from ſinnes: and this is not the leaſt thing, nor much differing from faſting, but fit to ouerthrow euen the fury of the Deuill
                  
                  Neither was there anie choiſe of meates appointed, becauſe the Apoſtle had ſaide, To the cleane, all thinges are cleane. But in the obſeruation of ſuch faſtes, we muſt chiefely marke the ende. The auncient fathers did ſometimes faſt whole daies together, that they might giue themſelues to publique praier, and by this diſcipline might admoniſh their Church,

and eſpecially the youth, of daungers that were paſt, or preſent, or hanging ouer their heades, and might ſtirre them vp to repentance, wherby the wrath of God might be aſſwaged. This is the godlie, and profitable ende of theſe faſtinges.
                  
                     Others doe faſte, That by the merit of this worke, they maie purge their ſinnes before God, or, as ſome doe ſpeake, Applie vnto themſelues the merit of Christ, by their faſting. But this end is vtterlie to be condemned. For firſt, the onelie death of Chriſt is the purging of our ſinnes. Secondlie, faſting was not ordeined for this vſe, that it ſhould be a worke, whereby the merit of Chriſt maie be applied to vs. For, faſting is either ioyned with true repentance, and then the merit of Chriſt is applied to him that repenteth by faith, which is the chiefe parte of repentance, before a man doth beginne or ende his faſting: or elſe faſting is without repentance, and then it is abhominable in the ſight of God, ſo farre is it from applying the merit of Chriſt to him that faſteth. Iſa 58. Is it ſuch a fast that I haue choſen, that a man ſhould afflict his ſoule for a daie, and to bowe downe his head as a bulruſh? Auguſtine Epiſt. 86. ad Caſulanum, ſaith, I reuoluing that in my minde, which is written in the Euangelicall and Apoſtolique Scriptures, and in that wholl inſtrument which they call the new Testament, doe ſee that faſting is commaunded. But on what daies we ought not to faſt, and on what daies, we ought to faſt, I doe not ſee it defined, either by the commaundement of the Lorde, or of the Apostles. And by this I thinke, that rather a releaſing, then a binding to fasting, is the more fit and apt, not to obtaine righteouſnes (wherein the beutie of the Kings daughter doth conſiſt inwardly) which is obtained by Faith, but yet, to ſignifie a perpetuall rest. And Chryſoſtome, Tom. 4. de Ieiun. Quadrag. Hom. 73. ſaieth: If we come dailie hither, and fast the wholl Lent, and doe not chaunge our life to the better, it will be an occaſion of our greater condemnation. By theſe teſtimonies it is euident, that it is neither Apoſtolique▪ nor Catholique, to thinke that faſting is a worke, whereby either ſinnes are purged before God, or the merit of Chriſt is applied.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Hitherto alſo pertaineth the 29. Article. Of the conſecrating of water, ſalte, wine, and other thinges.
                  
                  VVE confeſſe, that the forbidding of water, whereby the Leuitical vncleanes was purged, was ordained of god in the old teſtament. Alſo we acknowledge that miracle wherby the Prophet Elizeus did heale the barren waters of 
                        •
                     ericho, by caſting in of ſalte. And we embrace that, which Paull writing to Timothie, ſaieth, Euerie creature of God is good, and nothing is to be reiected, which is receiued with thankeſgiuing▪ for it is ſanctified by the worde of God, and by praie
                           •
                        
                      But where as in the new Teſtament, water is conſecrated, which they call holie water, by the ſprinkling whereof veniall ſinnes are taken awaie, and Deuills are driuen awaie: and whereas ſalte alſo is conſecrated, to make thinges wholſome, which otherwiſe be hurtfull, it ſeemeth neither to be Apoſtolique, nor Catholique. For we are not commaunded by the worde of God to imitate the Leuitical ſprinkling, or Elizeus his miracle, but it was vſed by mans arbitrement & pleaſure: & therfore it pertaineth to this ſaying of Chriſt, In vaine do they worſhip me, teaching for doctrines the preceptes of men. And it is euident that the ſprinkling of the bloode of Chriſt, which is made by the worde of the Goſpell, by Baptiſme, and the Lordes Supper, and receiued by faith, doth purge vs from our ſinnes. That therefore which is proper to the blood of Chriſt, which by the ordinance of god was ſhed for our ſins, ought not to be attributed towater, conſecrated by the appointment of man. And as touching that Elizeus did heale the barren waters by ſalte, there is a miracle ſet before our eies, that thereby we may confirme that credit, which we ought to giue to the preaching of the Prophet; but it is not ſet before vs to be imitated without a ſpecial calling of God: becauſe the miracles of the Saints vſe not to be generall▪ but perſonall.
                  And as touching that which Paull ſaith, that creatures are ſanctified by the worde of God, and by praier, he meaneth not that creatures, as for example, ſalt, fleſh, egges▪ hearbes, are to be coniured, that Sathan by the vſe of them may be driuen awaie; but that all creatures are by the worde of God euerie one appointed to their outward vſe, which then ſerue

for our good, when we vſe them well, by faith, and praying vnto God. So God created ſalt, to ſeaſon meat, and to preſerue fleſh from putrifying: he created water, to ſerue for drinke, or waſhing, or watering, and not to driue away the Deuill. In deede in Baptiſme, he ordeined Looke the 1. obſeru. vp on the confeſſ. of Saxony Sect. 13.water to waſh awaie ſinnes: but this is not the generall ende why water was created, but a ſpeciall ordinance, appointed by a ſpeciall worde of God. For, as touching the generall creation and ſanctification of God, there is no worde of God, that doth witnes, that the creatures, which we before haue rehearſed, by coniurings are made profitable hereunto, that they may take awaie ſinnes, and chaſe away the deuils. Now that which is brought in without the worde of God, to another vſe then God hath ordeined it vnto, it cannot be done in faith, but it becommeth an abuſe, & doth rather bring deſtruction, then ſaluation, Rom. 14 Whatſoeuer is not of faith, is ſinne. And Cyprian, Epiſt. 2. Lib. 2. ſaith. If Chriſt alone is to be heard, we are not to conſider what any other before vs hath thought good to be done, but what Chriſt, who is before all, hath done: for we ought not to follow the cuſtome of men, but the trueth of God, &c.
                  
                  Hitherto alſo perteineth Chap. 22. of the ſame confeſſion.
               
               
                  Of extreame vnction.
                  WE confeſſe that the Apoſtles anointed the ſicke with oile, and that the ſicke recouered their bodelie health. Alſo we confeſſe, that the Epiſtle, which beareth the name of Iames, doth commaund, that the Elders of t
                           •
                        e Church be called vnto the ſicke, that they may anoint them with oile, & praie for them, that they may obteine health. But th
                        •
                     ſe things were then practized profitably, when as yet the Miniſter of the Church were indued with the gift of healing the ſ
                        •
                     cke corporallie, and wonderfully. But after that this gift ceaſed, the Goſpell beeing confirmed in the Church, the thing it ſelfe doth witnes, that this ceremonie of Anointing is now idlely, & vnfruitfully vſed. For they which now are anointed, vſe not by this anointing to recouer their bodelie health▪ yea this anointing is not vſed, but on them, of whoſe bodelie health men doe deſpaire. Neither is there any word of God, which doth promiſe, the Goſpell of Chriſt beeing publiſhed, that this outwarde anointing ſhould be of any

force to take away ſinnes, and to giue a ſpirituall and heauenlie health. Notwithſtanding the Miniſters of the church are bound by duetie, to viſite the ſicke, and to praie together with the Church for their health, looke the 1. obfcruat. vpon this confeſſ.and to comfort them as well by the preaching of the Goſpell, as by diſpenſing of the Lordes Supper. And this is a godlie anointing, whereby the holie Ghoſt is effectuall in the beleeuers.
               
               
                  CHAP. 24. Of the remembrance of the dead.
                  
                  ALthough in deede there is no difference, betweene a Saint reſting in Chriſt, and a faithfull man departed (for euerie one which dieth in the faith of Chriſt, is a Saint) yet becauſe it hath pleaſed ſome to put a difference betwixt theſe two, we alſo thought it good to make two ſeuerall Chapters thereof. And firſt, we thinke, that it belongeth to a godlie minde, to make decent mention of his elders which haue died in the faith of Chriſt, and to ſhew forth towarde their poſteritie and friendes which are aliue, in all duetifull manner that we can, that thankefullnes, which is due to thoſe benefits, which we receiued of them. Secondly, faith requireth of vs, that we doe not thinke that the dead are nothing, but that they doe in deede liue before God: to wit, that the godlie doe liue bleſſedlie in Chriſt: and that the wicked doe liue in an horrible expectation of the reuelation of the iudgement of God. Alſo, charitie requireth, that wee ſhoulde wiſh all peace and happines to them that are dead in Chriſt. This alſo is to be added, that, to teſtifie the hope of our reſurrection, we muſte burie our dead decently, ſo neere as may be, and as the time, and conditions of men will ſuffer. Looke the 
                           •
                        . obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.Therfore we thinke it is a profitable thing, that at burialls thoſe things be rehearſed, & expounded out of the holie Scriptures, which doe ſerue to ſtrengthen our faith in the horror of death, and to confirme our hope of the reſurrection.
                  But that the dead are helped by thoſe vſuall watchings, praiers, and ſacrifices, and that by the merites thereof, they be either deliuered from their paines, or obtaine a greater felicitie which is in heauen, there is no teſtimonie out of

that doctrine which is in deede Propheticall and Apoſtolicall. For there is one onelie merit of eternall life, and we haue one onely redemption and deliuerance, to wit, the paſſion of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: and this merit is made ours, when we beleeue in Chriſt, and we haue nothing to doe with it, when we do not beleeue the Goſpell of Chriſt. Ioh. 3. God ſent not his Sonne into the worlde, that he ſhould condemne the world, but that the world through him might be ſaued. He that beleeueth in him, ſhall not be condemned: but he that beleeueth not, is condemned alreadie, becauſe he beleeueth not in the onelie begotten Sonne of God. Therefore if any man ſhall departe out of this life in the faith of Chriſt, he hath all the merit of Chriſt, & needeth no other. For God, which gaue his Sonne, doth alſo giue al things with him, as Paul ſaith. But he that departeth hence without Chriſt, cannot be helped by any merittes of men, becauſe that without Chriſt there is no ſaluation. Cyprian againſt Demet. Tract. 1. ſaith: When a man is once departed hence, there is no place left for repentance, there is no effect of ſatisfaction: here life is either loſt, or helde faſt: here we muſt prouide for eternall ſaluation, by the ſeruice or worſhippe of God, and by the fruite of faith. And Hierome vpon the Epiſtle to the Gal. Cap. 6. ſaith: We are taught by this ſmall ſentence, though obſcurelie, a new point of doctrine which lieth hid, to wit, that whileſt we be in this preſent worlde, we may helpe one an other, either by praiers, or by counſell: but when we ſhall come before the tribunall ſeate of Chriſt, it is not Iob, nor Daniell, nor Noe, that can intreate any thing for vs, but euerie man ſhall beare his own burthen. For, as touching that which is cited out of the Machabees, That ſacrifices were offered for the ſinnes of the dead, the Author himſelfe of the booke doth doubt, in the end of the booke, whether he hath written well, & craueth pardon, if in any point he hath erred. Therefore let vs pardon him that without any authoritie of the holie Scripture he affirmeth, that the dead are freed from their ſinne by the ſacrifices, and praiers of them that be aliue. And Tertullian ſaith, Oblations are made one day euerie yeare for them that are dead: But this was either receiued without authoritie of the word of God, from the cuſtomes of the heathen, as many other things were; or by the name of Oblation we muſt vnderſtand a publique rememberance of thoſe which died in the faith of Chriſt, and a thankeſgiuing for thoſe benefittes

which God beſtowed vpon them.
               
               
                  CHAP. 25. Of Purgatorie.
                  
                  ALthough we ought not to doubt, but that the Saints haue their Purgatorie fire in this life, as the examples of Dauid, Ezechias, Ionas, and others doe witnes, yet it is not without cauſe doubted, whether that after this life there be ſuch a Purgatorie, as the common ſort of men doe thinke there is, wherein the ſoules be ſo long tormented, till either by their puniſhment they doe ſatisfie for their ſinnes, or be redeemed by Indulgences. For if Purgatorie be ſuch a thing, it is much to be merueiled at, that neither the Prophets, nor the Apoſtles haue in their writings deliuered vnto vs any thing thereof certeinelie, and plainlie, but rather doe teach, and that not obſcurely, the cleane contrarie. Mar. 16. Preach ye the Goſpell to euerie creature: he that ſhal beleeue, and be baptized, ſhall be ſaued: but he that will not beleeue, ſhall be condemned. Here be two degrees of men placed: the one, of them, which beleeue the Goſpel, and they are pronounced, ſaued: the other, of them, which doe not beleeue the Goſpell, and theſe are pronounced, condemned: there is no meane betwixt theſe two. For either thou doeſt departe out of this life in the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, and then thou haſt remiſſion of thy ſinnes for Chriſt his ſake, and the righteouſnes of Chriſt is imputed to thee. Therefore he which dieth, beeing accompanied with Chriſt, he wanteth nothing toward the obteining of true and eternall life: but he which departeth from hence without Chriſt, goeth into eternall darkenes.
                  If beſide theſe two degrees there were ſome other third ſtate of ſoules in an other world, certeinlie Paul, Who was taken vp into Paradiſe, and into the third heauen, & ſaw many ſecret things, would not haue enuied the Church this knowledge. But ſee, when he doth of ſet purpoſe write to the Theſſalonians, concerning Chriſtians that ſleepe, he maketh no mention at all of anie Purgatorie, but rather willeth them, Not to be ſorofull, euen as others which haue no hope. Therefore if there were anie ſuch ſtate of ſoules in another world, as

the common people thinketh there is, Paull could not be withh
                        •
                     ld, but in ſo fit a place he would plainelie haue declared this ſtate of ſoules, and would haue preſcribed a meane vnto the Church, whereby miſerable ſoules might be deliuered from their torment. But the true and Catholike Church in deed, hath plainelie ſhewed that ſhee hath no certaintie at all concerning this third kinde of the ſtate of ſoules in another world. Chryſoſtome in his ſecond ſermon of Lazarus, ſaieth, If thou haſt violently taken anie thing from anie man, reſtore it, and ſaie, as doth Zacheus, If I haue taken from anie man by forged cauillation, I reſtore fourefoulde. If thou art become an enimie to anie man, be reconciled before thou come to iudgement. Diſcharge all thinges here, that without greefe thou maiſt beholde that tribunall ſeat. Whileſt we be here, we haue manie excellent hopes. But ſo ſoone as we depart thither, it is not then in our power to repent, nor to waſh awaie our ſinnes. And againe, He that in this preſent life ſhall not waſh awaie his ſinnes, ſhall not finde any comforte afterward.
                  
                  Auguſtine, although he place certaine men in the middeſt, betiwxt them, that be verie good, and thoſe that be verie euill, to the one ſorte whereof he ſeemeth to aſſigne the place of Purgatorie, yet in other places he doubteth of that matter, and doth not define anie certaintie. Therefore we muſt ſo thinke of this opinion of Auguſtine, as he requireth, that is, we muſt receiue that, which is confirmed, either by the authority of the Scripture, or by probable reaſon. But it is euident, that thoſe places of the Scripture, which are commonlie cited, to eſtabliſh Purgatorie, are wreſted from the naturall, to a ſtraunge ſenſe, and are farre otherwiſe expounded, euen of the a
                        •
                     ncient writers themſelues. And thoſe reaſons which Auguſtine bringeth for his opinion, do ſeme to leane to this foundation, That we obtaine remiſſion of our ſinnes and life, not onelie for Chriſt his ſake, through faith, but alſo for the merites of our workes. But how this agreeth with the true Apoſtolike doctrine, we haue before declared. Wherefore we thinke, that this ſpeculation of Purgatorie fire, is to be left to it owne authors, and that we muſt chiefely doe this, as Paull exhorteth vs, that we maie confirme our ſelues one another with ſpeaches touching the aſſured faith of our reſurrection, and ſaluation in Chriſt Ieſus, for whoſe

ſake God doth ſo fauour the faithfull, that in the middeſt of death he preſerueth them, and giueth them true peace.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               
                  
                     Of praiers and faſtinges. CHAP. 7.
                  
                     Theſe thinges which are mingled in this 7. & after in the 10. c. touching Praiers, did apperteine to the 15. Sect if they might fitlie haue beene ſeparated. VVE haue among vs praiers and Religious faſtes, which are moſte holie workes and ſuch as doe verie much beſeeme Chriſtians: whereunto our Preaehers do moſt diligentlie exhorte their hearers. For true faſting is as it were a renouncing of this preſent life, which is alwaies ſubiect to euill luſtes and deſires, and a meditation of the life to come, which is free from all perturbation. And praier is a lifting vp of the minde vnto God, and ſuch a familiar ſpeach with him, as no other thing can ſo greatlie ſet a man on fire with heauenlie affections, & more mightelie make the minde comformable to the will of God. And though theſe exercies be neuer ſo holie, and neceſſarie for Chriſtians, yet ſeeing that a mans neighbour is not ſo much benefited by them, 1. Cor. 13.as man is prepared, that he maie with fruit and profit haue regarde of his neighbour, they are not to be preferred before holie doctrine, godlie exhortations and admonitions, and alſo other dueties, whereby our neighbour doth preſentlie receiue ſome profit. Whereupon we reade of our Sauiour, that in the night time he gaue him ſelfe to praier, and in the daie time to doctrine, and to heale the ſicke. For as loue is greater then faith and hope, ſo to beleeue thoſe thinges, which come neereſt vnto loue, to wit, ſuch as bring aſſured profit vnto men, are to be perferred before all other holie functions: whereupon S. Chryſoſtome writeth, that Among 
                     In Math. Hom. 48.
                     
                     the wholl companie of vertues, faſting hath the laſt place.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Of the Commaunding of Faſtes. CHAP. 8.
                  BVt becauſe that no mindes, but theſe that be ardent, and peculiarlie ſtirred vp by the heauenlie inſpiration, can either praie, or faſte aright, and with profit, we beleeue that it is farre better, after the example of the Apoſtles, and the former & more ſincere Church, by holie exhortations to inuite men hereunto, then to wring them out by preceptes,

ſuch eſpeciallie, as doe binde men vnder paine of deadlie ſinne: the which thing the Prieſtes that were of late toke vpon them to doe, when as then the order of Prieſtes had not a litle degenerated. But we had rather leaue the placetime, and manner, both of praying, and alſo of faſting, to the arbitrement of the holie Ghoſt, then to preſcribe them by certaine lawes, eſpeciallie ſuch, as maie not be broken without ſome ſacrifice of amends. Yet for their ſakes that be the younger, and more imperfect ſorte, our Preachers doe not diſlike, that there ſhould be an appointed time and meanes, both for prayer, and alſo for faſting, that as it were by theſe holie introductions to exerciſes they might be prepared hereunto, ſo that it be done, without bynding of the conſcience. We were induced thus to thinke, not ſo much for that all compulſion being againſt a mans will, is repugnant to the nature of theſe actions, but rather, becauſe that neither Chriſt himſelfe, nor anie of his Apoſtles, haue in any place made mentiō of ſuch kinde of precepts: & this doth In Math. hom. 47.
                     Chryſoſtome alſo witnes, ſaying: Thou ſeeſt that an vpright life doth helpe more then all other thinges. Now I tearme an vpright life not the labour of Faſting, nor the bed of haire, or aſhes, but if thou doeſt deſpiſe monie, no otherwiſe then it becommeth thee, if thou burne with charitie, if thou nouriſh the hungrie with thy bread, if thou ouercome thy anger, if thou doſt not deſire vaine glorie, if thou be not poſſeſſed with enuie: for theſe be the thinges that he teacheth▪ for he doth not ſaie, that he will haue his faſt to be followed, howbeit he might haue proponed thoſe 40. daies vnto vs: but he ſaith, Learne of me, becauſe I am meeke, and lowlie in heart. Yea rather on the contrarie ſide, ſaith he, eate all that is ſet before you.
                  
                  Moreouer, we doe not read, that anie ſolemne or ſet faſte was enioyned to the auncient Church, but that faſte of one daie. For thoſe faſtes, which as the ſcripture doth witnes, were ordeyned of Prophets, and of Kinges, it is certaine, that they were no ſet faſtes, but enioyned onelie for their time, to wit, when as euident calamities, either hanging ouer their heads, or preſentlie pinching them, did ſo require it. Seeing therfore that the Scripture, as S. Paull doth affirme, doth inſtruct a man to euerie good worke, and yet is ignorant of theſe faſtes which are extorted by precepts, we doe not ſee, how it could be lawful for the ſucceſſours of the

Apoſtles, to ouercharge the Church with ſo great and ſo daungerous a burthen. Truelie, Irenaeus doth witnes, that in times paſt the obſeruation of faſte in Churches was diuers, and free, as it is reade in the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie, lib. 8. cap. 14. In the ſame booke Euſebius maketh mention, that one Apollonius, an Eccleſiaſticall writer among other arguments vſed this for one, to confute the doctrine of Montanus the heretike, Becauſe he was the firſt that made lawes for faſtes. Therupon Chryſoſtome ſaith in a vertaine place, Faſting is good, but let no man be compelled thereunto. And in another place he exhorteth him that is not able to faſte, to abſteyne from deinties, and yet affirmeth, that it doth not much differ from faſting, and that it is a ſtrong weapon to repreſſe the furie of the Deuill. Moreouer, experience alſo it ſelfe doth more then prooue, that theſe precepts concerning faſtes, haue bin a great hinderance to godlines.
                  Therefore when we ſaw it verie euidentlie, that the chiefe men in the Church, did beſide the authoritie of the Scripture, take vpon themſelues this power, ſo to enioyne faſtes, as to binde mens conſciences vnder paine of deadlie ſinne, we did looſe the conſciences out of theſe ſnares, but by the Scriptures, and chiefely by Pauls writinges, which doe with a ſingular endeauour remooue theſe rudiments of the world from the necks of Chriſtians. For wee ought not lightlie to account of that ſaying of Paull: Let no man condemne you in meate and drinke, or in reſpect of an holie daie, or of the new Moone, or of the Sabbath daies. And againe, Therefore if ye be dead with Chriſt from the rudiments of the worlde, why, as though ye liued in the worlde, are ye burdened with traditions? For if S. Paull, then whome no man at any time did teach Chriſt more certainelie, doe earneſtlie affirme, that through Chriſt wee haue obteined ſuch libertie in outwarde thinges, that he doth not onelie not giue authoritie to anie creature, to burden thoſe which beleeue in Chriſt, no not ſo much as with thoſe ceremonies and obſeruations, which notwithſtanding God himſelfe appointed, and would haue to be profitable in their time; but alſo denounceth, that they be fallen awaie from Chriſt, and that Chriſt ſhall nothing at all profitte them, who ſuffer themſelues to be addicted thereunto; what ſhall wee then thinke of thoſe commaundements, which men haue

deuiſed of their owne braine, not onelie without anie oracle, but alſo without anie example worthie to be followed, and which are therefore made vnto manie not onelie beggerlie and weake, but alſo hurtfull, not elements, that is, rudiments of holie diſcipline, but alſo impediments of true godlines? How much more vniuſtlie ſhall anie man take vnto himſelfe authoritie ouer the inheritance of Chriſt, to oppreſſe him with ſuch kinde of bondage? and how farre ſhall he remooue vs from Chriſt, if we ſubmit our ſelues vnto him? For who doth not ſee the glorie of Chriſt, to whom we ought whollie to liue, whome he hath whollie redeemed to himſelfe, and reſtored to libertie, and that by his blood, to be more obſcured, if beſide his authoritie, we doe binde our conſcience to thoſe lawes, which are the inuentions of men, then to thoſe which haue God for their author, although they were to be obſerued, but onelie for their time? Certainelie it is a leſſe fault to play the Iewe, then the Heathen. Now it is the manner of the heathen; to receiue lawes for the worſhip of God, which haue their beginning from mans inuention onelie, God neuer being asked counſell of in the matter. Wherefore if in anie matter at all, certainlie here that ſaying of Paull taketh place: Ye are bought with a great 
                     1. Gor. 7.
                     price, be not made the ſeruants of men.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Of the choiſe of meates CHAP. 9.
                  FOr the ſame cauſe was that forbearing and chuſing of meates enioyned and tyed to certaine daies, which S. Paull, writing to Timothie, calleth the doctrine of Deuils. Neitheir is their anſwere ſufficient. Who ſaie that theſe thinges be ſpoken onelie againſt the Manichies, En
                           •
                        ratites, Tatians, and Marcionites, who did whollie forbid certaine kindes of meates and mariage. For the Apoſtle in this place hath condemned thoſe, which commaund to abſtaine from meates, which G
                           •
                        d hath created to be taken with thank
                           •
                        giuing, &c. Now they alſo which do but forbid to take certaine meates, on certaine daies do neuertheles commaund men to abſtaine from thoſe meats, which God hath created to be taken, & are coſin germanes to the doctrine of the Deuils, the which alſo is euidentlie

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
ſeene by the reaſon, which the Apoſtle addeth. For, ſaith he, Whatſoeuer God hath created, it is good, and nothing is to be refuſed, that is receiued with giuing of thankes. Here he doth not take exception againſt anie times, although no man fauoured frugalitie, temperance, and alſo choiſe chaſtiſments of the fleſh, and lawfull faſting, more greatlie then he did, Certainlie a Chriſtian muſt be frugall, and ſometime the fleſh muſt be chaſtiſed by diminiſhing the dailie and accuſtomed portion or diet, but baſe meates, and a meane, doth ſerue better to this purpoſe, then anie kinde of meates: to conclude, it is meete for Chriſtians, now and then to take vpon them a lawful faſte, but that muſt not be an abſtinence from certaine, but from all meates, nor from meates onelie, but alſo from all the deinteis of this life whatſoeuer. For, what kinde of faſt is this? what abſtinence? onlie to chaunge the kinde of deinties, (the which thing at this day they vſe to doe which are counted more religious then others) ſeing that Saint Chryſoſtome doth not account it to be a faſte, if we continue whollie without meates, euen vnto the euening, except together with abſteining from meates, we doe alſo conteine our ſelues from thoſe thinges which be hurtfull, and beſtow much of that leiſure vpon the ſtudie and exerciſe of ſpirituall thinges.
               
               
                  
                     That by praiers and faſtes we muſt not looke to merit anie thing. CHAP. 10.
                  MOreouer, our Preachers haue taught, that this fault is to be amended in praiers and faſtes, that commonlie men are taught to ſeeke to obtaine, I know not what merit, and iuſtification by theſe workes. For, As we are ſaued by grace, through faith, ſo alſo are we iuſtified. And touching the wotkes of the law (among the which praiers and faſtes are reckoned) Paull writeth thus: For we through the 
                     Gal▪ 5.
                     Spiritwaite for the hope of righteouſnes through faith. Therefore we muſt praie, but to this ende, that we maie receiue of God, not that wee maie hereby giue anie thing vnto him. VVe muſt faſte, that we maie the better praie, and keepe the fleſh within the compaſſe of it duetie, and not before God to deſerue anie thing for our ſelues. This onelie

ende and vſe of prayers, both the Scripture, and alſo the writinges and examples of the Fathers doe preſcribe vnto vs. Moreouer, the caſe ſo ſtandeth with vs, that although wee coulde praie and faſte ſo religiouſlie, and ſo perfectlie doe all thoſe thinges which God hath inioyned vs, that nothing coulde more be required of vs (which hitherto no mortall man hath at anie time perfourmed) yet for all this wee muſt confeſſe, that we are vnprofitable ſeruantes. Therefore what meritte can wee dreame of.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTEENTH SECTION▪ OF CEREMONIES, AND RITES, WHICH ARE INDIFFERENT, in generall.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of Rites, Ceremonies, and indifferent things. CHAP. 27.
               
                  VNto the ancient people in olde time were giuen certaine ceremonies, as a kinde of ſchooling or pedagogie, to thoſe which were kept vnder the law, as vnder a Schole maſter, or Tutor: but Chriſt the deliuerer being once come, and the law taken awaie, we which beleeue are no more vnder the Rom. 6.law, & the ceremonies are vaniſhed & worne out of vſe. And the Apoſtles were ſo far from reteining them in the Church of Chriſt, or reparing them, that they witneſſed plainelie, that they would not laie any burden vpon the Church. Wherefore we ſhould ſeeme to bring in, and ſet vp Iudaiſme againe, if ſo be we ſhould multiplie Ceremonies, or Rites in the church, according to the manner of the old church. Therefore we are not of their iudgement, who would haue the Church of Chriſt kept in with many and diuerſe Rites, as it were with a certaine ſchooling or pedagogie. For if the Apoſtles

would not thruſt vpon the Chriſtian people the ceremonies and rites, which were appointed by God, who is there (I praie you) that is well in his wi
                     •
                  tes, that will thruſt vpon it the inuentions deuiſed by man. The greater that the heape of ceremonies is in the Church, ſo much the more is taken, not onelie from Chriſtian libertie, but alſo from Chriſt and from faith in him: whileſt the people ſeeke thoſe things in ceremonies which they ſhould ſeeke in the onelie Sonne of God Ieſus Chriſt, through faith. Wherefore a few, moderate, & ſimple rites, that are not contrarie to the word of God, do ſuffice the godly. And that there is found diuerſitie of rites in the Churches, l
                     •
                  t no man ſaie therefore that the Churches doe not agree. Socrates ſaith, That it were not poſſible to ſet downe in writing all the ceremonies of the Churches, which are thoroughout Cities and Countries: No Religion doeth keep euerie where the ſame ceremonies, although they admitte and receiue one and the ſelfe ſame doctrine touching them: for euen they which haue one and the ſelfe ſame faith doe diſagree among them ſelues about ceremonies. Thus much faith Socrates, & we at this daie hauing diuerſe rites in the celebration of the Lordes Supper, and in certeine other things, in our Churches, yet we doe not diſagree in doctrine and faith, neither is the vnitie and ſocietie of our Churches rent a ſunder. For the Churches haue alwaies vſed their libertie in ſuch rites▪ as beeing things indifferent, which we alſo doe at this daie.
               But yet notwithſtanding we admoniſh men to take heede, that they count not among things indifferent ſuch as indeed are not indifferent, as ſome vſe to count the Maſſe, & the vſe of Images in the Church, for things indifferent▪ 
                  That is indifferent, (ſaith Ierome to Auguſtine) which is neither good, nor euill, ſo that whether you doe it, or doe it not, you are neuer the more iuſt, or vniuſt, thereby. Therefore, when things indifferent are wreſted to the confeſſion of faith, they ceaſe to be free, as Paull doth ſhew, that it is lawfull for a man to eate fleſh, if no man doe admoniſh him that it was offered to Idolls: for then it is vnlawfull, becauſe he that eateth it, doeth ſeeme to approoue Idolatry by eating of it.
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               Of things indifferent.
               
                  
                     Art 25. THoſe things which be called, & are properlie things indifferent, although a godlie man may in al places, & at all times vſe them, freelie, yet he muſt onely vſe all things according to knowledge, and in charitie, to wit, to the glorie of God, and to the edifying of the Church, and his neighboures.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
               IN this Section alſo may the tenth Article of this confeſſion be placed, which we haue partlie referred to the firſt Section, where mention is made of humane Traditions, partlie to other Sections, as occaſion ſerued.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  Of acceſſories or things indifferent, to wit, of Eccleſiaſticall traditions, conſtitutions, rites, and ceremonies, and of Chriſtian libertie. CHAP. 15.
               TOuching this acceſſorie kinde, humane traditions, conſtitutions, and ceremonies brought in by a good cuſtome, men are taught that theſe be things inferior in degree, and leſſe neceſſarie, then are the gifts of the ordinarie Miniſterie: yea, that they be inſtituted and appointed in regard of the Eccleſiaſticall miniſterie, and to ſerue thereunto: and yet that they are with an vniforme conſent to be reteined in the Eccleſiaſticall aſſemblies of Chriſtian people at the common ſeruice of God, according to the doctrine of the holy Apoſtles: Let al things be done in your meeting (to wit in the Church) decently, & in order. Alſo, God is not the author of Confuſion, but of peace. But they muſt alwaies be kept with this caueat, & within theſe boundes, that they be not taken for foundations, whereupon ſaluation muſt ſtey it ſelfe, or for a worſhip, which is appointed of God without any difference; & that they doe not rather, or more ſtraigthly

binde the conſciences of men, then the commaundements of God doe; and that they be not lifted vp or preferred before them, but that they be taken for an ornament, decency, honeſt ſhew, and laudable diſcipline; and ſo, that they doe not violate the Chriſtian libertie of the Spirit of God, and of faith, nor diſturb charitie: and on the other ſide, that no man, by pretending a ſhew of Chriſtian libertie, doe withdraw himſelfe from ſuch conſtitutions▪ as be godly, & ſerue to a good vſe.
               
                  Iohn. 8. Rom. 6. Rom. 8. Act. 15. Pſa. 18. & 110. Rom. 8. 2. Tim. 1. Iac. 1. Now by the name of Chriſtian libertie is chiefly vnderſtood that libertie, wherby through Chriſt we are freed from ſinne, and the curſe, and the yoke of the law: ſecondlie, the receiuing of the Spirit of a readie will, or of the voluntarie Spirit of the Sonnes of God, whereby they doe earneſtlie, and with pleaſure, and of their owne accord, exerciſe the works of faith toward God, and charitie towards their neighbour; and by the law of charitie, the minde is ſtirred vp to performe theſe things, rather of loue, then of debt, or any compulſion: Alſo, whereby we are made free from all bond of conſcience to any humane traditions, that a man may not be tied in ſuch ſorte, or rather more ſtrictlie, vnto theſe, then to the commaundements of God: And laſtlie, that no man may fuffer his conſcience to be ſeared thereby, as with an hot iron. Therefore according to theſe things, al thoſe humane traditions and ceremonies, which do obſcure or take awaie the glorie, honour, worſhip, and grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and doe withdraw the people from true and ſincere faith, and in a worde, in reſpect whereof the commaundements of God are broken, neglected, and lightlie regarded, & the word of God is not exerciſed, or handled according to it owne ſinceritie and trueth, they are not onelie not to be obſerued, but to be auoided. For Chriſt our Lord doth ſharpely reprooue thoſe Phariſies, and Maſters of the Iewes, by the name of ſuch rites and traditions, and for Math. 
                        •
                     . Iſa. 29.that they doe obſerue ſuch, when he ſaith, Verie well hath Eſay prophecied of you, hypocrites, as it is written: This people honoureth me with their lippes, but their heart is farre away from me. But they worſhip me in vaine, ſeeing that they teach ſuch doctrine, as is deliuered, and brought in by men. For ye laie the commaundements of God aparte, and obſerue the traditions of men. And holy

Paull doth admoniſh vs, to take heede of ſuch toies deuiſed by men, when he ſaith, Beware, l
                        •
                     ſt there be any that ſpoile you through philoſophie, and vaine deceit, through the traditions of men, according to the rudimentes of the world, and not after Chriſt. 
                  Diſt. 8. & 11. cap. conſuetud.Whereof alſo there be Canons extant in the Canon lawe, and the wordes be theſe. We praiſe cuſtome, yet that onely, which is knowne to vſe nothing contrarie to the Catholique faith. Wherfore thoſe rites onely, and thoſe good ceremonies are to be obſerued, which among the people of God, doe builde vp one onelie, and that a true faith and a ſincere worſhippe of God, concord, charitie, and true and Chriſtian, or religious peace. Therefore, whether they haue their beginning and be brought in of Biſhops, or of Eccleſiaſticall Councells, or of anie other authors whatſoeuer, the ſimpler ſorte are not to care for it, neither to be mooued or diſquieted, but to vſe them to good, becauſe they are good, and to obſerue this onelie rule therein, as alwaies to put their greateſt confidence in thoſe things onelie, which are of God, ſettle their onelie and chiefe refuge in thoſe things, and with all diligence take heede, that they be not withdrawne by ſuch ceremonies from thoſe things, which are the chiefeſt of all, and whereon religion is founded, and ſo by conſequent from the thinges themſelues. For thoſe diuine and holſome things are to be preferred in euery reſpect, before all other things of all men, and the conſcience ought to be bounde to them alone. For the Lorde himſelfe did pronounce a Woe againſt thoſe Elders of the Iewes, who preferred their owne traditions before the commaundements of God, and thoſe which were the leſſer before things of greater weight: You 
                  Mat. 13. Lu
                        •
                     . 11.
                  leaue, ſaith he, the weightieſt matters of the lawe, as iudgement, and mercie, and fidelitie. Theſe ought ye to haue done, and not to haue lef
                        •
                     e the other.
               
               And although our Preachers doe not keepe all rites alike with other Churches, the which thing neither can be, neither is neceſſarie to be done, that in all places, where there be Chriſtian aſſemblies one and the ſame ceremonies ſhould be vſed, yet they doe not withſtande, or oppoſe themſelues to anie good and godlie conſtitution, neither are they ſo minded, as that for the ceremonies ſake they would raiſe vp anie diſſenſions, although they ſhould thinke that

ſome of them were not verie neceſſarie, ſo that they be not founde to be contrarie to God, and to his worſhip, and glorie, and be ſuch, as do not diminiſh true faith in Ieſus Chriſt, which alone doth purchaſe righteouſnes. Howbeit in this place, and in this point, it muſt not be paſſed ouer with ſilence, to wit▪ that we ought by no meanes to burden the people with many ſuperfluous, and grieuous traditions, ſuch as the Moſaical traditions were vnder the law. For the Apoſtles forbad that this ſhould be done, as alſo holie Peter ſaid vnto certeine concerning this matter: Why do ye tempt God 
                  Gal. 5.
                  in laying a yoke vpon the neckes of the diſciples? Alſo, Be ye not, ſaith Paul, intangled with the yoke of bondage. For which cauſe alſo Chriſt did vehementlie inueigh againſt the Scribes, Luc. 11.ſaying, Woe alſo be to you Scribes, for ye laie burdens vpon mens ſhoulders, which can ſcarſe be borne.
               
               Alſo men are taught to acknowledge this, that humane traditions do not containe a perpetual and immutable law, but as they are for iuſt cauſes inſtituted of men, ſo alſo they maie vpon iuſt and weightie cauſes, and if the matter ſo require, be broken, abrogated, and changed without anie ſinne▪ according to the example of the Apoſtles, who 
                  Math. 15. Marc. 7.
                  did tranſgreſſe the traditions of the Elders, when as they did eate bread with vnwaſhed handes, and did not obſerue the ſame faſtes with others, add yet they were not by this meanes guiltie of any ſinne: alſo according to the example of the firſt and holie Church, vpon which the Apoſtles, and the wholl councel laied this commaundement by the holie ghoſt, that they ſhould abſteine from the eating of thoſe thinges which were ſacrificed 
                  Act. 15.
                  to Idolls, and of blood, and of that which is ſtrangled. Notwithſtanding, after that the cauſes and occaſions, for the which this decree was made, in proceſſe of time did vaniſh awaie, euen this Apoſtolicall conſtitution did grow out of vſe. Neither in theſe things ought we to care for the offence of the wicked, who are offended with this thing, as the Lord ſaith, Let them alone, they be blinde, and guides of the blinde. And Mat. 15.on the other ſide, we muſt take diligent heede hereunto, that Rom. 14. 1. Cor. 8. Mat. 15.no offence be giuen to litle ones, by a raſh, froward, and wicked vſing of Chriſtian libertie: for this alſo the Lord ſaith, Woe be to that man by whome offence commeth.
               
               Now if ſo be that there be anie vnlikenes in traditions,

and externall ceremonies, and if anie diuerſitie which is not hurtfull be found in Eccleſiaſticall aſſemblies, certeinlie no man ought to be ſo ignorant in theſe thinges, as for this cauſe to be offended therewith, or to take offence at others, and in this reſpect to reproch or hurt others, or to be an author of ſectes and alſo of factions, ſeeing that there was neuer in all places one, and the ſame forme of an Eccleſiaſticall conſtitution in this point, neither is at this day the ſame. The which thing alſo is mentioned in the bookes of the Canon law in theſe wordes: The holie Church of Rome doth know, 
                  Dist. 12. Cap. Scit.
                  that conſtitutions, and cuſtomes beeing diuers, according to time & place, do nothing at all hinderthe ſaluation of the faithfull, if the Canonicall authoritie be not againſt them. Rather it becommeth euerie ſound Chriſtian to be content in his conſcience to reſt in that, if he ſee Chriſtians to haue the one ſpirit of Phil. 2. Eph. 4.Chriſt, and with agreeing mindes to holde and follow his true meaning, and one and the ſame doctrine, in al theſe things, and chiefe pointes of faith. For he that hath not this 
                  Rom. 8.
                  Spirit of Chriſt, he is not Chriſtes, as the Apoſtle doth▪ witnes, although he vſe all, and euerie kinde of ceremonies, or conſtitutions. Therefore whoſoeuer be Chriſtes, this is their duetie, as in all other ſuch like thinges, that as members of one bodie, they do ſuffer, and beare one with an other in charitie, without the which no thing can profit anie whit, according 1. Cor. 13.to the meaning of the Apoſtolike doctrine.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               
                  
                     Art. 32. WE beleeue that it is expedient, that they which be choſen to be gouernours in anie Church, do wiſelie looke vnto it among them▪ſelues, by what meanes the wholl bodie maie conuenientlie be ruled, yet ſo that they do neuer ſwarue from that which our Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath inſtituted. Yet this doth not hinder, but that euerie place maie haue their peculiar conſtitutions, as it ſhall ſeeme conuenient for them.
               
                  
                     Art. 32. But we exclude all humane deuiſes, and all thoſe lawes, which are brought in to binde mens conſciences vnder pretence of the word of God: and we do onelie like of thoſe, which ſerue for the nouriſhing of concord, and to keepe euerie one in due obedience, wherein we think that we are to

follow that, which our Lord Ieſus Chriſt appointed touching excommunication, which we do allow of, and together with it additions, thinke to be Looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſ.neceſſarie.
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               
                  Art. 15. Epiſt. ad 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     119.
                   AS touching the multitude of vaine and ſuperfluous Ceremonies, we know, that Saint Auguſtine did greeuouſlie complaine of them in his owne time: and therefore haue we cut of a great number of them: becauſe we know, that mens conſciences were encombred about them, and the Churches of God ouerladen with them. Neuertheleſſe we keepe ſtill, and eſteeme not onely thoſe Ceremonies, which we are ſure were deliuered to vs from the Apoſtles, but ſome others too beſides, which we thought might be ſuffered without hurt to the Church of God: for that we had a deſire that all thinges in the holy congregation might, as Saint Paull commaundeth, be done with comelines, and in good order. But as for all thoſe thinges, which we ſaw were, either verie ſuſuperſtitious, or vtterlie vnprofitable, or noiſome, or mockeries, or contrarie to the holie ſcriptures, or elſe vnſeemelie for ſober & diſcreet people, wherof there be infinite numbers now a daies, where the Roman Religion is vſed, theſe, I ſaie, we haue vtterlie refuſed without all manner exception, becauſe we would not haue the right worſhiping of God to be anie longer defiled with ſuch follies.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BEGIA.
               
                  Art. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   IN the meane time we beleeue that it is in deede profitable, that the Elders which doe gouerne in Churches, ſhould appoint ſome order among them-ſelues, ſo that they do diligently take heed, that in no caſe they do ſwarue, or decline from thoſe things, which Chriſt himſelfe, our onelie maſter, hath once appointed. Therefore we do reiect all humane inuentions, and all thoſe lawes, which were brought in to be a worſhip of God, that mens conſciences ſhould anie waie thereby be ſnared or bound: and we receiue thoſe onelie, which are fit, either to cheriſh, or manteine concord, or to keepe vs in the obedience of God. And

hereunto looke the 1. oſeru. vppon this confeſſ.excommunication is chiefelie neceſſarie, being vſed according to the commaundement of the word of god, and other additions of Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline annexed thereunto.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               Art. 15.
               COncerning Eccleſiaſticall rites, which are ordeined by mans authoritie, they teach, that ſuch rits are to be obſerued, as maie be kept without ſinne, & do tend to quietnes, and good order in the Church: as namelie, ſet holidaies, and certein godlie pſalmes, and other ſuch like rits. But yet touching this ſort of rites they teach, that mens conſciences are not to be burdened with ſuperſtitious opinions of them, that is, it muſt not be thought that theſe humane ordinances are righteouſnes before God, or do deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, or are dueties neceſſarie vnto the righteouſnes reuealed in the goſpel. But this is to be thought of them, that they are indifferent thinges, which without the caſe of offence may be omitted. But ſuch, as breake them with offence, are faultie as thoſe which doe raſhlie diſturbe the peace of the Churches.
               Such traditions therefore, as cannot be obſerued without ſinne, are reiected of vs, as the tradition of ſingle life. We reiect alſo that impious opinion of traditions and vowes, wherein they feign, that worſhips inuented by mans authority do merit remiſſion of ſinnes, & are ſatiſfactions for ſinne, &c. Of which like falſe opinions, touching vowes and faſtings, not a few haue beene ſpread abroade in the Church by vnlearned men.
               
                  This Article is thus to be found in another edition.
                  COncerning Eccleſiaſticall rites, they teach, that thoſe rites are to be obſerued, which maie be kept without anie ſinne, and are auaileable for quietnes and good order in the Church, ſuch as are ſet holiedaies, feaſtes, and ſuch like.
               
               
                  
                  Againe out of the 7. Article, touching abuſes of the ſame confeſſion, Theſe wordes that follow perteine to this place, and the reſt vno the eleuenth ſection.
                  Of the authoritie of the miniſters.
                  
                     Here alſo be manie thinges which might verie fitlie haue bin referred to the former Sect. by reaſon of ſpeciall examples of meates, and holie daies, here rehearſed: but ſeing that the title of this page is generall, it could not here be pretermitted. BEſides theſe things, there is a controuerſie, whether Biſhops or Paſtors haue power to ordeine ceremonies in the Church, & to make lawes of meates, and holie daies, and degrees, or orders of miniſters. They that aſcribe this power to the Biſhops, alledge this teſtimonie for it. I haue yet manie thinges to ſaie vnto you, but you cannot beare them away now. But when that ſpirit of trueth ſhall come, he ſhall teach you all trueth: They aledge alſo the examples of the Apoſtles, which commaunded the Chriſtians to abſteine from blood, and that which was ſtrangled. They alledge the change of the Sabboth into the Lords daie, contrarie as it ſeemeth to the morall law, & they haue no examples ſo oft in their mouthes, as they change of the Sabboth. They will needes haue the Churches power & authoritie to be very great, becauſe it hath diſpenſed with a precept of the moral law. But of this queſtiō our men do thus teach, that the Biſhops haue no power to ordeine anie thing contrarie to the Goſpel, as was ſhewed before. The ſame alſo do the Canons teach▪ 
                     diſtinct. 9. Moreouer it is againſt the ſcriprure, to ordeine or require the obſeruation of anie traditions, to the ende that we might merit remiſſion of ſinnes, and ſatisfie for ſinnes by them. For the glorie of Chriſtes merit receiueth a blow, when as we ſeeke by ſuch obſeruations to merit remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification. And it is verie apparant, that through this perſuaſion traditions grew into an infinite number in the Church. In the meane while the doctrine of faith, and of the righteouſnes of faith, was quite ſmoothered: for euer and anone there were new holiedaies made, new faſtes appointed, new ceremonies, new worſhippes for Saints ordeined, becauſe that the authors of ſuch geare ſuppoſed by theſe works to merit remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification. After the ſame manner heretofore did the penitential Canons increaſe, wherof we ſtill ſee ſome footings in ſatisfactions.
                  Againe, manie writers imagine, that in the new teſtament there ſhould be a worſhip like to the Leuitical worſhip

the appointing whereof god committed to the Apoſtles and Biſhops, wherein they ſeeme to be deceiued by the example of the law of Moſes, as if the righteouſnes of the new teſtament were the outward obſeruing of certeine rites, as the iuſtice of the law was. Like as therefore in the lawe it was a ſinne to eate ſwines fleſh, &c. ſo in the new teſtament they place ſinne in meates, in daies, in apparell, and ſuch like things: and they holde opinion, that the righteouſnes of the new teſtament can not ſtand without theſe. From hence are thoſe burdens, that certeine meates defile the conſcience, that it is a mortall ſinne to omit the canonicall houres, that faſtinges merit remiſſion of ſinnes, becauſe they be neceſſary to the righteouſnes of the new teſtament, that a ſinne in a caſe reſerued, can not be pardoned, but by the authority of him that reſerued it: wheras the Canons ſpeake onelie of reſeruing of canonicall puniſhments, and not of the reſeruing of the fault. Whence then haue the Biſhops power and authoritie of impoſing theſe traditions vpon the Churches, for the burdening of mens conſciences? For there are diuers cleare teſtimonies which inhibit the making of ſuch traditions, either for to deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, or as thinges neceſſarie▪ to the righteouſnes of the the new teſtament, or to ſaluation. Paull to the Coloſſ. 2. Let no man iudge you in meat, drinke, or a peece of a holie daie, in the new moone, or in the Sabboth. Againe, If ye be dead with Chriſt, from the rudiments of the world, why as though ye liued in the world, are ye burdened with traditions, as: Touch not, taſt not, handle not, which all do periſh with the vſing, and are the preceptes and doctrines of men, which haue a ſhew of wiſedome▪
                      And to Titus, he doth plainlie forbid traditions. For he ſaith, Not liſtning to Iewiſh fables, & to the precepts of men, that abhorre the truth. And Chriſt, Mat 15. ſaith of them, which vrge traditions, Let them alone, they be blinde leaders of the blinde. & he condemneth ſuch worſhips, Euerie plant which my heauenly father hath not planted, ſhall be rooted vp. If Biſhops haue authoritie to burden the Churches with innumerable traditions, and to ſnare mens conſciences, why doth the ſcripture ſo oft forbid to make & to liſten to traditions? why doth it cal them the deuils traditions? hath the holy ghoſt warned vs of them to no purpoſe?
                  It remaineth then, that ſeeing conſtitutions ordeined as

neceſſarie, or with opinion of meriting remiſſion of ſinnes by them, are flat repugnant to the goſpell, becauſe that it is not lawfull for any Biſhops to appoint or vrge anie ſuch worſhip. For it is verie requiſite, that the doctrine of Chriſtian liberty ſhould be manteined in the Church, becauſe that the bondage of the law is not neceſſarie vnto iuſtification, as it is written to the Gal. Come not ye vnder the yoke of bondage againe. It is neceſſarie that the chiefeſt point of all the goſpel ſhould be holden faſt, that we do freelie obteine remiſſion of ſinnes & iuſtification by faith in Chriſt, & not by anie obſeruations, nor by any worſhip deuiſed by man. For though they ſeeke to qualifie traditions, yet the equitie of them can neuer be ſeene nor perceiued, ſo long as the opinion of neceſſitie remaineth, which muſt needes remaine, wher the righteouſnes of faith & Chriſtian liberty are not known. The Apoſtles commaunded them to abſteine from blood: who obſerueth that now a daies? and yet they do not ſinne that obſerue it not: for the Apoſtles them ſelues would not burden mens conſciences with ſuch a ſeruitude: but they forbad it for a time, for offence ſake. For in that decree the perpetuall intent and minde of the goſpell is to be conſidered: 
                        •
                     carſelie anie canons▪ are preciſely kept, and manie grow out of vſe dailie, yea euen among them that doe moſt buſilie defend traditions: Neither can there be ſufficient care had of mens conſciences, except this equitie be kept, that men ſhould know, that ſuch rites are not to be obſerued, with anie opinion of neceſſitie, and that mens conſciences are not hurt though traditions grow out of vſe.
                  The Biſhops might Looke the 1. obſeru. vpon this confeſſ.eaſilie reteine lawfull obedience, if they would not haue men to obſerue ſuch traditions, as can not be kept with a good conſcience. But now they commaunde ſingle life, and they admitte none, except they will ſweare not to teach the pure doctrine of the Goſpell. The Churches do not deſire of the Biſhops, that they would repaire peace and concord with the loſſe of their honour, which yet good Paſtors ought to do: onelie they deſire that they would remit vniuſt burdens, which are both new, and receiued contrarie to the cuſtome of the Catholike Church. It maie well be, that ſome conſtitutions had ſome probable cauſes, when they began, which yet will not agree to latter

times. It is euident, that ſome were receiued through error. Wherefore it were for the Looke the 
                           •
                        . obſeruat.chiefe Biſhops gentlenes, to mitigate them now, for ſuch a change would not ouerthrow the vnitie of the Church. For manie humane traditions haue bene changed in time, as the Canons themſelues declare. But if it can not be obteined, that thoſe obſeruations may not be releaſed, which can not be kept without ſin, then muſt we folow the Apoſtles rule, which willeth to obey God rather then men. Peter forbiddeth Biſhops to be Lords, & to be imperious ouer the Churches. Our meaning is not to haue Looke the 3. obſeru.rule taken from the Biſhops. But this one thing is requeſted at their hands, that they would ſuffer the goſpel to be purely taught, & that they would releaſe a few obſeruations, which can not be obſerued without ſinne. But if they will remit none, let them looke how they will giue account to God for this, that by their wilfulnes they giue occaſion of ſchiſme.
               
               
                  Alſo in the ſame 7. Art. touching Abuſes, this expoſition is found thus in another edition.
                  NOw come I to the queſtion in hand, touching the laws of biſhops: concerning which firſt this moſt certaine rule is to be holden, That it is not laufull for anie to make lawes repugnant to the commaundement of God. That ſentence of Saint Paull is well knowne: If an Angell from heauen teach anie other Goſpell, let him be accurſed. Vpon this foundation, which is ſure and immooueable, the reſt maie eaſilie be reared. Now there be three orders of the decrees of Biſhops. Some doe conſtreine a man to ſinne, as the law of ſingle life, the lawes of priuate Maſ
                        •
                     es, wherein is made an oblation and application for the quick and the dead. And the opinion of tranſſubſtantiation breedeth a wicked adoration. Alſo the commaundement of praying to the dead. It is an eaſy matter to giue ſentence of theſe lawes. For ſeeing they doe manifeſtlie oppugne the commaundement of God, the Apoſtles rule is, We ought rather to obeie God then men.
                  
                  
                     The ſecond order is of thoſe rites, which concerne thinges in their owne nature indifferent, ſuch as are the lawes touching the difference of meates, and daies, and ſuch like thinges. But when falſe opinions are ioyned vnto theſe thinges, they are 
                        •
                     o more indifferent. Now our aduerſaries doe, ſome

more, ſome leſſe, tie vnto them abſurde and falſe opinions, for the which both thoſe laws & rites are to be caſt of, leſt anie corrupt worſhip ſhould be eſtabliſhed. The moſte parte do feigne, that the workes of mans traditions, as ſatisfactions, & ſuch like, doe merit remiſſion of ſinnes. This opinion is apparantlie falſe: for it remooueth the benefit of Chriſt vnto mans traditions. And there needeth here no long confutation: we will content our ſelues with one thundring ſaying of Saint Paull, Ye are made void of Chriſt, whoſoeuer are iuſtified by the law: Ye are fallen from Chriſt. This ſaying teacheth, that men doe not merit remiſſion of ſinnes by the proper workes, either of Gods lawe, or of mans traditions. Others being put in minde, what groſſe abſurditie there is in this firſt errour, they beginne to talke more modeſtlie of traditions. But yet they houlde ſtill an errour, that is not to be borne with all. They ſaie, That theſe workes, though they doe not deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, yet are they ſeruices of God, that is, workes, the immediat ende whereof is, that God by them might be honoured. This errour alſo muſt be ſtiffelie withſtoode. For Chriſt ſaieth plainelie, They worſhippe me in vaine with the preceptes of men. And Paull doth expreſſelie condemne will worſhippe to the Coloſſ. And ſeeing that the worſhippe of God muſt be done in faith, it is neceſſarie that we ſhould haue the word of God, that may teſtifie that the worke pleaſeth God. For how can the conſcience offer a worke vnto God, vnleſſe there be a voice of God, which maie declare, that God will ſo be worſhipped or ſerued with this honour? But vngodlie men vnderſtanding this Doctrine of faith, haue in all ages with damnable boldnes deuiſed worſhippes, without commaundement or word of God, which thing if it be lawfull to doe, you can ſhew no cauſe why the heatheniſh ſacrifices, ſlaing of dogges, ſacrifices offered at Lampſacum to Priapus, & ſuch like monſtrous worſhip ſhould not pleaſe God. Whether hath mans foolehardines ruſhed, not onelie amongſt the Ethnicks, in feigning worſhips, but alſo among the Popiſh rout in deuiſing eftſons new & fooliſh ceremonies, in praier to the dead, in the worſhipping of ſaintes, and in the babling of Monkes. Here therefore let vs be watchfull, and not ſuffer lawes to be thruſt vpon the Churches, which preſcribe workes without

the commaundement of God, as Gods worſhippe and mans righteouſnes. And whereas all our aduerſaries, euen they that ſpeake moſte modeſtlie, doe tie this opinion of worſhippe vnto thoſe workes, let vs know, that it is a good worke to withſtand them, and by violating ſuch traditions to ſhew a patterne, by which the godlie may knowe what to iudge of them. As Euſebius writeth of Attalus, That he was commaunded by God to ſpeake vnto a certaine man which ate nothing but bread, ſalte, and water, that he would vſe common meat, leſt he ſhould bring others into errour. Moreouer this ſecond errour which maketh theſe workes to be the worſhippe of God, brake farther. For manie in the Church were deceiued through a peruerſe emulation of the Leuiticall ceremonies, and did thinke that there ſhould be ſome ſuch rites in the new Teſtament, and that they are the worſhipe of God, or things whereby God wil be honoured, yea & that they are righteouſnes. And for that cauſe they gaue authoritie to the Biſhops to ordaine ſuch rites and ſuch ſeruices. This Phariſaicall errour Chriſt and his Apoſtles noted, who taught, that the worſhip of the new Teſtament is repentance, the feare of God, faith, and the workes of the tenne commaundementes, as Paull ſaieth, The kingdome of God is not meate and drinke, but righteouſnes, and peace, and ioie in the holie Ghoſt. For he that in theſe ſerueth Chriſt, pleaſeth God, and i
                           •
                         approoued of men. The Monkes fained themſelues to be Nazarites. The Maſſe Prieſtes that ſacrifice for the dead, would haue men think that they imitate Aaron offering ſacrifices. But theſe examples doe not agree: the rites of Monkes, and the Prieſts mercenary Maſſes, haue no word of god for them, yea there are manie fonde opinions mingled with them, which of neceſſitie muſt be reprooued in our Churches.
                  The third errour is the opinion of neceſſitie, wherein they imagine that the Church is like vnto other humane gouernmentes. For they ſurmiſe that it is a kingdome, wherin the Biſhoppes, as if they were Kinges, haue power to make new lawes, that are beſides the Goſpell, and that they muſt of neceſſitie be obeied (euen as the Princes lawes muſt neceſſarilie be obeied) eſpeciallie ſeeing this life of man can not be without traditions. And this opinion of the neceſſitie of theſe things hath ſtirred vp contentions, whilſt

euerie one defendeth his owne rites inuented by man, as ſimply neceſſarie. But Chriſt and his Apoſtls teach, that ſuch rites ſet forth without Gods commaundement, are not to be taken for thinges neceſſarie. Againſt this libertie enacted and eſtabliſhed by Gods authoritie, the opinion which maintaineth that the violating of traditions about thinges indifferent, though it be not in a caſe where offence maie be giuen, is not to be receiued. Hetherto belongeth the ſaying of Paull, Let no man iudge you in meat and drinke, and entercourſe of 
                           •
                        olie daies, &c. For to iudge ſignifieth to binde the conſciences, and to condemne them that doe not obeie. Againe, Gal. 5 Stand in the libertie wherein Chriſt hath made you free.
                  
                  Hitherto it hath bin ſhewed in what reſpect it is not lawful to appoint traditions, or to approoue them. Now ſome man may aske whether we would haue this life of man to be without order & rites? No ſurelie. But we teach that the true Paſtors of the churches may ordein publike rites in their churches, but ſo, as it be onelie for an end belonging to the bodie, that is, for good orders ſake, to wit▪ ſuch rites, as auaile for the inſtruction of the people: As for example, ſet daies, ſet leſſons, and ſuch like, and that without anie ſuperſtition, and opinion of neceſſitie, as hath bin ſaid before, ſo that it maie not be counted anie ſinne to violate anie of theſe ordinances, ſo it be not with giuing offence. But if ſo be that they be broken with offence there, where the Churches are well ordered, and there is no error in doctrine, let him that in ſuch place breaketh thē know, that he doth offend, becauſe he diſturbeth the peace of the Church wel ordered, or doth withdraw others from the true miniſterie. This reaſon doth ſufficientlie warrant the authority of profitable traditions, & laieth no ſnare on mens conſciences. So the Church in the beginning of it, ordained ſet daies, as the Lords day, the daie of Chriſts natiuity, Eaſter, Pēticoſt, &c. Neither did the church diſpenſe with the moral precepts, but Gods owne authority abrogated the ceremonies of Moſes law. And yet it was meet that the people ſhould know when to come together to the hearing of the Goſpel, & vnto the ceremonies which Chriſt did ordaine. And for that cauſe certain daies were appointed to that vſe, without anie ſuch opinions as were aboue mentioned.

And the general equity abideth ſtil in the moral law, that at certeine times we ſhould come together to theſe godlie exerciſes: but the ſpeciall daie, which was but a ceremonie, is free. Whereupon the Apoſtles retained not the ſeauenth daie, but did rather take the firſt daie of the weeke for that vſe, that by it they might admoniſh the godlie both of their libertie, and of Chriſtes reſurrection. Looke the 4. obſeruat.The thinges obiected againſt this maie eaſelie be taken awaie. The Apoſtles decree touching thinges offered to Idoles, and fornication, was moral, and perpetuall: but in that which they added, touching blood, and that which was ſtrangled, they had regard of offence giuing at that time. For it was an vſe euen before the Apoſtles time, that ſuch as then were conquered by the Iewes ſhould abſtaine from blood and thinges ſtrangled. The Apoſtles therefore haue laied no new thing vpon thoſe, that were ioyned vnto their fellowſhippe, but as yet they kept the olde vſual rite, which was pleaſing both to the godlie Iewes, and ſuch as ioyned with them in the ſocietie of Chriſt. As for that which Chriſt ſaith, I haue yet manie things to ſay vnto you: doubtles he meant not thoſe foloiſh ceremonies that the Popes haue brought in, nor any new articles of faith, but a farther illumination of that goſpel, which he had already deliuered. And therfore afterward he addeth touching the office of the holy ghoſt, that he ſhould not bring any other kinde of doctrine, but ſhould enlighten the mindes of the Apoſtles, that they ſhould vnderſtand the Goſpel touching the will of God, which before had bin taught. Therefore he ſaieth; Ioan. 14. He ſhal teach you all thinges, and ſhal bring al things to your remembrance, which I haue ſhewed you. Againe, He ſhall not ſpeake of himſelfe, but what he hath heard, that ſhall he ſpeake.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
               Of traditions, that is, of ceremonies inſtituted in the Church, by mans authoritie.
               ALthough for orders ſake there muſt needes be ſome 
                     Art. 20.decent and ſeemelie ceremonies; yet notwithſtanding men that are giuen to ſuperſtition doe ſoone peruert thoſe ceremonies, falſelie imagining that ſuch obſeruations doe merit forgiuenes of ſinnes, and are accepted for righteous in the ſight of God: and doe turne the ſignes into

Gods, like as manie haue aſcribed a godhead vnto Images: and manie, either of ſuperſtition, or by tyrannie, doe heap vp ceremonies: & ſuperſtition hath increaſed in the Church the ceremonies of ſatisfaction, as they cal them. Nebuchadneſar & Antiochus, becauſe they are of opinion, that conſent in Religion is auaileable to the peaceable gouernment of their kingdomes, doe ordaine ſuch ſeruice of God, as they wil hane indifferentlie obſerued of all their ſubiects. There new lawes, and new Gods were erected, not of ſuperſtition, but by tyrannie. Thus we obſerue that amongſt men true and falſe religion are confounded, and each chaunged into other, and we maruell at the cauſe, why men doe not ſtedfaſtlie continue in the truth reuealed by God. But the worde of God pronounceth, that men are ſet on by Deuils to fall away from God: and the nature of man being blinde▪ curious, and inconſtant, loueth to plaie with diuers opinions. Againſt theſe great miſchiefs God armeth and confirmeth his Church, and deliuereth a ſure and certaine doctrine, which is conteyned in the bookes of the Prophets and Apoſtles, and in the Creedes▪ Wherefore it is neceſſary to conſider, what thoſe lawes, or rites be, and whence they had their beginning.
               The firſt rule therefore is this: It is lawfull for no creature, neither for Angels, nor for men, neither for Kinges nor for looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.Biſhops to make laws, or ordeine ceremonies, diſagreeing from the worde of God. Horriblie ſinned the King of Babylon, although he excelled in wiſdome and valour, when he commaunded his Image to be worſhipped; and all men doe ſinne that obey ſuch proclamations or lawes: euen as Eue ſinned, when ſhee departed from the commaundement of God, for the lying perſuaſion of the Deuill. But generallie the rule is to be obſerued, which is ſet downe. Act. 5. We ought rather to obey God then men. Such are the edicts, which commaund to call vpon dead men, or to imbrace falſe doctrine, or to vſe vngodlie worſhippe. Touching all theſe, that Rule of the firſt commaundement is to be holden, 1. Cor. 10. Flie from Idolls. Such is alſo the law of the ſingle life of Prieſts, which manie can not obſerue without ſinne. And albeit we know what opinion politique and expert men doe hold of the chaunge of lawes, yet God hath

ſo commaunded obedience, that ſtill he would haue vs faſt tied vnto himſelfe, and to agree with his wiſdome and righteouſnes. From whence doe ariſe thoſe vnchangeable and perpetuall rules, Exod. 20. Thou ſhalt haue no ſtrange Gods. Alſo, Acts 5. We ought rather to obey God then men. Alſo Gal. 1. If anie man teach you anie other Goſpell, let him be accurſed.
               
               The ſecond rule. For aſmuch as it is vſuall to adde ſuperſtition to thoſe works, which otherwiſe in their owne nature were indifferent, as to eate, or not to eate fleſh, it is neceſſarie to reprooue ſuch ſuperſtitions & errours, as are in this ſorte added, and in the practiſe of our libertie, examples of this doctrine may modeſtlie be ſhewed. And that errour is not among the leaſt, which the follie of many teachers, and for the moſte parte of the people bringeth in, in that they teach and thinke that faſting and ſuch like workes deſerue forgiuenes of ſinnes, both of the guiltines, & of the paine: as both Thomas doth write of ſatisfactions, and manie alſo doe ſaie the ſame. This Phariſaicall imagination eaſilie intangleth the mindes of men, and darkeneth the light of the doctrine of the benefits proper to Chriſt, and of free forgiuenes of ſinnes, and of faith. For when as men thinke that they merit remiſſion of ſinnes by theſe their ceremonies, they take awaie the honour due vnto Chriſt, and giue it vnto theſe ceremonies, and are ſomewhat puffed vp with vaine confidence. Yet afterward when they be in true ſorrow, they fal headlong into manie doubts, which turne to their deſtruction. And of it ſelfe it is a great ſinne, not to know the benefits of God. For this cauſe Paull ſo earneſtlie contendeth for the aboliſhing of circumciſion, and other ceremonies of the law of Moſes, for feare leſt the true acknowledgement of the Mediatour might be cleane put out, if men ſhould think that they deſerued remiſſion of ſinnes, and were made righteous by this obſeruation of the law and ceremonies of Moſes, as the Phariſies did auouch. And oftentimes Paull admoniſheth to beware that the light of the Goſpell be not darkened by new ceremonies of mans inuention. This ſecond errour is not ſo euident, but yet verie daungerous. After that ſome men ſee that this Phariſaical errour can not be defended, they come to this: Although, ſay they, theſe ceremonies deſerue not remiſſion

of ſinnes, yet are theſe traditions defended, becauſe they are good workes and ſeruices of God: as in the law of Moſes the abſtinence of the Nazarites, although it deſerued not remiſſion of ſinnes, yet it pleaſed god, and was a ſeruice acceptable vnto God. With this colour certaine of late haue learned to paint traditions, which yet ſtriue not about theſe indifferent matters, but go about to eſtabliſh other foul errours, and the opinion of the power of Biſhops. But it is neceſſarie for the godlie here to beware of deceitfull doctrine. There is a great errour euen in this colourable reaſon: neither is that example well alledged out of Moſes. The workes ordeined and commaunded by God doe farre differ from workes not commaunded nor ordeined by God, but onely deuiſed by mans inuention. The works ordeined in the law of god, were ſeruices of god, although they deſerued forgiuenes of ſins. But wilworſhips deuiſed by men, neither haue bin, nor are any ſeruice of god▪ God doth not alow this boldnes of men, which notwithſtanding hath alwaies been vſuall, to deuiſe new worſhip, that is, ſuch as is immediatlie intended to honour God withall. Therefore the worde of God crieth out, Math. 15. In vaine do they worſhip me after the ordinances of men. And euerie where in the Apoſtles, and in Paull, this boldnes is reprooued. But the true ſeruice of God are thoſe workes, that he hath commaunded, which are done in the acknowledgement and confidence of the Mediatour, to the end, that God maie be obeyed, and that we maie profeſſe him to be the true God, whome we ſo worſhip. So alſo Ezec. 20. he calleth vs back to the commaundement of God, ſaying: Walke not after the ordinances of your fathers, but walke in my commaundements. And often are ſuch warnings repeated, And Pſal. 118. Thy word is a lanterne vnto my feete. And Num. 15. Let them not follow their owne imaginations.
               
               The third errour is this. Hypocrites do imagine that ſuch workes are a kinde of perfection: as Monkes doe preferre their vowes ful of vanitie before the ciuill and houſeholders life: whereas God by his wonderfull prouidence hath ſo ioyned mankinde together in fellowſhippe, and in theſe trauels and daungers would haue our faith, praier, and confeſſion, or liberallity one toward an other, or patience, and other

vertues, to be tried.
               The fourth errour is, the opinion of neceſſitie, as ſome doe write, That the faſting of Lent is neceſſarie, and other things are arbitrarie. Neither is it onelie a torment
                     •
                  of conſcience, to iudge that he is no Chriſtian nor member of the Church of God, that eateth fleſh on the Satursdaie, or obſerueth not the faſte of Lent; but it is alſo an errour that darkneth great matters▪ as the doctrine of the righteouſnes of the Goſpell, and of the Church, what manner of Church it is, and how the members of the Church are to be diſcerned, not by meate and drinke, but by faith, praier, and other vertues. And againſt the opinion of neceſſitie it is expreſſely ſaid, Col. 2. Let no man iudge you in meat or drinke. And Galat. 5. Stand in the libertie wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not againe intangled with the yoke of bondage. And that opinion of neceſſitie hath alwaies breade great diſcord: as in time paſt there was great contention about Eaſter daie, & about leuen, and now alſo many ſuch like contentions haue riſen.
               The fift errour. To the former opinions this errour alſo is added, that the Biſhops take to themſelues authoritie to ordaine new kindes of worſhipe, & to binde conſciences, as Gregory hath ordeined, That maried men tranſlated to the order of prieſthoode ſhould forſake the companie of their wiues, and the conſtitution of confeſſion commaundeth to reckon vp ſins, and decrees haue beene made of differences of meates, and faſting, and ſuch like. Of ſuch traditions there are alſo late books ſetforth, full of labyrinths, wherin it is written, that the tranſgreſſions of ſuch ceremonies are mortall ſinnes, yea though they be committed without giuing offence to others. Gerſon ſought for ſome mitigations, but the true comfort is the voice of the Goſpel, which would haue the vnderſtanding of this liberty to be made known and mainteined in the Church, namely by remoouing thoſe errours whereof hath beene ſpoken. But ceremonies inuented by man, ſuch as are ſeemelie, deuiſed for order, may be obſerued without any opinion of merit, worſhip, or neceſſitie, as hath beene aforeſaid out of the Col. 2. Let no man iudge you in meat or drinke. And Peter ſaith, Act. 15. Why doe ye tempt God laying vpon the neckes of the diſciples a yoke, which neither your fathers, nor we were able to beare.
               
               
                  
The third rule. Thoſe errours beeing remooued, whereof the Church muſt needes be admoniſhed, afterward we both obſerue certeine ceremonies, which are comelie, and made for good order, and alſo teach that they ought to be obſerued, euen as men can not liue without order. And Paull ſaieth, 1. Cor. 14. Let all things be done decentlie, and in order. And there is a ſaying of Athanaſius, Ceremonies are profitable, but with knowledge of the trueth, and in meaſure. It is plaine, that this laſt word is opproſſed to ſuperſtition, which then alſo dailie increaſed ceremonies, and darkened the trueth, and burdened conſciences, and the Churches. But we thanke God the euerlaſting Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who for his Sonne, and by him gathereth an eternall Church, for that euen from the firſt beginning of mankinde he hath preſerued the publique miniſterie of the Goſpell, and honeſt aſſemblies, who himſelfe alſo hath ſet a part certeine times for the ſame: and we pray him that henceforth he will ſaue and gouerne his Church. And we diligentlie teach, that al men ought to help to mainteine the publike miniſterie, & auoid offences, & diſſentions that ſcatter the Church, as in it proper place more at large is declared.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               Of Eccleſiaſticall ceremonies.
               
                  
                     Art. 35. WE acknowledge, that by Chriſt the Sonne of God two ceremonies were ordained in the Church, Baptiſme, and the Lords Supper, which are alſo to be obſerued, according to the inſtitution of Chriſt. We confeſſe alſo, that the Apoſtles did appoint certaine ordinances in the Church, That all things be done decentlie, and in order, as Paull ſpeaketh, ſuch as they be, that are ſet downe. 1. Cor. 14. and 1. Timoth. 2. The Apoſtles alſo, in ordaining Miniſters of the Church, vſed laying on of hands, which beeing reteined out of the cuſtome of the olde law, and not beeing commaunded to the Church, may be freely obſerued. They ordeined alſo in the Acts of the Apoſtles, That the gentils ſhould beware of eating of that which was ſtrangled, and of bloode: not that this obſeruation ſhould be for euer among the Gentiles, but for a time, and ſo long to continue, till this eating

were no more offenſiue. We confeſſe this alſo that it is lawfull for the Biſhops, with the conſent of their Church, to appoint holie daies, leſſons, and Sermons, for edifying, and for inſtruction in the true faith in Chriſt. But it is not lawfull for them to thruſt vpon the Church the ceremonies of the olde law for the holie ſeruice wherewithall God alone is worſhipped. Neither is it lawfull either to reſtore the olde ceremonies of the law, or to deuiſe new, to ſhadow forth the truth allreadie laide open, and brought to light by the Goſpell: as in the daie light to ſet vp candles, to ſignifie the light of the Goſpel, or to carie banners and croſſes, to ſignifie the victorie of Chriſt through his croſſe. Of which ſort is al that wholl furniture of maſſing attire, which they ſay doth ſhadow out the wholl paſſion of Chriſt, & many other things of that kinde. Much leſſe is it lawfull to ordaine ceremonies, and holie rites, by the merit whereof ſinne may be purged & the kingdome of heauen purchaſed. For of that former kind of ceremonies and holie rites, Chriſt out of Eſay preacheth, ſaying, In vaine, doe they worſhippe me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men. And Paull ſaith, Let no man iudge you in meat, or drink, or part of an holie daie, or of the new Moone, &c. Hitherto may be added the teſtimonies of Auguſtine & others, touching the obſeruation of ſuch ceremonies. But touchgin the latter kinde of ceremonies, it is manifeſt, that they are wicked rites, and reprochful to the death and reſurrection of Chriſt, by whoſe onelie merit, we haue deliuerance from ſinne, and inheritance of eternall life by faith.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               
                  Of humane traditions. CHAP. 14.
               FVrthermore, touching the traditions of the Fathers or ſuch as the Biſhops and Churches doe at this daie ordaine, this is the opinion of our men. They reckon no tradirions for mens traditions, but ſuch as are condemned in Scripture, but ſuch as are contrarie to the law of God, ſuch as binde the conſcience about me at, and drinke, and times, and other outward things, ſuch as forbid mariage to them who haue neede therof, to liue honeſtlie, and the reſt of that ſtamp. For ſuch as agree with the Scripture, and were ordeined

for good manners & the profit of men, although they be not word for worde expreſſed in the Scriptures, neuertheles in that they proccede from the commaundement of loue, which ordereth all things moſt decentlie, they are worthely to be accounted rather of God, then of man. Of this ſort were thoſe ſet downe by Paull, that women ſhould not praie 1. Cor. 14. 1. Cor. 14▪
                  in the Church bareheaded, nor men with their heades couered, that they who are to communicate together ſhould tary one for another: that no mā ſhould ſpeak with tongues in the congregation without an interpreter: that the Prophets without confuſion ſhould deliuer their Prophecies to be iudged by them that ſit by. Many ſuch the Church at this daie for good cauſe obſerueth, and vpon occaſion alſo maketh new, which who ſo refuſeth, he deſpiſeth the authoritie, not of men, but of God, whoſe tradition, it is, whatſoeuer is profitable. For, whatſoeuer truth is ſaide or written, by his gift it is ſpoken and written, who is truth, as Saint Auguſtine hath godly written. But often times there is diſputing about that, what tradition is profitable, what not: that is, what ſet forward godlines, what doth hinder it. But he that ſhall ſeeke nothing of his owne, but ſhall wholly dedicate himſelfe to the publike profit, he ſhal eaſily ſee, what things are agreable to the law of god, what are not. Furthermore, ſeing the eſtate of Chriſtians is ſuch, that they are alſo helped by iniuries, the Chriſtian will not refuſe to obey, no not vniuſt lawes, ſo they haue no wicked thing in them, according to the ſaying of Chriſt, If any man compell thee to goe with him one mile, go with him two. Euen ſo ſurelie the Chriſtian ought to become all vnto al, that he may ſtudie to do and ſuffer all things, ſo that they be not contrarie to the commaundements of God, to pleaſure and profit men withall. Hence it commeth to paſſe, that euerie man, ſo much the more willinglie obeyeth the ciuill lawes which are not repugnant to religion, the more fullie he is indued with the faith of Chriſt.
            
         
         
            
            THE EIGHTEENTH SECTION.
            OF WEDLOCKE, SINGLE LIFE, AND MONASTIcall vowes.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  Of ſingle life, wedlocke, and houſeholde gouernement. CHAP. 29.
               
                  SVuch as haue the gift of chaſtitie giuen vnto them from aboue, ſo as they can with the heart, or wholl minde be pure and continent, and not be grieuouſlie burned with luſt, let them ſerue the Lord in that calling, as long as they ſhall feele themſelues indued with that heauenlie gift: and let them not lifte vp themſelues aboue others, but let them ſerue the Lord dailie in ſimplicitie and humilitie. For ſuch are more apt for doing of heauenlie thinges, then they which are diſtracted with priuate affaires of their familie: but if againe the gift be taken away, and they feele a continuall burning, let them call to minde the words of the Apoſtle, It is better to marrie, then to burne.
               
               
                  1. Gor. 7. For wedlocke, which is the medicine of incontinencie, & continencie it ſelfe, was ordeined by the Lord God himſelfe, Mat. 13.who bleſſed it moſt bountifully, and willeth man and woman

to eleaue one to the other inſeperablie, and to liue together in great loue and concorde. Whereupon we know the Apoſtle ſaid, Mariage is honourable among all, & the bedde vndefiled. 
                  Heb. 13. 1. Cor. 7.And againe, If a Virgine marrie, ſhe ſinneth not. We therefore condemne Poligamie, and thoſe which condemne ſecond mariages. We teach that mariages ought to be made lawfullie, in the feare of the Lord, and not againſt the lawes, which forbid certein degrees to ioine in matrimony, leſt the mariages ſhould be inceſtuous. Let mariages be made with conſent of the parents, or ſuch as be in ſteed of parents, & for that ende eſpeciallie, for the which the Lord ordeined mariages: and let them be confirmed publiquely in the church, with praier, and bleſſing of them. Moreouer, let them be kept holilie, with peace, faithfulnes, duetifulnes, loue, and alſo puritie of the perſons coupled together. Therefore let them take heede of brawlings, debates, luſts, and adulteries. Let lawfull iudgements and holie Iudges be eſtabliſhed in the Church, which may mainteine mariages, and may repreſſe all diſhoneſtie, and ſhamefulnes, and before whom the controuerſies in matrimonie may be decided, and ended.
               Let children alſo be brought vp of the Parentes in the feare of the Lord, and let Parentes prouide for their children, remembring the ſaying of the Apoſtle, He that prouideth not for his owne, hath denied the faith, and is worſse then an infidell. 
                  1. Tim. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  But ſpeciallie let them teach their children honeſt ſciences, whereby they may mainteine themſelues: let them withdraw them from idlenes, and plant in them a true confidence in god in al theſe things: leſt they through diſtruſt, or ouermuch careles ſecuritie, or filthie couetouſnes wax loſe, and in the end come to no good. Now it is moſt certaine, that thoſe workes which Parents doe in a true faith by the dueties of mariage, & gouernment of their families, are before God holie & good workes in deed, and doe pleaſe God no leſſe, then praiers, faſtings, and almes deeds. For ſo the Apoſtle hath taught in his Epiſtles, eſpecially in thoſe to Timothie & Titus. And with the ſame Apoſtle we account the doctrine of ſuch as forbid mariage or do openly diſpraiſe, or ſecretlie diſcredit it as not holie, or cleane, amongſt the doctrines of Deuills. And we do deteſt vncleane ſingle life, licentious

luſts, and fornications, both open, and cloſe, and the continencie of diſſembling hypocrites, when as they are of all men moſt incontineut. All that be ſuch, God will iudge. We doe not diſalow riches, and rich men, if they be godly, and vſe their riches well, but we reprooue the ſect of the Apoſtoliques, &c.
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               Of holie wedlocke.
               WE thinke that wedlocke beeing appointed of God 
                     Art. 37.for all men, that be fit for it, and are not called to ſome other thing, is nothing repugnant to the holynes of any degree. The which as the Church doth conſecrate and eſtabliſh, with a ſolemne exhortation and praier, ſo it is the duetie of the Magiſtrate, to ſee that it be worthelie kept, and mainteined, looke the 1. oſeru vppon this confeſſ.and that it be not diſſolued, but vpon iuſte cauſe. Therefore we doe farre reiect this Monaſticall ſingle life, and this wholl ſlothful kinde of life of ſuperſtitious men, which is nothing elſe but an abhominable deuiſe, as beeing as much repugnant to the Church, as to the common wealth.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  Hitherto perteineth firſt, that which is ſet downe in the 19. Chap. of this confeſſion in theſe wordes.
                  FOr this cauſe it is thought to be good, and well ſtanding with wiſdome (ſo farre vndoubtedlie as may be done by conſcience) that Prieſts, to the end that they may ſo much the more diligentlie exerciſe them-ſelues in the ſtudie of the holie Scriptures, and may the more readilie and profitablie ſerue the Church of God, be free, and exempted from all affaires and burdens of ciuill conuerſation, ſeing that it behooueth them to fight valiantlie for the faith of the goſpell of God, and if it may be, to be alſo free from wedlock, to this end, that they may be the more ready and free to do that which is for the increaſe and furtherance of the ſaluation of the people, and that manie harmfull impediments

may be turned from them, which doe concurre with that kinde of life, & do often times withhold, and hinder the due workes of the miniſterie. For which cauſes our miniſters think, that they are more readie preſt, and more fit for the Eccleſiaſticall Miniſterie, which are vnmarried: yet they meane ſuch vnmarried perſons, as haue this peculiar gift giuen to them of God, that they maie remaine ſuch, and ſo giue them-ſelues whollie to the Miniſterie. This thing is ſo obſerued among vs, as is meet: yet is it neither taken for a ſinne, neither doth anie man diſdaine at it, if Prieſts, vpon iuſt and lawfull cauſes, be married. For holy Paull teacheth, how ſuch ought to be choſen to this function, 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1.yea the holie Ghoſt himſelfe doth permit that Byſhops and Elders ſhould haue their lawfull and honeſt wiues, and he doth in no caſe giue them libertie, contrarie to order and the diſcipline of God, to entertaine concubines, or otherwiſe ſo to liue, as that they maie thereby giue offence to others. And concerning marriage, it is thus written, It is better to marie, then to ſinne ſo manie waies, and to burne with ſo great diſhoneſtie: for which ſinnes, not onely the Prieſt, but alſo euerie Chriſtan, without reſpect of perſons, both ought, and ſhall worthelie, by excommunication be caſt out of the Church.
               
               
                  Alſo, CHAP. 19. Of ſingle life and of Wedlock.
                  
                  COncerning the condition of ſingle life, virginitie, and widowhead, our Preachers do teach, that euery man hath free libertie, either to chuſe it to himſelfe, or to refuſe it: for by waie of a law nothing is commaunded of God to men touching theſe things: neither is this thing appointed of God, neither is it on the other ſide forbidden: for which cauſe no man ought to be enforced thereunto againſt his wil, nor be driuen from it. And as concerning the Church, and certaine men, & chiefly the miniſters of the church, our men haue taught from the beg
                        •
                     nning, and do now teach, firſt, that the gift of chaſtitie, by the peculiar goodnes of God, and of the holie ghoſt, both in times paſt was giuen, & at this day alſo is giuen to ſome, for the ſingular vſe and profit of the Church, as Chriſt his ſpeach doth euidentlie witnes. Euerie man, ſaith he, doth not receiue theſe wordes, that is, that Math. 19.
                     
a man ſhould keepe him-ſelfe ſingle without a wife, but they 
                     1. Cor. 7.
                     to whome it is giuen, And holie Paull alſo doth both place and celebrate this amongſt peculiar giftes, and whereunto ſome are peculiarlie called. And moreouer, the examples of certaine in the Propheticall and Apoſtolicall writings, and of Iohn Bapiſt, and of many miniſters, and Looke the 
                           •
                        . obſeruat.weomen miniſters of the Church, do witnes this thing.
                  In the ſecond place they teach that this gift is not of fleſh and blood (for the Lord by diſtinguiſhing doth remooue and ſeperate from hence that vnablenes which is in this kinde) but of the ſpirit which is ielous, who from his heart hath a care and pleaſure in the glorie of God, and in his owne and his neighbours ſaluation, and alſo in the Miniſterie of the Church, and for this cauſe he doth of his owne accord abſteine from wedlock: Therefore the Lord ſaith, Thoſe which 
                     Mat. 19.
                     haue made them-ſelues Eunuches for the kingdome of heauen: that is, who be ſuch, as might be maried, yet they do omit and abſteine from it, becauſe of the affection of the inward heart and their loue toward God, and his word, and for the pleaſure and ioy which they receiue thereof: and through this gift of the ſpirit, whoſe vertue and power doth ouercome the motions of nature, they do preſerue the purenes as well Looke the 3. obſeru.of the ſpirit, as of the bodie: howbeit this thing is not in them without labour and difficulty, euen as it is a thing of no ſmall labour and difficultie for all Chriſtian men to forſake, and to want the vſe of other pleaſant things, and alſo ſuch as are profitable for this life, as friendes, riches, and monie.
                  Thirdlie, that ſingle life is to be choſen, and taken with a true intent and a godlie meaning, that is, not to this end, or with this purpoſe, that a man would by this meanes merit or get vnto himſelfe, or to another, remiſſion of ſinnes, and eternall life, and ſo conſequentlie ſaluation it ſelfe. For ther is no continencie or chaſtitie, nor anie humane action, or other vertue, which can merit: the onelie innocencie and death of the onely begotten Sonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt doth performe and perfit this thing. Neither muſt the thing be receiued with this meaning, as to think that ſome dignitie is added to the holie miniſterie of the Church by reaſon of this gift: or that the workes of thoſe that be vnmaried in this miniſterie, are to be preferred in merit and

dignitie before the works of married men: but as the Lord ſaith, that it maie be receiued for the kingdome of heauen: that is, in ſuch ſort, as he which for the gift ſpoken of before, is fit to lead a ſingle life.
                  As therefore by theſe things he may with leſſe hindrance and more eaſily, and readilie with great leaſure, and more commodiouſlie imploy his labour to the ſaluation of the Church and holy aſſemblies, euen ſo he may be a more conuenient miniſter then others, of the ſame ſaluation, which Chriſt hath purchaſed for him: (and whereof that he may be partaker by faith▪ it is giuen him freelie of grace, and wherein he doth keepe and vpholde him ſelfe) ſeeing that it is certeine, that by the ſtate of marriage many lets, manie cares, and manie thinges whereby neceſſary quietnes is diſturbed, are caſt in our way. And this is it which Paul ſaith, I would that you ſhould be without ſuch cares. He that is vnmarried, is 
                     1. Cor. 7.
                     careful for thoſe things which pertein to the Lord, how he may pleaſe the Lord. Alſo, I think that this is good for the preſent neceſſitie. Alſo, to that which is ſeemlie to performe diligence, by ſeruing the Lord without diſtraction. And before we rehearſed the voice of the Lord who ſaith, that there be ſome, who for the kingdome of heauen, do abſtaine from marriage. And holy Paull ſaith, He that giueth not his virgine to be married, doth the better. For which cauſe it is taught, that all they, who of their owne accord do take and chuſe vnto themſelues this kinde of life, ought carefully to haue regard hereunto, that in ſuch a life they may with a ſingular & earneſt endeauour exerciſe godlines, and be holie, as Paull commaundeth, as well in body, as in ſpirit, and giue more light then others, by the honeſtie of their actions, by the laboures of ſuch trades as beſeeme a Chriſtian profeſſion, by doing all that they can for the benefit of the Church, and by yeelding their ſeruice to the ſicke, and to other needy members.
                  This gift and purpoſe of ſuch which do thus in this matter conſecrate themſelues to God, and ſuch an exerciſe of their godlines, is commended of our men, and they do faithfully perſuade men hereunto: but they do perſuade, as we ſaid, and not compell: the which thing Paull alſo doth, who writeth 1. Cor. 7.thus: Concerning Virgines I haue no commaundement of the 
                           ••
                        rd, but I deliuer my iudgement, which haue receiued this mercie
                     
                     of the Lord, that I maie be faithfull. I thinke it good for a man to be ſuch a one: and he concludeth after this ſort, He is more happie, in my iudgement, if he remaine ſuch a one, that is, vnmarried, then if he marrie: and I thinke that I haue the ſpirit of God. In like ſorte, in compariſon of others, there be bountifull and peculiar promiſes, and ſingular rewardes offered vnto thoſe, that keepe themſelues ſingle, to wit, that their worthie workes 
                     Mat. 17.
                     ſhall be recompenſed with a great reward, and that no man ſhall in vaine for ſake anie thing, as houſe, father▪ brother, ſo alſo his wife &c. as the Apoſtles did, for the Lords cauſe. Furthermore it is taught, that they which haue receiued this gift of God, and being throughly prooued and tried in this behalfe, do of their own accord ſerue the Lord and the Church, they are taught I ſaie, together with other giftes to make great account of this gift, and to keepe it diligentlie, leſt that by anie euill luſtes, or by anie allurements of occaſions, they do looſe it. Yet notwithſtanding if anie good, faithful, and diligent man chaunce to be aſſaulted with ſuch a tentation, as to feare in himſelfe the heat and wicked fact of luſte, then there is no ſnare laid for ſuch a one, neither is there anie daunger of entrapping his conſcience, but he that is in this caſe, let him be put ouer Looke the 4. obſeru.to take counſell of the Elders, and gouernours of the Church, who haue the ſpirit of God, that all may be done in the Church in order, decentlie, with honeſtie of the example, and with the vſing of all due conſideration. Then verilie, if vpon theſe thinges thus done, he doth lawfullie chaunge his kinde of life, he doth not ſinne, ſeeing that he obeyeth the counſell of the holie Ghoſt: and the holie Church ought not for this cauſe to contemne him, nor to make anie thing the leſſe account of his miniſterie. Notwithſtanding, if for this cauſe he ſhould be contemned, which the Church can not do without ſinne, it were certeinly better for him, by this meanes to preſerue his ſoule, (although he ſhould be one of the common ſort of Chriſtians onely) then by perſiſting in his miniſterie with ſinne, to looſe and condemne it.
                  But although it ſeemeth to come neerer to the example of the Primitiue Church, that worthie and honeſt maried men may be choſen to take the charge of ſoules in the Church, thē to giue them leaue to change their kinde of life, who before

being vnmaried, did labour diligently in the miniſtery of the Lord, yet notwithſtanding our men do not ground the worthines, holines, and vertue of the Eccleſiaſticall miniſterie, no more then they doe of Chriſtian ſaluation, vpon either of theſe kindes, to wit, neither vpon the ſtate of ſingle life, nor of wedlocke: neither is there any other thing ſought or looked for (as it is before declared) more then that onelie profit, and opportunitie, which falleth into a ſingle life, and is commended of the holie Ghoſt. After theſe thinges they doe thus conſequentlie teach touching wedlocke, that ſuch a condition of life, though it haue many difficulties, puniſhments, and curſes ioyned with it, wherewith after the fall of man, both mankinde▪ and this order is opreſſed, yet that it is in this wiſe holie, and acceptable vnto God, becauſe that God himſelfe did in the beginning ordaine it, and afterward Chriſt our Lord did confeciate it, and doth daily conſecrate it in thoſe that are his, and that in ſuch ſort, that their children alſo be holie, and that moreouer God hath offered vnto it peculiarlie ſingular promiſes, and bleſſings, which are conteined in the Scriptures. Thence therefore muſt al true Chriſtians know, that whoſoeuer doe chuſe this kinde of life ſo as it becommeth them, and with an vpright purpoſe doe both giue them ſelues thereunto, and be conuerſant therein, they doe not onelie not ſinne, but they doe, and accompliſh that, which God would haue them to doe: and that they lead ſuch a kinde of life, as God doth peculiarlie call ſome vnto, and that they doe ſerue the ſelfe ſame Lord, whome the vnmaried men doe ſerue.
                  
                     THE FRENCH CONFESSION doth condemne Monaſticall vowes, and the forbidding of Mariage, Artic. 24. which we haue inſerted in the 16. Sect.
                  
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
               VVE ſaie, that Matrimonie is holie, and honorable in all ſortes and ſtates of perſons: as in the Patriarchs, in the Prophets, in the Apoſtles, in the holy Martyrs, in the Miniſters of the Church, and in Biſhops: and that it is an honeſt, and lawfull thing (as Chryſoſtome ſaieth) for a man, 
                  In Tit. 1. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     11. Theo. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Tit. 10.
                  
                  liuing in Matrimonie, to take vpon him therewith the dignitie of a Biſhoppe. And, as Sozomenus ſaith of Spiridon, and as Nazianzene

                  Euſeb. lib. 10 cap. 5.
                   ſaieth of his owne Father, we ſaie, that a good, and diligent Biſhoppe doth ſerue in the Miniſterie neuer the worſe, for that he his maried, but rather the better, and with more hablenes to doe good. Further we ſaie, that the ſame lawe, which is by conſtraint, taketh awaie this libertie from men, and compelleth them againſt their willes, to liue ſingle, is the doctrine of deuills, as Paull ſaieth: and, that euer ſince the time of this lawe, a wonderfull vncleannes of life, and manners in Gods miniſters, and ſundrie horrible enormities haue followed, as the Biſhop of Auguſta, as Faber, as Abbas Panormitanus, as Latomus, as the Tripartite Worke, which is annexed to the ſecond Tome of the Councells, and ſome other champions of the Popes bande, yea and as the matter it ſelfe, and all hiſtories doe confeſſe. For it was righlie ſaide by Pius the ſecond Biſhoppe of Rome, that he ſaw manie cauſes, 
                  Plat. in vita Pi
                        •
                     . 2.
                  
                  why wiues ſhould be taken awaie from Prieſtes: but that he ſaw manie moe, and more weighty cauſes, why they ought to be reſtored to them againe.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               
                  Art. 5. Of Abuſes.
                  
                  Of the marriage of Prieſts.
                  WHereas the Doctrine of Chriſt maketh honourable mention of mariage, and willeth men to vſe the ſame, not onelie for procreation ſake, but alſo to bridle and auoide luſtes: now a daies the mariages of Prieſtes are not onelie by the popes lawe, but alſo by a new and vnwonted cruelty forbidden, and ſuch as be made and contracted are diſſolued and broken. Which is ſo much the more vnſeemelie, for that theſe thinges are done in the Church, which, as ſhe ought moſt of all to abhorre and deteſt filthines, ſo ſhould ſhee with great care defend Wedlocke, for the auoiding of manie greeuos enormities. Beſides, ſeeing that in all heatheniſh common wealthes that were but meanelie well ordered▪ mariage was in great account, for verie waightie cauſes; what is there leſſe ſeemelie in the Church, then either to breake in ſunder the moſte holie kno
                        •
                      of wedlocke, or to puniſh mariage with puniſhmentes of death, as though it were a moſt hainous offence? Whence is it, that this crueltie hath ſpread it ſelfe into the Church, in which mutuall loue ſhould floriſh moſte of all? Moreouer

the matter it ſelfe doth teſtifie how much beaſt lines, & how manie vilanies this popiſh law of ſingle life doth bring forth: no voice of man is able to ſhew, how manie vices haue iſſued forth of this fountaine into the Church. For (to ſaie nothing of Epicures, whoe bluſh at nothing) how manie good and godlie men haue had all ſucceſſe in ſtriuing with their natural weaknes, and at the laſt haue fallen into horrible diſpaire? Now wherto tendeth this new crueltie, but that thoſe innumerable vilanies might be confirmed in the Churches, and that wicked men might ſinne more freelie? This matter needeth no diſputation at all. For this now law defended by our aduerſaries, which forbideth Prieſtes to marie, and diſſolueth thoſe that are contracted, is flat contrarie to the lawe of nature, to the lawe of god, to the Goſpell, to the conſtitutions of auncient ſynods, and to the examples of the auncient Church. Onelie in this calling we need the godlines and equitie of the moſte excellent Emperour, whome we beſeech for his godlines and dueties ſake that he would ſeeke ſome remedie for the Church by aboliſhing this tyrannicall law. For as all vniuſt crueltie doth diſpleaſe God, ſo that moſte of all, which is exerciſed againſt godlie and learned Prieſtes, which deſerue well of the Church.
                  And in this caſe we haue not onelie the worde of God threatning moſte greeuous plagues againſt them, which exerciſe crueltie on the Prieſtes, but alſo there are examples to be ſeen in al ages which do plainely teſtifie, that ſuch threatnings are not in vaine. For to let poſſe infinit other examples, the Tribe of Benjamin was almoſt quite deſtroied, for abuſing the Prieſtes wife that came thither as a ſtranger. For when as the dead bodie of the woman, which died after ſhee had beene ſo abuſed, was cut in peeces, and ſent to all the Princes of Iſraell, all the people iudged that ſuch outrage ought moſte ſeuerelie to be reuenged. And when they could not get the authors of this ſhameful fact to be deliuered vnto them, for to be puniſhed, the wholl Tribe of Beniamin receiuing a great ouerthrowe, was puniſhed for it. Now in theſe daies the Prieſtes are vexed with ſundrie iniuries: they are (when no other crime is obiected vnto them but mariage) racked with moſte horrible torments, and ſo put to death, their miſerable wiues and litle

children, being throwne out of houſe and home, wander vp and downe, as baniſhed perſons, without anie certaine place of abode, or houſe to dwell in. Paull calleth The forbidding of mariage the Doctrine of Deuilles: which to be true, not onelie theſe filthie vices, which the ſingle life hath brought into the Church, but alſo the crueltie, which by reaſon of this lawe is exerciſed vpon Prieſtes, and their wiue
                        •
                      and Children, doe teſtifie plainelie. For the Deuil is a murtherer, and he is chiefelie delighted with the miſeries of the godlie. But the deuiſers of ſuch counſell ſhall one day haue their iuſt reward from God. We iudge that ſuch crueltie is not worthie for Chriſtians to vſe, nor profitable to the Church of God.
                  Whereas they obiect the authoritie of the Popes lawe, whie doe they not alledge the authoritie of the Canons againſt thoſe ſhamefull examples of vncleane ſingle life, and thoſe vilanies, that were worthie of moſte ſeuere puniſhment? The authoritie of the Popes decree, which is contrarie to the lawe of nature, and the commaundement of God, ſhould be of no waight. Men are ſo made by nature, that they ſhould be fruitfull. Whereupon the lawiers ſaie, That the coniunction of man & woman is by the law of nature. And the ſame the firſt book of Moſes teacheth in the firſt & ſecond Chapters. Againe, when Saint Paull ſaith, To auoide fornication, let euerie man haue his wife, it is certaine, that he biddeth all which are not apt for a ſingle life, to ioyne in mariage. And Chriſt doth admoniſh, that all are not fit for a ſingle life, when he ſaieth, All men doe not reeeiue this thing. Moreouer, neither mens lawes, nor anie vowes, are of force, which are againſt the commaundement of God. And the euent it ſelfe doth teſtifie, that nature cannot be chaunged by mans lawe. For we ſee what vile filthines this ſingle life doth bring forth, and if there be anie honeſt men which endeuour to keepe themſelues chaſte, they preceiue right wel how great a burden, how great daunger there is in this thing, and they doe eſpecia
                        •
                     llie bewail this ſlauery of their order.
                  Certaine men went about in the Nicen Synod to make a lawe to forbid Prieſtes the vſe of their wiues. This law was refuſed by the holie Synod: and the Latine Churches in the

olde time was not ſo ſeuere in this pointe: for they did put from the miniſterie onelie ſuch, as when they had taken vpon them anie Eccleſiaſtical function, did afterwards marrie wiues, yet they did not forbid mariage. But this is a new law of the Pope, vnknowne to the auncient Churches and Synods, which doth whollie forbidde mariages, and breaketh of ſuch as are contracted. But it is euident, that either part of this decree is flat contrarie to the Goſpell. They alledge againſt vs the authoritie of the Church, and of ſynodes, which the Popes them ſelues that were authors of this decree, did impudentlie contemne, and godlie Prieſtes did euidentlie withſtand this new lawe. For the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtories doe teſtifie, that it was neuer laied vpon the Churches, without great contentions and reſiſtance. The Biſhoppe of Tarracon writeth to Syricius the Pope, That the Prieſtes of Spaine could not be brought to admit that lawe which for bad them the vſe of their wiues. What a ſtirre doth Syricius keepe there? How ſharpelie doth he write? For theſe are the wordes of Syricius, which are vnmeete for a Pope: Let him tell me, whoſoeuer he be, a hunter after luſtes, and a Maſter of vices. And thereupon he wreſteth the words of S. Paull to his cauſe, which are moſt farre from it: They which liue in the fleſh can not pleaſe god. A man may doubt ſuerelie, whether it maie better be attributed to his ignorance, or his impudencie, that he ſpeaketh ſo diſdainefully of mariage. For he goeth about nothing elſe but to forbidde Prieſtes the vſe of their wiues, which then they had maried.
                  But the Popes that ſucceeded after were yet more harde and cruell. When the Archbiſhop of Mentz did in a Synode rehearſe the Popes decree touching the putting awaie of wiues in Germanie, the Prieſtes were ſo kindled in their anger that they threatned to ſet vpon the Archbiſhoppe himſelfe. And it was in deed both an vnworthie, and cruell thing, to put awaie their wiues, which they then had But at laſt either force, or ſuperſtition got the vpper hand. Cyprian was farre more equall and gentle to ſuch women as had not kept their vowed chaſtitie. For he writeth in the firſt booke, the 11. Epiſt. If they will not, or cannot indure it▪ it is better they ſhould marrie, then that they ſhould fall into the fire through their importune luſts. In any wiſe let them giue no offence to
                     
                     the breethren or ſiſters. Beſides this, vniuſt lawes are not wonte to be perpetuall. Wee doe therefore intreat the moſte excellent Emperour, that among manie other enormities of the Church, he will alſo conſider the faultes of this law: in which caſe that alſo is to be weighed. The nature of man doeth as it were waxe olde, and is become weaker. Wherefore there muſt be care had that vices doe not increaſe: Neither muſt the lawes themſelues be ſeedes of vices. Plato ſaith verie wiſelie, that Lawes muſt be made for vertues ſake. Now whether this tradition of ſingle life be mainteined for pieties ſake, or for ſome other purpoſe, it is no hard matter to determine. Laſt of all, ſeeing that Chriſt hath eſpeciallie commended the care of the miniſters of the Goſpell to the godlie, wee deſire therefore that the moſte excellent Emperour would reſtraine this crueltie, which hath a long time bin exerciſed vpon godlie Prieſtes, and would rather conſult with the Church, then with our aduerſaries, in that behalfe. Surelie loue and mercifull dealing ſhould floriſh in the Church. Wherfore the true church doth greatlie abhorre vnneceſſarie crueltie, and would not haue the Prieſtes put to death for a tyrannicall tradition. She would alſo haue the poore Wiues & Children of Prieſts fauourablie dealt with. All whoſe liues & ſaftie the Church doth commend vnto thee, O moſt mercifull Emperour. All the godlie whereſoeuer, are touched with their miſeries & doe in heart deſire Chriſtian lenitie in this behalfe, and doe alſo with teares iointlie commend learned and honeſt men that are profitable to the Church together wth their wiues and children, vnto thee, whome they ſe both to be indued with an excellent and heroi
                        •
                     all goodnes and kindenes, and alſo to haue vſed in this cauſe verie notable moderation, which doth let vs vnderſtand that thou art carefull of bringing ſome remedie vnto the common wealth. The Church would not haue thee to be a miniſter of another mans crueltie. The greateſt honour of Kings is that which Eſaie giueth to them when he ſaith, that they ſhould be nurſe fathers to the Church: that is, that kingdomes and the maintenance of peace and of humane ſociety ſhould not onlie ſerue for the profit of the bodie, but alſo ſhould further the goſpel, namelie when as they both rule the Prieſts, and alſo graunt peace

& quietnes to Cities, that the youth might be trained vp in religion, and men might be inſtructed. The Church therefore doth beſeech thee to remember that the care of defending the godlie Prieſts, as of certeine nourſlings, lieth vpon thee. It belongeth vnto this calling to be a ſuccour for innocencie, to ſaue from iniuries, eſpecially ſuch as are weake, which are not able to defend themſelues, as namelie godlie women, children, and orphanes or the fatherles. Among which you maie well thinke that the wiues and children of Prieſts, which are right orphanes in deed, are left vnto your charge by the Lorde. The Church, as moſte full of naturall affection and loue, doth not onelie approoue of the mutuall loue of maried folkes one to another, and of the loue of parents to their children, but is alſo touched with the miſeries of thoſe that are forlorne and fatherles. And ſurelie ſhee iudgeth in ſo great goodnes of your nature that there is no inhumanitie or want of naturall affection. VVherefore ſhee is in good hope that the murders, and executions of Prieſts, and the baniſhment of their wiues and children doe grieue thee not a litle. The Church alſo doth giue thee warning to looke to it, leſt manie points of Chriſtian doctrine, the vnfolding and laying open whereof is verie neceſſarie, be ſmothered vp, whiles godlie and learned miniſters are put to death, and whiles men are driuen from the ſtudie of Chriſtian doctrine. VVhat elſe do our aduerſaries ſeeke, but that all good learning & true doctrine may be rooted out or oppreſſed, & men maie onlie depend vpon the authoritie of ſuch as do bear rule, & that they might eſteem the dreams of vnlearned men, though neuer ſo impious, neuer ſo abſurd, for oracles. Our aduerſaries imagine that this barbarous bondage is the beſt, and ſureſt for their Lordlie rule. And in deed it is verie euident, how the Church in manie places i
                        •
                      oppreſſed with this bondage. Now though libertie maie not be graunted to diſanull ſuch determinations, as be receiued by good authoritie, and though men ought not to depart either from the ſcriptures, or from the decrees of the ancient Synods, wherin they haue determined of Chriſtian doctrine, yet is it not meet that the authority of the church ſhould be pretended for all ſuch abuſes and faultes, as the latter and worſer age hath brought into the Church. And

ſurelie men doe flatter and deceiue themſelues too much, if they think that there be no faults conueied into the church by the deſires of couetous men, and by thoſe Labyrinthes & obſcurities, of the doctrine and traditions of the ſchoolemen. For now a daies good men are not ſo much in daunger for their marriage ſake, as for their care and deſire they haue to purge and bring to trial the doctrine of Chriſt. Which care the Biſhops ought wiſelie to direct and further. For to them eſpeciallie is the care of ſetting forth the maintenance of true doctrine commended: they ſhoulde be the ringleaders and furtherers of this moſte holie and ftuitfull care and ſtudie. But it belongeth not to the Biſhop alone but alſo to godlie Princes, and eſpeciallie to the Emperour, to vnderſtand the goſpell purely, to iudge of opinions, to be warre and watchfull that no wicked opinions be receiued or roo
                        •
                     ed▪ and to aboliſh Idolatrie with all his might & maine.
                  By cheſe and ſuch like dueties did manie valiant and notable men deſerue well at the handes of godlie men, as Gedeon, Ezechias, Ioſias, and Conſtantine, and ſundrie others. Wherefore you muſt thinke it your duety alſo to take heed, leſt ſuch thinges, as be godly and profitablie brought to light and reformed by God and learned men, be ſmothered againe, and leſt that wicked abuſes be eſtabliſhed by your authoritie. The Pſalme ſaith, for thy temples ſake in Ieruſalem, the King ſhall offer giftes vnto thee▪
                      The proper gifts that Kings are to beſtow vpon the Church are, to ſearch out true doctrine, & to ſee that good teachers be ſet ouer the Churches, to giue diligence that the controuerſies of the Church may be rightlie decided: Not to take awaie true and holie doctrine, but to raiſe it vp, and to ſet it forward, and to defend it, and rightlie to ſet it in order, and to mainteine the quiet concord of the Church. By theſe true giftes, moſte noble Emperour, you may adorne the Church of Chriſt, which eſpeciallie both Chriſt himſelfe requireth, and the Churches, that are rent and torne in moſte horrible manner, doe craue at your handes.
                  Laſt of all, ſeeing that humane traditions ought to giue place to times and opportunities, eſpeciallie in the Church, wherein there ſhould be more regard had of the ſaluation of the godlie, and of loue, and publique peace, then of anie

humane traditions, it were a great deale better to make ſhew of abrogating this ſeelie tradition of ſingle life, then to ſtrengthen luſts, to diſſolue mariages, to exerciſe crueltie againſt the Prieſts and their wiues and children, to oppreſſe true and holie doctrine, and to make hauock of the Church. We doe therefore commend this matter of their mariage vnto your pietie and bountie, O noble Emperour, as that which hath no difficultie or doubt fulnes in it. For they that be gouernours both maie and ought to aboliſh an vniuſt lawe. And the lawes of ſingle life, whether they be new, or olde, belong onlie to humane equity, in mitigating whereof the authoritie of the Church ſhould be of great force. VVee could bring verie manie examples out of the hiſtories of all times and countries, in which there might be ſeene horrible examples of iudgements, which followed vpon vncleane luſts. Among manie other cauſes of the general flood, there is mention made of fleſhlie luſts. Afterward fiue cities were ſwallowed vp in an opening of the earth, ſo as the lake called Aſphalites was left as a perpetuall monument of that puniſhment: when the Iſraelites were departed out of Egypt, and diuers had defiled them ſelues by going in vnto Moabitiſh weomen, the twelue Princes of the tribes were hanged vp, and 24. thouſand men were ſlaine. The Cana
                     
                        •
                     ites after this were cleane rooted out, and among the cauſes thereof, inceſtuous copulations are namelie reckoned vp: ſhortlie after followed the ouerthrow of the tribe of Beniamin, for abuſing the Leuites wife. After this Dauid was driuen out of his kingdome for adulterie. And Ieremie in diuers places crieth out, that theſe three, Idolatrie, oppreſſions, and adulteries, are the cauſes of thoſe great calamities, which ouerwhelmed the wholl nation of the Iewes then, when they were carried captiues to Babylon. Theſe thinges are written for this purpoſe, that wee might know certainelie that God is diſpleaſed with wandring luſtes of vncleannes: and that vncleane and inceſtuous perſons doe not fall into puniſhments by chaunce, but are puniſhed of God. Therefore the deſtructions of heathniſh Cities alſo doe put vs in minde of the wrath of God againſt theſe villanies, Sibaris was ouerthrowne: Athens, Sparta, and Thebes, being toſſed with ciuill warres, receiued due puniſhment

of their filthines. And Rome when it brought forth manie Neroes and Heliogabales, at length it came to ruine, the Empire being rent into ſundrie partes by the warres of ſundrie barbarous nations. There is alſo a long Catalogue in Ariſtotle of Cities, wherein there happened chaunges of gouernment and ſeditions, for vncleane luſtes. Beſides all which puniſhments Paul warneth the church that there is another iudgement that followeth vpon theſe luſtes, and that is madnes, or furie, as it is written. Rom. 1. and Epheſians 4. And it maie well be, that this iudgement hath ſeaſed vpon our Eccleſiaſticall gouernours, whoe for the moſte parte are open Epicures, open defenders of Idolls, that they may get welth and authoritie, and ſcoffe at thoſe heauenlie ſayings, which threaten vengeance vpon Idolaters, vncleane perſons, and Parricides. They vaunte that they doe all thinges well, which they doe for their kingdomes ſake, and that ſuch are good ſubiects, and loue quietnes and peace, that allow of errours and open naughtines, that they maie vphold the maieſtie of the Popes kingdome. The wholl world can beare witnes that there is a God that doth reuenge all filthines, vncleannes, and oppreſſion. Wherefore though they now deride and ſcoffe at theſe ſpeaches, yet let them know, that they ſhall one daie ſtick faſt in thoſe puniſhments, whereunto the world it ſelfe doth call them.
                  Seeing then it is a cleare caſe, that the law of ſingle life is directlie againſt the commaundement of God, we thinke that the Prieſtes and others doe verie well, which ioyne in honeſt marriage, as Paull ſaith, that a Biſhoppe muſt be choſen that is the husband of one wife. We iudge alſo that the rulers both may, and ought to aboliſh this law of the Pope. For they are foulie deceiued, that thinke either that marriage is forbidden to prieſts by Gods law, or elſe that the Kinges or the Biſhops may make a law to forbid them marriage. And if that rulers will not helpe the Church in this behalfe, yet the godlie doe well which follow the Apoſtles rule, which ſaith, That we must rather obey God, then men. To conclude, ſeeing the defenſe of the Popes lawe hath many faultes ioyned with it, as namelie the ſtrengthning of wandring luſts, ſuperſtitions, and murdering of godlie Prieſts, euerie

one may ſee that our Churches deale well in aboliſhing and condemning that law of the Pope. And we beſeech the moſte renowmed Emperour, that he wil not defile himſelf, wirh defending that vncleane ſingle life, and with the blood of the Prieſts: for it is written, Bleſſed is he that hath pittie o
                           •
                         the poore and needie, the Lorde ſhall deliuer him in the cuill day.
                  
               
               
                  This article we found elſewhere placed in the ſecond place, amongeſt thoſe wherein the abuſes that are chaunged be mentioned.
                  Of the mariage of Prieſts. Art. 2.
                  
                  THere was a common complaint of the examples of ſuch prieſts, as were not cōtinent. For which cauſe alſo Pope Pius is reported to haue ſaid, that there were certaine cauſes for which marriage was forbiddē to prieſts, but there were many waightier cauſes why it ſhould be permitted again. For ſo Platina writeth. VVhen as therefore the Prieſts among vs ſought to auoide theſe publike offences, they married wiues, and taught that it was lawfull for them ſelues to ioyne in marriage. Firſt, becauſe that Paull ſaith, To auoid fornication, let euerie man haue his wife. Againe, It is better to marrie, then to burne. Secondlie Chriſt ſaith, All men doe not receiue this worde: where he ſheweth that all men are not fitte for a ſingle life, becauſe that God created man for procreations ſake. Gen. 1. It is not in mans power, without a ſpeciall gifte and worke of God, to alter his creation. Therefore ſuch as are not meet for a ſingle life, ought to ioyne in matrimonie. For no lawe of man, no vowe can take away the commaundement of god and his ordinance. By theſe reaſons our Prieſts doe prooue that they maie lawfully marrie wiues. And it is wel knowne, that in the auncient Churches Prieſts were married. For Paull ſaith, that a Biſhop must be choſen which is a husband. And in Germanie about 400. yeares ago, the Prieſts were by violence compelled to liue a ſingle life, who then were ſo wholy bēt againſt the matter, that the Archbiſhop of Mentz, being to publiſh the Pope of Rome his decree in that behalfe, was almoſte murdered in a tumult by the Prieſts in their anger. And the matter was handled ſo contrarie to law, that they did not onlie forbid mariages for the time to come, but alſo

ſuch as were then contracted, contrarie to all lawes diuine and humane, contrary to the Canons themſelues, that were before made not onelie by Popes, but alſo by moſte famous Councels. And ſeing that the world decaying, mans nature by litle and litle waxeth weaker, it is behoouefull to looke well to it, that no more vices doe ouerſpread Germanie.
                  Furthermore, God ordained mariage to be a remedie for mans infirmitie. The Canons themſelues doe ſa
                        •
                     e, that the olde rigour is now & then in latter times to be releaſed for the weaknes of men. Which it were to be wiſhed might be done in this matter alſo. It is verie like that if mariage be forbidden any longer, we ſhall at length want Paſtours in the Church. Seing then that there is a plaine commaundement of God, ſeeing the vſe of the Church is well knowne, ſeing that the impure ſingle life bringeth forth verie many offences, adulteries, and other enormities worthie to be puniſhed by the godlie magiſtrate, yet it is a maruell, that greater crueltie ſhould be ſhewed in no other thing, then againſt the marriage of Prieſts. God hath commaunded to honour marriage: the lawes in all well ordered common welthes, euen among the heathen alſo haue adorned marriages with verie great priuileges. But now men are cruellie put to death, yea and Prieſts alſo, contrarie to the minde of the Canons, for no other cauſe, but onelie for marriage. Paul calleth that a doctrine of Diuells which forbiddeth mariage. 1. Tim. 4. which may now verie well be ſeene, when as the forbidding of mariage is mainteined by ſuch puniſhments. But as no law of man can take awaie the law of God, no more can anie vow whatſoeuer. Therfore Cyprian giueth counſel, that thoſe women ſhould marry, which do not keep their vowed chaſtity. His words are theſe in the firſt book, the 11. Ep. If they wil not, or are not able to indure, it is far better they ſhould marrie, then that they ſhould fall into the fire by their importune deſire. In any wiſe let them giue no offence to their brethren or ſiſters. Yea and the Canons vſe a kinde of equitie towards ſuch, as before their ripe yeares did vowe chaſtitie, as hitherto the vſe hath beene.
               
               
                  
                  To this place alſo belongeth the 6. Art.
                  
                  Of the vowes of Monkes.
                  WHat is taught amongeſt vs, touching the vowes of Monkes ſhall be better vnderſtoode, if you call to minde what was the ſtate of Monaſtaries, and how many thinges were euerie daie committed in the Monaſteries, contrarie to the Cannons. In Auguſtines time Colledges were free, but afterward, when diſcipline was corrupted, euerie where vowes were laid vpon them, that as it were by a new deuiſed priſon, the diſcipline might be reſtored againe. Ouer and beſides vowes by litle and litle many other obſeruations were added. And theſe bands and ſnares were caſt vpon many, before they came to ripe yeares, contrarie to the Canons. Many through errour fell into this kinde of life vnawares, who though they wanted no yeares, yet they wanted diſcretion to iudge of their ſtrength and abilitie. They which were once got within theſe ſnares, were conſtrained to abide in them, though by the benefit of the Canon, ſome might be ſet at libertie. And that fell out rather in the Nonneries, then in the Colleges of Monks, becauſe the weaker ſexe was more to be ſpared. This rigour & ſeuerity miſliked many good men hertofore, when they ſaw young maides and young men thruſt vp into Monaſteries, there to get their liuing, and ſaw what an vnhappie ſucceſſe this counſell had, what offences it bred, and what ſnares it laide vpon mens conſciences. They were grieued that the authoritie of the Canons was wholly neglected and contemned in a thing moſt dangerous. To all theſe euills there was added, ſuch a perſwaſion of vowes, which as it is well knowen, did in former times miſlike the Monks themſelues, if any of them were ſomewhat ſtouter then the reſt. They taught forſooth that vows were equal to B aptiſme: touching ſingle life, they taught that it merited remiſſion of ſinnes, & iuſtification before God: yea farther, that the Monkes life did not onelie merit righteouſnes before God, but more then that, becauſe it obſerued, not onelie the commaundements, but alſo the Counſells in the Goſpell. And thus they taught, that the Monkes profeſſion was better then

Baptiſme, that the Monkes life did merit more, then the life of Magiſtrates, of Paſtours, and ſuch like, which in the obedience of Gods commaundement followed their calling, without any ſuch religion of mans making. None of theſe things can be denied, they are to be ſeene in their writings. What fell out afterwarde in the Monaſteries? In olde time there were Schooles for the ſtudie of Diuinitie, and other artes, which were profitable to the Church, and thence were Paſtours and Biſhops taken. But now the caſe is altered. It is needeles to rehearſe their vowes. In olde time they came together into ſuch places to learne, but now they feigne, that it is a kinde of life taken vp to merit remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification: yea they ſay, it is a ſtate of perfection, and preferre it to all other kinde of lifes that God ordained. We haue therefore mentioned theſe things, amplifying nothing odiouſlie, to the end that the doctrine of our men touching this matter might be vnderſtood.
                  Firſt, touching ſuch as ioyne in mariage, thus they teach with vs, that it is lawfull for any to marrie, that is not fit for a ſingle life: foraſmuch as vowes can not take away Gods ordinance & commaundement. The commaundement of God is, To auoide fornication, let euerie man haue his wife. And not onelie the commaundement, but alſo the creation and ordinance of God, compelleth ſuch vnto marriage, as without the ſpeciall worke of God are not exempted, according to that ſaying, It is not good 
                           •
                        or man to be alone. They therefore that are obedient to this commaundement and ordinance of God doe not offend. What can be ſaide againſt theſe thinges? Let a man amplifie the bonde of a vow, as much as he will, yet can he neuer bring to paſſe that the vow ſhall take away Gods commaundement. The Canons teach, That in euery vow the right of the ſuperiou
                           •
                         is excepted: much leſſe therefore can theſe vowes, which are contrarie to Gods commaundement, be of force. If ſo be that the bond of vowes had no cauſe▪ why it might be changed, then ſhould not the Romane Biſhops haue diſpenſed therewith. For in deede it is not lawfull for man to diſanull that bond, which doth ſimplie belong to the law of God. But the Romane Biſhops haue iudged verie wiſelie, that in this bond there muſt an equitie be vſed: therefore they are often read

to haue diſpenſed with vowes. The hiſtorie of the King of Arragon, beeing called backe out of a Monaſterie, is well knowne, and there be many examples of our time.
                  Secondly, why do our aduerſaries exaggerate the bond, or the effect of the vow, when as in the meane time they ſpeake not a word of the very nature of a vow, which ought to be in a thing poſſible, which ought to be voluntarie, and taken vp of a mans owne accorde, and with aduiſe or deliberation. But it is not vnkowne, how perpetuall chaſtitie is in the power of a man. And how many amongſt them is there, that doth vowe of his owne accord, and with aduiſe? Wenches & young maides, before they know how to iudge, are perſwaded, yea ſometimes alſo compelled to vow; wherfore it is not meete to diſpute ſo rigorouſlie of the bond, ſeeing that all men confeſſe, that it is againſt the nature of a vowe, which is not done of a mans owne 
                        •
                     ccord, or vnaduiſedlie. The canons for the moſt part doe diſanull vowes, which are made b
                           •
                        
                        fore one be 15. yeares of age, becauſe that before one come to that age, he ſeemeth not to haue ſo much iudgement, as to determine of a perpetuall life. Another Canon permitting more to the weaknes of men, doth adde ſome yeares moe, for it forbiddeth a vow to be made, before one be 18. yeares of age. But whether of theſe ſhall we follow? the greateſt parte hath this excuſe, why they forſake Monaſteries, becauſe that for the moſte parte they vowed before they came to this age.
                  Laſt of all, although the breaking of a vowe may be reprehended, yet it followeth not, that the mariages of ſuch perſons are to be diſſolued. For Auguſtine in his 27. queſt. 1. Cap. of Mariages, doth denie that they ought to be diſſolued: and his authoritie is not lightly to be eſteemed, although others afterward haue thought otherwiſe. And although the commaundement of God, touching wedlocke, doth free moſte men from vowes, yet our men doe alſo bring another reaſon concerning vowes, that they be fruſtrate, becauſe that al the worſhip of God, inſtituted of men without the commaundement of God, and choſen to merit remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification, is wicked, as Chriſt ſaith: They doe in vaine worſhip me with the commaundements of men. And Paull doth euerie where teach, that righteouſnes is not to be ſought, out of our obſeruations, and thoſe worſhips, which are deuiſed by

men, but that it commeth by faith to thoſe that beleeue that they haue God pacified and reconciled to them for Chriſt, not for any of their merits. But it is euident, that the Monkes did teach, that theſe made or counterfeited religions doe deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes and iuſtification, and that they doe ſatisfie for ſinnes. What els is this, then to detract from the glorie of Chriſt, and to obſcure, and denie the righteouſnes of faith? wherefore it followeth, that theſe vowes thus vſed were wicked worſhips, and therefore they be of no value. For a wicked vowe, and that which is made againſt the commaundement of God is of no force, neither ought a vowe to be a bond of iniquitie, as the Canon ſaith. Paul ſaith, Ye are made voide of Chriſt, which ſeeke to be iuſtified by the law, ye are fallen from grace: that is, they which doe thinke, that by their owne workes they doe merit remiſſion of ſinnes, and that they doe pleaſe God, for their owne fulfilling of the law, and doe not perceiue, that for Chriſt his ſake they doe freelie receiue by faith remiſſion of their ſinnes, through the mercie of God, and that they doe pleaſe God through Chriſt, they doe looſe Chriſt, becauſe they do transferre the confidence which is due to Chriſt, and to the promiſe of God vnto workes. Alſo they oppoſe to the wrath of God, not Chriſt the propitiatour, but their owne workes, therefore they doe transferre the honour, which is due vnto Chriſt, vnto our workes. Now it is manifeſt, that the Monkes doe teach this, that by their obſeruations they doe deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes, becauſe they finde God merciful vnto them for theſe obſeruations. Wherefore they teach men to truſt to their owne workes, not to the propitiation of Chriſt. This is a wicked confidence, and is contrarie to the Goſpell, and in the iudgement of God it ſhall be ſound to be vaine. For our workes can not be oppoſed to the wrath and iudgement of God: the wrath of God is then onelie appeaſed, when as we doe by faith laie holde vpon the free mercie, promiſed for Chriſts ſake. Therefore they looſe Chriſt, which place their confidence, not in Chriſt, but in their owne workes.
                  Moreouer the Monks haue taught, that their kinde of life is a ſtate of perfection, becauſe they did obſerue not onely the commaundements, but alſo the counſells. This error is chiefelie contrarie to the goſpel, becauſe they haue feigned

that they do ſo ſatisfie the commaundements, as that they can alſo do ſomwhat more: & hereupon aroſe that horrible errorwhich they haue feigned, that they had merits of ſuper erogation. Theſe they haue applied for others, that they might be ſatisfactions for other mens ſinnes. If anie man wil odiouſlie exaggerate theſe thinges, how many things might herehearſe, whereof the Monks themſelues are now aſhamed? It is no light offence, in the Church to propound vnto the people a certein worſhip deuiſed by men, without the commaundement of God, and to teach, that ſuch a worſhip doth iuſtifie men: becauſe that the righteouſnes of faith in Chriſt, which ought eſpeciallie to be taught in the Church, is obſcured, when as thoſe maruelous religions of Angells, feigning of pouerty, and humilitie, and of ſingle life, are caſt before mens eies. Moreouer the commaundements of God and the true worſhip of God are obſcured, when as men do heare, that Monks alone are in that ſtate of perfection: becauſe that Chriſtian perfection is this, to feare God ſincerely, and againe to conceiue great faith, and to truſt aſſuredlie, that God is pacified toward vs for Chriſt his ſake, to ask, and certainly to look for help from God in al our affaires, according to our calling: and outwardlie to do good workes dilligentlie, and to tend vpon our vocation. In theſe things doth true perfection and the true worſhip of God conſiſt: it doth not conſiſt in ſinglenes of life, in beggarie, or in vile apparell.
                  The people alſo doth conceiue many pernitious opinions of thoſe falſe commendations of the monaſticall life. They heare that ſingle life is praiſed aboue meaſure, therefore they liue in marriage with offence of conſcience. They heare that beggers onelie are perfect, therefore they keepe their poſſeſſions, & buy and ſell, with offence of conſcience. They heare that the goſpel giueth counſell, not to reuenge: therfore ſome that lead a priuat life are not afraid to reuenge themſelues: For they heare that it is a counſell, not a commaundement. Others do think that all Magiſtracie and ciuill offices are vnworthie a Chriſtian man. VVe read examples of men, who forſaking wedlock, and leauing the gouernment of the common wealth, haue hid themſelues in Monaſteries. That they called, to flie out of the world, and to ſeeke a kinde of life, which is more acceptable to God▪
                     
neither did they ſee, that God is to be ſerued in thoſe commaundements, which he himſelfe hath deliuered, not in the commaundements, which are deuiſed by men. That is a good and perfect kinde of life, which hath the commaundement of God for it warrant. It is neceſſarie to admoniſh men of theſe thinges. And before theſe times Gerſon did reprehend this errour of the perfection of Monkes, and he witneſſeth, that in his time this was a new or ſtrange voice, that the Monaſticall life is a ſtate of perfection. Thus many wicked opinions doe cleaue faſt vnto vowes, as that they merit remiſſion of ſinnes & iuſtification, that they are Chriſtian perfection, that they do keepe the counſells and commaundements, that they haue works of ſupererogation. All theſe thinges, ſeing they be falſe and vaine, do make vowes to be of no effect.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONIE.
               
                  Of Wedlocke.
                  
                     
                        Art. 1
                           •
                        . THe trueth concerning Wedlocke did at all times remaine ſincere in the Church onelie. For the Church, doth know, that God doth moſte ſeuerelie forbid wandring luſtes amongſt mankinde, and that he would haue chaſtitie ſo to be vnderſtoode, and performed, as he himſelfe hath ordeined it, that we alſo maie know, that he is a pure and a chaſte minde, and maie diſcerne him from deuils, whoe through the hatred they beare to God, are delighted with the confuſions of luſts, & doe driue forward this weake nature of man, that it maie be horriblie defiled. Wherefore both the Heathen did euerie where admitte ceratine foule examples, and Heretikes at all times haue ſpreade abroad monſtrous opinions touching wedlocke, as Clemens Alexandrinus, and Epiphanius doe declare. And the Turkiſh manners, and the lawe of the Pope, concerning ſingle life, haue cauſed a great deformitie in this laſt olde age of the world. But Paull doth affirme, that it is a ſigne of euill Spirites, to forbid marriage.
                  Wherefore we doe verie carefullie keepe the ſincere doctrine of God touching marriage, and by the mercie of God our ciuill Magiſtrates haue appointed, and doe defende

iudgements for Marriage matters in their gouernment, and they doe ſeuerelie puniſh thoſe wicked deeds which are contrarie to the lawe of God, and know that by the commaundement of God they are inioyned to haue a care to defende chaſtitie, and wedlocke. And we retaine this true definition▪ agreeing with the commaundements of God, and the cuſtome of the Apoſtolique Church. Marriage is a lawfull and indiſſoluble coniunction, onelie of one man and of one woman, to be kept becauſe of the commaundement of God, whoe by this meane will haue mankinde aſſociated, chaſtitie to be vnderſtoode, and luſtes not to wander. God in the beginning did conſecrate this order, ſaying thus, They ſhall be two in one fleſh, to wit, one man, and one onelie woman inſeperablie ioyned together. And againe, this firſt lawe was eſtabliſhed of Chriſt, Math. 19. Now that this coupling together maie be lawfull, we doe immutably obſerue the differences of perſons, that we maie not make a mixture of thoſe perſons, whoe by the lawe of God are not permitted to couple together. looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.Alſo we keepe the rules of the Canon lawe, touching other neerer degrees, as there be ordinances to be ſeene deliuered with graue and wiſe deliberation in our Conſiſtories.
                  Moreouer, we know it is the will of God, that Marriage ſhould not be for bidden to anie perſons, that be fit thereunto, and which, without Marriage, could not liue without daunger of their conſcience, as it is written, Gen. 2. Math. 19▪ 1. Cor. 7. Therefore we giue leaue to Prieſtes and other perſons, to marie, which had rather liue godlie in Marriage, then in a ſingle life to haue wounded conſciences, ſo that they may not inuocate God, and liue holilie. In affiances, euen according to the auncient lawes, we will haue the conſent of the Parentes alſo, ſeeing that Parentes are mooued with a probable reaſon. Touching diuorcementes, this rule is moſt firmelie held, that they doe ſin, who either by adultery, or by forſaking, be the firſt cauſe of diſtraction: and adulterers and adultreſſes, and he and ſhee that doth foſake the other, are condemned by the voice of them that preach in our Churches, and of the Iudges in our Conſiſtories, and they be ſeuerelie puniſhed of our Magiſtrates. But the innocent perſon (when as the matter beeing well knowne, he is

ſet free) is not forbid to marrie, that he maie inuocate God, & liue holilie. For ſeing that the Lord doth expreſſelie ſet at libertie the innocent perſon, Math. 19. when as the other partie is polluted with adulterie, we muſt vnderſtande a ſetting at libertie, not in name onelie, but in deede. And Paull ſpeaketh after the ſame manner, in the caſe of forſaking. This our cuſtome doth alſo agree with the auncient Church. The other lawes which we haue in our Conſiſtories, looke the 2. oſeru.doe agree with the Canon lawe: and we doe trulie propound vnto the people the wholl doctrine touching mariage and chaſtitie.
                  VVe affirme, that all commixtions, and ſpilling of the ſeed without marriage, are ſinnes condemned of god, Looke the 3. obſeru.as mortall ſinnes, and ſuch as driue out of men the holie Ghoſt, and that manie greeuous puniſhmentes are ſpreade throughout mankinde, by reaſon of luſts, as it is written, Fornicatours and adulterers God will iudge. And there is a threatning of theſe puniſhmentes ſet downe, Leuit. 18. Now we counte that to be chaſtitie, both to keepe puritie in a ſingle life, and alſo to haue the lawes of wedlocke obſerued: and we affirme wedlocke, as we did before deſcribe it, to be a ſocietie inſtituted, and conſecrated of God, and that this verie ſocietie, and the dueties of a life in wedlocke, doe pleaſe God. And we condemne all thoſe fanaticall ſpirites, Baſilides, Tatianus, Carpocrates, and ſuch like, whereof ſome by one meanes, and ſome by another, did either condemne wedlocke, or did approoue filthie confuſions. Alſo we condemne that Popiſh lawe, which forbiddeth Prieſtes to mary, and giueth occaſion of deſtruction to a great multitude of men, and for the ſame cauſe we doe vtterlie diſlike the monaſticall vows of ſingle life. Touching other cauſes we ſhall ſpeake hereafter: for thoſe popiſh lawes and vowes are flat contrarie to the lawe of God. The Lorde ſaide, It is not good for man to be alone: He ſaid, that is, by his vnſpeakeable wiſdom he decreed in this ſorte to make mankinde, that by the ſociety of man and woman it might be propagated. And H
                           •
                         made them two, that there might be a Church, & he eſtabliſhed theſe bounds, that luſtes might not ſtraie abroade: for he would haue an vnderſtanding of chaſtity to be in mankinde.
                  Although God had ſaide and decreed theſe thinges, yet

Tatianus, the Pope, and the Monkes doe ſaie the contrary: whoe when as they forbidde mariage, doe giue occaſion to manie men, being otherwiſe fit vnto vertue, to heape vp manie horrible ſinnes, by reaſon whereof verie manie do fal headlong into eternall deſtruction, and the wrath of God is the more kindled againſt wholl mankinde. A lawe of man▪ being contrarie to the decree of God, and to the verie worke of God inſtituted and eſtabliſhed in the creation, and alſo to the commaundementes of God, and that lawe, which is the fountaine of great wickednes and hainous deedes, for the which both manie doe periſh, and the wrath of God is the more kindled, yea which lawe the holie Ghoſt doth affirme to haue it beginning from the deuill, is in no caſe to be laide vpon the Church, but by the conſent of all godlie men to be aboliſhed. Now it hath fallen out verie often within theſe 30. yeares, that Prieſtes, whoſe manners were blameles, and honeſt, haue chiefelie beene put to death becauſe they were maried. Thus the Deuill goeth about to eſtabliſh his lawe by moſte cruell murthers, and he hath for his inſtruments, moſte impudent writers, Ecchius, Faber, Pighius, whoe hath expreſſelie written, That a Prieſt doth leſſe offend, if he be an adulterer, then if he marrie a wife. It is an vnworthie thing that theſe, who will be counted Chriſtians, ſhould write and ſpeake ſuch thinges. Wiſe men doe ſee that in this declining age of the world, both the nature of men is more weake, and by litle and litle there is greater releaſing and confuſion of diſcipline. And at all times a licenſe in this kinde did immediatlie goe before the deſtroying of cities, and the ruines of kingdomes. Therefore ſuch as are gouernours ought to be more vigilant and ſeuere in mainteining diſcipline, in ſtrengthning the lawes of wedlocke, in puniſhing and prohibiting wandring luſtes: touching which matter we reioyce that our admonitions be extant for all poſteritie, and we alſo deſire the Sonne of God, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the keeper of his Church, and a true louer of charitie, that he would bow the mindes of gouernours to liſten to wholſome counſelles, and repreſſe the deuill, which kindeled the flames of luſtes, and hinder euill examples, that they maie not be farre ſpread. The mindes and heartes of all godlie men doe tremble, when they read, and heare of

ſuch foule and horrible heathniſh examples: the which trulie afterward were accompanied both with blindnes in the mindes, and with other outrages, which were pernitious to wholl nations, as in the hiſtories of the heathen examples do euerie where offer themſelues to all men. The Scedaſian
                           •
                        
                      had caſt into a well two daughters of Spartanus being deflowred: afterward, as it were in the verie ſame footeſtep, the armie of the Lacedemonians was ſlaine, and the Empire changed. But there be manie examples of all ages. We our ſelues doe remember, that certaine Biſhoppes, whoe were famous for their nobilitie, and their wittes, were ſlaine in adultrie. But we beſeech the Sonne of God, that for this cauſe he would preſerue many, and bowe them vnto chaſtitie, that he may ſincerelie be inuocated of many. As for thoſe thinges which are alledged of our aduerſaries for the defenſe of ſingle life, they are as well applied to the matter, as that ſaying of Chriſt to Salomon, which Tacianus did alledge out of the Goſpel according to the Egiptians, I came to deſtroie the workes of the woman: Tacianus did thus interpret it, I came to deſtroie, that is, to aboliſh wedlocke: 
                     Looke the 4. obſeruat.whereas the wordes of Chriſt did ſpeake of the fall of Eue, and of the miſeries that folowed that fall, as alſo Iohn doth write, The ſonne of god came to deſtroie the workes of the Deuill.
                  
               
               
                  Hitherto alſo perteineth the 21. Art. of the ſame Confeſſion.
                  Of the Monaſticall life.
                  WE omit a larger rehearſall out of auncient writers, of thoſe, who either departed into the wildernes, as did An
                           •
                        onius, or erected like Colledges or Schooles, as did Baſilius: for diuers men had diuers cauſes of ſeparating them ſelues. We ſpeak now of the preſent Monks, which are not in the wildernes, but are Colledgesof men either learned, or vnlearned, which do liue more commodiouſlie in the open light, & in places of greateſt reſort, then other men do. They haue thoſe pleaſures which they deſire, ſome one, ſome another: and they haue much more leaſure, then other men haue▪ that liue either in ciuill, or in domeſticall affaires. Neither do they now transferre vnto themſelues thoſe ridiculous praiſes of perfection, & of a contēplatiue life, as in times paſt ſome did. And ſeing that there is great difference in diuers ſocieties of men▪ we will not preach to the euill, who for

the kitchins, & al licentiouſnes, do loue thoſe darke places: but thoſe, of whom there is hope of amendment, we do earneſtlie requeſt, for the glory of God & their owne ſaluation, that they would think vpon theſe ſayings: Thou ſhalt haue no ſtrange Gods. Flie from Idols. What manner of thing is the Monaſticall life now a daies? It hath verie much wicked worſhip, and vanitie: their Maſſes for the quick & the dead they ſet out to ſale, and this is the greateſt gaine that Monaſteries for the moſt part haue: there is vſed inuocation of the dead, heaped vp with verie foule ſuperſtitions: as with the adoring of Images, with indulgences, and other iugling tricks. The ſtudie of doctrine is either none at all, or verie corrupt. Theſe onely cauſes are great inough, why men, which are not prophane, ought to depart out of ſuch ſocieties: becauſe that the vows, which wrap thē in a kinde of life, wherein is the worſhip of Idolls, are without doubt fruſtrate, according to the firſt commaundement which is immooueable, eternall, and the rule of all other commaundements, Thou ſhalt haue no ſtrange Gods, Exod. 20. They do bring a teſtimonie out of Paull, 1. Tim. 5. Concerning widowes, They haue loſt their firſt faith: But the anſwer is ſure and cleare, although Paul ſhould ſpeake of vowes, yet would he in no caſe alow of ſuch vowes, as are ioyned with the worſhip of Idolls, and with manie errors. But there be alſo manie other lies in vowes. They promiſe chaſtitie & pouerty: but how many of them be fit to lead a ſingle life, they themſelues doe know. And touching pouerty, they know that the farre greater part doth there rather ſeeke kitchins well furniſhed, then for pouertie and hunger.
                  Now we muſt alſo conſider of this: let eloquent men excuſe and praiſe the Monaſticall life as they liſt, yet alwaies this opinion is confirmed in men, that are not prophane, by this example, that ſuch workes, choſen by mans diuiſe, are the worſhip of God: that is, ſuch works whereby God doth count himſelfe to be honoured. This opinion is to be reproued and to be pulled out of the mindes of men, and men are to be drawne back to the commaundements of God, according to this ſaying, Math. 15. In vaine doe they worſhip me with the commaundements of men. Alſo, walke not after the commaundements of your fathers, but walke ye in my commaundements. This

is a true and notable reprehenſion of the Monaſticall life. Now if they do faigne hereunto merites and perfections, the goſpell of Chriſt touching the righteouſnes of faith and true worſhip, is the more obſcured: becauſe it is a foule and horrible lie, that monaſtical obſeruations ſhould merit remiſſion of ſins, or be of ſo great value, as is Baptiſme, as Thomas doth expreſſely ſaie: Neither was antiquity ignorant of this reprehenſion. There is a narration extant, whether it be true, or written onelie for doctrines ſake, yet doth it ſhew forth the iudgements of godlie men: They write, that when Antonie, deſired to know, how much he had profited before God in thoſe externall exerciſes, there was ſhewed vnto him a coblers houſe at Alexandria, being next dore to him. He therefore going in ſpeaketh to the goodman of the houſe, queſtioneth with him concerning doctrine, & exerciſes of godlines. The cobler anſwereth ſincerely touching doctrine. Afterward he ſaith, that in the morning in a ſhort praier he giueth thankes to God, both for other benefits, and that he ſent his ſonne: then that he doth aske remiſſion of his ſinnes for the Sonnes ſake, and praie that God would preſerue the Church, and his familie: alſo that he praieth to the Sonne, tomake interceſſion for vs: and that he doth reſt in this faith, and doth his domeſticall affaires ioyfullie, and prouide that his Children may be well taught. And vſeſt thou no other ſtreighter exerciſe, ſaith Antonie? why, ſaith he, doth he labour a litle, trow you, that prouideth how his familie ſhall be manteined? and many thinges do often times happen, which do ſurelie vex him that gouerneth a houſe, beſide other burthens which he hath common with the Citizens. Doeſt thou not ſee, how manie priuate and publique miſeries there be in this life? and to beare theſe well, and in them to exerciſe faith & patience, doeſt thou not think it a warfare hard inough? Antonie went his waie, and vnderſtood that he was admoniſhed, not to preferre his owne exerciſes, before the dueties of this common life. Theſe, and other like narrations are read, which although th ey be ſo written for doctrines ſake, yet they do declare the iudgements of learned men. Neither is it now needful to ad a longer diſcourſe, eſpeciallie ſeeing that no man is ignorant, how that in thoſe places, where Monkes be, there is much wicked ſuperſtition in Monaſteries, and that the ſtudies of doctrine are either none at all, or verie corrupt. To deliberate of the meanes how to amend theſe thinges we leaue it to them, that are in authoritie.
               
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               
                  
                     Of wedlocke. CHAP. 21
                  VVE confeſſe that wedlock is a kinde of life, inſtituted and approoued of God, and that it is 
                     Looke the 1. obſeru.
                     a myſterie, that is, as commonlie it vſeth to be expounded, a great Sacrament, in Chriſt and his Church, as Paull ſaith. And becauſe Chriſt doth euidentlie affirme, that wedlock doth perteine to this preſent life and the adminiſtration of the things of this life doe conſiſt of publique lawes being made vpon right and probable reaſon, therfore we teach that it is lawful to marry in theſe degrees of conſanguinity & affinity which looke the 2. oſeru.the politique lawes, which are the ordinances of God, do permit. Alſo we teach, that thoſe which be young ought not to marie without the authoritie of their parentes, and that the marriage which is contracted by a raſh and vnlawfull conſent of young parties without the authoritie of them, in whoſe power they are, is not to be counted as ratified▪ For although there be certaine caſes, wherein it is lawfull to marrie without the conſent of parentes, yet it ſeemeth not good to make a generall rule thereof, as though euery conſent of young parties, ſhould ratifie the contract of mariage, and as though priuie mariages were to be approoued. For not onelie the commaundement of God doth require, that children ſhould honour their Parentes, but alſo natural reaſon doth commaund, that the conſent of parentes ſhould be requeſted in making a marriage: hitherto alſo are children called by the politique lawes. And there is a decree of Pope Euaraſtus extant, the wordes whereof be theſe: Marriage as we heaue hard of our Fathers & haue found it deliuered vnto vs of the Apostles, and their ſucceſſours, is not otherwiſe made lawfull, but when a wife is ſought for at their handes, and affianced by the neereſt Parentes, whoe ſeeme to haue authoritie ouer the maide or woman, and in whoſe cuſtodie ſhee is.
                  
                  Morouer we do not dout, but that they which are in deed louers of honeſtie, do thinke that it is not free for the laie men onlie, as they call them, but alſo for the miniſters of the Church, to marrie. For the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes ſaith, Marriage is honourable in all men, and the bed that is vndefiled. And Paull aloweth of Marriage in a Biſhoppe, and affirmeth that the forbidding of Marriage is a ſpirit of errours, and a doctrine
                     
                     of Deuilles. For though this ſaying of Paull is commonlie expounded of the Tatians and Eucratians, whoe thought that Marriage doth nothing at all differ from whoredome, yet notwithſtanding ſeeing that marriage is forbidden in the popiſh decrees, it is forbidden by the ſame reaſons, by the which mariage is wholie condemned, and not in one kinde of men onelie. For that ſaying is alledged out of Leuiticus▪ 
                     Be ye holie, becauſe I am holie: and that of Paull, Not in chamberings and wantonnes: And againe, They which are in the fleſh, cannot pleaſe God, But ſeeing that theſe ſayings of the Scripture doe perteine to all men, certainelie they might driue all godlie men from mariage, if they were fitlie applied to forbid marriage vnto Prieſtes. But we hope that all good men doe thinke more honeſtlie of marriage, and that they do not diſlike of that in the miniſters thereof, which they did approoue in the Church it ſelfe, eſpeciallie ſeeing that there be manifeſt examples of the Church, when as yet it was but freſh and more pure, wherein it was lawfull, both for the Apoſtles, which was the higheſt degree in the Church, and alſo for Biſhops, to haue their wiues. And we thinke that this thing is ſo to be vnderſtood, that it was not onelie lawful for the miniſters of the Church to be married, before they were ordained miniſters, but alſo to marrie after theirordination. For which opinion there be very euident argumentes.
                  Neither ought the vowe of chaſtitie to be any hinderance herin, becauſe that ſuch a vow beingtaken vpon a man by humane ſuperſtition, without the authoritie of the word of god, and againſt faith, is not acknowledged of God, and wedlocke alſo hath it chaſtitie, that he which before had vowed chaſtitie, and marrieth a wife in the Lord, doth indeed fullfill the vowe of chaſtitie. Seeing therefore that the worde of God is euident, touching th e honeſtie of wedlocke, the examples of the Apoſtles and Biſhoppes of the primitiue Church be euident, the weakenes of mans nature is euident, daungers of ſingle life be euident, and ſeeing that the offences, which vnchaſte Prieſtes doe giue▪ are euident, we doe verily hope that it will come to paſſe, that they which haue the gouernment of the Church, will not goe forward ſeuerelie to maintaine and defend this conſtitution touching the marirage of Prieſtes, but fauourablie to interpret it.

For ſo it ſhal come to paſſe, that there may be both fewer and leſſe offences in the Church, and that manie good mens conſciences maie be relieued. Alſo we hope that it will come to paſſe, that all good Biſhoppes and princes will permit them, whoe, by a lawfull diuorce▪ are ſeparated from their adulterous wiues or huſbandes, to vſe that libertie of marrying againe in the Lord, which the Sonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath graunted to them, Math. 5. and 16.
               
               
                  Hitherto alſo pertaineth the 26. Article, Of Monaſticall vowes.
                  
                  THere is no doubt but that godlie, iuſt, and lawfull vowes are to be kept and paied, & that wicked vowes are to be diſanulled. But it is not without cauſe made a matter of controuerſie, in what kinde of vowes monaſticall vowes, touching virginitie or ſingle life, pouertie and obedience, are to be placed. For it is euident, that ſingle life, is not commaunded by the word of God: alſo it is euident, that although the eſtate of ſingle perſons be in publique daungers quiet, and more fit and commodious to execute the publike Miniſteries of the Church, then is theirs, which vſe it not, yet we muſt not thinke, that this kinde of life is of it ſelfe before the tribunall ſeat of God more excellent, and more holy, then is marriage. For as in Chriſt there is neither Iew, nor Grecian, neither ſeruant nor free man, as Paull ſaieth, ſo in Chriſt, there is neither married, nor vnmarried. And as, In Chriſt Ieſus circumciſion auaileth nothing, but the keeping of the commaundementes of God, and a new creature: ſo alſo doth ſingle life auaile nothing, and wedlocke auaileth nothing, but to be renued in Chriſt Ieſus, and to obeie the calling of Chriſt. In the Councell held at Gangrum there was this Canon: If any of thoſe, who for the Lordes ſake doe keepe virginitie, is lifted vp againſt thoſe that be married, let him be accurſed. And another Canon ſaieth, If any man, for continencie, as it is thought, doeth weare a cloake, as beleeuing that hereby he hath righteouſnes, and doth deſpiſe others, who with reuerence doe weare other common and vſual kindes of garmentes, let him be accurſed. And Auguſtine De bono coniugali, Cap. 21. dareth not preferre the virginitie of the Baptiſt, before the wedlocke of Abraham.
                  
                  Therefore he that doth vowe virginitie or ſingle life, doth either vowe it, as a ſingular worſhippe of God (And then, becauſe

cauſe the ſtate of ſingle life is not commaunded by the word of God, this vowe perteineth to the commaundementes of men, whereof Chriſt, ſaieth, In vaine doe they worſhippe r, 
                           〈◊〉
                         teaching for doctrines the preceptes of men.) Or elſe he worketh it, as a merit of remiſſion of ſinnes, and of life eternall, and then it is euidently a wicked vowe, whereunto no man is bounde. It is to no better purpoſe to vowe pouertie. For either thou art poore by condition or eſtate, and poſſeſſeſt no earthly ſubſtance: (And then this croſſe, which God hath laid vpon thee, thou muſt beare it patientlie, which moreouer if thou do vowe, thou doeſt nothing elſe, then if in thy ſickenes thou ſhouldeſt vowe, that thou woulded alwaies be ſicke, or that in thy infamie, thou ſhouldeſt alwaies vowe to be infamous: which kinde of vowe is rather a madnes, then godlines.) Or elſe thou doeſt poſſeſſe ſubſtance, and voweſt that, forſaking thy ſubſtance, thou wilt alwaies leade a poore life, and get thy liuing by begging, and obteine, by the merit of this vow, eternal life: and then this vow is firſt of all repugnant to the loue of thy neighbour, which requireth, that by thy begging thou be not troubleſome to anie, further then neceſſity compelleth: ſecondly it is contrary to faith in Chriſt, becauſe that he alone is the merit of eternall life. Therefore it is euident, that this kinde of vowe is vnlawfull & wicked. But ſo to forſake thy ſubſtance, as to giue it to a common vſe, is not to follow after pouertie, but to prouide a more certeine and bountifull liuing for thy ſelfe: the which what manner of worſhip it is before God, it cannot be vnknowne. And as for obedience, it is either referred to God, and then it is not an arbitrarie vowe, but of due neceſſitie, of which obedience it is ſaide, Obedience is better then ſacrifice: Or elſe it is referred to man, and then of their owne accord they are to performe thoſe dueties, which the ſubiect oweth to the Magiſtrate, children to the Parentes, ſeruantes to their Lords, and ſchollers to their ſchoolemaſters. Theſe thinges doth God looke for at mens handes, whether they be vowed, or not vowed: but yet with this condition, that we doe alwaies rather obeie God, then men. But to vowe obedience vnto man, without a ſpeciall calling of god, that by the workes of ſuch obedience, a man maie not onelie performe a ſingular worſhip vnto God, but alſo purge his ſinnes

before god, it is altogether ſuperfluous (becauſe that Chriſt ſaieth, They worſhippe me in vaine with the traditions of men) and alſo wicked, becauſe the obedience of Chriſt alone, which he performed to god his Father, hath purged our ſins, and reconciled vs with god. By all theſe things it is manifeſt, that the kinde of vowing ſingle life, pouertie, and obedience, doeth not agree with that doctrine which is indeede Catholique, eſpeciallie ſeeing that certaine men are not afraid, to make this kinde of vowing equall with Baptiſme.
               
            
            
               
                  The former part of this 12. c. might more commodiouſlie haue bin referred 
                        •
                     o the 17▪ Sect. where we intreated of true Chriſtian liberty if thos things, which follow had not hindred it. OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               
                  Of Monkerie. CHAP. 12.
               AND for the ſame cauſe, that all our Iuſtification doth conſiſt in faith in Ieſus Chriſt, whereupon we haue libertie giuen to vs in all externall things, we haue permitted the bondes of Monkerie to be releaſed among vs. For we ſaw that this libertie of Chriſtians was vehementlie challenged in euerie place by S. Paull, whereby euerie chriſtian man doth aſſure himſelfe, that alrighteouſnes and ſaluation is to be ſought for onelie in Chriſt Ieſus our Lorde, and is alſo aſſured, that he muſt at all times vſe all the things of this life, as to the profitte of our neighbours, ſo to the glorie of God: and that all which he hath is to be arbitrated, and moderated by the holie Ghoſt, who is the giuer of true adoption and true libertie, and that he ought freelie to permitte them to be appointed, and beſtowed both to the reliefe of his neighbours, and alſo to the aduancement of the glorie of God. Seing that we retaine this libertie, we ſhew ourſelues to be the ſeruants of Chriſt: when we betray it to men, addicting our ſelues to their inuentions, we doe like runnagates, forſake Chriſt, and flie to men. The which thing wee doe ſo much the more wickedlie, becauſe that Chriſt hath freed vs by his blood not by a vile or common price, and hath redeemed vs to himſelfe from the deadlie ſlauerie of Sathan. And this is the cauſe, why S. Paul writing to the Galathians, did ſo much deteſt it, that they had addicted themſelues to the ceremonies of the law, though they were commaunded of God, whereas notwithſtanding, as we declared before, that might be farre better excuſed, then to ſubmit themſelues to the yoke of thoſe ceremonies,

which men haue feigned of their owne braine. For he did write, and that trulie, that they which admitte the yoke, of thoſe ceremonies, deſpiſe the grace of God, and count the death of Chriſt as a thing of nothing: and thereupon he ſaith, That he is afraid, leſt that he had beſtowed his labour among them in vaine: and he exhorteth them, That they would ſtand ſteadfaſt in that libertie, wherewith Chriſt hath made vs free, and not to be intangled againe, with the yoke of bondage.
               
               Now it is euident, that Monkerie is nothing els then bondage of traditions deuiſed by men, and in deede of ſuch as Paule hath by name condemned in the places which we alledged. For vndoubtedlie they which profeſſe Monkerie do addict themſelues to thoſe inuentions of men for hope of merits. And hereupon it is, that they make it ſo hainous an offence, to forſake thoſe inuentions, and to imbrace the libertie of Chriſt. Therefore, ſeing that as well our bodie, as 
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 6.
                  our ſpirit, belong vnto God, and that in a double reſpect, to wit, of our condition, and Redemption, it can not be lawfull for Chriſtians, to make themſelues ſlaues to this Monaſticall ſeruitude, much les then for prophane ſeruants, to chaunge their Maſters. Moreouer it can not be denied, but that by ſuch like bondage, and vowes to liue after the commaundement of men, a certaine neceſſitie (as it alwaies vſeth to be) of tranſgreſſing the law of God is brought in. For the law of Mat. 15.God doth require, that a Chriſtian man ſhould, as much as lieth in him, imploie his ſeruice to the benefit of the Magiſtrate, his parents, kinred, and others, and of all thoſe, whome the Lord hath made his neighbours, and brought to him to be deliuered, in what place, time, or manner ſoeuer their neceſſitie ſhall require it. Then let him imbrace that kinde of liuing, whereby he may chiefly prouide for the affaires of his neighbours, neither let him chuſe a ſingle life, but let him know that to renounce marriage, and to make himſelfe an Eunuch for the kingdom of heauen, that is, to further godlines, and the glory of God, it is a peculiar and a ſpeciall gift of God. For that edict which Paull did publiſh, ſtandeth firme and ſtedfaſt, neither can anie vowes of men make it fruſtrate; For the auoiding of whordome let euerie man (he excepteth none) haue his owne wife, and euerie woman hir owne husband. For all men doe not receiue that
                  
                  worde, of taking vpon them a ſingle life for the kingdome of heauen, as Chriſt himſelfe doth witnes, then whome no man did more certenly know, and more faithfully teach, either of what force mans nature is, or what is acceptable to his Father. Now it is certaine, that by theſe Monaſticall vowes, they which doe make them are bound to a certaine kinde of men, ſo that they thinke it not lawful to ſhew themſelues obedient and dutifull any longer, either to the Magiſtrate, or to their parents, or to anie men (onely the chiefe gouernour of the Monaſterie excepted) nor to releeue them with their ſubſtance, and leaſt of all to marrie a wife, though they be greatlie burned, and therefore they doe neceſſarilie fall into all kindes of diſhoneſties of life.
               Seeing therefore that it is euident, that theſe Monaſticall vowes doe make a man, which is freed from the ſeruice of Chriſt, to be in daunger, not ſo much of the bondage of men, as of Sathan, and that they doe bring in a certaine neceſſitie of tranſgreſſing the law of god, (according to the nature of all ſuch traditions as are deuiſed by men) and that therefore they be manifeſtlie contrarie to the commaundements of god, we doe, not without cauſe, beleeue, that they are to be made fruſtrate, ſeeing that not onelie the written law, but alſo the law of nature doth commaund to diſanull a promiſe, if beeing kept it be a hindrance to good manners, not onelie to religion. Therefore we could not withſtand any which would change a monaſtical life, which is vndoubtedlie a bondage to Sathan, for a Chriſtian life, as alſo we could not withſtand others of the Eccleſiaſticall order, who marrying wiues, haue imbraced a kinde of life, wherof their neighbours might looke for more profitte, and greater honeſtie of life, then of that kinde wherein they liued before. To conclude, neither did we take vpon vs to driue them from the right of wedlocke, who among vs haue perſeuered in the miniſterie of the worde of god, whatſoeuer chaſtitie they had vowed, for the cauſes before ſpecified, ſeeing that Saint Paull the chiefe mainteiner of true chaſtitie, doth admit euen a Biſhop to be a married man. For we haue lawfully preferred this one law of god before all lawes of men, For the auoiding of whoredome, let euerie haue his owne wife. Which law truelie, for that it hath beene reiected ſo long time, all

kindes of luſt, euen thoſe which are not to be named (be it ſpoken with reuerence to your ſacred M. O noble Ceſar) haue more then horribly ouerthrowne this Eccleſiaſticall order, ſo that at this daie amongſt men there be none more abhominable then they, which beare the name of Prieſts.
            
         
         
            THE NINTEENTH SECTION.
            OF THE CIVIL MAGISTRATE.
            
               THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               
                  
                     Of Magistracie. CHAP. 30.
                  
                     THE Magiſtracie, of what ſort ſoeuer it be, is ordained of God him ſelfe, for the peace and quietnes of mankinde: and ſo, that he ought to haue the chiefeſt place in the world: If he be an aduerſarie to the Church, he may hinder and diſturbe it very much: but if he be a friend and a member of the Church, he is a moſte profitable and excellent member thereof, which may profit it verie much, and finallie may helpe and further it verie excellentlie. His chiefeſt dutie is, to procure and maintaine peace and publique tranquillitie. Which doubtles he ſhall neuer do more happilie, then when he ſhall be truelie ſeaſoned with the feare of God and true religion, namelie when he ſhall after the example of moſte holie Kinges and Princes of the people of the Lorde, aduaunce the preaching of the truth, and the pure and ſincere faith, and ſhall roote out lies, and all ſuperſtition, with all impietie and Idolatrie, and ſhall defend

the Church of God. For in deede we teach that the care of religion doth chieflie appertaine to the holie Magiſtrate: let him therefore holde the worde of God in his handes, and looke that nothing be taught contrary thereunto. In like manner let him gouerne the people committed to him of God looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.with good lawes, made according to the worde of God. Let him hold them in diſcipline, and in their dutie, and in obedience, let him exerciſe iudgement by iudgeing vprightlie, let him not accept anie mans perſon, or receiue bribes: let him deliuer widowes, fatherles children, and thoſe that be afflicted from wrong: let him repreſſe, yea and cut of ſuch as are vniuſt either by deceit, or by violence. For he hath not receiued the ſworde of God in vaine. Therefore let him draw forth this ſworde of God againſt Rom. 13.all malefactours, ſeditious perſons, theeues, or murderers, oppreſſours, blaſphemers, periured perſons, and all thoſe whome God hath commaunded him to puniſh or execute. Let him ſuppreſſe ſtubborne heretiques (which are heretiques in deede, who ceaſe not to blaſpheme the maieſtie of God, and to trouble the Church, yea and finallie to deſtroy it: but if ſo be it be neceſſarie to preſerue the ſaftie of the people by warre, let him doe it in the name of God, ſo that he firſt ſeeke peace by all meanes poſſible, and vſe it not ſaue onelie then, when he can ſaue his ſubiects no waie but by warre. And while as the Magiſtrate doth theſe things in faith, he ſerueth God by thoſe workes, as with ſuch as be good workes, and ſhall receiue a bleſſing from the Lorde.
                  We condemne the Anabaptiſts, who as they denie that a chriſtian man ſhould beare the office of a magiſtrate, ſo alſo they deny that anie man can iuſtlie be put to death by the Magiſtrate, or that the Magiſtrate maie make warre, or that othes ſhoulde be performed to the Magiſtrates, and ſuch like thinges. For as God will worke the ſaftie of his people by the Magiſtrate, whome he hath giuen to be as it were a father of the world, ſo all the ſubiects are commaunded to acknowledge this benefit of God in the Magiſtrate: therefore let them honour and reuerence the Magiſtrate, as the miniſter of God, let them loue him, fauour him, and pray for him, as their father, and let them obey all his iuſt and equall commaundements: Finallie, let

                     *Looke the 2. obſeruat.▪
                      them pay all cuſtomes and tributes and all other dueties of the like ſorte, faithfullie and willinglie. And if the common ſaftie of the countrie and iuſtice require it, and the Magiſtrate do of neceſſitie make warre, let them laie downe their life, & ſpend their blood for the common ſaftie and defence of the Magiſtrate, and that in the name of God willinglie, valiantlie, and cherefullie. For he that oppoſeth himſelfe againſt the Magiſtrate, doth procure the wrath of god againſt him. We condemne therfore all contemners of Magiſtrates, as rebells, enemies of the common wealth, ſeditious villaines, & in a word, all ſuch as do either openlie or cloſelie refuſe to performe thoſe duties which they ought to do, &c.
               
               
                  THE CONCLVSION.
                  WE beſeech God our moſt mercifull Father in heauen, that he will bleſſe the Princes of the people, and vs, and his wholl people through Ieſus Chriſt our onelie Lord and Sauiour, to whome be praiſe, and thankeſgiuing, both now and for euer.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
               Of Magiſtracie.
               SEing that euery Magiſtrate is of God, his chiefe dutie (except it pleaſe him to exerciſe a tyranie) conſiſteth in this▪ to defend religion from all blaſphemie, & to procure it, and, as the Prophet teacheth out of the word of the Lord, to put it in practiſe, ſo much as in him lieth. In which parte trulie the firſt place is giuen to the pure & free preaching of the worde of God, the inſtruction of the youth of Citizens, and a right and diligent teaching in Schooles, lawfull diſcipline, a liberall prouiſion for the Miniſters of the Church, and a diligent care for the poore. Secondlie to iudge the people according Looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon this confeſſ.to iuſt & diuine lawes, to keepe iudgement and iuſtice, to maintaine this publique peace, to cheriſh the common wealth, and to puniſh the offenders, according to the quantitie of the fault, in their riches, bodie, or life: which things when he doth, he performeth a due worſhip or ſeruice to God. We know, that though we be free, we ought whollie in a true faith holilie to ſubmit our ſelues to the Magiſtrate,

both with our bodie, and with all our goods, and indeauour of minde, alſo to performe faithfulnes, and Looke the 2. obſeruat.the othe which we made to him, ſo farre forth as his gouernment is not euidentlie repugnant to him, for whoſe ſake we doe reuerence the Magiſtrate.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASILL.
               
                  Of Magiſtracie.
                  MOreouer, God hath aſſigned to the Magiſtrate, who is his miniſter, the ſword and chiefe externall power, Rom. 13.for the defence of the good, and to take reuenge and puniſhment of the euill. Therefore euerie Chriſtian Magiſtrate (Looke the 1. obſerua. vpon this confeſſ.in the number whereof we alſo deſire to be) doth direct all his ſtrength to this, that among thoſe which are cō
                     mitted to his credit, the name of God may be ſanctified, his kingdome may be enlarged, and men may liue according to his will, with an earneſt rooting out of all r
                        •
                     ughtines. And in the margent, This duetie alſo was inioyned to the heatheniſh Magiſtrate, how much more to the Chriſtian Magiſtrate ought it to be commended, as to the true ſubſtitute of God?
               
               
                  
                     Alſo, Art. 11. Sect. 1. 3. and 4.
                  We doe clearelie proteſt, that together with all other doctrines, which are directlie contrarie to the ſound and pure doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt, we doe not onelie not receiue, but, as abominations and blaſphemies, reiect & condemne thoſe ſtrange and erroneous doctrines, which the ſpirits of hurleburlie, among other damnable opinions do bring forth, ſaying, &c. that Magiſtrates can not be Chriſtians. And in the margent, The Magiſtrate doth then ſhew himſelfe to be a good Magiſtrate, when he is a true Chriſtian.
               
               
                  THE CONCLVSION.
                  LAſt of all, we ſubmit this our Confeſſion to the iudgement of the holie Scripture of the Bible, and therefore we promiſe, that if out of the foreſaide Scriptures we may be better inſtructed, we will at all times obey God and his holie word, moſt thankefully.
               
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
               
                  
                     Of the ciuill power, or ciuill Magiſtrate. CHAP. 16.
                  FVrthermore, it is taught out of the holie Scripture, that the ciuill Magiſtrate is the ordinance of God, and appointed by God: whoe both taketh his originall from God, and by the effectuall power of his preſence, and continuall aide is mainteined to gouerne the people in thoſe things which appertaine to the life of this bodie here vpon earth: whereby alſo he is diſtinguiſhed from that ſpirituall Rom. 13.ſtate: whereof is that worthie ſentence of Paull, There is no power but of god, & the power that is, is ordeined of god. Then according to theſe points, all they that beeing indued with this authoritie doe beare publique offices, of what kinde ſoeuer they be, beeing in the degree of Magiſtrates, neceſſarilie muſt know, acknowledge, and remember this, that they are Gods deputies, and in his ſteade, and that God is the Soueraigne Lord and King, euen of them all, as well as of other men, to whome at length in the laſt daie they muſt giue an account, of the degree wherein they were placed, of their dominions, and of the wholl adminiſtration of their gouernment, whereof it is expreſſelie written in the booke of Wiſdome, and elſe where.
                  
                     
                        Sap. 6. And ſeeing they doe gouerne in ſtede of God vpon earth, and are his Lieuetenants, it is meete that they frame themſelues to the example of the ſuperior Lord, by following, and reſembling him, and by learning of him mercie and iuſtice. As touching theſe therefore ſuch an inſtruction hath beene deliuered, that they who are in authoritie ought to doe good vnto others, according to that which Chriſt ſaith, Luc. 22.▪
                     
                     They that are mightie are called gratious, or bounteous Lords, and that in regard of their duetie they are eſpeciallie bound thereunto, and that this is their ſpeciall charge, that they cheriſh among the people without reſpect of perſons, iuſtice, peace, and all good things that are appertaining vnto the time: that they protect and defend their peaceable ſubiects, their rightes, their goodes, their life and their bodies,

againſt thoſe that wrong, and oppreſſe them, or doe any waies indammage, or hurt them: alſo againſt the vniuſt violence of the Turkes, together with others that doe the like, to ſuccour and defend them: and ſo to ſerue the Lorde God herein, that they beare not the ſword in vaine, but valiantlie, couragiouſlie, and faithfully vſe the ſame to execute the will and workes of God therewith. Hereof in the holie Scripture ſuch are called Gods, and of Saint Paull, Pſal. 82. Iohn. 10. Rom. 13. 1. Pet. 2.
                     the Miniſters of God. The Magiſtrate, ſaith he, is the Miniſter of God for thy good; who is ſent, as Peter ſaith, to take vengeance on thoſe that doe euill, and to giue honour vnto thoſe that doe good.
                  
                  But for as mueh as the Magiſtrate is not onelie the power of God, in that ſort, as the ſcripture doth aſcribe that title euen to an heathen Magiſtrate, as Chriſt ſaid vnto Pilate, Thou couldeſt haue no power ouer mee, vnles it were giuen thee from 
                     Ioh. 19.
                     aboue: but the Chriſtian Magiſtrate ought alſo to be a partaker, Apoc. 1. & 1
                           •
                        . 1. Tim. 6. Iſa 49. Math. 15. Lu. 13.and as it were, a miniſter of the power of the Lambe Ieſus Chriſt, whome God hath in our nature made Lord and King of Kings, that Kings of the earth, who in times paſt had beene heathen, might come vnder the power of the Lambe, and giue their glorie vnto the Church, and become nources thereof: which then began to be fulfilled, when they receiued Chriſtian religion, and made them neſtes vnder the tree of muſtard ſeed, which is faith. Then for this cauſe the Chriſtian Magiſtrate is pecularlie taught to be ſuch a one, that he ſhould well vſ
                        •
                      this glory and portion of his authority, which he hath common with the Lamb, and that he betray it not to Satan and to Antichriſt, vnles he will be tranſformed into that beaſt, and hideous Monſter, which carieth the beaſt, and that he be not aſhamed of the name of Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, and that by this authoritie of his he ſet forth the truth of the holie goſpell, make waie for the trueth wherſoeuer, be a defender of the miniſters and people of Chriſt, ſuffer not ſo farre as in him lieth Idolatrie, or the tyrannie of Antichriſt, much leſſe follow the ſame, although he be driuen to ſuſtein ſome harme therefore, and ſo lay downe his crowne before the Lambe, and ſerue him together with the ſpirituall Kings and prieſts of the holie Church, that is, with all the faithfull, and Chriſtians that are called to eternall life. Whereunto alſo the ſecond pſalme doth exhort Magiſtrates▪
                     
                     Pſal. 2. which it is profitable often to remember, where it is thus read, And now ye Kings vnderſtand, and be ye learned that iudge the earth ſerue the Lord with feare, & reioyce vnto him with trembling, Hereupon it followeth and is concluded by force of argument: namelie, that whoſoeuer doth vſe in ſuch ſort as hath beene ſaid, this ordinarie power of God and of the Lambe, with patience in their aduerſities, as well on the right, as on the left hand, they ſhall receiue for this thing, and for their labour a large and infinite reward and bleſſing of God vpon earth, and alſo in the life to come, through faith in Chriſt: and contrariwiſe vpon the wicked, cruell, and bloodthirſtie, that repent not, ſhall come the paines of Pſal. 82. Sap. 6.fearfull vengeance in this life, and after this life euerlaſting torment.
                  Moreouer the people alſo are taught of their duety, and by the word of god are effectuallie therto inforced, that al and euerie of them, in all things, ſo that they be not contrary vnto God, performe their obedence to the ſuperior power, firſt to the Kings Maieſtie, then to all Magiſtrates, and ſuch as are in authoritie, in what charge ſoeuer they be placed, whether they be of themſelues good men, or euill; ſo alſo to al their miniſters, and ſuch as are ſent with commiſſion from them, to reuerence & honour them, and yeald vnto them all things, whatſoeuer by right are due vnto them; and to performe and paie vnto them, honour, tribute cuſtome, and ſuch like whereunto they are bound. But in thinges perteining to mens ſoules, to faith and eternall ſaluation, of thoſe the people is taught, Looke the 2. obſeruat.that they ought to obey no man more then God, but God onelie and his holy word aboue al things Math. 22.and eſpecially, according to that which the Lord commaundeth, Giue vnto Ceſar the things which are Ceſars, and vnto God the things which are Gods. But if ſome ſhould attempt to remooue any from this Chriſtian and true opinion, they ought to follow the example of the Apoſtles, who with a bolde courage nothing at all daunted anſwered the Magiſtrate and counſell of Ieruſalem in this manner, We ought rather to obey 
                     Cauſa. 11 Quaeſt. 3. Cap. Si Dominus.
                     God, then men. Whereof alſo is to be ſeene the iudgement of the olde fathers, and of the Canon law: where they thus write, and theſe are the wordes of S. Ierome: If the Lord (or magiſtrate) commaund thoſe things that are not contrary to the holy
                     
                     ſcriptures, let the ſeruant be ſubiect to the Lord: but if 
                           〈◊〉
                         anie thing contrarie, let him rather obey the Lord of his p
                           ••
                        rit then of his bodie. And a litle after. If it be good which the Emperor commaundeth, do the will of him that commaundeth: if it be euill, anſwer, we ought rather to obey God then men.
                  
               
               
                  THE CONCLVSION.
                  ANd hetherto haue beene informed and ſhewed vnto your Maieſtie in this writing the reaſons & cauſes of our faith and doctrine and Chriſtian religion: fuch doctrine as the miniſters of our Churches, all and ſingular, euery one according to the gift of god graunted vnto him, do with one conſent of iudgement holde, talke of, and preach, and do conſtantlie manteine and fight for the ſame, not with the power of this world, but by holy ſcriptures, againſt thoſe that impugne it, or by teaching do ſpread abroade contrarie errors thereunto. Neither yet without that modeſtie that becommeth the profeſſion of Chriſtians, do they ſtubbournly rather then rigiouſlie perſiſt in this doctrine, or haue at any time heretofore perſiſted: but if anie thing be found herein not well taken by them, and that by certeine grounds out of the word of god (which ought to be the rule of iudgement vnto all men) peaceablie, and with a meeke ſpirit (as it ought to be done) be ſhewed vnto them, they are readie and forward, and thereunto, as alwaies heretofore, ſo now they offer themſelues, that after due conſideration & true knowledge of the trueth had, they will moſt gladlie, and thankfullie receiue that doctrine which ſhall haue better foundations, and willinglie reforme whatſoeuer ſhall haue need to be amended. Wherefore moſt excellent King, and gratious Lord, maie it pleaſe your Maieſtie to examine this our confeſſion, and after diligent and due conſideration had, to waie and conſider whether anie man worthelie and for iuſt cauſe, may reiect, and condemne this doctrine, as not agreeable to the holie ſcripture, nor Chriſtian. Verilie we are of opinion, that if anie man preſume to deſpiſe, or condemne this doctrine, he muſt of neceſſitie alſo condemne the holie ſcripture, from whence it was taken, and the auncient, and true Chriſtian Doctors, with whome it agreeth, and alſo the holie

lie Church it ſelfe, which from the beginning, and that conſtantlie, 
                        〈◊〉
                      and doth teach. And hereby your Maieſty may graci
                        ••
                     ſlie perceiue and determine, whether the complaints and accuſations of our aduerſaries, and ſuch as fauour not vs and our teachers, be iuſt, or noe. Wherefore moſt humbly we pray, that your ſacred Maieſtie will giue no place or credit to our aduerſaries, in thoſe matters which diuers waies without anie ground they charge vs withall, when as without all humanitie they accuſe vs, our miniſters and preachers, as if we had an other religion, and taught an other doctrine, then that which at this preſent we offer vnto your Maieſtie; or that we preſume ſtubbournlie to take in hand, or do attempt anie other thing againſt God, and your Maieſtie, and contrarie to the inſtitutions of this common wealth, and to the publique law of the kingdome of Bohemia. And your Maieſtie may well call to your remembrance that we haue euerie waie, and at all times, behaued our ſelues obedientlie and peaceablie, and in all things which may turne or belong to the preſeruation of your Maieſties perſon, and to the publique good, and commoditie of the whol realme: in al ſuch things, I ſay, we haue indeauoured not to be behinde others: and hereafter alſo we offer our ſelues moſt readie to perfourme the ſame, according to our allegeance and duetie. Neither do we think it onelie a point of vertue, and to apperteine vnto honeſty alone and the good eſtate of the common wealth, to yeeld our ſelues ſubiect and faithfull to your maieſty, for peace, concord and the rewards of this life, but much rather we acknowledge that it pleaſeth God, and that ſo is his will, that euery one for conſcience ſake ſhould be obedient to the Magiſtrate, and ſhould reuerence, loue, honour, and highly eſteem him: euen as our teachers alſo do deale both with vs, and with the people to perfourme this, and oftentimes by teaching out of the word doe in force it vpon vs both.
                  Here we commend our ſelues vnto your Maieſty, as to the fatherly and liberall tuition, care and protection of our moſt gracious Lord, and do moſt humbly beſeech of your Maieſty, that vnto theſe things, which on the befalfe of Chriſtian religion we haue tendred vnto your Maieſtie, we may receiue a courteous anſwer▪ and ſuch as God maie be pleaſed

withall. The almightie and euerlaſting God graciouſlie preſerue your Maieſtie in continuall health, to the profit, benefit, and increaſe of his holie Chriſtian Church. Amen,
                  
                     Prouerb. 20. Mercie and trueth preſerue the King, for his throne is eſtabliſhed with mercie.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
               
                  
                     Art. 39. WE beleeue that God would haue the world to be gouerned by lawes, and by ciuill gouernmenr, that there mai
                     •
                   be certaine bridles, whereby the immoderate deſires of the world maie be reſtrained, and that therefore he appointed kingdomes, common wealths, and other kindes of principalitie, whether they come by inheritance, or otherwiſe. And not that alone, but alſo whatſoeuer perteineth to the ſtate of righteouſnes, as they call it, whereof he deſireth to be acknowledged the author. Therefore he hath alſo deliuered the ſword into the hands of the Magiſtrates, to wit, that offences maie be repreſſed, not onely thoſe which are committed againſt the ſecond table, but alſo againſt the firſt. Therefore, becauſe of the author of this order, we muſt not onelie fuffer them to rule, whome he hath ſet ouer vs, but alſo giue vnto them all honour and reuerence, as vnto his embaſſadours, and miniſters aſſigned of him to execute a lawfull and holie function.
               
                  
                     Alſo, Art. 40.
                  THerefore we affirme that we muſt obey the lawes and ſtatutes, that tribute muſt be paied, and that we muſt patientlie endure the other burdens, to conclude, that we muſt willnglie ſuffer the yoke of ſubiection, although the Magiſtrate, be infidells, ſo that the ſoueraigne gouernment of God do remaine wholl or entire, and nothing diminiſhed. Therefore we deteſt all thoſe, which do reiect all kinde of dominion, and bring in a communitie and confuſion of goods, and who, to conclude, do go about to ouerthrow al order of law.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
               
                  
                     Art. 3
                        •
                     . WE beleeue that the moſt gratious and mighty God did appoint Kings, Princes, and Magiſtrates, becauſe

of the corruption and deprauation of mankinde, and that it is his wil that this world ſhould be gouerned by laws, & by a certein ciuill gouernment, to puniſh the faults of m
                     •
                  n, and that all things may be done in good order among men. Therefore he h
                     •
                  th armed the Magiſtrates wi
                     •
                  h the ſword, that they may puniſh the wicked, and defend the good. Moreouer it is their duetie, not onelie to be carefull to preſerue the ciuil gouernment but alſo to endeuour that the miniſterie maie be preſerued, that all Idolatrie and counterfeit worſhip of God maie be cleane aboliſhed, that the kingdom of Antichriſt maie be ouerthrowne, and that the kingdome of Chriſt maie be enlarged. To conclude, it is their dutie to bring to paſſe, that the holie word of the goſpell maie be preached euerie where, that all men maie ſerue and worſhip God purelie and freelie, according to the preſcript rule of his word.
               Moreouer all men of what dignitie, condition, or ſtate ſoeuer they be, ought to be ſubiect to their lawful Magiſtrates, and paie vnto them ſubſidies and tributes, and obey them in all thinges, which are not repugnant to the word of God. Alſo they muſt poure out their praiers for them, that God would vouchfafe to direct them in all their actions, and that we maie lead a peaceable and quiet life vnder them with all godlines and honeſtie. Wherefore we condemne the Anabaptiſts, and all thoſe troubleſome ſpirites, who doe reiect higher powers, and magiſtrates, ouerthrow all lawes and iudgements, make all goods common, and to conclude, doe aboliſh and confound all thoſe orders and degrees, which God hath appointed among men for honeſties ſake.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
               COncerning ciuill affaires they teach, that ſuch ciuill 
                     Art. 16.ordinances, as be lawfull, are the good workes and ordinances of God, As Paull witneſſeth, The powers which are, be ordained of God. They teach therefore that it is lawfull for Chriſtians to beare offices, to ſit in iudgement, and to determine of matters by the Princes lawes, or by the lawes of the common wealth, to appoint puniſhmentes according to lawe, to make lawfull warres,

to goe to warre, to deale in bargaines and contractes, by lawes to holde his owne, to take an othe at the requeſt of the Magiſtrates, to contract lawfull marriage, and to follow ſuch craftes and ſciences as are approoued by law.
               They condemne the Anabaptiſtes, which forbid Chriſtians theſe ci
                     •
                  ill offices. They likewiſe condemne them which haue placed perfection vnder the Goſpell, in the renouncing of ciuill offices, whereas it is ſpirituall, that is, it conſiſteth in the motions of the heart, in the feare, faith, loue, and obedience of God. For the Goſpell ſpeaketh of a certeine eternall righteouſnes of the heart, yet doth it not take awaie Ciuill, or domeſticall gouernement, but requireth moſt of all to haue them preſerued in this bodelie life, as the ordinances of God, and that we ſhould exerciſe loue and charitie in ſuch ordinances. Wherefore Chriſtians moſt of neceſſitie obeie the magiſtrates lawes that now a
                     •
                  e, ſaue onelie where they commaund and ſet forth anie ſinne. For in ſuch caſe they muſt obeie god, rather then men. Act. 4.
               
                  Theſe thinges are thus found in another edition.
                  
                     
                        Art. 1
                           •
                        . COncerning ciuill thinges, they teach that ſuch ciuill ordinances as are lawfull ar
                        •
                      the good works of god, that chriſtians may lawfully beare office, ſit in iudgements, determine matters by the Princes or countrie lawes, lawfullie appoint puniſhmentes, lawfullie make warre, be ſouldiours, make bargaines and contractes, by law holde their owne, take an oth when the magiſtrates require it, marrie a wife, or be giuen in marriage. They condemne the Anabaptiſtes, which forbid Chriſtians to meddle with ciuil offices: as alſo thoſe that place the perfection of the Goſpell, not in the feare of God and ſaith, but in forſaking ciuill offices. For the goſpel teacheth an euerlaſting righteoſnes of the heart. In the meane time it doth not diſſalow order and gouernement of common wealths, or families, but requireth eſpeciallie the preſeruation and maintenance thereof, as of Gods owne ordinance, and that in ſuch ordinances we ſhould exerciſe loue and charitie. Chriſtians therefore muſt in anie wiſe obeie their Magiſtrates, and lawes, ſaue onelie

then, when they commaund anie ſinne. For then they muſt rather obeie God then men.
                  
                  We condemne the Anabaptiſtes which doe ſpread Iewiſh opinions a freſh. They imagin that the godlie before the reſurrection, ſhall poſſeſſe the kingdomes of the world, and the wicked and vngodlie in all places be deſtroied and brought vnder. For we are ſure that ſeeing the godlie muſt obeie the Magiſtrates that be ouer them, they muſt not wring their rule and authoritie out of their handes, nor ouerthrow gouernmentes by ſedition, foraſmuch as Paul willeth euerie ſoule to be ſubiect to the Magiſtrates. We know alſo that the Church in this life is ſubiect to the croſſe, and that it ſhall not be glorified till after this life, as Saint Paull ſaieth, We muſt be made like to the image of the Sonne of God, And therefore we doe condemne and deteſt the follie and deuiliſh madnes of the Anabaptiſtes.
               
               
                  THE CONCLVSION.
                  THeſe are the principall articles that ſeeme to haue anie doubt or controuerſie in them. For though we might haue ſpoken of manie more abuſes, yet to auoid tediouſnes, we haue onelie ſet downe the chiefeſt, by which it is eaſie to iudge of the reſt. There haue bin great complaints of Indulgences and Pilgrimages, and of the abuſe of excommunication, Pariſhes haue beene diuerſe waies moleſted by Catchpoles therehaue beene manie braules and bickerings berweene pariſh Prieſtes and Monkes about this, whoe had greater right to the pariſh, and about commiſſions, burials & extraordinarie ſermons & other innumerable things▪ ſuch like matters we haue pretermitted, that fuch as are the principall in this cauſe, being ſhortlie ſet downe, might the better be vnderſtood. Neither haue we here ſpoken or written anie thing to anie mans reproch. Onelie we haue rehearſed ſuch thinges, as ſeemed neceſſarie to be ſpoken, to the ende that it might be ſeene, that nothing is receiued among vs in doctrine or ceremonies, contrarie to the ſcripture, or the Catholique Church. For it is euident, that we haue moſte diligentlie taken heede that no new or wicked opinions ſhould creepe into the Church. Theſe articles

aboue written we thought good to exhibit according to the Emperours his highnes edict wherein our confeſſion might be extant, and the ſumme of that doctrine, which our teacher doe deliuer among vs, might be ſeene and knowen. If any thing be wanting in this confeſſion, we are readie, if God permit, to yeald a more full information thereof according to the ſcriptures.
               
               
                  Another edition hath it thus.
                  VVE haue ſet downe the ſumme of the doctrine of the Goſpell that is needfull for the Churches. And wee are out of doubt that this our iudgement in theſe pointes is in deede the doctrine ſet forth in the writinges of of the Prophetes and Apoſtles, and whereunto the vniuerſall Church of Chriſt doth agree and conſent, and whereto the beſt learned writers of the Church do giue teſtimonie in manie places. And we offer our ſelues to make a more large and ample explication of theſe thinges when neede ſhall require. Now we beſeech God, the father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, that he will vouchſafe to rule, preſerue, purge, and increaſe his Church, which he hath purchaſed and redeemed by the bloode of his ſonne.
               
               Amen.
               
                  
                     
                        The faithfull, & ſubiects to the Emperours Maieſtie.
                        Iohn Duke of Saxonie Elector.
                        George Marques of Brandembrough.
                        Erneſt Duke of Luneborough.
                        Philip the Lantgraue of the Heſſes.
                        Iohn Frederick Duke of Saxonie.
                        Frances Duke of Luneborough.
                        VVolfgang Prince of Anhalt.
                        The Senate and Magiſtrats of Nurnborough.
                        The Senate of Reutling.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONIE.
               Artic. 23. Of the ciuill Magiſtrate.
               
               BY the benefit of God this part alſo of doctrine of the authoritie of the Magiſtrate, that beareth the ſword, and of the authoritie of Lawes and Iudgements, and of the wholl ciuill ſtate is god
                     •
                  ily ſet forth: and by great trauell, and many writings the manifold and great furies of the Anabaptiſts and other fantaſticall men are refuted. We teach therefore that in the wholl doctrine of God deliuered by the Apoſtles and Prophets, the degrees of the ciuill ſtate are auouched, and that Magiſtrates, Lawes, order in iudgements & the lawfull ſocietie of mankinde▪ are not by chance ſprong vp among men. And although there be many horrible confuſions, which grow from the Deuill, and the madnes of men, yet the lawfull gouernment and ſocietie of men is ordained of God, and whatſoeuer order is yet left by the exceeding goodnes of God, it is preſerued for the Church ſake, as it is ſaid Rom. 13. and Pſal. 126. Except the Lords ke
                        •
                     pe the Citie, in vaine he watcheth, that keepeth it, &c. Therefore in themſelues they are thinges good, to beare the authoritie of a Magiſtrate, to be a Iudge, to be a miniſter, to execute iudgements, to make lawfull warres, and to be a ſoldiour in lawfull warres, &c. And a Chriſtian man may vſe theſe thinges, as he vſeth meate, drinke, medecines, buying and ſelling. Neither doth he ſinne that is a Magiſtrate, and diſchargeth his vocation, that exerciſeth iudgement, that goeth to warre, that puniſheth lawfullie thoſe that are condemned, &c. And ſubiects owe vnto the ciuill Magiſtrate obedience, as Paull ſaith Rom. 13. Not onelie becauſe of wrath, that is, for feare of corporall puniſhment, wherewith the rebellious are rewarded by the Magiſtrate, but alſo for conſcience ſake, that is, rebellion is a ſinne that offendeth God, and withdraweth the conſcience from God.
               This heauenly doctrine we propound vnto the Churches, which eſtabliſheth lawfull authoritie, and the wholl ciuill ſtate, and we ſhew the difference of the Goſpell, and the ciu
                     •
                  l
                     •
                   gouernment. God would haue all men to be ruled and

kept in order by ciuill gouernment, euen thoſe that ate not regenerate, and in this gouernment, the wiſdome, iuſtice, and goodnes of God toward mankinde, is moſte clearelie to be ſeene. His wiſdome is declared by order, which is in the diſcerning of vertues and vices and in the ſocietie of mankinde vnder lawfull gouernment, and in contracts guided and diſpoſed by maruelous wiſdome. Then the iuſtice of God appeareth in ciuill gouernment, in that he will haue open ſinnes to be puniſhed by the Magiſtrates, and when they that are in authoritie doe not take puniſhment on offenders, God himſelfe miraculouſlie draweth them vnto puniſhment, and proportionablie doth lay vpon grieuous ſinnes, grieuous puniſhment in this life: as it is ſaid, Mat. 26. Whoſoeuer taketh the ſword, ſhall periſh with the ſword. & Heb. 3. Whoremongers and adulterers, God will iudge. In theſe puniſhments God will haue to be ſeene the differences of vertues and vices, and will haue vs learne that God is wiſe, iuſt, true, and chaſte. The goodnes of God alſo toward mankinde is ſeene▪ in that he preſerueth the ſocietie of men after this order. And for that cauſe doth he maintaine it, that from thence his Church may be gathered, & he wil haue common wealthes to be places for the enterteinment of his Church. And the ciuill gouernment is one thing, which keepeth in order all men, euen thoſe that are not regenerate: and forgiuenes of ſinnes, and righteouſnes in the heart, which is the beginning of life and of eternall ſaluation, which by the voice of the goſpell is effected in the hearts of them that beleeue, is another thing. Both theſe benefits god hath beſtowed vpon mankinde, and will haue vs to vnderſtand the difference of ciuill iuſtice, and light in our hearts. Neither doth the goſpel condemne or ouerthrow common welthes or families. And although it belong not to thoſe that teach in the Church, to giue particular lawes of politique gouernment, yet the worde of God doeth generallie teach this of the power of the Magiſtrate▪
               
               Firſt, God would that the Magiſtrate without all doubt ſhould ſound forth the voice of the morall law among men, touching diſcipline, according to the 10. commaundements or the law naturall; that is, he woulde haue by the voice of the Magiſtrate, firſt ſoueraigne and immutable lawes to be

propounded, forbidding the worſhip of Idols, blaſphemies, periuries, vniuſt murders, wandring luſtes, breach of wedlock, theft, and fraude in bargaines, contracts, and iudgements.
               The ſecond dutie. Let the Magiſtrate be an obſeruer of theſe diuine and immutable lawes, which are witneſſes of God, and chief rules of manners, by puniſhing all thoſe that tranſgreſſe the ſame. For the voice of the law without puniſhment and execution is litle auaileable to bridle and reſtraine men. Therefore it is ſaid by S. Paull, Rom. 13. The Magiſtrate is a terrour to him that doth euill, and giueth honour to them that doe well, And well hath it beene ſaid of olde, The Magiſtrate is a keeper of the Law, that is, of the firſt and ſecond Table, as concerning diſcipline and good order.
               The third dutie of the ciuill Magiſtrate is to adde vnto the law naturall, ſome other lawes, defining the citcumſtances of the natural law, and to keepe and maintaine the ſame by puniſhing the tranſgreſſours: but at no hand to ſuffer or defend lawes contrarie to the law of God or nature, as it is written, Eſai. 10. Woe be to them that make wicked lawes. For kingdoms are the ordinance of God, wherein the wiſdome and iuſtice of God, that is, iuſt lawes ought to rule, euen as the wiſe King, and one that feared God, Ioſaphat ſaid, 2. Chron. 19. Ye exerciſe not the iudgement of men, but of God, who is with you in iudgement. Let the feare of God be with you, and doe all things diligentlie. For although manie in kingdoms doe deſpiſe the glorie of God, yet notwithſtanding this ought to be their eſpeciall care, to heare and imbrace the true doctrine of the Sonne of God, and to cheriſh the Churches. as the 2. Pſalme ſpeaketh, And now yee Kings vnderſtand, and be learned ye that iudge the earth. And Pſal. 23. Y
                        •
                     e Princes open your gates, that is, open your kindomes to the goſpell, and giue entertainment to the Sonne of God. and Eſa. 49. And Kings and Queenes ſhallhe thy nurces, that is, let commonwelthes be nurces of the Church, let them giue entertainment to the Church, and to godlie ſtudies. Let Kinges and Princes themſelues be members of the Church, and rightlie vnderſtand the doctrine thereof, and giue no help vnto thoſe that eſtabliſh falſe doctrine, and exerciſe vniuſt crueltie, and remember this ſaying, I will honour them that honuor
                  
                  me. And Daniell in the 4. Chap. exhorteth the King of Babylon, to acknowledge the wrath of God, and to ſhew mercie to the banniſhed Church, when he ſaieth, Redeeme thy ſinnes with righteouſnes and with mercie toward the poore, and there ſhallbe a healing of thy tranſgreſſion. And ſince they are among the principall members of the Church, let them prouide that iudgement be rightlie exerciſed in the Curch, as Conſtantine, Theodoſius, Arcadius, Martian, Charles the great, & manie godlie Kinges haue prouided, that iudgement in the Church ſhould be ſincerely executed. But of the difference of both ſtates, namely of the miniſterie of the goſpell, and the ciuill magiſtracie, there are many writinges in our Church, which declare, that we teach no fantaſticall nor ſeditious opinions, but doe ſhew the neceſſarie doctrine deliuered in the goſpell touching both degrees, profitable to godlines, and common peace.
               
                  Thankes be to God.
                  THis is the ſumme of that doctrine, which by the bleſſing of God with one conſent we teach in our Churches, which to be the ſincere meaning of the doctrine deliuered from God in the writings of the Prophets and Apoſtles, and in the Creedes, we nothing doubt, and it may be vnderſtood out of the auncient & purer writers, to be agreeable to the ancient and pu
                        •
                     er Churches. Now the matter it ſelfe declareth, that we haue not ſought to diſpute about newfangled, curious and ſubtle queſtions, neither doe ſtriue about authoritie or riches, but onelie to vnfolde and bring to light from the great darkenes of traditions and opinions, that doctrine which is neceſſarie to the true inuocation of God, to true worſhip, to the right knowledge of the Sonne of God, and to the ſaluation of ſoules, and doe in moſte ſimple and plaine manner propound the ſame vnto the Churches. For all wiſe men muſt needes confeſſe that there was much obſcuritie and many errours in the doctrine of the Monkes, and many ſnares of conſcience in the Popes traditions: and whether doctrine is true, plaine, euident, profitable for conſciences, and for manners, compariſon doth declare. For we auoide not the iudgements of the Godly, yea rather we

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
deſire thatthe wholl true Church of God, that is, al the faithfull & learned, whereſoeuer they are, may vnderſtand what we ſay, who we doubt not will be witneſſes that this doctrine is the conſent of the true Catholique Church of God. Alſo we offer our ſelues at any time, to a more full declaration in in euerie point; and we thinke that this rehearſall of our doctrine now made is agreeable to the confeſſion exhibited at Auſpurge, Anno. 1530.
                  For as much therefore as the doctrine, which we here recite, is true, and neceſſarie for the Church, we intreat that our Churches may not be condemned, as if they either imbraced errours, or fooliſhlie or ſeditiouſlie ſtirred vp ſtrife without any weightie cauſe. The truth, and weight of the matters may deliuer vs from this vniuſt accuſation. Next after a godly manner, we admoniſh the Councell itſelfe. They ſee that olde abuſes and many great errours are as yet ſticking in the Church, becauſe in al ages euen from the beginning of mankinde the deuil cōtinueth ſcattering his ſeed of errour, and ſince that time through the ignorance of men, by ſuperſtition they are either confirmed, or do ſhoote forth againe. And now for that the vanitie of many ſuperſtitions is known, the times require a reformation, & vnles the gouernours prouide that the trueth may be brought to light, great diuiſion in opinions is like to follow: eſpecially becauſe in this laſt age of the worlde great confuſion is to be feared. Therfore let the councel ſee to it, that they condemne not a manifeſt truth. And if in a godly ſort they wil deliberate how they may prouide for the churches, & if a more ample declaration ſhal be demaunded of vs, men learned, of vnderſtanding▪ louing the truth & fearing god muſt be choſen, to conſult together of theſe ſo weighty matters▪ Neither let them only ſtriue with vs in number of vices, ſeeing it is manifeſt by many preiudices, of what opinion the Biſhop of Rome, and others are, that are adicted vnto him, who now by the ſpace of many yeares haue not onelie ſet forth againſt vs edicts written with bloode, but alſo haue ſlaine many of our ſide: and there be many that neither vnderſtand, nor looke after any truth of doctrine, but being alreadie corrupted with prophane perſwaſions, doe thinke this to be an eſpeciall parte of politique men, to defend the preſent ſtate and

to mainteine their owne authoritie. And for this purpoſe they ſeeke fit Miniſters▪ by ſophiſticall iugling to 
                        •
                     eſt out the truth. Wherefore now we teſtifie that we will not reiect the truth, although it be condemned by the iudgements of ſuch men. And we openlie profeſſe, that we conſent not to the Councell of Trent, which heretofore hath ſent abroade decrees partlie falſe, partly captious and ſophiſticall: but doe earneſtly requeſt that both we may be heard in the ſame matter, and that the errours before confirmed by the decrees of the Tridentine Councell may be reformed. And we reuerently beſe
                        •
                     ch the moſt worthy Emperour Carolus Augu
                        
                           ••
                        us that he giue not leaue to the Aduerſaries to oppreſſe the truth by their preſumption, and to ſtrengthen their crueltie which they exerciſe againſt innocents, and to ſtare vp greater diſſention by their vniuſt decrees. And now we commend the Church and our ſelues to the Sonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who we know, by the voice of the Goſpell gathereth together to himſelfe an euerlaſting Church: and we praie him that he would gouerne vs, and not ſuffer the light of his Goſpell to be extinguiſhed, nor the aſſemblies of them that rightlie call vpon him to be diſperſed.
               
               
                  AN ADDITION.
                  AND we requeſt all that teach in the Churches ne
                        •
                     re adioyning or els where, that receiue the Confeſſion exhibited at Auſpurge, 1530. that when they reade theſe things, if in any point they finde any want, they would louinglie admoniſh vs thereof: for that it was not our purpoſe to bring vp any other kinde of doctrine, but plainlie to recite the ſumme of the Confeſſion of Auſpurge, and the common conſent of theſe Churches▪ and we deſire that we may be fauourablie, and not quarrelouſlie iudged of. We purpoſe not to ſtirre vp new contentions: but eſpecially we pray to the Sonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that was crucified for vs, and roſe againe, that praied in his agonie, that we might be one in God, that he would make vs alſo in the moſt Churches one in himſelfe. We whoſe names are ſubcribed hereunto, who doe now teach in the Churches & Vniuerſities vnder mentioned, do proteſt that in this writing,

which we deſire to haue rightlie and not quarrelouſlie vnderſtood, we haue recited the common doctrine publiſhed in the Churches and Vniuerſities, wherein we teach the Goſpell, and we are perſwaded that this is the true, ſincere, and incorrupt doctrine of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, agreeing with the Apoſtles and Prophets and with the Creedes, and that it is neceſſarie for the Churches, and we praie our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who was crucified for vs, and roſe againe, that he would mercifully gouerne and defend theſe Churches.
                  Alſo we offer our ſelues to further declaration in euerie Article. This was written Anno 1551. Iulie. 10. in the towne of Wirtemberge, where the Paſtours of the Churches neere adioyning were met together, &c.
               
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
               The Concluſion, which is placed in the latter end of the 35. Chap.
               
               WE haue rehearſed thoſe things, which ſeeme good both to be approued, and alſo to be refuted, or amended in the Eccleſiaſticall doctrine, and in the wholl adminiſtration of the Church. And if anie thing be ſpoken either more brieflie, or more obſcurelie, then ſo great a matter would require, our Preachers do promiſe that they will expouud them more largelie, and more cleerlie. That which remaineth, we beſeech all the godly through Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God, our onelie Sauiour, that (which thing we hope they wil do of their owne accord) euerie one according to his office and calling, would take vnto himſelfe a true and earneſt endeauour to reforme the Church. It can not be denied, but that hitherto for theſe manie yeares not onelie the diſcipline of the Church hath decaied, and the manners thereof haue beene corrupted with great and horrible vices, and they haue verie much degenerated from the honeſtie of our Elders, but that alſo the doctrine of the Church hath beene depraued in ſuffering and bearing with corruptions: which if hereafter they be either diſſembled, or confirmed, euerie man that is but meanlie wiſe maie conſider, how great euills are like to follow in the Church of God. Thoſe execrations and curſings are well knowne, whereunto the

law of god doth addict the transgreſſours of his word. And Ioſias the King of Iuda, was endued with an heroicall minde, when he repaired the Church, and although the wrath of god was by his godlie repentance and obedience mitigated (after that the Booke of the law was found out, and well knowne) that thoſe puniſhments, which the Church of god at that time had deſerued, through the neglect of his word and their impietie, might be differred till another time yet notwithſtanding ſuch was the ſeueritie of god againſt the contemners of his word, and the impenitent, that the King although he were verie godlie, could not altogether take it awaie from them, and appeaſe it. Now we thinke that in theſe times the wrath of god is no leſſe, yea much more grieuouſly kindled, and ſet on fire againſt the aſſemblie of his Church, (by reaſon of ſo manie hainous wicked deeds and offences, which euen in that people which glorieth in the name of god, are more euident, then that they can be denied, and more cleere, then that they maie be excuſed) then in times paſt, when as yet the Sonne of god was not made knowne to the world by his goſpell: And the iudgement of god ſhall be ſo much the more ſeuere, by how much his benefits are the greater, which he ſeemeth to haue beſtowed, both in the former, and alſo at theſe preſent times vpon vnthankful men.
               But both many other things haue need of amendment in the Church and miniſterie thereof, and eſpeciallie the doctrine of repentance, Iuſtification, and the vſe of the Sacraments, and ſingle life of the Miniſters of the Church, do require a godlie amendment. If theſe things by the mercie of God, and by the diligence and care of all good men ſhall be reſtored, according to the writings of the Prophets and the Apoſtles, and according to the true Catholique conſent of the auncient and purer Church, we ſhall not onelie giue vnto god the father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt a moſt acceptable worſhip, but alſo the wholl Chriſtian world ſhal be ſtirred vp, to declare their thankfulnes and obedience in all duetifull manner that they maie. We truelie do not know of anie errour in our Preachers, either in doctrine, or in the other adminiſtration of the Church: yet we do not doubt, but that they are indued with ſo great modeſtie and godlines, that if

they be admoniſhed by the teſtimony of the heauenly doctrine & by the true conſent of the Catholique Church, they wil in no caſe be wanting to the edifying of the church And as much as lieth in vs, and in our gouernment, we will do our indeuour, that the mercy of godhelping vs, none of thoſe dueties may be pretermitted of vs, whereby we hope that the true quietnes of the Church, and ſaluation in Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of god, may be preſerued.
            
            
               OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
               
                  
                     Of Seculare Magiſtrates. CHAP. 23.
                  IN the former points we haue declared, that our Preachers doe place that obedience which is giuen vnto Magiſtrates, among good workes of the firſt degree, and that they teach, that euerie man ought ſo much the more diligently to applie himſelfe to the publique lawes, by how much he is a more ſincere Chriſtian, & richer in faith. In the next place they teach, that to execute the office of a Magiſtrate, it is the moſt ſacred function, which can happen vnto man from God, whereupon alſo it is come to paſſe, that they which are endued with publique authoritie, are in the Scriptures called Gods. For when as they doe iuſtlie and orderlie behaue themſelues in their function, it goeth well with the people both in doctrine, and in life: becauſe that God doth vſe 
                        •
                     o to moderate our affaires, that for the greater parte, the ſafetie and deſtruction of the ſubiects doth depende vpon them which are the gouernours. Wherefore none doe more worthelie execute Magiſtracie, then they which of all others are the moſt Chriſtian, and Biſhops and other Eccleſiaſtical men were promoted by moſt godly Emperours & kings to an external gouernment in ciuil affaires. Wherein though they were religious and wiſe, yet in this one point they offended, becauſe they were not able to diſcharge both thoſe functions ſufficiently, and it was neceſſarie, that either they ſhould be wanting to the Churches in ruling them by the word, or to the common wealth, in gouerning it by authoritie.
               
               
                  
                  THE CONCLVSION.
                  THeſe be the chiefe pointes, moſte mightie and religiuos Emperour, wherein our Preachers haue ſomewhat ſwarued from the common doctrine of preachers, being forced thereunto by the onelie authoritie of the Scriptures, which is worthelie to be preferred before all other traditions. Theſe things, being ſo declared, as the ſhortnes of time would giue vs leaue, we thought it good to offer thē to your ſacred Maieſtie, and that to this ende, that we might both giue account of our faith to thee, whome next vnto God we doe chiefelie honour and reuerence, and might alſo ſhew how neceſſarie it is, ſpeedely and earneſtlie to conſult of a way and meane, whereby a thing of ſo great importance, maie be knowen, diligentlie weighed, and diſcuſſed, as the honour which we doe chiefelie owe to God (in whoſe chiefe matter it behooueth vs to be conuerſant with feare & and trembling) doth require. Secondlie, it is a thing worthie of your ſacred Maieſtie, (which is ſo much commended for the name of religion and clemencie). To conclude, the very meane to attaine to that certaine and ſound peace, which your ſacred Maieſtie goeth about, doth require it: which peace, ſeeing that we doe varie about faith and religion, can no other waies be obteined, then when as before all other thinges the mindes be plainelie inſtructed concerning the trueth.
                  But peraduenture it might ſeeme needeles, that we in theſe matters ſhould vſe ſo many words, ſeing that the moſt famous Prince Electour of Saxony and others haue very largely and ſoundly declared vnto your ſacred Maieſty thoſe things, which at this daie are in controuerſy in our holy Religion. But becauſe that your ſacred Maieſtie hath deſired that all they, who haue any intereſt in this buſines, ſhould declare vnto you their iudgement concerning Religion, we alſo thought it our duety, to confeſſe thoſe things vnto your ſacred Maieſtie, which are taught among vs. Howbeit this matter is ſo large, & comprehendeth ſo many thinges, that euen thoſe thinges which we haue declared on both ſides, are as yet fewer, and more briefelie declared, then that

we maie hope, preſentlie to haue ſome certeintie determined in the controuerſies, and that ſuch, as may be approoued, not of all, but at the leaſt of a good parte of Chriſtian people: So few is the number of thoſe that doe ſubſcribe to the trueth. Therefore ſeeing that this matter is ſo weighty, ſo diuers and, manifold, and can not fruitfully be decided, except it be well knowne and ſifted of many, we beſeech your ſacred Maieſty, and moſt humblie requeſt you by god and our Sauiour, whoſe glory without doubt you do chiefely ſeek, that you would procure, as ſpeedily as may be, that a general, free, and a Chriſtian Councell in deed may be ſummoned, which hitherto hath ſemed ſo neceſſary a thing▪ both to your ſacred Maieſtie, and alſo to other Princes of the ſacred Empire, for the ſetting of Eccleſiaſtical affaires at a ſtay, that almoſt in all aſſemblies throughout the Empire, which haue been gathered together ſince the beginning of this variance about religion, both your ſacred Maieſties commiſſioners and other Princes of the Empire, haue openly witneſſed, that there was no other waie in theſe matters, to bring that to pas which might be wholſome. Whereupon in the laſt aſſembly held at Spire, your ſacred Maieſtie gaue occaſion to hope, that the Biſhop of Rome would notwithſtand it, but that ſuch a Councell might with ſpeed be ſummoned.
                  But if ſo be that in time we may not haue opportunitie for a generall Councell, yet at the leſt your ſacred maieſtie may appoint a Prouinciall aſſemblie, as they call it, of the learned men of euery degree and ſtate, whereunto all, for whome it is expedient to be preſent, may freelie and ſafely reſorte, euery man may be heard, and all thinges may be weighed, and iudged, by ſuch men, whome it is certaine, as being indued with the feare of God, to make the chiefeſt account of the glorie of God. For it is not vnknowne, how grauelie, & diligentlie in times paſt both Emperours and Biſhops behaued themſelues in deciding the controuerſies of faith, which notwithſtanding were oftentimes of much leſſe moment, then thoſe which doe preſentlie trouble Germanie, ſo that they thought it not an vnworthie thing for themto examine the ſelfe ſame things the ſecond, and the third time. Now he that ſhall conſider, how things ſtand at this preſent, he can not doubt, but that at this day there is greater

need, then euer was heretofore, of greater faithfulnes grauitie, meeknes, and dexteritie, to this ende, that the Religion of Chriſt maie be reſtored into her place. For if ſo be that we haue the truth, as we doe vndoubtedlie beleeue, how much time and labour, I pray you, is requiſite that they may know the truth, without whoſe conſent or patience at the leaſt, ſounde peace can not be obtained? But if we doe erre (from rhe which we doe not doubt but we be far) againe the matter will not require ſlouthfull diligence nor a ſhort time, that ſo many thouſand men may be called into the way againe. This diligenee and time it ſhall not be ſo vnſeemelie for your Maieſtie to beſtow, as it is meete that you ſhould expreſſe his minde toward vs, in whoſe ſtead you doe gouerne ouer vs, to wit, the minde of Ieſus Chriſt the Sauiour of vs all who, ſeeing that he came with this minde, to ſeeke, and to ſaue that which was periſhed, ſo that he vouchſafed alſo to die, that he might redeeme them which were loſt, there is no cauſe, why your ſacred Maieſtie ſhould thinke much, although you ſhould vndoubtedlie beleeue, that we are fallen from the truth, to leaue the ninty nine ſheepe in the wildernes, and to ſeeke for the hundreth, and to bring it backe into the ſheepefolde of Chriſt, that is, to preferre this buſines before all other things, that the meaning of Chriſt in euery of theſe things, which at this preſent are in controuerſie, may out of the Scriptures be plainlie and certeinlie laide open vnto vs, though we be but a few in number and of the meaner ſort, and we for our parts will ſhew our ſelues willing to be taught, (onely let all obſtinacie be remooued) ſo that it may be lawfull to heare the voice of our ſhepheard Ieſus Chriſt: and let all things ſtay and reſt vpon the Scriptures (which teach whatſoeuer is good) whereunto we ſhall be called. For if it ſhould ſo fall out, that the care of teaching vs being reiected, there ſhould compendious formes of Edicts be ſought (which we doe nothing feare whileſt the matter is in the hand of your ſacred Maieſtie) it can not be ſaid, into what ſtraightes innumerable thouſands of men ſhould be brought, to wit, of thoſe, whome, as beeing perſwaded that God is chieflie to be heard, and then that thoſe things which follow as opinions muſt ſtay vpon the vndoubted oracles of God, theſe

ſayings of our Sauiour doe alwaies appale: Feare not them which kill the bodie. He that ſhall looſe his ſoule, ſhall finde it. He that ſhall not hate Father and Mother, &c. yea euen his owne ſoule, he can not be my Diſciple. He that ſhal be aſhamed of me, before this froward and adulterous nation, of him will I be aſhamed before my Father and his Angells, And ſuch like.
                  Many men being mooued with theſe thundering ſpeaches, haue reſolued with themſelues to ſuffer all extremitie: and many for feare of death doe rather ſeeke delaies, but yet waiting for a fit opportunitie, if they ſhould be dealt withalin this matter by authority, before they be dealt withall by doctrine, and by force, before their errour ſhould be made knowne vnto them. For of what force a ſound perſwaſion of Religion is, and how it maketh men to make no account not onelie of their goods, but alſo of their liues, it hath bin ſeene more then ſufficientlie in very many, euen within theſe 10. yeares (that we may ſay nothing of the former ages) who haue willinglie ſuffered not onely baniſhments and proſcriptions, but alſo torments, and death it ſelfe, rather then they would ſuffer themſelues to be withdrawne from that iudgement which they had conceiued, and which they beleeued to be true. If now a daies when as there is contention of thoſe lighter matters, there be but a few to be found, whom a man may bring to vnfeigned concorde, except they may be perſwaded of the law, or the equitie of conditions, how, when as the controuerſie is of Religion, ſhall we looke for true peace, and an vndoubted tranquillitie in theſe matters, to wit, ſuch a one as your ſacred Maieſty goeth about to eſtabliſh, except that on both ſides it be agreed vpon, what things they be that God d
                        •
                     th approoue, and what things be agreeable to the Scriptures? For as Religion, by right, and by the cuſtom of al nations, is preferred before all other things, ſo there neuer was any more vehement or ſharpe fight among men, then that which is vndertaken for Religion. But we, ſeeing that your ſacred Maieſtie hath vſed ſuch an vnſpeakeable clemency toward your enemies, and thoſe ſuch, as haue pretermitted no kinde of hoſtilitie, that we may let paſſe other things, haue not without cauſe receiued great hope, that you will ſo moderate all things euen in this matter alſo, that you wil much

more ſeeke for the praiſe of goodnes and courteſie in vs, who are moſt deſirous of your ſafetie and honour, as we haue in deed teſtified, and do from the bottome of ourhearts deſire yet farther to teſtifie. For we haue dealt ſo moderately in all points, that we haue made it euident enough to all good men, that it was neuer in our minde to hurt any man, or deceitful to increaſe our commodities by the diſcommodities of other men. In deede we haue ſuſteined dangers for this cauſe, and ſpent exceeding much, but we haue not gained no not ſo much as a little thereby, this one thing excepted, that we being better inſtructed, touching the goodnes of God ſhewed vnto vs through Chriſt, we haue begun (by the grace of God) to hope better of thoſe things which are to come: and of that we doe by right make ſo great account, that we do not think that we either haue done, or ſuffered any thing as yet worthie therof, ſeing that it is an ineſtimable thing, and to be preferred aboue all things, which are in heauen or in earth. We haue bin ſo farre from emparing the riches of Eccleſiaſticall men, that when the husbandmen were in an vprour, we, to our great coſtes and dangers, defended them to their vſes. The Goſpell of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, as ſurelie as we would that he ſhould loue vs, is the onelie thing that enforceth vs, and hath cauſed vs to doe all theſe things, which we ſeeme to haue altered.
                  Therefore let it pleaſe your ſacred Maieſtie rather to follow the examples of theſe moſt mightie and in deed happy Emperours, Conſtantine, Iouinian, Theodoſius, and ſuch like, who both by doctrine dailie taught in all meekenes by moſt holie and vigilant Biſhops, and alſo by Councels lawfully aſſembled, and by a wiſe diſcuſſing of al things, did deale with them that erred, and aſſaied all meanes to bring them again into the way, before that they would determine any thing more ſharply againſt them; then to follow thoſe, who it is certaine had ſuch counſellers, as were moſt vnlike to thoſe auntient and holy Fathers in deed, and receiued an euent nothing anſwerable to the godlines of thoſe Fathers. In conſideration hereof let not your ſacred Maieſty be withdrawne with this, that the chiefeſt matters, which are now in controuerſie, were decided long ſince, and chieflie in the Councell held at Conſtance, eſpecially ſeeing you may ſee, that

of thoſe innumerable, no leſſe holie then neceſſary decrees of the former Councells, there is not ſo much as the leaſt point obſerued of our Eccleſiaſticall men, and that they haue ſo degenerated in all things, that no man which is but endued with common ſenſe, doth not cry out, that there is need of a Councell, to reſtore Religion, and the holines of the Eccleſiaſticall order. But if that doth like them ſo well which was decreed at Conſtance, how commeth it to paſſe, that by no meanes at all that decree euer ſince toke place, that Chriſtian Councells ſhould be aſſembled euery tenth yeare? the which thing was at that time decreed. For by this meane much godlines and faith might either be recouered, or preſerued.
                  But what is he that will not confeſſe, that ſo often as the diſeaſe waxeth freſh, ſo often the remedy is to be vſed, and they which haue the truth in deed do neuer thinke it much, both that good men ſhould teach it, & alſo defend it againſt the euill ſort, where anie fruit thereof may be hoped for? Now when as ſo many thouſand are ſo miſerablie intangled in the opinions of our religion, who can deny that there is hope of moſt plentiful fruit, and ſuch as hath iuſtlie enforced al thoſe that are gouerned by the ſpirit of Chriſt, that omitting all other things whatſoeuer, contemning all kinde of labour and coſt, they may giue themſelue wholly to this one thing, that the doctrine of Chriſt, which is the mother of all righteouſnes and ſaluation, may be worthelie weighed or conſidered, purged from al errors, and offerd in it naturall colour to all thoſe that loue godlines and the true worſhip of God, to the end that a peace, and and ſuch as may be firme for euen, & a true ſetting of al holy things at a ſtay, may be reſtored and confirmed to the ſheepe of Chrtſt, for whome he hath ſhed his blood, which are now too much troubled and wa
                        •
                     ering. The which peace can by no other mean, as we ſaid, be reſtored and confirmed vnto them, as being certein that in other things they are in ſome ſort to yeald or to giue place, but in the matter of godlines, they are ſo to ſtick, and bend themſelues to the word of God, that if they had a thouſand liues, they ſhould offer them to be tormented, rather then to yeald one iot, or in the leaſt point, which they are perſuaded to be the word of God. Now if one onely ſoule be

of more value then the wholl world, what ought we to do for the ſaluation of many thouſands? Certeinlie ſeeing we are allured by ſo great a hope, both by this, that they which are accuſed to your ſacred Maieſtie of errour, do deſire nothing elſe but that they may be taught, and haue wholly addicted themſelues to the holie ſcriptures, which are fullie ſufficient to confute euerie errour: & alſo thereby, that Chriſt our Sauiour hath made ſo large a promiſe, that where euen two or three be gathered together in his name, there he will be in the middeſt of them, & graunt vnto them any thing wherupon they ſhal agree.
                  
                  Theſe thinges, moſt godlie Emperour, we do here rehearſe for no other cauſe, then to ſhew our ſelues obedient to your ſacred Maieſtie, which would haue vs alſo to declare what is our iudgement, concerning the reforming of religion. For otherwiſe we haue good hope that your ſacred Maieſty hath of late verie well conſidered, and doth ſufficiently perceiue, what neceſſitie doth enforce vs thereunto, what fruit doth allure vs, and to conclude, how worthie a thing this is for your ſacred Maieſtie, which is ſo much praiſed for religion and clemencie, that all the beſt learned and moſte godlie men beeing called together, they maie finde out of the diuine ſcriptures, what is to be thought of euerie point of doctrine, which are at this time in controuerſie, and then that it be expounded by the fit Miniſters of Chriſt, with all meekenes and faithfulnes, to them which are thought to be deteined in errors. Notwithſtanding herewithall it is to be feared, that there will not be men wanting, who will do their endeauour to withdraw your ſacred Maieſtie from this: vnto theſe men it ſeemed good to vs in this ſort to make auſwere as it were before your Maieſty. Let it pleaſe your ſacred Maieſty, according to your moſt excellent clemencie, for which you are renowmed, to take & interpret in good part both this ſame, and all other things, (which we haue here expounded and confeſſed, for no other reſpect, then to defend the glory of Chriſt Ieſus our God, as our dutie requireth, and, as it is meet we ſhould, to obey your ſacred Maieſtie) and to count vs among thoſe, whoe truelie doe from our hearts deſire to ſhew our ſelues no leſſe obedient and addicted to your Maieſtie in all humble ſubiection, then were our Elders, being readie in this point, ſo farre as is lawfull, to ſpend both

our goods and our liues. The King of glorie Ieſus Chriſt graunt vnto your ſacred Maieſtie, both in this and in all other matters, to do all things to his glorie, and preſerue it long, and aduance it happilie both in health, and in floriſhing eſtate, to the ſafetie of all Chriſtendome.
               
            
            Amen.
         
         
            VERIE BRIEFE OBSERVATIONS VPON ALL THE FORMER HARMONIE.
            
               Wherein the doubtfull ſayings of euery Confeſſion are made plaine, the darke ſpeaches opened, and beſides ſuch as in outward ſhew ſeeme to be contrarie one to the other, are with modeſtie reconciled: And to be briefe, ſuch things wherein there is yet any controuerſie (which in deed are very few) are fauourablie marked & noted, that they alſo may at length through Gods aſſiſtance come to be agreed vpon, by a common conſent of all the Churches.
               
                  1. Cor. 14. 32. The ſpirits of the Prophets are ſubiect to the Prophets.
               
                  Phil. 3. 15. Let vs therefore ſo many as be perfect be thus minded: and if ye be otherwiſe minded, God shal reueal euen the ſame vnto you. Neuertheles, in that whereunto we are come, let vs proceed by one rule, that we may minde one theng.
            
            
            VERIE BRIEFE OBSERVATIONS VPON THE FORMER HARMONIE, ACCORDING TO THE ORDER OF THE SECTIONS.
            
               IN THE FIRST SECTION.
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pa. 7. 
                     ACcording to the auncient cuſtome. This auncient cuſtome we doe thus farre allow, that libertie be left to euerie Church to vſe, or not to vſe thoſe Poſtills, as they call them: yet ſo as we aduiſe them to beware, leſt this culling out of ſome partes of the Scripture, bring in a neglect of the other partes.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Saxonie.
                  
                     IOyning our Praiers with al Saintes in heauen. We learne in many places of the holie Scripture, that the Angels, according to the nature of their miniſterie which they are ſent to performe, doe further the ſaluation of the godlie: and it is euident by that ſaying, Loue doth not fall awaie, and by the 6. chap. ver. 10. of the Apoc. that the ſpirits of the Saintes taken vp vnto Chriſt, doe with their holie deſires, in ſome ſort helpe forward the grace and goodnes of God, touching the full deliuerance of the Church. And thus we acknowledge, that as wel this, and other places of the ſame confefſion, as alſo that place in the 23. Chap. of the confeſſion of Writemberge, which followeth after in the 2. Section, page 45. are to be interpreted. And we acknowledge no other interceſſion or intreating either of the bleſſed Angels, or of the

ſpirites of holie men, that are now departed from vs.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Wirtemberge.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 13. 
                     OF whoſe authoritie there was neuer doubt made. What books theſe be, may be ſeene outit of the French and Bellgian Confeſſions, where they are all reckoned vp one by one. And though that in the Catalogue of the bookes of the new. Teſtament there are ſome to to be found of which there hath beene ſome doubt made ſometimes by the auncient Doctours of the Church, yet at length by the common conſent of the whole Catholike Church euen they alſo were receiued and acknowledged for canonicall. And therefore there is no cauſe, why they ſhould now be refuſed, for the ſcruples that ſome make about them.
               
            
            
               IN THE 2. SECTION.
               
                  Vpon the latter Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     FOr as touching their nature and eſſence they are ſo ioyned together. 
                     Obſar. 1. pa. 19.Leſt any man ſhould ſlaunder vs, as though we did make the perſons al exiſting together, but not all of the ſame eſſence, or elſe did make a God of diuerſe natures ioyned together in one, you muſt vnderſtand this ioyning together, ſo as that all the perſons (though diſtinct one from the other in properties) be yet but one and the ſame whole godhead: or ſo, that all and euerie of the perſons haue the whole and abſolute godhead.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  VVE reiect not the gods onelie of the Gentiles, but alſo the 
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 20.
                     images of Chriſtians. By Chriſtians vnderſtand ſuch as cal themſelues Chriſtians in deed, but yet do reteine the vſe of images for the ſeruice of religion, againſt the expreſſe commaundement of God.
               
               
                  Vpon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     REiecting herein all meanes of life and ſaluation ſaue Chriſt 
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 23.
                     alone. Vnderſtand it thus, that here are excluded and condemned all thoſe meanes that vſe to be matched with, or made inferiour vnto Chriſt, by ſuch as be ſuperſtitious: and

not inſtrumentall meanes, ordained by the worde of God▪ whoſe helpe god doth ſo vſe, that the whole force of the outward miniſterie is to be aſcribed wholly to God alone, as is plainelie ſet downe afterward in the 12. Section, in the declaration of this ſelfe ſame confeſſion, where it intreateth of the miniſterie and ſacrifices.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 26. Vpon the Confeſſion Of Bohemia.
                  
                     IS aboue all to be honoured with high worſhippe. To wit, with religious worſhip, and ſuch as properlie reſpecteth the conſcience, which is all wholie due to God alone, as it is in plaine tearmes afterwades ſet downe, leſt anie man ſhould thinke, that that falſe and impious diſtinction of Latria, dulia, and hyperdulia (if ſo be that it be referred to religious worſhippe) ſhould here be confirmed. For otherwiſe as for ciuill honour, which is due to the higher powers, and to ſome other for honeſtie and orders ſake, we are ſo farre from reiecting it, that we teach, that ſeeing it is commaunded of God, it cannot be neglected of vs, without ſome wounde of conſcience.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 27. 
                     SHe was made a deare companion of Chriſt by the holy Ghoſt through faith. Vnderſtand this of that peculiar grace & mercie which was beſtowed vpon Marie alone, whereby ſhe was made the Mother of God that bare him, and was alſo indued with an excellent faith: and not as though anie duties of the onely Mediatour Chriſt, either of redemption or of interceſſion, were to be attributed to her, as afterwardes in plaine wordes is expreſſelie declared.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pa. 27. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     MVch leſſe their images. The meaning of this is, that we are bounde to honour in the Lord both the ſaintes that are aliue, and alſo the memory of them that are dead. But to their images we are not to giue any ſhew of worſhip whether religious or ciuil, for as much as that cannot be attempted without abominable ſuperſtition.
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. p. 37. 
                     OFfer vp their praiers by the Sonne of God, as in the ende of the praiers it is accuſtomed to be ſaid, Through Ieſus Christ our Lorde, &c. Theſe wordes doe not excuſe the popiſh praiers vnto Saintes, which they conclude with this tearme of wordes, for that he ſpeaketh here, of godlie praiers vnto God, and not of Idolatrous and ſuperſtitious praiers to ſaintes.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Saxony.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. p. 43. THere is no dout but ſuch as are in bliſſe praie for the Church, &c. Looke the firſt obſeruation vpon this confeſſion aboue in the 1. Section.
                  
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame
                  
                     VVAſting Gods gifts in vaine. Concerning waſting and Obſ. 2. p. 44.loſing of the ſpirit and of the gifts of the ſame, looke the firſt obſeruation vpon this confeſſion in the 4. Section following.
               
            
            
               IN THE 4. SECTION.
               
                  
                     Obſ. 1. p. 68. Vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     THey teach alſo that we muſt acknowledge our weakenes. The termes of imbecillitie & difficultie, which this confeſſion vſeth in many places, muſt be referred either to the regenerate (in whom the ſpirit ſtruggling with the fleſh, can not without a wonderful conflict get the vpper hand) or elſe vnto that ſtrife between reaſon & the affections, wherof the Philoſophers ſpeake, in which not the ſpirit with the fleſh (for the ſpirit is through grace in the regenerate only) but the reliques of iudgement & conſcience, (that is, of the Image of God) which for the moſte parte are faultie, doe ſtriue with the will whollie corrupted: according to the ſaying of the Poet, I ſee the better, and like it well, but follow the worſe, &c. Which thing is largely and plainlie ſet forth in the latter Confeſſion of Heluetia.
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. p. 68. 
                     IT could not riſe againe or recouer that fall. This is thus to be taken, not as though the firſt grace doth finde vs only weake and feeble before regeneration, whereas we are rather ſtarke dead in our ſinnes, and therefore wee muſt be quickned by the firſt grace, and after we be once quickned by the firſt, be helped by the ſecond following, and confirmed and ſtrengthned by the ſame continuing with vs to the end of our race.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Belgia.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. p. 7
                           •
                        . 
                     THerefore whatſoeuer things are taught as touching mans free will, &c. This generall worde Whatſoeuer wee take to appertaine to thoſe things onely, which either the Pelagians, or Papiſts, or any other haue taught, touching this point, contrarie to the authoritie of the Scripture.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
                  
                     Obſ. 
                           •
                        . p 74. 
                     THat which in this confeſſion is ſaide touching the libertie of mans nature to performe a ciuill iuſtice, and cited out of the 3. booke hypognoſticon (which is fathered vpon Auguſtine) wee are taught it out of another place of the ſame Father, namelie in his booke de gratia ad Valentinum. Cap. 20.) whoſe words are theſe. The holie Scripture if it be well looked into doth ſhew, that not onely the good willes of men (which God maketh good of euill, and hauing made them good, doth guid them vnto good actions and to eternall lfie) but alſo thoſe which are for the preſeruation of the creature in this life, are ſo in gods power, that he maketh them bend, when he will, and whether he will, either to beſtow benefits vpon ſome, or to inflict puniſhments vpon others, according as he doth appoint in his moſte ſecret, and yet without doubt moſte iuſt iudgement.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame,
                  
                     THis ſpirituall iuſtice is wrought in vs, when we are helped by the holie Ghoſt. And a little after, In theſe ſure we had 
                     Obſ. 2. p. 74. & 75.
                     need to be guided & helped of the holie Spirit, according to that ſaying of Paull, The Spirit helpeth our infirmities, &c. Vnderſtand this not of anie naturall facultie, which vnto anie good thing in deed, is none at all, but of the will regenerated, which is verie weake, except it be aided by another grace,

euen vnto the end. And ſo alſo muſt it be vnderſtood which is ſaid a little after, that The lawe of God can not be fullfilled by mans nature, to wit, though it be chaunged and renewed, according as we haue declared in the former obſeruations vpon the confeſſion of Bohemia, which we aduiſe you to looke ouer.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pa 75. 
                     MAns nature can by it felfe performe, &c. By it ſelfe, that is, by it owne proper and inward motion, yet ſo, as the working and goodnes of God, who vpholdeth the ſocietie of men, is not excluded, which doth not indeed renew a man, but preſerueth that reaſon which is left in him (though it be corrupt) againſt the vnbridled affections, and diſperſeth the darkenes of the minde, leſt it ouerſpread the light that remaineth, & repreſſeth the diſorder of the affections, leſt they burſt forth into act.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Saxonie.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 
                           •
                        0. THat which is both here and elſewhere in this Confeſſion, and now and then in the Confeſſion of Auſpurge, repeated, touching the ſhaking of and loſing the holie Spirit, we take it thus, that it is chiefly meant of the gifts which are beſtowed, euen vpon thoſe alſo which pertaine nothing to the Church (as in Socrates, Ariſtides, Cicero, and ſome others there ſhined certaine ſparkes of excellent vertues) Secondlie of thoſe gifts alſo, which are beſtowed vpon thoſe that are ſo in the Church, that yet they are not of the Church, nor trulie regenerated by the Spirit of adoption, as may be ſeene in the examples of Saull, Iudas, and ſuch others. For as concerning the ſpirit of ſanctification, which is onelie in thoſe that are trulie regenerated, it is neuer taken wholly from them; but onelie the force and working thereof for a time interrupted, whilſt luſtes doe beare ſwaie in the heart, euen as drunkennes doth not take awaie the minde it ſelfe, but onlie the vſe of the minde for a time.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa 
                           •
                        1. 
                     NOR are ſinnes againſt the conſcience. We take the meaning to be this. That the elect are ſaid to ſinne not againſt their wholl conſcience, or ſo as ſin raigneth in them,

but that albeit they often yeld and fall downe, yet they ruſh not into ſinnes with a full purpoſe and deliberation, and that as yet the ſpirit (though for a time it yeldeth to the fleſh) doth wraſtle and ſtriue in them, till at length by power from aboue it getteth the vpper hand againe.
               
            
            
               IN THE 6. SECTION.
               
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 92. Vpon the latter Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     THis Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde is the onely and eternall Sauiour of mankinde, yea of the wholl world. This which is ſaide diſtinctlie of ſauing the wholl world, we take to be meant of the reſtoring of the world at the laſt: wherein notwithſtanding men muſt not harken to vaine ſpeculations, which are beſides the word of God.
               
               
                  Vpon the former confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 94. 
                     SImplie reiecting all mean. Looke the 1. obſeruation vpon this confeſſion in the 2. Section, where theſe verie ſame wordes are ſet downe.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 97. 
                     COncerning Chriſt his preſence, &c. Concerning the preſence of Chriſt in his church euer ſince his aſcenſion, & ſo to continue vntill his ſecond comming, we teach this in plaine and euident wordes: (And we doe not think that the brethren are of any other minde in this point) Namely that the perſon of Chriſt may not be deuided, but that both the ſubſtance of the natures and their eſſentiall proprieties, ought euermore of neceſſitie to be kept and retained. And therefore that Chriſt according to his deitie is trulie and eſſentiallie with vs in the earth, as he is alſo in heauen, not onlie as filling a place, (in which manner he is euerie where) but alſo by his peculiar ſauing vertue; in reſpect whereof he is ſaid not onlie to be, but alſo to dwell in the Saints alone, and in none elſe. But according to the humane nature being aboue the heauens, he is neither viſiblie nor inuiſiblie now in the earth, but onlie hy his effectual working and moſte mightie power, when as the god head by

meanes of the Communication of his humanitie with vs ſpirituallie by faith, worketh that in the beleeuers, which he worketh to their ſaluation.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Belgia.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. p. 103 BVt two natures ioyned together in one perſon: that is, vnited hypoſtaticallie, or per ſonallie.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 1. p. 108 Vpon the Confeſſion of Saxonie.
                  WEe doe not ſee as yet, &c. To wit, plainelie and perfectlie.
                  
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Wirtemberge.
                  
                     Obſe. 1. pag 108. TO procure the eternall ſaluation of mankinde, that is, to bring to paſſe.
                  
               
            
            
               IN THE 7. SECTION.
               
                  Vpon the latter Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 110. 
                     THe wholl will of God, &c. Vnderſtand, as concerning thoſe things which men are bound to performe to God, and alſo to their neighbours.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 111. Obſ. 3. pag. 111. Obſ. 4. pag. 111. Obſ. 5. pag. 111. 
                     Anie fleſh, that is, anie man, although he be regenerate.
                  
                     The law of God, to wit, the morall law, comprehended in the 10. Commaundements.
                  
                     In the law, to wit, in the morall law.
                  
                     The Scripture of the law, to wit, the ceremoniall law.
               
            
            
               IN THE 8. SECTION.
               
                  Vpon the Cenfeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 218. 
                     MOreouer the penitent are taught: Vnderſtanſtand thoſe penitent, whoſe ſinnes are examined in the Eccleſiaſtical iudgement: who are inioyned to giue a teſtimony of their repentance, til the ſentence of abſolution be prounced: yet ſo, that euery Church may keep hir libertie, both in this kinde of examination, and alſo in the teſtimonie of repentance and, in the adminiſtration of priuate abſolution.
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 219. 
                     AN externall teſtimonie of their repentance. Looke the obſeruation that doth immediatlie go before this.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
                  
                     Obſ. 1▪ pag. 223. 
                     THey maie finde: yea and it maie in deed be giuen to thoſe, which do truelie repent.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 223. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     ANd that the Church: That is, the Presbyterie, or the Colledge which doth repreſent the Church, as Mat. 18. 17. Therfore this can not fitlie be vnderſtood, either of al kinde of ſinners, or els of priuate abſolution, but onelie of thoſe, which were firſt bound by the Presbyterie. For certeinly the wholl aſſemblie of the Church can not be ſaid to abſolue the penitent, which is a parte of the holie Miniſterie, (as ſhall hereafter be made euident in the 11. Sect.) but to gathertogether thoſe who do ſatisfie it, ſomuch as in it lieth, to wit, by the conſent and approbation of it.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 3. pag. 224. 
                     THat the calamities of this life may be aſſwaged by good works, yet not ſo, as though anie good workes did deſerue this mitigation, but it is of the meere mercie & grace of God.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     THey condemne the Anabaptiſter, whoe denie that they who be once iuſtified, can againe loſe the Spirit of God, &c. We alſo Obſ. 4. pag. 224.doe condemne the Anabaptiſtes, although we doe denie, that they which are once iuſtified doe altogether loſe the holie Ghoſt, but yet not ſo, as they doe denie it. For they confound the holie Ghoſt, not onelie with the ſpirit of the fleſh, but alſo with thoſe Satanicall furies, wherewith they be toſſed. Againe, neither doe they know, neither wil they know, what faith is, and who are in deede iuſtified. But we doe teach, that the holie Ghoſt is to be diſcerned by the worde of God, that is, by the Propheticall and Apoſtolical writings, from the Spirit of darkenes, although he doe

transforme himſelfe into an Angell of light: And we diſtinguiſh the gifts of the holie Ghoſt which are without repentance (to wit, the Spirit of adoption, & an aſſured perſwaſion, which is proper to the Elect and to thoſe that are truely iuſtified) from the temporall gifts, of which ſort is that counterfeit or reſemblance of faith, to wit, atemporall faith. Neither do we denie, that the motions, euen of thoſe gifts which are without repentance, are diſcontinued, and ſomtimes allmoſt extinguiſhed, yet ſo, that the verie true roote beeing once planted in thoſe, that be truelie iuſtified, doth perſeuere in them without repentance euen to the end.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 5. pa. 226. 227. 
                     THat priuate abſolution is to be reteined in the Church, &c. but alſo to euerie one in particular, &c. How farre and vpon what condition, priuate abſolution is to be reteined in the Church, we haue declared a litle before in the firſt obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia. But here it is in deed a miracle, to haue that applied to the vſe of the keies, which Chriſt ſpake of priuate admonition betweene priuate perſons, to wit, Thou haſt gained thy brother.
                  
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 6. pa. 229. 
                     THoſe auncient cuſtomes were in time worne out of vſe. Be it that thoſe painfull puniſhments and ſatisfactions, which can not, eſpecially at theſe times, be brought into vſe againe, but that they wil do more hurt then good, be worne out of vſe, yet notwithſtanding this doth nothing hinder but that euery church, as it knoweth what is expedient, may appoint a certeine kinde of Cenſure or Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline, which it may vſe, where need ſo requireth, that the Church maie be ſatisfied, as we haue noted before in the firſt obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia, and hereafter in the 10. Sect. and in the third obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 7. pa. 
                           •
                        2
                           •
                        . 
                     WE giue men warning of this alſo, &c. How temporall puniſhments may be ſaid, ſometime to be differred,

and ſome time to be mitigated by good workes we haue declared a litle before, to wit, in the third obſeruation vpon this confeſſion. Moreouer, the word merit, both in the words which follow (Repentance deſerued that God ſhould alter his purpoſe, touching the deſtruction of Niniuie:) and alſo in other places▪ whereſoeuer either this or other Confeſſions doe vſe it, it is without doubt thus to be taken, for that which we ſaie, to obteine, and to get, as it is often times vſed among the auncient Latine deuines. And whereas God here is ſaid to haue chaunged his minde, we do not doubt, but that our bretheren do vnderſtand it, as ſpoken after the manner of men, as when he is ſaid to Repent him of ſome thing: or elſe it is to be referred to the outward preaching of Ionas. For as concerning God himſelfe, it was onelie a threatning, and not a ſentence decreed.
               
               
                  Vpon the confeſſion of Saxonie.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 231. 
                     WE affirme that the Ceremonie of priuat abſolution is to be, reteined in the Church. How farre we thinke that this priuate confeſſion and abſolution is to be reteined in the Church, we haue declared a litle before, to wit, in the firſt obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 232. 
                     In true Confeſſion there muſt be theſe chaunges, a mortification and a quicking, Rom. 6. &c. This is moſte truelie ſaide, but in a diuers ſenſe. For neither is contrition, or a ſenſe of ſinne, which is a fruit of ſinne common to al, ſignified by the name of mortification (inſomuch as it is a gift of the holie Ghoſt, proper to the Elect) but an aboliſhing of the olde man or of the fleſh, or of that natural corruption, which taking it beginning of that contrition or ſorow, which is according to God, (whereof that place Pſal. 5. 19. and Eſa. 66. 2. is vnderſtood) is by litle and litle perfited in the elect, and is the beginning of true conuerſion, whereunto on the other ſide quickning is anſwerable, that is, a certeine reſtoring, as it were from death vnto life, of the minde, which was before in a manner dead in that corruption: and being perſuaded of the free remiſſion of ſinnes in Chriſt, by faith, it beginneth to hate ſinne, wherewith it was delighted: to loue God, whome it hated, and to conclude, to will well, and to do vprightlie.
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pa. 233. 
                     To ſhake of God, and againe to looſe, &c. Looke thoſe things which are noted in the firſt obſeruation, of the 4. Section vpon this Confeſſion.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 4. pa. 234. 
                     This wholl cuſtome was appointed for examples ſake, and is politicall, &c. We doe thinke that this cuſtome of publious ſatisfaction before the Church is in ſuch ſorte politicall, that notwithſtanding it maie be referred to the Eccleſiaſticall order, and maie altogether be diſtinguiſhed from thoſe puniſhmentes which are meerelie ciuill, and from thoſe which are to be inflicted by the ciuill Magiſtrate. For although ſuch a publique kinde of acknowledging and d
                        •
                     te
                        ••
                     ing of ſinnes, being made in the Church, is in no caſe to be thought, to be of anie value before God for the ranſom of our ſinnes (ſuch leſſe that it ſhould be a Sacrament) yet we doe not doubt, but that this abaſing is both acceptable to God, and commodious for the edifying of the Church, and that in ſuch places, wherein it maie be fruitfullie vſed.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 5. pa. 234. 
                     Hath no commaundement to inioyne ſuch puniſhmentes, &c. But it hath a commaundement lawfullie to binde and to looſe, and to trie by diligent ſearch, which is true repentance. Concerning which thing looke what we haue ſpoken a litle before in the 2. obſeruation vpon the confeſſion of Auſpurge, and is hereafter taught more at large in the 11. Section, where we doe expreſſelie intreat of the power of the keies.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 6. pa. 235. 
                     Are cheefelie mitigated for the Sonne of God, &c. Where the queſtion is of the Church of God, we ſaie, that all bleſſings, without any exception, are beſtowed vpon it, and the members thereof, not chiefelie, but onelie for the Sonne of God his ſake. And theſe wordes, Euen for the very conuerſions ſake our puniſhmentes are mitigated, becauſe that in the Saintes the legall promiſes being added to their workes are not without their effect, but haue their rewardes, &c. ought, as they ſeeme, to be thus taken, by adding to them this interpretation, They are not without their effect, but that muſt be of meere grace, and in reſpect of Chriſt alone, in whome God doth vouchſafe euen to rewarde both the Saintes themſelues, and alſo

good workes▪ hauing no regard to the blemiſhes of their workes▪ as we haue ſaide before in the 3. and 7. obſeruatious vpon the confeſſion of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 7. pag. 236. 
                     I
                           •
                         doth onely pro
                           •
                        unce this ſentence, &c. To wit, according to the Eccleſiaſticall iudgementes and cenſures, whereof we 
                        〈…〉
                      before, and not by anie ciuill authoritie▪ 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      as they be
                        ••
                     armed in Papacie, vſe to doe.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Wirtemberge.
                  
                     Obſer 1. pag. 238▪
                      
                     ALthough we thinke, that it is not neceſſarie to ſaluation, to reckon 
                           〈…〉
                         &c. yet we endeauour, that a generall confeſſion of 
                           〈…〉
                         be reteined in our Churches, &c. Seeing that theſe thinges perteine not to the Doctrine of faith, but vnto the vſe of Eccleſiaſtical diſcipline (of the libertie wherof in particular Churches we haue oftentimes ſpoken elſewhere) we doe not thinke it good, that this lawe ſhould be brought into our Churches, being made, and receiued in other places, beſide the word of God, and the cuſtome of the auncient pure Church, which did neuer require priuate confeſſion of euerie one of thoſe which did profeſſe the Chriſtian Religion, but onelie of them, of whoſe ſinnes knowledge was taken in the aſſemblie.
               
            
            
               IN THE 9. SECTION.
               
                  
                     Obſer. 
                           •
                        . pag. 254▪
                      Vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     BVT ſuch works as are taught of men, what ſhew ſoeuer they haue euen of goodnes, are in no caſe to be ſo highlie eſteemed, as thoſe whieh are commaunded of God. Vnderſtand this of thoſe workes which yet are not willworſhip, and deuiſes of mans braine. For ſuch are wholly to be reiected, as is alſo ſaide of ſuch, a little after, that are not of faith, but contrarie to faith.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pag. 25
                           •
                        . 
                     By taking heede that they fall not into mortall ſinne. Looke the 2. obſeruation vpon the Saxonie Confeſſion in the 4. Sect.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pag. 25
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      Firſt for this cauſe, that is, for diuerſe cauſes, whereof this is one, Leſt that the grace of faith which we haue alreadie, &c.
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
                  
                     Obſ. 1 p. 26
                           •
                        
                      
                     THe Goſpell bewraieth our ſinne. Theſe wordes 
                        •
                     eeme thus to be vnderſtood, that the Goſpell ſhould bewray all kinde of ſinne, yet not properly & by it ſelfe. For the proper difference between the law and the Goſpell, is to be held faſt, to wit, that the Goſpel doth properly, reprooue the ſinne of infidellity, and by an accident all other ſinnes alſo: but the law doth properlie reprooue all ſinnes whatſoeuer are committed againſt it.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 
                           •
                        66. 
                     And deſerueth reward. Touching the word of meriting or deſeruing, which this Confeſſion vſeth oft in this Section. Looke before in the 8. Sect. the 7. obſeruat. vpon this ſame Confeſſion, and looke the 1. obſeruat. vpon the Confeſſ. of Wirtemb. in this Section. And againe after in the 16. Sect. the firſt obſeruat. on this Confeſſ.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 3. pag. 266. 
                     Liuing in mortall ſinne. Looke before in the 4. Sect. the 2. obſeruat, vpon the Confeſs. of Saxony
                  
                  
                     Obſ. 4. pag. 266. 
                     Nor the righteouſnes of workes. Looke before in the 4. Sect. the 1. obſer. vpon the Confeſſion of Saxonie.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 5. pag. 268. 
                     And like as the preaching of repentance is general, ſo the promiſe of grace. General, that is offered to all ſorts of men indefinitely, as wel to one as to another, without difference of country, ſexe, place, time, or age. But we can not conceiue how repentance and the promiſe of grace can be ſaid to be preached vniuerſallie to euerie nation, much leſſe, to all men particularlie, for as much as experience doth plainly prooue that to be vntrue.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 6. p. 269 
                     Here needeth no diſputation of predeſtination. Euen as we doe abhorre curious diſputations, that is, ſuch as paſſe the boundes of Gods worde, touching predeſtination (of which ſort we take theſe words to be meant) as moſt dangerous matters for grieuous falls: ſo we affirme, that whatſoeuer the holy ghoſt doth teach touching this point in the holy Scriptures, is warilie and wiſelie to be propounded and beleeued in the Church, as well as other parts of Chriſtian Religion: which thing the Doctors of the Church, both olde and new,

did, and among the reſt Maſter Luther himſelfe in his booke, de ſeruo arbitrio, and els where.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 
                           •
                        . pa
                           •
                         273. 
                     That they be neceſſarie. We take them to be neceſſarie, becauſe they doe neceſſarilie follow the true faith, whereby we are iuſtified, not that they concurre vnto the working of our iuſtification in Chriſt, as either principall or ſecundarie cauſes, for that faith it ſelfe, as it is an inherent qualitie doth not iuſtifie, but onely in as much as it doth apprehend and laie hold on Chriſt our righteouſnes.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 8. pa▪ 275. Vpon the ſame.
                  Albeit that men by their owne ſtrength, be able to doe outward honeſt deedes, &c. Looke in the 4. Sect. the 3. obſeruat. vpon this Confeſſ.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 9. pag. 275. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Moreouer nature by it ſelfe is weake. Without Chriſt & without regeneration, the nature of man can doe nothing but ſinne. For God by his grace doth create the hability of thinking, willing, and doing well, not helping the old man in that he wanteth, but by little & little aboliſhing it. According to that ſaying, When we were dead in ſinnes, &c. Epheſ. 2. But touching the weaknes of our nature, looke that which was ſaid, in the 1. obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia. Section. 4.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Saxonie.
                  
                     BEcauſe that God left this libertie in man after his fall. Here alſo looke in the 4. Sect. the 1. obſeru. vpon the Confeſſion Obſ. 1. pag. 282.of Bohemia, and the 3. vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pa
                           •
                        
                        ▪ 292. 
                     Therefore although men by the natural ſtrength. Looke here againe the 1. obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia in the 4. Sect. & alſo the 9. obſer. vpon the Confeſſ. of Auſpurge in this ſame Sect.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Wirtemberge.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 300. 
                     WE teach that good workes are neceſſarilie to be done, and doe deſerue, &c. That is, obteine, and that (as it is 
                        •
                     ell added by and by after) by the free mercie and goodnes

of God. Touching which point looke the 7. obſer. vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge in the 8. Section. the 2. obſer. vpon the ſame Confeſſ. in this Sect. Alſo touching the neceſſitie of good workes, looke the 7. obſer. vpon the ſame Confeſſ. in this ſelfe ſame Sect.
               
            
            
               IN THE 10. SECTION.
               
                  Vpon the latter Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 
                           •
                        08. 
                     ANd no maruell if it erre. How and in what reſpect the viſible Church conſidered vniuerſallie is ſaid to erre, it is afterward declared more fullie in this ſame Confeſſion.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 
                           •
                        16. 
                     THe Heatheniſh life. This ſaying the breethren in Bohemia did themſelues expound thus vnto vs in their letters, to wit, that they ſpeake here of the notes of the viſible Church, which are all ioyntlie to be conſidered, that looke where both the errors of Idolaters and heretikes and impietie of life do openlie ouerflow, there it can not ſafelie be affirmed, that the viſible Church of Chriſt is to be ſeene, or is at all. And yet notwithſtanding there is no doubt to be made but ſome ſecret true members of Chriſt, and ſuch as it may be are onelie knowne to God, be there hid, & therfore that there is a Church euen in Poperie, as it were ouerwhelmed and drowned, whence God will fetch out his elect and gather them to the viſible Churches that are reſtored and reformed, whereas Popery neuer was, nor is the true Church.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     But he that looſeth: In what ſenſe we thinke that a true Obſer. 2. pa. 316.faith maie be loſte, we haue declared before in the fourth Sect. in the firſt obſeruation of the Confeſſion of Saxony, and els where.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pa. 318. 
                     By Eccleſiaſtical puniſhment, which is commonly called, &c. We take this to be ſo meant, as that notwithſtanding euerie Church hath hir liberty left vnto hir what way to exerciſe ſuch diſcipline, as is before ſaid in the 1. obſer. vpon this ſame confeſſ. in the 8. Sect. As for this particular curſing, to

wit, of this or that man, if the word be taken for a 
                        〈…〉
                      vnrepealable caſting out from the Church of God, 
                        〈…〉
                      it to God alone; and therefore we would not 
                        〈…〉
                      in our Churches. For the Church vſeth onelie 
                        〈…〉
                      as determineth nothing finallie, following S. 
                        〈…〉
                      22.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 4. pa. 318. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      that is, reprooue him, & admoniſh him 
                        〈…〉
                     .
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Saxonie.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa▪ 329. 
                     The ſentence of excommunication, &c. Looke before in the 3. obſer. vpon the confeſſ. of Bohemia in this ſame ſection.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 332. Vpon the Confeſſion of Wirtemberge.
                  
                     HAth authoritie to beare witnes of the holie ſcripture. This authoritie and right you muſt vnderſtand in this reſpect that the true Church of God diſcerning the Canonical bookes of the ſcripture from al others teacheth & defendeth that nothing is to be added to or taken from the canon of the olde Hebrew, or the new Scripture of the Chriſtians.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 332. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Authoritie to iudge al doctrines and to interpret ſcripture. To this we yeald, with theſe cautions. Firſt, that in the iudgeing of controuerſies, not any iudges whatſoeuer do take vnto them ſelues the name of the Church: but that as the matter and importance of the cauſe doth require, iudges lawfullie choſen, whether more or fewer, whether in an ordinarie aſſemblie of a particular Church, or in a more generall meeting, ordinarie or extraordinarie, prouinciall or generall, be appointed to iudge of the matter. Secondlie, that there be free obedience, and free giuing of voices. Thirdlie, that all controuerſies be determined out of the word of God alone, yet ſo as the fathers iudgements be not condemned, but laid to the onelie rule of Gods word (according as they themſelues would haue vs to do) Now the Church is ſaid to iudge of doctrine, not that it is aboue the truth of the doctrine, or that the doctrine is therfore true, becauſe the Church hath ſo iudged, but in as much as the Church beeing taught

and confirmed out of the word by the holie Ghoſt, doth acknowledge and hold faſt the true doctrine and teach men to holde it faſt, and condemneth, and reiecteth, and teacheth to reiect all other ſtrange doctrines.
               
            
            
               IN THE 11. SECTION.
               
                  Vpon the latter confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 339. 
                     ANd ſuch are found among vs, &c. To wit, interpreters of the Scriptures, that were indued with a ſpeciall gift of the ſpirit thereunto. For as touching the viſions of Prophets, and thoſe extraordinarie motions, and inſpirations of the holie ſpirit, this gift, as alſo the gift of tongues and of healings, being fitted for the confirmation of the church, when it was beginning, is now long ſince ceaſed, after that the wholl Counſell of God touching our ſaluation, was plainlie reuealed, howbeit God yet can, when he will, raiſe it vp againe.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 339. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     And were alſo Preachers of the Goſpell. Such as the Apoſtles did ioyne vnto themſelues as helpers, and ſent them now to this place, now to that: and theſe alſo are no more in vſe, ſince the Churches were ſetled in good order: Of which ſort, diuers are mentioned in the Acts, and in the Epiſtles of the Apoſtles.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 3. pag. 339. 
                     Biſhops were the ouerſeers and watchmen of the Church which did distribute, &c. Taking this name for thoſe, which in a more ſtrict ſignification are called Deacons, and are diſtinguiſhed from them, which attend vpon the preaching of the word.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 4. pag. 339. 
                     Prouide thinges neceſſarie for it. To wit, ſpirituall things, by teaching, reproouing, correcting, inſtructing both all in generall, and man by man particularlie, yet tied to their ſpeciall flocks and charges.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame
                  
                     Obſ. 5. pag. 343. 
                     Now the power giuen to all the miniſters. To wit, of the word, that is, the Paſtours, and Doctours, whoſe diuerſe

functions are afterward more fullie ſet forth.
               
               
                  Vpon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 347. 
                     BY the voice of God. As namelie if at any time, the lawfull ordinarie vocation being quite aboliſhed (as it hath fallen out vnder the Papacie, God by his ſpirit hath extraordinarilie raiſed vp certein men. Which thing when it appeareth by their fruits, then the liking and approbation of the Church reformed being added thereunto, they are confirmed in their calling. For otherwiſe while the lawfull order of calling ſtandeth in the Church, no man may enter into the miniſterie, but by that dore.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 347. 
                     By the laying on of hands of the Prieſt. By Prieſt, take that they meane him that is appointed out of the Colledge and companie of the Paſtours, for to ſet him, that is lawfullie choſen, as it were into the poſſeſſion of his miniſterie, in the fight and preſence of the wholl Church. Now as touching the very rite of this ordination, euerie Church hath it owne libertie, ſo that both alike, ſuperſtition and occaſion of ſuperſtition, be auoided.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 351. 
                     BY laying on of handes. Looke before the 2. obſeruation vpon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia, and looke after in the 14. chap. of this ſame Confeſſ. and the 1. obſer. vpon this Confeſſ. in the 13. Sect.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 351. 
                     Hereof ſpeaketh the Author of the Epiſtle to the Hebrues. Yet not properlie, for he diſputeth of the Leuiticall Prieſthood, which was abrogated by Chriſt, and not of the miniſterie vnder Chriſt.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 3. pag. 352. 
                     Are a long time, &c. Let the reader thus take theſe words, not as though this ſame order were preſcribed vnto all and ſingular Churches, or were obſerued of all: ſeing we neither haue any commmaundement touching that matter, neither can it euery where be performed: But that this is verie carefullie to be looked vnto, that none but he that is furniſhed with learning, and an approoued integritie and vprightnes

be aduanced to anie Eccleſiaſticall functions.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 4. pa. 354. 
                     And Sodomiticall life. That is, of an vncleane life giuen to riot, and exceſſe. as Ezech. cap. 16. ver. 49. chargeth the inhabitants of Sodome.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 5. pa. 355. 
                     Eſpeciallie thoſe, &c. Once againe this is to be taken, as that wee muſt know that this law of working with their owne handes, is not preſcribed to the Churches.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 6. pa. 356. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Such as are to lay on handes. Touching this ri
                        •
                     e looke before in the 2. obſeru. vpon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 7. pa. 357. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     To each ſeuerall Eccleſiaſticall ſocieties. That is, to Presbyteries or conſiſtories, which ſtand of Paſtours and Elders: and vnto whome properlie the diſpenſing and ordering of the Keies, and Eccleſiaſticall Cenſures doe belong. As afterwarde is taught in the fift obſeruation vpon the Confeſſ. of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 8. pa. 357. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     That euery Chriſtian, ſo often as he needeth theſe Keyes, &c. ought to require them. This is to be interpreted by thoſe things, which we ſpake of priuate abſolution in the eight Section, in the 1. obſeruation vpon this Confeſſion, and the firſt vpon the Confeſſion of Saxonie.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 9. pa. 358. 
                     That the prieſtes ought not. Whom they meane by the name of Prieſts it hath bin alreadie ſhewed before in the 2. obſer. vpon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia, & ſhall ſtraight after be repeated in the 3. obſeruation vpon the Engliſh Confeſſion, in which ſignification it is henceforward to be taken in all the Confeſſions.
               
               
                  Vpon the Engliſh Confeſſion.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 361. 
                     ANd is Lucifer. It is growne to a cuſtome to call Satan Lucifer, the Prince of Deuills, vpon a place of Eſaie miſunderſtood of ſome of the aunciet Fathers.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 361. 
                     By open excommunication. There is alſo a certaine kinde of excommunication which is not publique or open, and is vſed onlie for a triall of repentance. Againe, this is ſo to be

taken, that (as we haue oft before admoniſhed) all and ſingular Churches may keepe their holie libertie both in or
                     
                        •
                     aining and putting in practiſe this manner of diſcipline. So that there be good heed taken that the flock be not infected with a contagion of obſtinacie, and that the ſacred myſteries be not caſt to dogges and ſwine.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pa. 362. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Vnto the vnbeleeuing a ſauour of death. This muſt be vnderſtoode, to be the accidentall, and not the proper end of the Miniſterie of the Goſpell, ariſing not of the Goſpell it ſelfe, but of the contempt of the Goſpell. But this application of the ſimilitude of the keies (for the opening of all mens conſciences) which this Confeſſion doth often vſe, ſeemeth to be ſomewhat farre from the meaning of Chriſt.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 4. pa. 362. 
                     That the Prieſt in deede. Touching the name of Prieſtes, looke the 2. obſeruation vpon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia. Againe it muſt be vnderſtood that (when the queſtion is of Eccleſiaſticall Cenſures) the lawful intelligence of the S
                        ••
                     gniorie muſte goe before the Prieſtes iudgeing. That which is ſaid▪ touching power or authority, muſt be vnderſtood of ciuill power, which Eccleſiaſtical functions haue not at all: or elſe, of the authority of making lawes to mens conſciences, which reſteth whollie in Chriſt the onely lawgiuer, according to whoſe preſcript and appointment, his miniſters ought to iudge and determine in the Churches.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 5. pa. 363. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Yea and the Biſhop of Rome: & a litle after, except he go to worke. By Biſhop vnderſtand not him, that now ſitting Pope at Rome is called of other and termeth himſelfe vniuerſall Biſhop, but ſuch a Paſtor, as being lawfully called in the Church of Rome (if there were anie true Church to be found) did with his fellowe laborers diſcharge a Chriſtian miniſterie.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 365. Vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
                  
                     No more then doth the skill of Muſick, namely becauſe it hath a diuerſe ſcope, not that there is no more affinite or agreement betweene the Eccleſiaſticall miniſterie and the ciuill gouernment, then between a muſition and a magiſtrate, when as they do both tend directly vnto the ſelfe ſame onely, though by means diſtinct and diuerſe one from the other:

and alſo both the Miniſters in matters ciuill be ſubiect to the Magiſtrate, and the Magiſtrate in matters belonging to conſcience is ſubiect to the Eccleſiaſticall miniſterie, and one doth leane and ſtay it ſelfe vpon the other, and one aid and ſuccour the other.
               
               
                  Von the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 365. 
                     The Magiſtrate is to defend, not the minde, but the bodies. This alſo is to be vnderſtood, as that notwithſtanding this, the Magiſtrate is the keeper and defender of both tables of this lawe.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 3. pag. 366. 
                     If ſo be the Biſhops haue, &c. This do we alſo acknowledge to be moſt true: but we ſaie, that it was neither lawfull for the Princes to deriue this power vnto Biſhoppes, nor for the Biſhops to take it when it was offered, becauſe the Lord hath ſo diſtinguiſhed theſe two, as he hath alſo ſeuered them the one from the other. And the Apoſtle doth expreſly forbid miniſters to entangle themſelues in the things of this life: yea and the Apoſtles them ſelues did caſt of euen the care of the almes from themſelues vnto the Deacons, that they might attend vpon the word and praiers.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 4. pag. 366. 
                     To debarre the wicked, &c. To wit, by the iudgement and verdict of the Presbyterie lawfullie gathered together, and not by the will and determination of anie one man, as was noted before in the third obſeru. vpon the Engliſh Confeſſion.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     The Churches muſt performe vnto them, To wit, to the Miniſters Obſ. 5. pag. 366.of the word, and to the Elders, and not to ſuch alone as now by the law of man carie the name of Biſhops, as proper and peculiar to themſelues alone, which is common to all Paſtors equallie, as Hierome can teſtifie.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 6. pag. 3
                           •
                        6. 
                     If ſo be they haue anie other power, &c. they haue it by mans law. It ſeemeth the band of marriage ſhould be excepted, the knowledge whereof, by Gods law, belongeth to the Paſtors, and namelie in this reſpect, that it can not be iudged firme and ſure, or voide and fruſtrate, but by the worde of God, according to that: That which God hath coupled, let not man put
                     
                     aſunder: touching which point looke the 1. obſeru. vpon the former confeſſion of Heluetia, and the 2. vpon the Confeſſ. of Wirtemb. in the 18. Section.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 7. pag. 368. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Chriſt. Though Chriſt would alſo be the Miniſter of the circumciſion, yet we would not haue him raunged in the ſame order with others, whether they be Prophets or Apoſtles.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Wirtemberge.
                  
                     Obſ. 1▪ pag. 
                           •
                        72. 
                     IF we ſpeake of the Mediatour of praying. Looke the 2. obſeru. vpon the Confeſſion of Saxonie in the 1. Sect.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 373. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     That except a Prieſt be ordained. To wit, when queſtion is of ſuch Elders or Prieſts, as did attend vpon the preaching of the word. For there was alſo another fort of Elders whom the Apoſtle calleth gouernours, 1. Cor 12.
               
            
            
               IN THE 12. SECTION.
               
                  
                     Obſe. 1. pag 380. Vpon the latter Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     THe thing ſignified is regeneration. That is, the bloode of Chriſt, by vertue whereof we are regenerated & waſhed from our ſinnes. For to ſpeake properlie, the thing ſignified by the water, is the bloode, and by ſprinkling the waſhing from ſinnes and regeneration is ſignified.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 382. Vpon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     THe thing it ſelfe is regeneration. Looke the Obſeruation that went next before vpon the latter Confeſſion of Heluetia. Obſ. 2. pag. 382.
                  
                  
                     But the thinge is the communication of the bodie, &c. that is, the bodie and blood of Chriſt, communicated to vs ſpirituallie by faith, to the remiſſion of ſinnes, and to eternal life.
                  Vpon the declaration of the ſaid former Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 383. Obſ. 2. pag. 384. 
                     Viſiblie ſhew, that is, ſhew by ſetting forth viſible ſignes.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     The Miniſter doth conuert. To wit, as the inſtrumentall outward cauſe, which the holie ſpirit vſeth, to work thoſe things inwardlie, which are preached to vs outwardlie,
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the confeſſion of Baſill.
                  
                     Obſer 1. pa. 386. 
                     TO teſtifie our faith. Hereunto adde alſo the other endes and effectes, which are more fullie ſet forth in other confeſſions.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pag. 387. Vpon the confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     EIther entirelie. Entire, that is, lawfull libertie, ſuch as 
                        •
                     oth agree with Chriſt his inſtitution.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer 2. pag 389. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     They doe alwaies exerciſe their vertue. This muſt warilie be vnderſtood. For properlie the ſacramentes doe witnes, ſeale, or confirme no other thing, but grace and ſaluation. The condemnation of ſuch as vſe them vnworthelie doth not flow from anie vertue or power of the ſacraments, which doth auaile onelie to ſaluation, but onelie from the fault of the vnworthe themſelues, (whereby it commeth to paſſe, and that by an accident) that whileſt they receiue the ſignes alone, and that vnworthely, they depriue themſelues of the vertue of the ſacramentes: and yet for all that they ceaſe not on gods behalfe to be perfect ſacraments, whether they be giuen to the worthie, or to the vnworthie: touching which point, loke after in the 14. Section the 1. and 2. obſeruations vpon the confeſſion of Auſpurge.
               
            
            
               IN THE 13. SECTION.
               
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 396. Vpon the lattter Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     THat is the moſt perfect forme of Baptiſme, &c. Vnderſtand by forme, the externall ceremonie, whether it be of dipping, or of ſprinkeling.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 396. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     We thinke them nothing neceſſarie, &c. Yea we haue vtterlie reiected ſome of them, as meere ſuperſtitious, ſome as beeing manifeſtlie brought by the negligence of Biſhopps, from the Baptiſme of thoſe which be of age, vnto the baptiſme of infantes, and ſome, to be ſhorte, as altogether vnprofitable, as it is clearelie expounded in the Confeſſion of Writemberge.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 400. Vpon the Confeſſion Of Bohemia.
                  
                     BY the laying on of handes, &c. This wholl ceremonie is profitablie kept in the churches of Bohemia, not as a point of Doctrine, but as a part of Eccleſiaſtical diſcipline, without 
                        〈◊〉
                      preiodice to the libertie of other Churches: ſeeing that it is no where commaunded in the writinges of the 
                        〈…〉
                      doth this confeſſion therfore approoue 
                        〈…〉
                      which they d
                        •
                     e falſelie call a 
                        〈…〉
                      which is added, that they which are thus 
                        〈…〉
                      into the couenant of Baptiſme, it is 
                        〈…〉
                      a litle after, to wit, ſo farre forth 
                        〈◊〉
                      that g
                        •
                     ace which they receiued in Baptiſme, is by this 
                        〈…〉
                      manifeſt to the Church, and to them that are baptized.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 403. Vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
                  THat it is neceſſarie to ſaluation, &c. Vnderſtand this by thoſe things, which afterward were declared in the agreement made at Wirtemberge 1536. the 29. of May, where theſe wordes be read: Maſter Luther and his fellowes doe agree vpon this, that by the power of Chriſt, euen thoſe which are not Baptized, maie be ſaued: But it is neceſſarie that theſe ſhould not contemne Baptiſme. And hence it is that they will haue infants to be Baptized of neceſſitie, &c
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 404. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     And holde that infants are ſaued, &. Looke the former obſeruation. We alſo condemne the Catabaptiſts, who doe either forbid the Baptiſme of Infants, or elſe teach, that it is by no meanes neceſſarie.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 405. Vpon the confeſſion of Saxony.
                  
                     ANd that the holie Ghoſt is giuen in Baptiſme, &c. That is, that it is in deed offered indifferentlie to all, but is receiued onlie by faith, and not giuen, to wit, through faith for the workes ſake: And that it is ſo receiued, as that neither faith, nor the efficacie of Faith, are neceſſarilie to be referred to that verie moment, wherein anie one is baptized. Moreouer in the verie forme of the adminiſtration of Baptiſme, we vſe in our Churches to declare, that baptiſme is not onlie a pledge of our Renuing, but alſo, and that chieflie

lie of the remiſſion of ſinnes.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 405. 
                     That Baptiſme is neceſſarie, &c. Looke the 1. obſeru. vpon the Confeſſ. of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 3. pag. 405. 
                     And to thoſe onely, &c. And a litle after, Becauſe that then they be grafted into the Church. How we vnderſtand this grafting looke before in the former Confeſſion of Heluetia, Art. 21.
               
            
            
               IN THE 14. SECTION
               
                  Vpon the latter Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     NOt as they be corporallie eaten. The aduerb (ſo far as) vnderſtand to be vſed cauſallie, for becauſe, as if he Obſ. 1. pag. 413.had ſaid, not that they be eaten corporallie, &c. But in this place and other places els where afterwarde ſo vnderſtand theſe aduerbs corporallie, and ſpirituallie, that by them not the thing ſignified, which is receiued, but the manner of receiuing it is declared, namelie, to be not corporall, but ſpirituall, that is, not of the externall mouth, but of the faithfull minde.
               
               
                  Vpon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     THeſe things be holy, and to be reuerenced, &c. by holie vnderſtand thoſe things, which are appointed to a moſt holie vſe, not thoſe wherein conſiſteth anie inherent holynes. Obſ. 1. pag. 417.In like manner by reuerent, vnderſtand thoſe things which are to be receiued with outward comelines, and in that order, which might teſtifie an internal reuerence: namelie, when our mindes are lifted vp vnto God, not that anie worſhip ought to be yealded to the ſignes themſelues, or that thoſe rites, which are either in their owne nature ſuperſtitious, or els may eaſilie be turned into ſuperſtition, ought to be vſed in the holie ſeruice of the Lord.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     THat which of themſelues they do ſignifie, &c. that is, to ſaie, of the true bread and wine, and alſo of the very bodie, that was giuen for vs, and of the verie blood, that Obſ. 1. pag. 422.was ſhed for vs. As for that attribution wherein the bread is ſaid to be the bodie, and wine to be the blood, euen in this Confeſſion it is euidentlie ſet downe, that it ought to be interpteted by a ſacramental metonymie.
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pag. 423. 
                     And the trueth thereof. By the word trueth in this place vnderſtand, not the fruite of the Sacramentes, which is receiued of the faithfull onelie, neither yet the verie bodie and bloode of Chriſt (ſeeing that they alſo can not be receiued but by faith, to ſaluation) but the bread and the wine, the which (whether worthie, or vnworthie communicantes doe approch) are neuer, in reſpect of God, offered to be receiued, without the thing ſignified, becauſe the trueth of God dependeth not vpon the worthines, or vnworthines of the communicants. Yet hereby it cannot be concluded, that both of them are receiued of euery one, becauſe both of them are alwaies offered by God to al indifferentlie. Concerning which matter looke before in the 12. Section and ſecond obſeruation vpon the confeſſion of the Waldenſes, or Bohemians, and alſo very fullie hereafter in the firſt obſeruation vpon the confeſſion of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pag. 425. 
                     Moreouer abſolution from ſinnes, is lawfullie adminiſtred, &c. looke the 8. Section vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia, Auſpurge, and Saxonie.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 4. pag. 425. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Moſt commonlie falling downe on their knees, &c. In this rite alſo ſuppoſe that euerie Church ought to haue her libertie not that we doe vtterlie in it ſelfe condemne this manner (ſo that the caution be added, whereof we ſpake of late in the 4. obſer.) but becauſe that for the rooting of the ſuperſtitious worſhipping of the bread out of mens mindes, it were more expedient that that ceremonie in moſt places were aboliſhed in the receiuing of the ſignes themſelues: whereof looke before in the firſt obſeruation vpon the former confeſſion of Heluetia.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 1. 
                           〈◊〉
                         426. Vpon the French Confeſſion.
                  
                     THe ſubſtance of his bodie and bloode, &c. The French Churches haue witneſſed in generall Synods, that they after the example of the auncient Fathers doe vſe the word ſubſtance: not as if the very ſubſtance of Chriſt were conueied into the bread, or deriued into vs anie manner of way, either corporal, or vnſpeakeable, or that it were applied

to our corporall ſubſtance (ſeeing that it verilie is now in heauen, and no where elſe, vnto the laſt daie, and we in earth and no where elſe) but to meete, with the ſlaunder of thoſe men, which thinke that we in ſtead of the verie bodie and blood of Chriſt doe place onelie his merites, or his ſpirituall force and operation, whereas notwithſtanding we do teach, that we though ſpirituallie and myſticallie, yet not withſtanding trulie) do participate Chriſt himſelfe, not that either we ſhould cleaue eſſentiallie vnto him, or he vnto vs, but that his life is deriued into vs. Looke alſo concerning this matter in the firſt obſeruation vpon the confeſſion of Auſpurge, in this Section.
               
               
                  Vpon the confeſſion of Belgia.
                  
                     Obſ 1. pag. 431. 
                     AL the operations of the holie Ghoſt are hidden, &c. That is to ſaie, both when the proper force of the holie ſpirit, which is incomprehenſible, is regarded, and ſeeing that his effectes doe exceed our ſenſes. Both which doe come to paſſe in theſe myſteries.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 431. 
                     That which is eaten, &c. Namelie by faith, as it is often iterated in this confeſſion, that is to ſaie, that which is receiued ſpirituallie, by the minde, by beleeuing, as the ſigne is eaten and dronken corporallie. For the wordes eating and drinking can no otherwiſe be ſpoken of the minde and of faith (which are the onelie inſtrumentes of receiuing the verie bodie and bloode of Chriſt) then metaphoricallie or metonymicallie.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 3. pag. 432. 
                     By the eating of his fleſh, and drinking of his bloode, &c. That is (as hath beene ſaid in the former obſeruation) by a ſpirituall participation, the which ſometimes by reaſon of the ſacramentall receiuing, and (ſometimes by reaſon of that ſpirituall life, which Chriſt ingendereth in vs is metaphoricallie ſignified, by the names of eating or drinking.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 4. pag. 432. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Although the ſacramentes be ioyned to the thing, &c. Of the ſacramentall vnion we haue ſpoken before, in the ſecond obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the confeſſion of Auſpurge.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 432. 
                     THat the body and blood of Chriſt are there in deed, and are diſtributed, &c. We alſo doe alowe of this, namely that the word of God is not deceitfull, and therefore as often as the holy ſignes are rightly giuen, that is, according to Chriſt his inſtitution, that then alſo the thing ſignified by the ſigne (which is the verie bodie of Chriſt crucified for vs, and the very blood of Chriſt ſhedd for vs) is alſo giuen to be receiued. But we affirme that the thing ſignified is no otherwiſe coupled with the ſigne, then ſacramentallie. The trueth of which ſacramental coniunction, doth not conſiſt in this, that whereſoeuer the ſigne is, there the thing repreſented by the ſigne, ſhould alſo be preſent, but in this, that that which God promiſeth by the ſigne, he alſo doth offer to be receiued. Therefore we hold that the bodie of Chriſt is not really preſent in, with, or vnder the bread, otherwiſe then after this ſacramentall manner▪ both becauſe it is a true body, being circumſcribed in his local ſituation, and alſo hath truly aſcended from the earth, aboue the heauens, that be ſubiect to our ſight, and ſhall there remaine (from whence he exerciſeth a gouernment ouer al theſe beneath, euen as he is man) vntill he come truely from thence to iudge both quicke and dead. Moreouer we doe alſo auouch that as the ſignes are offered to the bodie, ſo the thinges ſignified are offered to the minde▪ and therefore that the ſignes are receiued of euery one with the hand and mouth, that come vnto the ſupper: the which vnto ſome, namely, to the worthie receiuets, do turne vnto ſaluation, but vnto others, that is, the vnworthy communicants▪ by reaſon of the profanation of the ſignes, and contempt of the thing ſignified, they doe turne to condemnation. As for the things ſignified thoſe we affirme to be truely, and effectuallie apprehended, onely of thoſe that be indued with a right minde and a true faith,, and that alwaies vnto ſaluation, whereunto the diſtance of place is no hinderance, by reaſon of the vnſpeakeable operation of the holie Ghoſt. And yet not ſo as that the ſubſtances ſhould be mingled betwixt themſelues, or cleaue together in any place (for Chriſts fleſh abideth in heauen, and ours vpon the earth) but that (theſe things being myſticallie vnited▪
                     
which in true diſtance of ſituation are ſeperated) we might draw from the fleſh of Chriſt all gifts neceſſary for our ſaluation, and eſpeciallie that liuely iuiſe wherby we are nouriſhed to eternall life. Therefore whatſoeuer they pretend which are of the contrarie iudgement, the controuerſie is not either of the ſigne, or of the thinges ſignified, or of the truth of the ſacraments, or of the receiuing of them, or of the effectes; but of the onely definition of the ſacramentall coniunction, & alſo of the manner of receiuing the thinges ſignified. Both which we contend to be ſo interpreted by ſome out of the word of God, that if their opinion be once graunted, both the truth of Chriſtes bodie, his aſſention into heauen, and his ſecond comming is conſequentlie ouerthrowne. Looke the expoſition of this article expreſſed in the diuers editions of the Auſpurge confeſſion, though not after the ſame manner, & in the ſame words, and for the full declaration therof look in the admonition lately ſet forth by our bretheren the Neuſtadians in the 5. chapter, out of the which our agreement in this point of doctrine rightly declared doth appeere.
               
               
                  vpon the ſame. Art. 1. Of the abuſes.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 433. 
                     For the Maſſe is retained still amongſt vs, &c. The Princes, and Diuines in the aſſemblie at Newburdge teſtified in the yeare 1561. as is manifeſt by the decrees of that aſſemblie, that they by the word Maſse, doe vnderſtand the adminiſtration of the Supper, and do from the bottome of their hearts deteſt the Romiſh Maſſe. And although we doe abhorre all contentions about words, and doe acknowledge that the worde Maſſe is not newlie ſprong vp in the latine Church: yet ſeeing that the originall of this tearme (namely becauſe almes were ſent from the faithfull in their vſuall meetings at their loue feaſts) is long ſince aboliſhed, and ſeeing that this worde hath theſe many yeares broken out into great abhomination, and ſo great, that none ſo groſſe or execrable was euer heard of, wee doe not with out cauſe together with the thing aboliſh the name it ſelfe out of our Churches. As for the holie liturgy there, we think that it is moſt rightly celebrated, where it is moſt ſimply & moſt nearelie vnto the firſt inſtitution obſerued. And ſeing it is manifeſt that the ceremonies in the Romane Liturgie are partlie in them

ſelues vnprofitable, partlie tending rather to an ambitious ſhew and pompe, then to edification, partlie ridiculous, and partlie either in themſelues ſuperſtitious, or elſe readie to be turned into ſuperſtition. Therfore the moſte of them, or in a manner all, we haue in euery place vtterlie ſwept awaie. Yet ſo as that the Church hath her liberty leftin things indifferent, as it is meet, and ſhall be declared in the 17. Section. As for the ſpeaking or ſinging of any thing in the publique Liturgie, in ſuch a tongue, as is vnknowne to the common people, vnleſſe there be an interpreter, the Apoſtle doth plainlie forbid it, 1. Cor. 14.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pa. 436. 
                     A Ceremonie, in the new couenant, without faith doth merit nothing, &c. No, nor yet in the olde Teſtament: yea neither any ceremonie, nor faith it ſelfe doth merit anie thing, but whereas the externall worke being performed with faith, according to Gods commaundement, is acceptable vnto him, all that we teach out of Gods word to be of grace and not of debt. Whereof looke the 8. Section, and the 7. obſeruation, the 9. Section and the ſecond obſeruation vnto the ſame Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 4. pa. 438. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     The Paſtours of the Churches doe conſecrate, &c. By the name of conſecration we vnderſtand no other thing, then the vſe of Chriſts ordination by whoſe bleſſing and power the elements are ſanctified vnto vs, whereof dependeth the wholl force and dignitie of the ſacraments.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 5. pa. 438. 
                     Euerie holie daie, and other daies alſo, if any be deſirous to vſe the ſacrament, &c. Of holie daies is ſpoken afterwards in the 16. Section. But in our Churches certaine daies by publick warning are appointed, wherein if any refuſe to receiue the Supper, they anſwere for it in the Conſiſtorie.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame, about the ende of the 2. Article of abuſes. Obſer. 6. pa. 446.
                  
                  
                     And becauſe that the parting, &c. This verilie is one cauſe why the carying about of the Sacrament is condemned: yet neither the onlie cauſe, nor the chiefeſt.
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Saxony.
                  
                     ANd that he is in thee, &c. This we admit, touching the Obſer. 1. pa. 447.ſpirituall efficacie, not concerning the verie eſſence of the fleſh: the which is now in heauen and no where elſe, as hath beene before ſhewed in the 1. obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 448. 
                     Neither are any admitted to the Communion, &c. This we alow, as being vnderſtood of Catechizing or inſtruction. As for priuate abſolution, how farre we thinke it to be required, it hath bin ſhewed of vs heretofore, namelie in the 8. Section, and 1. obſeruation, both vpon this, and alſo vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pa. 448. 
                     That Chriſt is trulie and ſubſtantiallie preſent, &c. Looke the 1. and 2. obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 4. pa. 448. 
                     That Chriſt witneſseth, that he is in them, and doth make them his members, &c. Both theſe alſo we doe imbrace, as is contained in the worde of God, namely ſo, that this wholl dwelling be by his power and efficacie, and that the fleſh of Chriſt be communicated vnto vs, yet after a ſpirituall and myſticall manner, as hath bin declared of vs before, both in the Confeſſion of Bohemia and of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 5. pa. 448. 
                     And leſsons appointed, &c. How farre we doe alow this diſtribution of the holie ſcripture▪ looke the 1. obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia, the 1. Section.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Wirtemberge.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 454. 
                     That the true bodie of Chriſt, &c. Looke before in the firſt obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Of the bodie of Chriſt being onelie abſent, &c. We doe beleeue Obſer. 2. pa. 454.out of the word of God, and by the perpetuall and euident agreement of the wholl auncient and true Church, that the bodie of Chriſt hath alwaies bin, is, and ſhall be circumſcribed and locall▪ Wherefore, as when he liued vpon the earth, he was no where elſe, ſo now alſo beeing aboue in heauen, he is there, and no where elſe in his ſubſtance, as Vigilius plainlie affirmeth

againſt Eutiches. Yet for all that we doe not affirme, that the verie body of Chriſt is onelie or ſimplie abſent, or that the bread and wine are onlie ſimple and naked ſignes, or bare Pictures, or nothing elſe, but certaine tokens of Chriſtian profeſſion. For in this ſence is there one onlie action of the holie Supper, that yet notwithſtanding it ſhould be partlie corporall, and celebrated vpon the earth (in which reſpect we doubt not to ſay that Chriſts body is as farre diſtant from vs, as heauen is from the earth) partlie heauenlie the minde and faith lifting vp the heart vnto God: in the which reſpect we acknowledge, that the body of the Lord is preſent in the Supper to our minde and faith. But that they be bare and naked ſignes, how can we poſſiblie affirme which ſo often and ſo euidently haue beaten vpon this, that the things ſignified are no leſſe certainly giuen vnto the mind, then the ſignes themſelues vnto the body.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pa. 454. 
                     Or elſe chaunge them into the bodie and blood, &c. We ſe not how God may be ſaid to be able to doe that which is manifeſtly repugnant to his owne will, concerning the euerlaſting truth of Chriſts body, as it hath bin opened vnto vs in the word of God.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 4. pa. 454. 
                     But for the truth of the ſacramentes &c. The truth of the Sacrament we affirme whollie to conſiſt in this, that there be not any vaine ſignification of the ſignes: but that that which is ſignified vnto them by the bodie, is indeed giuen vnto the minde to be receiued by faith. As hath more fully beene ſpoken heretofore in the firſt obſeruation vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 5. pa▪ 455. 
                     But that whole Chriſt, &c. But we ſay by the inſtitution of God, that the body▪ by the deliuering of the bread, is giuen vnto vs as true meate: and that his blood by the powring of the wine is giuen vnto vs as diſtinctlie as true drink▪ yet both of them to be receiued with the minde and with faith, & not with the mouth. Notwithſtanding that by this diſpenſation (which in reſpect of the thing ſignified is diſtinctlie made, and in regard of the ſignes themſelues ſeuerally diſtributed) that nothing is deuided in the humanitie of Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 6. pa. 456. 
                     Therfore to the right action of the Euchariſt, &c. This we do ſo graunt to be true, that notwithſtanding we doe alſo knowe that the ſupper of the Lord is not priuate vnto two, but that it appertaineth to the wholl Church, or at the leaſt to ſome one part of the ſame.
               
            
            
               IN THE 15. SECTION.
               Vpon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia.
               
                  Obſer. 1. pa. 4
                        •
                     8. 
                  TO the people euerie daie, &c. to wit, where it may be done commodiouſlie: but in other places as oft as may be.
            
            
               IN THE 16. SECTION.
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa▪ 506. 4
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      
                     OF this ſort be certaine daies appointed for faſts & holydaies, &c. And a litle after, to the remembrance of holy men, as of the Virgin Marie, &c. Alſo a litle after, in the 17. Chap. Holy daies conſecrated to the Virgin. &c. Alſo, That the Saints are truely worſhiped, &c As certaine Churches doe ſo farre ſubmit themſelues to the infirmitie of them, with whome they be conuerſant, as to obſerue theſe things, though they doe diſagree very much, yea though they be altogether contrarie in the manner thereof: ſo moſt Churches not being compelled by any ſuch neceſſitie, haue without the offence of other Churches, vtterly aboliſhed euen theſe things alſo, not onelie as vnprofitable, but as hurtfull.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 486. 
                     Doe make godlie and Chriſtian ſongs of hir, &c. Alſo a litle after, and ſing profitable ſongs, and ſuch as are free from ſuperſtition, &c. Herein alſo let the Churches vſe their libertie, to edifying: and let that be very carefully auoided in this ſong, which hath hapned in extolling the praiſes chieflie of the Virgin Marie: leſt that whilſt God ſeemeth to be praiſed in his Saints, the Saints being transformed into Idolls, the worſhip which is due to God alone, be againe transferred vnto them. Howbeit they truelie ſeeme to be the wiſer, who doe not ſuffer any thing to be either taught or ſung in the Church of God, beſide the word of God, interpreted in a

tongue peculiar to the people, and in ſinging doe keepe this meane, that the greateſt parte of the time may be ſpent, rather in hearing, then in ſinging of the word of God: and that which is ſung may ſo be ſung, that the mindes may rather be inſtructed, then the eares delighted with any broken muſicke.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 495. 
                     ANd meritorious workes. Although we are perſwaded, that ſuch meritorious workes be not meant in this place, as by their owne worthines doe deſerue any thing, but that they be acceptable to God, and are crowned, not according to debt, but according to grace, yet we can not approoue this improper ſpeach, by what interpretation ſoeuer it be qualified, as we haue alreadie in certaine places noted before, Sect. 8. obſer. 7. vpon this confeſſ. Alſo Sect. 9. obſe. 2. vpon the ſame; & obſer. 1. vpon the Confeſſ. of Wirtemb.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 498. 
                     The order of leſſons in the Maſſe, &c. Alſo we haue declared before Sect. 14. obſer. 2. vpon the ſame Confeſſ. of Auſpurge, why we do worthely deteſt euen the very name of the Maſſe, and as touching holidaies, or faſts, we ſpake thereof in the Confeſſ. of the Waldenſes, or Bohemia, going next before this.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Wirtemberge.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 506. 
                     ANd to comfort them as wel by the preaching of the Goſpell, as by the diſpenſing of the Lords Supper, &c. We doe alſo vnderſtand this without any preiudice to the liberty of other Churches, wherein the Supper vſeth not to be adminiſtred but in the publique aſſembly, leſt that ſaluation might ſeeme to be tied to the Sacraments, or the fruit of the Supper of the Lord be bound to that time onely wherein it is receiued.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 506. 
                     We thinke it is a profitable thing, &c. In this point alſo the Churches doe vſe their liberty to edifying, howbeit we think it the ſafer way, once to lay aſide funerall orations, & with honeſt ſimplicitie to burie thoſe that are departed godlily, ſeeing that it is a very hard thing to keepe a meane therein:

and we ought very carefully to take heede, that not ſo much as the leaſt entrance be opened to the reuoking of the opinion of praiers to be made for the dead, then the which nothing can happen more pernitious in the Church of God, as the lamentable experience of ſo many ages hath taught.
               
            
            
               IN THE 17. SECTION.
               
                  Vpon the French Confeſſion.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 523. 
                     WE thinke it to be neceſſarie. In all the French and Belgian Synodes, it was decreed, that it is neceſſarie for this people, plainly to reprooue thoſe that be vnrulie or impenitent, and not to leaue them to the diſcretion of their owne conſcience, but whereas the lawfull intelligence of the Presbyterie goeth before, ſo long to exclude them from the Supper of the Lord, till they doe teſtify their amendment. By which cuſtome notwithſtanding they meane not to preiudicate thoſe brethren, who thinke that they can auoid the prophanation of the Supper of the Lord, although they doe not ſo farre extend the authoritie of the Eccleſiaſticall Cenſure.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Belgia.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 524. 
                     ANd hereunto excommunication is chiefly neceſſary, &c. Looke the obſeruation which goeth next before this, vpon the French Confeſſion.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Auſpurge.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 527. 
                     THe Biſhops might eaſilie, &c. Three kindes of Biſhops may be reckoned vp. One which is in deed the Apoſtles Biſhop, and is a Biſhop in order, not in degree, and is common to all Paſtours, that is, to the Miniſters of the word. An other is not onelie in order, but alſo in degree, whereby the wholl cleargie of ſome Dioces is ſubiect to ſome one man, and is euen by the teſtimony of Ierome himſelfe, an olde inuention of mans appointment, and not of Gods ordinance, limited and hedged in by verie many auncient Canons. But as for the third kinde, which roueth farre and wide, not onely beyonde the worde of god, but alſo beyond the moſt iuſt Canons, and is in deed Satannical and Tyrannicall, and as yet floriſhing in the Romane falſe named

Church, we doe deteſt it, as a moſt certaine peſtilence of the Chriſtian Church.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 528. 
                     It were for the chief Biſhops gentlenes. We ſuppoſe that this is not ment of the Popes gentlenes, whom all the purer churches doe at once deteſt as that Antichriſt▪ but of that kinde of Biſhops, which in the obſeruation next before this we called the ſecond ſort. Which though it be ſo, yet it ſeemeth to be againſt the old Canons, that that ſhould here 
                        •
                     e hanged vpon the Biſhops gentlenes which after lawfull intelligence, they are▪ rather bound to doe both by Gods lawes and by mans, or elſe they are to be remooued from their Biſhopprick.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     To haue rule taken from Biſhops. It is without al controuerſie, that Chriſt did not onelie diſtinguiſh, but alſo both by word Obſ. 3. pag. 528.and his owne example ſeuer the ciuill rule and iuriſdiction from the Eccleſiaſticall. Beſides, that is alſo a plaine caſe, that the goods purpoſed and appointed to the vſes of the Churches were in olde time giuen not to the Biſhops owne perſons, but to the Church it ſelfe. Now how fare it is expedient that the Biſhops ſhould carie the ſhew and apperance of any ciuill rule and iuriſdiction, it is the duetie of Godlie Magiſtrates to conſider.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 4. pag. 532. 
                     The Apoſtles decree touching things offered to Idolls. to wit, touching that ſorte of things offered to Idolls, which is eaten at the tables of deuills, or by the eating whereof men ſinne againſt their weake brethren. Like as the decree of the Apoſtles is expounded of Paul, 1. Cor. 9. & 10.
               
               
                  Vpon the confeſſion of Saxony.
                  
                     NOt lawfull for Kings nor Biſhops to make lawes or rites, that can not ſtand with the word, &c. And therefore no myſticall Obſ. 1. pag. 533.rites (that is, which carie ſome myſterie or hid ſignification in them) though not otherwiſe impious, as namelie ſuch as ſhould be parts of Gods doctrine or kindes of Sacraments: but onlie ſuch lawes as pertaine to order and decencie (as is ſaid in the end of this Article) & that not vpon their priuate will and aduiſe, but by the iudgement of a lawfull aſſemblie.
               
            
            
               
               IN THE 18. SECTION.
               
                  Vpon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     Obſer. 
                           •
                        . pag. 542. 
                     BVt vpon iuſt cauſe, &c. to wit, taken from the word of God. For we do not think that it is lawfull for men, at their pleaſure tomake lawes concerning diuorcements in marriages permitted, and alreadie contracted, according to the word of God, as they may do in contracts, which are meerelie ciuill: for the Lord hath ſaid. That which God hath ioyned together, let not man ſeparate. But the matter being diligentlie weighed by them, of whome it is profitable for the Church that counſel ſhould be asked, concerning ſuch matters as be not meerely ciuill, the ciuill Magiſtrate maie preſcribe in his iurisdiction what affinities, and vpon what conditions, it maie ſtand with the profit of the common peace, to haue permitted, or forbidden.
               
               
                  Vpon the Confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pag. 543. 
                     EIther to chuſe it to himſelfe, or to refuſe it, to wit, if he be throughly priuy to himſelfe of his owne ſtrength, and ſo that he do not binde himſelfe by a vow, as it is expounded a litle after.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pag. 544. 
                     And women Miniſters, that is, of thoſe, who haue willinglie ſubmitted them-ſelues to take care for the hoſpitalls, and for the poore, & thoſe that be ſick: whome notwithſtanding the Apoſtle doth forbid to be receiued before they be three ſcore yeares olde 1. Tim. 5. 9. And generallie he forbiddeth women all other Eccleſiaſticall miniſtery, in the ſecond Chapter of the ſame Epiſtle.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 3. pa. 544. 
                     They do preſerue the purenes as wel of the ſpirit, as of the body, &c. to wit, reſiſting the burning. For otherwiſe the purenes both of the bodie & of the ſpirit is preſerued in wedlocke of maried parties that vſe it holily.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 4. pag. 546. 
                     To take counſel of the elders, and gouerneres of the church, &c. vnderſtand this of him who ſhould be taken into the Eccleſiaſticall Miniſterie being a ſingle man, as for the moſt part it is vſed in the Churches of Bohemia, yet without anie vo
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      & with no preiudice to other Churches, which

do not obſerue this difference. For this neceſſitie of going to, and asking counſell of the Presbyterie, it is not laid vpon others. Concerning which thing we will not thinke it much to ſet downe in this place what the breethren themſelues of Bohemia did heretofore anſwer to a certein godlie and learned man admoniſhing them of theſe things, that no man maie be offended with thoſe things which be read both in this place, and elswhere in their Confeſſion, touching the ſingle life of Miniſters. The meaning, ſaie they, of ſingel life is euidently declared in the beginning of that article, that it is not ordained of God by any commaundement. Neither do we place anie dignity of the miniſtery in ſingle life. We do without dout beleeue, according to the wordes of Chriſt, that that gift is giuen to ſome, and to whome it is not giuen, for them it is free to marrie. We haue by the mercie of God both married and vnmarried Miniſters, and we endeauour to keep a meane in this matter. The Monkiſh cuſtome, and other abſurd things we haue by the grace of God remooued farre out of our Churches. Thus did they write that they might the better expound themſelues.
               
               
                  
                     Obſer. 1. pa. 565. Vpon the Confeſſion of Saxonie.
                  
                     ALſo we keepe the rules of the Canon lawe, touching other neerer degrees, &c. Our Churches alſo do herein attribute ſome thing to the degree of Coſin Germanes, to auoid the offence of thoſe that be weak: ſeeing that euen certeine prophane lawmakers haue forbidden this degree: and Chriſtian charitie doth commaund vs to departe euen from our right in thoſe things which of themſelues be lawfull, for their ſakes that be weake. But we admoniſh the people diligentlie that they do not thinke, that this degree is forbidden in it ſelfe, that is, by the lawe of God, either expreſſed, or vnderſtood, which is the law of nature. As for other inferiour degrees of affinitie, and whatſoeuer that law, beeing not Canonicall, but Tyrannicall, hath decreed, as though it were ſpirituall▪ concerning corporall affinitie, without the word of God, which is agreeable to the ciuil laws, we do aboliſh & deteſt it, as proceeding from the onelie inſpiration of the lying ſpirit.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſer. 2. pa. 566. 
                     Do agree with the Canon lawe, &c. We would haue it declared vnto vs what manner of law this Canon law is: ſeing that there be manie things, both in certeine auncient, and

eſpeciallie in the Canons of the Popes, flat repugnant to the word of God, and to equitie.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     Obſ. 3. pag. 566. 
                     As mortall ſinnes and ſuch as expell the holy Ghoſt, &c. why we do think that this alſo hath need to be more diligentlie expounded, we haue ſhewed not once before. Looke th
                        •
                      4. Sect. obſeru. 1. & 2. vpon this ſame Confeſſ. Alſo Sect. 8. obſeru. 4. vpon the Confeſſ. of Auſpurge.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame
                  
                     Obſ. 4. pag. 568. 
                     Where as the wordes of Chriſt did ſpeake, &c. If ſo be that we ſhould admit that goſpell according to the Egyptians, wherin thoſe words be attributed to Chriſt.
               
               
                  Vpon the confeſſion of Wirtemberge.
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 571. 
                     ANd that it is a myſterie, &c. to wit, a ſpirituall marriage between Chriſt and his Church, and not this carnall or corporall, and humane marriage: which is not appointed to repreſent that other, which is ſpirituall.
               
               
                  Vpon the ſame,
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 571. 
                     The politique lawes which are the ordinances of God, &c. we alſo do approoue the politique lawes touching theſe things, ſo that the conſciences be not ſnared, and that which in this contract is meerelie diuine, be adminiſtred according to the true word of god being diſtinguiſhed from ciuill controuerſies, whch fall out in marriage. Looke before obſeru. 1. vppon the former Confeſſion of Heluetia
               
            
            
               IN THE 19. SECTION.
               
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 579. Vpon the latter confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     WIth good laws made according to the word of God, th at is, with ſuch as do not forbid that, which god doth commaund in the morall law, and by the voice of nature it ſelfe, nor commaund that which he forbiddeth. For otherwiſe by the name of the word of god the Iudaicall ciuill law might alſo be vnderſtood, to the which notwithſtanding we are not bound in ſo much as it is ciuill, but onelie ſo farre forth as it is grounded vpon a generall and perpetuall rule of iuſtice.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 580. Vpon the former confeſſion of Heluetia.
                  
                     ACcording to iuſt and diuine Lawes, &c. That is, agreeable to equitie and righteouſnes, and to conclude, to the

law of nature, whereof God himſelfe is the author.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 2. pag. 581. Vpon the ſame.
                  
                     And the oth which we made to him, &c. that is an oth, whereby ſubiects are bound to their Magiſtrates.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 1. pag. 581. Vpon the Confeſſion of Baſill.
                  
                     IN the number whereof we alſo deſire to be, &c. Theſe things are ſpoken in the perſon of the Magiſtrates themſelues and not of the Paſtors of the Church at Baſill, in ſo much as this Confeſſion was publiſhed in the name of the Magiſtrats themſelues.
               
               
                  
                     Obſ. 1. p. 584 Vpon the confeſſion of Bohemia.
                  
                     THe people is taught, that they ought to obey no man more then God. This is ſo farie to be extended, as that we muſt vnderſtand, that we ought not to obey anie in theſe things which perteine to the conſcience and to ſaluation, but God alone, ſeeing that the Apoſtle doth not except ſo much as the Angells themſelues, Gal. 1.
               
            
            The end of the Harmony, and of the Obſeruations.
         
      
   