
      
         
            
            
               THere bee many that ſpeake much of Ieſus Chriſt, and beare a faire ſhew of his holines and vertue: but
none are able to conceiue (much leſſe to declare) the ſweete comforts of his heauenly grace, ſauing
ſuch as hold faith in a good conſcience, without hypocriſie, pride, and couetouſnes, and be reformed in
their liues with charitie, peace, and vnitie.
            
            THE HEARTIE CONFESSION OF A CHRISTIAN,
Deuiſed for his owne comfort, written for his remembrance, and now publiſhed
for the vſe of M. H. and others his faithfull and priuate friends onely.
            
               1 Cor. 3. 18.
               Let no man deceiue himſelfe, if any man ſeeme to be wiſe amongſt you in this world, let him be (as) a foole: that he may be (come) wiſe▪
19. For the wiſedome of this world is fooliſhnes before God, &c.
            
            
               The argument of the ſong.
1. COR. 1.
               30. But you are of him in Chriſt Ieſus, who was made vnto
vs wiſedome from God, yea, and righteouſnes, & holines,
and redemption.
               
               31. That, as it is written, he that boaſteth, or reioyceth, let
him boaſt, and reioyce in the Lord.
            
            
               A ſpirituall ſong of thankes-giuing,
with praier vnto God, containing the full
effect of true religion in a
Chriſtian.
               The forespeech with the drift and ſubſtance
of the Song.
               
                  THe ſomme of all the comforts, which I finde
                  In holy writ to eaſe my troubled minde:
               
               
                  Is this, that GodThe vniting of two natures in the perſon of Chriſt, who is our Emmanuell, that is, God with vs, very man as wee are ſinne excepted. my nature did vnite
                  Vnto his Godhead full of grace, and might?
                  
               
               
                  Iu Chriſt who ſtandeth betweene God and me
                  For euer more my Sauiour to be.
               
               
                  Ruling me, as myThe annexing of three offices in the perſō of Chiſt, namely of Prophet, Prieſt, & King, who is our full and perfect Sauiour. Prophet, Prieſt, and King,
                  On me beſtowing euery needefull thing.
               
               
                  Not onely for my preſent conſolation,
                  But alſo for my eternall ſaluation.
               
               
                  I will therefore ſing of his wondrous praiſe
                  For his exceeding loue to me alwaies.
               
            
            
               The Song.
               Doctrine by way of example.
               
                  1. WHere I by natureAgainſt our birth ſinne, commonly called originall ſinne. through my parents fal,
                  Am ſo diſtemper'd in my members all,
                  And bent to ill (which beareth in me full ſway)
                  As from all goodnes drawes me guite away
                  And thus in ſin originall am drown'd:
                  Chriſt is myThe proper remedie is, the vniting of two natures in Chriſt by his incarnation vpon earth. 
                     perfect innocencie ſound:
                  Him, as that brazen ſnake, if I adore,
                  In me ſhalbe no ſicknes nor no ſore.
               
               
                  Application of the Doctrine
praier wiſe.
                  O Chriſt forgiue my naturall infection,
                  Which to thy law will not be in ſubiection,
                  And ſo prouoketh me to dayly ſtrife,
                  Whileſt I am nouſled in this noyſome life,
                  
                  And grant me thy
                        That is diuine ſubſtance, maieſtie, or godlines: as, Mat. 5. 48. Ioh. 13. 15. and 17. 20. 21. 22. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Ephe. 5. 1. Coloſ. 1. 10. 1. Theſ. 2. 12. Heb. 1. 3. 1. Pet. 1. 15. 2. Pet. 1. 4. &c.
                      
                     pure nature to expreſſe,
                  Henceforth in my behauiour, more or leſſe,
                  Til fleſh and blood by death thou ſhalt ſubdue,
                  My ſtate in heau'n for euer to renue.
               
               
                  Doctrine.
                  2.Againſt all our other ſinnes, commonly called actual ſinnes, the proper remedie is the annexing of three offices in Chriſt by his heauenly diſpenſation. And firſt of his Prophecie. Where through myAgainſt our ignorāce, which is the mother of all ſinne and miſchiefe. folly, & mine own ignorance,
                  I know not how Gods glorie to aduance,
                  Nor to diſpoſe my ſelfe in any ſort
                  For others helpe, nor for mine owne comfort:
                  And thus am blinde, and no truth I can ſee;
                  Chriſt is moſtThe proper remedie is his wiſdome, which is the roote of all grace, and welfare. 
                     perfect wiſedome vnto mee:
                  Him, as that faithfull guide, if I attend,
                  I ſhall not neede any way to offend.
               
               
                  Application.
                  O Chriſt forgiue my iudgement darke & weake,
                  Which cauſeth me thy bleſſed Lawes to breake,
                  And ſo prouoketh me to daily ſtrife,
                  Whilſt I do wander in this wau'ring life,
                  
                  And grant me thy deepe knowledge to expreſſe
                  Henceforth in my behauiour more or leſſe,
                  Till fleſh and blood by death thou ſhalt ſubdue,
                  My ſtate in heau'n for euer to renue.
               
               
                  Doctrine.
                  3.Further of his Prieſthoode. Where IAgainſt our vnholines, and breach of the firſt table. vngodly am, and ſuperſtitious,
                  Vnreuerent, profane, and irreligious,
                  Leading my life after a worldly faſhion
                  Againſt the rule of my heauenly vocation,
                  And thus am ſet in an ilfauor'd caſe;
                  
                  Chriſt is myThe proper remedie, is his holines. 
                     perfect holines, and grace:
                  Him, as that holy of holies, if I frequent,
                  My blottes, and blemiſhes ſhall ſoone be ſpent.
               
               
                  Application.
                  O Chriſt forgiue my foule and vgly vice,
                  Which dooth my ſoule, and body both diſguiſe,
                  And ſo prouoketh me to dayly ſtrife,
                  Whileſt I am foiled in this filthie life.
                  
                  And graunt me thy faire beautie to expreſſe,
                  Henceforth in my behauiour more or leſſe,
                  Till fleſh and blood by death thou ſhalt ſubdue,
                  My ſtate in heauen for euer to renue.
               
               
                  Doctrine.
                  4.Moreouer of his Prieſthoode. Where I amAgainſt our vnrighteouſnes, and breach of the ſecond table. toyl'd with care of earthly pelfe,
                  And doe not loue my neighbour, as my ſelfe:
                  But hurt his ſtate, life, bed, goods, and good name
                  In thought, word, deede, and luſting for the ſame,
                  And ſo am filled full of all iniquitie:
                  
                  Chriſt is myThe proper remedie, is 
                           〈◊〉
                         righteouſnes. 
                     perfect righteouſnes, and equitie:
                  Him, as that vpright iudge, if I obay,
                  I cannot hurt my neighbour any way.
               
               
                  Application.
                  O Chriſt, forgiue my violence and treacherie,
                  Which makes me offer others mickle iniurie,
                  And ſo prouoketh me to dayly ſtrife,
                  Whilſt I am carking in this carefull life.
                  
                  And grant me thy high iustice to expreſſe
                  Henceforth in my behauiour more or leſſe,
                  Till fleſh and blond, by death thou ſhalt ſubdue.
                  My ſtate in heauen for euer to renue.
               
               
                  Doctrine.
                  5.Laſtly of his kingdo
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . Where I amAgainſt our bondage & 
                           ••
                        
                        ſirie, which is the iuſt pun
                           •••
                        
                        ment of all our ſinnes. bond-ſlaue to al kinde of miſery,
                  Solde vnder ſin, and ſubiect to all infamy,
                  Falling downe headlong to vtter deſtruction,
                  By naturall, and actuall corruption,
                  And thus am feeble, fraile, and tranſitorie;
                  
                  Chriſt myThe proper remedie, is hi
                           •
                          
                        
                           ••
                        
                        demption and glorie, wh
                           ••
                         the due rewarde of his e
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ding mercie towards vs. 
                     redemption is, and perfect glorie:
                  Him, as that Lord of hoasts, if I doe ſerue,
                  From force of foes he will me ſure preſerue.
               
               
                  Application.
                  O Chriſt forgiue my wretched imperfection,
                  Which pulleth me from thine happie protection,
                  And ſo prouoketh me to daily ſtrife,
                  Whilſt I doe warrefare in this wearie life,
                  
                  And grant me thyNamely by relieuing of the needy, after thy Royall example, according to the power of thy grace in me. Io. 13. 14. 15. Rom. 12. 16. Ephe. 5. 21. Phi 2 5. 6. 7. &c. 1. Pet. 1. 17. 18. 19. Ephe. 4. 7. 8. Iam. 2. 8. &c.
                      
                     free ranſome to expreſſe
                  Henceforth in my behauiour more or leſſe,
                  Till fleſh and blood, by death thou ſhalt ſubdue,
                  My ſtate in heauen for euer to renue.
                  Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            AT LONDON
Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Chriſtopher
Hunt. 1593.
         
      
   