
      
         
            
               
                  
                     
                     
THE GHOSTS OF THE DECEASED SIEVRS, de VILLEMOR, and de FONTAINES.
                  A moſt neceſſarie Diſcourſe of DVELLS: Wherein is ſhewed the meanes to roote them out quite.
                  
                  
                     WITH THE DISCOƲRSE of VALOVR.
                  
                     By the Sieur de CHEVALIER.
                  
                     To the KING.
                  
                  
                     The third, Edition reviewed, corrected, and augmented in French, and tranſlated by THO. HEIGHAM, Eſquire.
                  
                  Printed by Cantrell Legge, Printer to the Vniuerſitie of Cambridge. 1624.
               
               
                  
                  
                  
                     TO MY THRICE-HONOVRED KINSMEN, THE TWO WORTHY KNIGHTS, Sir WILLIAM HARVY, of Ickworth. and Sir EDVVARD SVLYARD, of 6Hauley.
                  
                     NOBLE Knights: When I had read ouer this Diſcourſe, and waighed the ſincerity of the Author, and how iuſtly in taxing his owne Country, he hath laid open the errours of Ours; and not onely ſearched the bottome of our corruptions, but preſcribed a dyet and a remedy, both to preuent and cure their contagions. And ſeeing how cuſtome and euill example hath miſled all ſorts, euen of the moſt peaceable natures, to ſuch impatience,

that almoſt euery man thinkes himſelfe out of faſhion, if he be not incompatible; I thought I could not better employ my idle houres for the generall good, then to make this Directory of Honour and Well-liuing, a freedenizon, and to ſpeake our Countrey Dialect. If I vndergoe the cenſure of a Foole in Print, I care not, my intent is honeſt: I tooke the paines partly to pleaſe my ſelfe, and to auoid worſe occupations: And I am ſure that all vertuous and good diſpoſitions will make true vſe of it. For the reſt, none can wiſh them more good, then they will worke themſelues hurt.
                  Now hoping (my moſt entirely honoured Knights) that you are both of this firſt, and beſt Ranke; as alſo true votaries to all other nobleneſſe of mind, I thought it fitting in many reſpects, to addreſſe it to you: And among other good cauſes, for that you are both Linguiſts, and can iudge of my indeauours; you are in an age, and of an age, fitting to run or be throwne vpon theſe diſaſtrous rockes: you liue at eaſe, with plenty and pleaſure, which may produce effects of hot blood. Be pleaſed to behold from the Port of your felicities, the ſtormes, ſhipwracks, torments, and precipitations of them, that had more falſe courage then good conſcience; and I doubt not, but it will make you both

good huſbands of your Honours, Liues, and Soules: which I thought my ſelfe obliged to aduertiſe you of, as a teſtimony of the ſeruiceable and ſincere good wiſhes of
                  
                     Your moſt affectionate kinſman and ſeruant, Thomas Heigham.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Generous and Wel-diſpoſed Reader.
                  
                     GEntle Reader, the greateſt Commaund or Soueraigntie that a man can haue, is to be Monarch of his owne Minde: And he that is not ſo, runs from errour to obſtinacie, to ruine, and to deſtruction. This Author hath not done like him, who ſeeing his friends houſe on a fire; becauſe he would not be the meſſenger of euill newes, let the houſe burne downe: but doth (as you may ſee) ingenuouſly and ingeniouſly, piouſly and paſſionately (without feare or flattery) reprooue and inſtruct both the King and Nobilitie. By which alſo all that are wiſe, and honeſt, and haue any propenſion to gaine this power ouer themſelues, may attaine vnto it, by learning (in this Booke) what true Honour, Ʋalour, Magnanimity, and Martyrdome is. You may perceiue that ignorance,

enuy, pride, and ambition, which are all off-ſprings of idlenes, were the abſolute motiues to all theſe murthers. And ſome will thinke that God, by the Kings bloody ende, did ſhew his anger againſt him for his remiſneſſe in theſe preuentions. Giue me leaue then, out of my affection to all that would doe well, to admoniſh them to ſhunne by all meanes, this deuouring monſter Idleneſſe, ſo odious to God and good men. It was one of the ſinnes of Sodome, it is the mother and nurſe of all ſinnes and iniquities. No man can expreſſe the infinite miſchiefes that it hath produced. But becauſe I thinke, the falſe opinions of many (who hold all employments vnworthy a Gentleman, but gaming, and ſporting) doe much hurt, I will ſet you downe examples, and reaſons to the contrary. I haue read of a Noble-man, that did ſo much hate Idlenes, that when he had nothing to doe of greater moment, he would make Butchers-pricks, ſaying, they might happily be vſefull to ſome; at the leaſt (ſaith he) they will in the making with-draw me from vain thoughts, idle words, and wicked actions.
                  There was a Baron of this Realme, a very excellent Gold-ſmith: my ſelfe haue ſcene

a faire ſiluer ſtandiſh of his making. A Knight I knew of an auncient family, that made it his daily exerciſe to make nets.
                  Some worthy Gentlemen there are, that are excellent Painters, ſome grauers, ſome perfumers, and the like: all expreſſing generous ſpirits, and diuine diſpoſitions. For the ſoule of man is alwaies in action, ſtill imagining or contriuing good or euill; and euery action that is honeſt is profitable and laudable, and farre from baſenes or diſhonour. There is no man ſo noble or free borne, but ought to doe ſomewhat to the ſeruice of God, his Prince, or Countrey; and he that can make that his paſtime, pleaſure, and delight, is infinitely more bleſſed then other men.
                  Theſe conſiderations did pricke me forward to tranſlate this Booke, who being not bred, nor aduanced to any vocation of doing good, nor naturally inclined to the faculties aboue mentioned, or the like; did thinke this my beſt remedie againſt that contagious diſeaſe of Idleneſſe.
                  
                  It may be, that Critticks as wel as Chriſtians will reade this Booke, and as they doe the holieſt bookes of all, will deride and traduce both that and the Author: But Salomon
                     
ſaith, It is no ſinne, but a glory for a man to ſuffer iniurie, and that ſuch are to be anſwered with ſilence. I doe publiſh it for the good of others, to ſerue as a Pilot to conduct honeſt men with honour, and ſafety to their iourneyes end; as alſo vpon the importunitie of ſome eſpeciall friends of mine. And if I may find that it doth paſſe with good acceptance, I ſhall bee encouraged to make further triall hereafter. If not, I will make my future endeauours onely to content my ſelfe, and remaine
                  
                     Your wel-wiſhing friend, THO. HEIGHAM.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ TO MY LORD DE SVLLY, Duke and Peere of FRANCE, &c.
                  
                  
                     My Lord,
                  
                  
                     THis Treatiſe of Duells, is not dedicated to your Fortune, but to your 
                     Ʋertue, which is the principall cauſe thereof. The moſt part doe runne after proſperitie, I am none of the great number. My eies are onely ſet vpon your rare merit, by which you ſhine, by which you gouerne. It is accompanied with felicitie, and fauour. For this regard, the preſent Diſcourſe (made for the Publique) hath neede of your Fortune: Seeing that the King teſtifieth ſo expreſſely, that he eſteemeth your Prudence

and Probity (ornaments ſo knowne, ſo admired) you may make it of Validity. Your humour is wholly carried thereunto, by the knowledge, by the ſenſible apprehenſion of ſo great a miſchiefe. It ſhall be a Chriſtian worke, worthy of your zeale to the ſeruice of his Maieſtie, and good of the Eſtate. You ſhall anew oblige France, doe not fruſtrate it (if it pleaſe you) of the helpe which it expecteth from your Vertue in ſo faire an occaſion. You are inuited thereunto, a man may ſay obliged, ſeeing that you are one of the eyes of our great Monarch: You ſhall get Honour in this affaire. Faire actions ought to bee produced without deſigne of glorie in time to come: But in doing for the Common good, it is not vnlawfull to encreaſe the reputation of his Name. Let your excellent ſpirit iudge if this action which is hoped for, will not be a reliefe of all the others, whereof France hath had a true feeling. Whereupon I remaine
                  
                     MY LORD,
                     Your moſt humble, and moſt obedient ſeruant, CHEVALIER.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Nobility of FRANCE.
                  IT is long ſince this Diſcourſe of Duells was made. The Publication hath been hindred for important cauſes: they ceaſe now, and here it is come into the light. One of the occaſions that brought it forth, was the death of two Gentlemen of the Court, who were killed in ſingle Combate, the 3. of Ianuary 1602. That rauiſhed me with impatience to this worke. They were both full of merit, of Honour, of reputation. I lamented their loſſe, eſpecially of Sieur de VILLEMOR, whom I knew, whom I honoured for his vertue. Hee feared God, was courteous, wiſe, charitable, adorned with all Chriſtian Vertues, eſpecially with thoſe, which are altogether repugnant to the laſt act of his life. The occaſion of their Quarrell was

feeble, and very little ſutable to ſo many faire qualities, as all thoſe of this time be. Their ruine is to be lamented, it is deplorable, the Commonwealth hath loſt thereby. They were able to doe a great ſeruice by their Valour, whereof they had rendred ſo many good teſtimonies, in iuſt occaſions. Their courage was worthy to haue been reſerued to ſome better ſeruice, then that which rooted them vp. Now my intention in this worke is altogether Chriſtian, without oſtentation, without vanity. The end propounded is, that it may ſerue. It is indifferent to me whether it be pleaſing or not: That is not my reach. If it be profitable to France it will be an vnſpeakeable contentment vnto me, it is my onely deſire. It was made for you. I ſpeake vnto you with all freeneſſe. This ſhall teſtifie my zeale, and my affection, to your good. Receiue it with a good heart, if you thinke good: I doe not regard your taſt which is ſicke, but your profit. There is nothing in all the world, for this regard, ſo raſh, ſo blinded, ſo tranſported, as the Nobility of France. Hee that doth not know it, let him come ſee here the picture. The deſigne, is the ruine of ſoule, body, and goods: the action is inconſiderate ambition: the proportions impatience: the lineaments raſhneſſe: the ſhadowes falſe iudgement: the ſhortnings

preſumption: the liuely colours doe ſhine by furie, and by deſpaire. Take heede of it, none haue ſo much hurt by it, as you: If you know it not, I aduertiſe you of it. They doe in euery place deride your frenſies. They which haue charges and gouernements are protected, and play the Romanes with your furies, doe as they doe, be wiſe: they fight not, and yet haue neuer the leſſe courage. If you thinke to receiue Honour thereby, to be the ſooner Dukes, and Peeres, Officers of the Crowne, Knights du St Eſprit, Embaſſadours, or gouernours of places. I tell you that you are very farre from your accompt; you know not why you runne ſo lightly to death. At what good leiſure you are, to precipitate your ſelues to ſo many miſcheifes, without receiuing any aduantage, Honour, or profit thereby: either death, the ruine of your houſes, or a perpetuall quarrell, be the ordinary fruites which hang ouer your heads. There is all the glory you haue thereby: See if you bee not in great heate: Though you bee not aſhamed of your rages, at the leaſt pity the loſſe of your ſoules, you cannot doe better. To conclude, imitate them which doe not fight, you ſhall bee the more perfect. God be with you.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  Courteous Reader, there are ſome faults eſcaped this 
                        〈◊〉
                      Booke; thou art not to impute the cauſe thereof to 
                        〈◊〉
                      Author, whoſe care and diligence both in tranſlating 
                        〈◊〉
                      writing may iuſtly deſerue commendations; but rather 
                        〈◊〉
                      the negligence in reading and correcting, the Printe
                        •…
                      that time beeing drawne away by vrgent occaſions fr
                        ••
                      his more vſuall diligence. Thus hoping thy loue will me theſe faults as thou meeteſt with them in reading, I 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  
                     Pag. 11. lin. I. it is loſt put out it. p. 17. l. 4. for Parevine read Poite
                           ••
                        
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     l. 24. for prickings read pricking. p. 29. l. 19. for fare read faire. 
                        •…
                      
                     l. 2 
                        •…
                     . for his read this. p. 32. l. 12. for garden read great garden. p. 35. l. for duely read daily. p. 39. l. 18. for whoſe fraile read who is fraile. p. 41. for haue read haue had. p. 48 l. 25. for mention of read mention made of. 
                        
                           •…
                         l. 19. for none at all read not any. ibid. i 22. for geate read go
                        •…
                     t. p. 54. l. 
                     
                        •…
                      and read that ibid. l. 16. for heart and read heart, into. p. 58 l. 20. for co
                           •…
                        
                        read courages. p. 68. l. 10. for the read his. ibid. l 14. for is damnable read damnable. p. 72. l. 15. for laire read fairer. ibid. l. 27. for a throug read the th
                        •…
                      
                     p. 73. l. 4. for would read ſhould. p. 7
                        •…
                     . l. 23. put out the. p. 81. l. 3. for him read thinking. p. 94. l. 20. for phillip read fillip. p. 118 l. 8. for workeman workewoman. p. 120. l. 2. for to their read to all their. p. 122 l. 13. for a ſerable read the miſerable. ibid for irreſotions read irreſolutions. p. 12 
                        •…
                     . for this the hand read this hath the hand. p. 124. l. 
                     
                        •…
                     . for and contempt read the contempt. p. 126. l. 15. for inuite read inuitehim. p 127. l. 17 for euill euills. p 123. l 20. for pleaſure read pleaſures. ibid l. 23. for oues read 
                           •…
                         p. 129. l. 27. for be cleare read be the cleate. p. 136. l. 8. for toyling read 
                     
                        •…
                     
                     iings. p. 1 38. l. 8. for her luſtice read her Iudgement. Iuſtice. p. 143. l. 23 belonging read belongeth. p. 147. l. 11. for daaw read draw. p. 149. l. 5 they like read they likeit.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE GHOSTS OF VILLEMOR and FONTAINES.
                  
                     To the KING.
                  
                     WOnder of the World, Mars of Chriſtendome, Great Monarch, whoſe invincible Heart neuer found Equall, whoſe Arme is a Thunder-bolt, his Diligence Lightnings, his High Deedes Thunder-cracks; that thunder, which aſtoniſh Fortune; You will haue no apprehenſion of our Shadowes, ſeeing you neuer had any of Death it ſelfe, amidſt the horrour, the

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
terrour of Armes; amongſt the ſulphure, the moſt thicke ſmoakes of Canons and Harquebuzes: Theſe obſcure apparances, and theſe dimenſions confuſedly dilated, will bring you no feare. This is the ſecond time that we doe appeare; hauing quitted our repoſe to come to procure yours, and by the meanes of our particular harmes, to repreſent thoſe of France in generall for this Subiect.
                  You are a King, the light of Kings; an excellent Title, a holy Title. Seeing that Kings be the liuely Images of the greatnes of God, and that Truth (an incorruptible Virgin) ought to be their eldeſt daughter; we doe promiſe our ſelues that your Maieſtie (who haue alwaies entirely cheriſhed it, and who in that condition, and a thouſand others, haue made your ſelfe admirable) will not reiect it. Giue then (if it pleaſe you) ſome time from your employments to our holy remonſtrances, to our aduiſe, to our plaints, for the common ſafetie. Permit vs to ſpeake truely, you are obliged thereunto, by this faire qualitie of King, and by Magnanimity, the capitall enemie of vntruth. The Subiect is of the moſt important and moſt notable of the Realme, but

yet which regards that, more properly then all the reſt.
                  Your Maieſtie giues euery day pardons for murthers committed in Duell. If wee did reſpire againe in mortall bodies, wee would craue one of you, which without doubt you would iudge equitable, that is, to pardon vs, ſpeaking freely thereupon. It is a libertie not inſolent, animated onely with zeale to the good of the State, and whoſe motions, doe carry nothing but Obedience and Iuſtice.
                  In the time of Tiberius, they held their finger on their mouthes: but Auguſtus permitted them to tell him his faults. Hee thanked the Cenſors, did them good, and which is more, he corrected himſelfe. This Crowne hath had no Tiberiuſſes, but many Auguſtuſſes. Hee which hath begunne to make the moſt magnanimious Branch of Bourbon to waxe greene, and flouriſh, will ſucceed as well in goodneſſe, and iuſtice, as in the Scepter. A man cannot ſpeake more mildely of ſo great a miſchiefe. Some haue ſaid of old, that Kings muſt haue words of ſilke: But in this matter there muſt bee words of gall, of wormewood, tart, pricking. And what can be ſaid too ſharpely, too

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
boldly thereupon. Euery one knowes, that your Maieſtie hath found this miſerable diſorder of Duells, and haue gone about to remedie it by holy Ordinances, as your Maieſties Predeceſſors Henry 2. Charles the 9. Henry 3. haue done. Euery one knowes how your Maieſtie is diſpleaſed at it: Euery one knowes that this violence is produced by the libertie which ſo long, and ſo wofull ciuill wars (as haue been theſe forty yeares in this Kingdome) hath brought, which haue been ſpunges ſucking all ſorts of confuſions, eſpecially in theſe laſt times, the very ſinke of times paſt, and of all humane malice. So wee doe aſſure our ſelues, that your Maieſtie will take in good part what wee ſhall preſent vnto you in this behalfe, ſeeing that your Maieſtie doth deſire withall your affection and power to redreſſe it.
                  Sir, when any man offends you, he is accuſed of high Treaſon, and preſently puniſhed, and there is nothing more reaſonable. If any Prince of your Realme, or Stranger, would be ſo preſumptuous to giue pardons, he had need bee ſtronger to vſurpe that Iuriſdiction vpon your Maieſtie, and ſo hee ſhould be a Tyrant. If he were weaker hee would be mocked. Yet that is not all, hee

ſhould be rigorouſly puniſhed for it. You would bee loath, neither were it iuſt, that any ſhould encroach vpon your Authoritie: why? becauſe you are the Image of God, that doth repreſent his greatnes and iuſtice. The ſymmetries of his Image, and of his principall Type, ought to be obſerued. In the meane time, you giue pardons againſt the Law of GOD, and Man: againſt the Diuine Law, for the Commandements doe expreſſely forbid them; againſt the humane Law, for as much as it cuts the knot of publike ſocietie, and is quite contrary to the order of all the Eſtates of Chriſtendome.
                  Wee ſpeake that, which your Magiſtrates, your Confeſſors, and all the pillers of the Catholique—romiſh—Church, are bound eſpecially to admoniſh you of. It is for your ſeruice, it is for the common good, it is for the ſafetie of your ſoule. Pardon, great King, giue vs leaue (if it be your pleaſure) to tell you, Your Pardons are grounded neither vpon Reaſon, Example, nor Authoritie.
                  Vpon Reaſon not at all; nay on the contrary, they doe deſtroy, and demoliſh the magnificent edifice, built by diuine Iuſtice, in all her proportions and dimenſions.
                  
                     
Vpon example? In no wiſe: for no Kingdomes, no Common-wealths, doe ſuffer theſe bloody and horrible acts, fitter for the moſt barbarous heathen, then for them that vaunt themſelues to be the moſt Chriſtian Chriſtians.
                  Vpon Authoritie? No: all the Ciuill and Canonicall Lawes are directly repugnant thereunto; and theſe were eſtabliſhed for the common good.
                  Let vs looke into the profit of this ſpirituall madneſſe. Let vs enquire of experience what commoditie comes of it to the Common-weale. So many houſes deſolated, wholly ruinated; ſo many widowes, ſo many orphanes, ſo many ſutes, ſo many quarrels, or rather an eternitie of Quarrels. Theſe are the fruites of this mortall tree, moſt bitter fruits, and a lamentable tree, which groweth continually by his loſſe, flouriſheth in his winter, and whoſe greenneſſe will drie vp his rootes.
                  There is not almoſt any houſe in France, where this marke of the wrath of God is not read in great Characters, in Characters of blood. Nothing but teares, mournefull lights, ſighes and tombes. In what time? euen when all the Kingdome els are at quiet.

In what age? euen in the moſt flouriſhing age of life. For what ſubiect? For falſe imaginations, for fantaſies. Euery thing is ſufficient to make theſe quarrellers goe into the field, be the occaſion great or ſmall. They be like the Naphta of Babylon, which takes fire as farre off as it is preſented. They haue their hearts and ſpirits full of blood. For a glaſſe of water, for gloues, for ſilke ſtockins, for a feather, for a crabbed looke, for a thing of nothing, they are ready to cut throats. They which haue receiued great hurts, are mooued vpon the leaſt change of the time: and theſe wretches bee prouoked by the leaſt occaſion, to go looſe their bodies and ſoules, not knowing how, nor why. Doe they not goe about to kill one another, for that which is not yet in nature, and which they as little know as the day of iudgement? It is an exorbitant frenſie. Whoſoeuer would conſider all, ſhould enter into a profound depth; one folly hath ſo begotten others, what vanitie, what preſumption, what brabling language, what brauadoes of oſtentation? wherefore is all this good? The words are fooliſh, and the effects prodigious, we are aſhamed to ſpeake it. There haue been ſome, who hauing

their enemie vnder them, haue held their weapon at their throat, and with execrable blaſphemies, bidding them pray to God, haue therewithall killed them: what Chriſtian vertue is this? call you this Gentilitie? count you this to be aboue the common ſort?
                  The moſt eager are loſt by theſe light occaſions, many times the moſt valiant, and almoſt at all times, the moſt happy, and moſt at hearts eaſe. What pitty? what deſolation is this? After ſo much care had to bring them vp, euen when they beginne to know the light, and then become more worthy, beeing made fit to ſerue their Prince and Countrey, they root themſelues out from the breaſt thereof, raſhly, cruelly, deteſtably. Men dare marry no more, and they which haue children, will not vouchſafe to bring them vp carefully as they were wont, to make them capable to ſerue you. They dare ſend them no more to your Court, that is the Scylla and Charybdis, where they periſh miſerably; the Altar where they be ſacrificed continually; the mournefull Schoole, where they find death, inſtead of learning ability to defend the life of the Prince, for the maintenance of the

Eſtate. France ſoyled with the blood of her owne children a furious parricide, all horrible with wounds crieth out, caſteth her ſelfe at your feet, tearing her haire, and craues mercy of you: will you deny it to your Subiects, to your ſeruants, hauing been ſo franke of it to your enemies?
                  Then are you well grounded, Sir: The Pardons which your Maieſtie doth ſo often giue, or to ſpeake more properly, which are ſnatched from you by ſuch importunitie, bee againſt the Lawes of GOD and Men; againſt the vniuerſall order of Kingdomes and Common-weales. Wee ſay ſo often, and not without cauſe, that is too well knowne. Wee will adde in ſo great a quantitie: For in one day onely in the voyage of Savoy, your Maieſtie diſpatched ſixſcore, which is monſtrous. It is not ſimply to tollerate the euill, but to approoue, nouriſh, and command it.
                  All Diuines with a generall accord, and conſent, doe ſay, that they which die in theſe miſerable combates are damned: a fearefull ſentence, and yet true. Your ſelfe doe ſay, Sir, and promiſe that you will make lawes; you doe make them, and renew the old ones; but to what end ſerue they, if they

be not obſerued? There be many ſprings which play vpon this worke, many that haue the honour to approach your Maieſty, doe deteſt quarrells in word, and afterwards oftentimes are the cauſe of them, taxing them that they doe thinke are not valiant (we ſay are valiant) for theſe follies, for theſe frienſies, extreame frienſies. Is there any thing ſo ridiculous as the ſubiect of quarrells? But alas! there is nothing ſo deplorable as their euents.
                  Here is a ſtrange miſtery. This iniuſtice is acknowledged, and condemned of the moſt part, and yet if a Gentleman doe not go to Duel, he is deſpiſed, he is reproached. If he goes, and eſcapes the iron, he falls vpon the penne, he muſt paſſe through iuſtice. What a perplexitie is this? What ſhall become of this miſerable man? He hath cut off one head, and out of that ariſed ſeauen others. Such a man is much troubled. There is yet more, and that is, that although they know your Maieſtie will take order for it, and doe make edicts, yet the report runnes, that your Maieſtie doe blame them which doe not fight. This is it, that prickes moſt. The Iudgements of Kings be Oracles, they excite the furics of Oreſtes; no patience but

it is loſt, no conſideration retained. What is all this? light and darkeneſſe, hot and cold. The miſcheife is, that vpon the rocks of theſe contrarieties, many doe ruſh, and are miſerably loſt.
                  There is not any in the world, that knowes what Honour, and Valour is, like you, Sir; none, that makes them better vnderſtood, better taſted by diſcourſe, not any that for his owne particular, hath ſo well practiſed them, nor ſo exactly obſerued, and ſo diligently and gloriouſly acquired the firſt ranke; and none that makes them leſſe obſerued, and practiſed by others in theſe times. You muſt of neceſſitie know the efficient cauſe of ſo many diſaſters. And this it is; the two rare peices, ſo exquiſite and ſo precious whereof we come to ſpeake, Honour, and Valour. By the one your Nobility will get the other, which beeing euill vnderſtood, doth bring ſo much deſolation, by the meanes of 
                        Ʋalour ſo ill knowne, and ſo brutiſhly practiſed. All the world knowes, that the number of your trophies, doe exceed the number of your years. They are excellent tokens of the greatnes of your courage, which hath made you put downe the ſtatues of Caeſar by ſo many great exploites.

There is nothing that your Maieſty can better vnderſtand, then theſe two points, whereof it hath rendred ſo famous teſtimonies, & ſuch extraordinary proofes. It belongs then to your Maieſty to reforme the diſorder cauſed by them, ſince it knowes them ſo perfectly. You haue both will and power, the one from your clemencie and iuſtice, the other from your Authoritie. Your Maieſtie is mooued thereunto by the knowledge of theſe iniuſt acts, inuited, preſſed, and as it were reproached by theſe fit ſubiects. Your inimitable clemencie, hath produced inimitable effects: but who doubts of that, which hath made you the moſt famous Prince of the world, and of that which hath ſaued this Eſtate, hauing made you expoſe your life, ſo often, and ſo freely, for the conſeruation thereof. In the meane time here is a bloody diſorder, which continueth and encreaſeth daily. By diſperſing theſe clouds which will obſcure the brightneſſe of your glory, bought with ſo many hazardes, you ſhall conſerue and augment that which you haue worthily gained. The continuance, and perſeuerance, in doing well, be the ſinewes, and reflexions of reputation. It is that which mooues it, it

is that which encreaſeth it. And the Tombe onely ought to bee the laſt line of vertuous actions: what can be imagined more exquiſite, more triumphant?
                  Let vs ſee the errour of men of this time: raſhnes put on by all the moſt brutiſh paſſions, concupiſcence, vanity, pride, reuenge, enuic, and other furies, naturall to men, they call courage; theſe are the lime, and ſand, but the workeman, and ſubtill Architect is the euill ſpirit. That this is true, doe but conſider that euen they, who hardly doe beleeue a Paradiſe, who are ſo well pleaſed in the world, not knowing any other, and haue ſuch occaſion to abide in it, doe caſt away themſelues without cauſe, againſt their owne knowledge, againſt their iudgement, depriuing themſelues of the world, with the blindneſſes whereof, they are ſtrooke as with the falling ſicknes. And how? by a looſe vanity, by friuolous conſiderations, without reaſon, without foundation. It is a high ſecret: we muſt returne to that which we haue ſaid, that it is the euill ſpirit which forgeth all theſe miſeries. Doe we not alſo ſee, theſe killers early, or late, end their dayes with a violent death? Blood is in the ende expiated by

blood, ſinne puniſhed by the ſame ſinne.
                  It is ſtrange, that making the delights of the earth their heauen, reſpiring nothing but all ſorts of pleaſures, not teſtifying in their faſhions, in their ſpeach, in their effects, any apprehenſion of the eſtate of ſoules after this fraile life (we ſay the moſt part) are notwithſtanding ſo forward, ſo reſolute, to hazard that which they hold ſo deare. But if they doe beleeue a more happy life, after this mortall, iudge what their end is, what their iudgement, to quit their part thereof, ſo without purpoſe. Some ſay, there is great cunning among theſe people, that they make ſubtill ſhewes, but it falls out commonly that they are countermined by a iuſt iudgement of God.
                  Let a man well and wiſely weigh the quarrells of theſe times, he ſhall ſee that pride and vanity, are the two great ſupporters thereof. Are not theſe excellent markes of a magnanimious courage? The moſt part doe avowe, that that which they doe, is to aduantage themſelues at an other mans coſt: a weaknes of iudgement; for if they whom they offend be not in reputation, there is no glory. If they be naughty fellowes (as they ſay) a man incurres a danger

to continue in it. After death there is no more ſpeach of that action; if a man liues, the aduantage is not very great, as we will ſhew hereafter.
                  They are of opinion, that if they eſcape they ſhall be in better eſtimation with the Prince, and with all others. This falſe imagination, is one of the mortall poyſons which venometh, which bewitcheth their ſoules, and rauiſheth them to this deſpaire. Here is a wonderfull conſideration: Vanitie blindeth them, and carrieth them to Iniuſtice, feeding them moſt daintily with a hot throat: this is vanity indeed. If the Prince in the moſt noble aſſemblies would blame and deſpiſe them, they would ſtay the torrent of their follies: but it happens, that in the preſence of him, and others of the greateſt, they praiſe ſuch actions, tell ſtories of them, they extoll them, with applauſe, with admiration. See, ſay they, how handſomely he hath challenged him, how freely the other iumped with him, and being hindred, after they had giuen their faith not to fight (an heroicall proweſſe) ſee how gallantly they broke it, to goe peirce their carkaſſes with ioy of heart, without any occaſion of quarrell; ſo

they do magnifie a thouſand wayes a beaſtly barbariſme, baptizing it with the moſt ſpecious names of vertue. It is a winde that ſoundeth within theſe empty heads, and fils them with falſe imaginations, which takes away their wits. To be eſteemed of the Soueraigne Prince, and of the great ones, is a charming flaſh of lightening which doth penetrate their ſoules. It is a magicke which ſurpaſſeth all the characters of the Cabaliſts, which dazeleth and decayeth their eyes, and iudgements, and teareth a man violently from himſelfe.
                  We haue called theſe effects Deſpaire, and not greatnes of Courage. What will you ſay of them which do hang themſelues, precipitate themſelues, poyſon themſelues, runne themſelues through with a rapier, ſtarue themſelues? Doe they it not in deſpight of death? It cannot be denied, ſome will anſwer, that all this, is imbecillity, blindneſſe, rage, becauſe the puniſhment doth not make the Martyr, but the cauſe of the puniſhment. It is well ſaid, what difference put you betweene thoſe deſperate men, and the others which kill one another without iuſt cauſe? you cannot find any in the leaſt appearance.
                  
                     
That it is a rage, proceeding from feeblenes of iudgement; it may be prooued by a thouſand arguments, and eſpecially by the combate of two new Pateuine Amazones, who ſixe or ſeauen yeares ſince, did fight in a liſt or place railed in for a combate: Oh what an vnnaturall accident? It ſhould bee the Cryſis of quarrels of this time; Cryſis ſent from Heauen, if France would make it ſelfe worthy of ſuch a bleſſing. This Hiſtory is a ſhame for both Sexes; but it is a diſcourſe by it ſelfe. If it be Courage, it is very common, beeing practiſed by imbecilitie it ſelfe: if Deſperation, it is come by example, and that example is reprooueable and puniſhable.
                  Yet there are found amongſt the Iewes, the Egyptians, the Perſians, the Greekes, the Romanes, and the French, women of qualitie generous, bred aboue the infirmitie of the ſex, equall to men, by the fauour of nature, and of nourture. But to ſhew how vile and abiect this deſperate action is, it is knowne that baſe Porters haue been in the field, with the ſame ceremonies, vſing like curteſie as they do, that thinke themſelues Samſons. This doth much extenuate the glory of theſe actions, which the ignorant

doe ſo vnworthily exalt.
                  The Lord de la Noue, in one of his diſcourſes, blames Amadis for decyphering with a loftie, and as it were a magicke ſtyle, a falſe Valour, and Chymera's of 
                        Ʋalour. And ſome which bee neere your Maieſtie, and elſewhere, doe put forward (vpon this matter) things more extravagant and fantaſticall, then the tales of Meluſina, and of the Roman of the Roſe. In the meane time, all the diſperſion falls vpon the Nobilitie, which is the baſis of the Eſtate.
                  Your Maieſtie, by your excellent Vertue haue ſaued your Kingdome, raiſed it again, and remitted it by the very ſame: and now that it is in the harbour, your Maieſtie lets them ſuffer ſhipwracke, who haue helped your invincible courage to take land. All the reſt of the Kingdome doe enioy the benefit of peace euen to the beaſts: It is one of the praiſes that Strangers doe giue, with admiration to your Maieſties vertue and fortune: And the Nobilitie, who haue ſo great a ſhare in ſo faire a Conqueſt, (at leaſt the greateſt number) are onely depriued of this good, couered with blood, enwrapped in a warre more then ciuill, or rather in many inteſtine warres.
                  
                     
There is more miſchiefe and iniuſtice in theſe Combates, then in ciuill warres. Becauſe that in ciuill warres, they flie, they ſaue themſelues, they retire into the forts: in the other, to ſhunne occaſions is cowardize, to ſeeke out the leaſt is extraordinary Honour. All is open, all is ſure, to them that ſay, They beare not a word but like a Caualier. That which is done moſt commonly in ciuill warres by chance, is done in theſe combates of ſet purpoſe: likewiſe the ruine thereby is almoſt alwayes ineuitable. Ciuill warres be againſt enemies, the other againſt friends, neighbours, neere kinſfolkes, brothers. In briefe, in ciuill warres there is alwaies ſome honour for the particular; ſome profit for the generall: In the other, there is neither honour nor profit, for one or other.
                  When there bee any quarrells, all the world runnes to hinder the miſchiefe, the King is diſquieted with it, his Guard are much troubled. What is all this? It is a very ſtage-play: for to hinder all theſe furies, there needes no more but an Edict well obſerued. To ſay that they doe but counterfeit to hinder them, is againſt experience. To ſay likewiſe that the King doth not deſire

it, is repugnant to his good nature. What is it then? a ſenceleſneſſe, a madnes, which hath ſeized, and tranſported the Frenchmen. A ſenceleſneſſe, not to be mooued by the conſequence of theſe follies: a madnes, to follow with ſo much furie that lamentable way of miſerie. From whence comes ſo great a diſaſter?
                  
                     From Pardons, without which all the World iudgeth that this wild-fire would ſoone be extinguiſhed.
                  
                  The birth of theſe Monſters, and their increaſe, bee from the exquiſite workes of flatterers, which hauing finely ſlid, and as it were melted themſelues into the ſoules of Kings, ſince Henry the 2. haue perſwaded them, that it is a marke of Soueraigntie to giue Pardons. It is ſo without doubt, but they muſt be conformable to the Iuſtice of God, who hath eſtabliſhed Lawes therein, as is ſeene by the Townes of Refuge, which were aunciently amongſt the Iſraelites; which were for accidents proceeding of ignorance, chance-medley, and other notable circumſtances; following which, all Soueraigne Princes may iuſtly, and with good conſcience giue life. But for the Pardons which are forged now a dayes, there

can bee found no example, either in holy Bookes, or in prophane.
                  But if they take that for a marke of Soueraigntie, the Aſſyrian Monarchs, Perſians, Greekes, and Romanes, were by that reckoning no Soueraignes. The Kings of England, of Spaine, Swede, Denmarke, &c. be then no Soueraignes; they haue for all that the markes of Soueraigntie common with our Kings. To giue letters of Nobilitie, of Naturalitie, to mint money, to create new Eſtates, to confirme them, to leuie impoſitions, &c. Bee not theſe faire markes, and well raiſed? There is no ſpeach of giuing Pardons of this qualitie. It followeth, that Soueraigntie is not founded vpon that. What is then her foundation? that the Soueraigne doe depend vpon God onely, and not to acknowledge any man liuing for his Superiour. So he is inferiour to God onely. But how ſay you to this, Sir? He doth abſolutely forbid that, which you permit. God will be angry: we ſpeake it for the health of your ſoule. And (if wee did conuerſe ſtill among men, wee would beſeech you, with knees to the ground, to waigh theſe words) if you take not a better order, God will be angry.
                  
                     
Wee will not ſpeake of Strangers from Spaine, Italie, Almanie, England, Poland, Denmarke, who hold the French for madmen, and poſſeſſed with deuills; and doe ſpeake of the Kings of France, (for this occaſion very ſtrangely) and which is worſe, with too great truth. We alleadge onely your Aunceſtours Clouis, Charlemagne, Sr. Louis, and ſo many other excellent Princes. A man ſhall not finde, that they haue permitted theſe combates of the Nobilitie ſo ill grounded. And if they haue permitted them, it hath been twice, or thrice, in a thouſand yeares, and for very important conſiderations, onely capable of offence, and to make a diſtinction of great and ſmall things. The Subiect touched,
                  
                     
                        1. 
                        The honour of God.
                     
                     
                        2. 
                        The honour and ſeruice of the Prince, and conſequently of the Commonwealth.
                     
                     
                        3. 
                        The honour, the conſcience, and the life of euery particular man.
                     
                  
                  It was alſo a Gordion knot, a quarrell without any meanes of attonement, and a miſchiefe without any remedie but extremitie, which ariueth very ſieldome: for there is not almoſt any offence, but may be reconciled. Theſe principall points are ſo

pertinently deduced, by a Diſcourſe intituled, of Quarrels, and of Honour, that the Author deſerueth much glory thereby, as a man that hath ſet downe the true, and ſolide foundations of Honour.
                  
                  If they ſay, that it is an inueterate furie, becauſe that quarrells haue Honour for their foundation: we anſwer firſt of all, that vntill King Francis the 1. they knew not what quarrells were, in the manner vſed now adaies; and that France before that time, was all heaped with honour, bowed vnder the burthen of glorious victories gotten vpon ſtrangers; when as there was no ſpeach at all, of this mortall contagion, nor any imagination thereof. It had as many magnificent Trophies, as Captaines; as many triumphant Palmes as Gentlemen; and as many crownes of Oake, as ſimple ſouldiers; we will marke onely one of thoſe times. When Charles the 8. as a winde, a torrent, a thunder, tempeſtious, furious, pierceing; ouerthrew, ſpoiled, vanquiſhed Italy, with ſo great and fearefull a ſwiftnes; was there in all the earth a Nobility like to the French? was there any thing ſo generous? ſo vertuous? and then there was no ſpeach of Duell. We forbeare to ſpeake

of all the other ages paſt, which haue had valiant men, Demy-Gods, ſo renowned, ſo redoubted, through all the world, who neuer knew this folly. Secondly, we ſay, let there be meanes found to tie vp fooles, and deſperate men. There hath beene no fault but in your moderne Predeceſſors; there will be no fault but in your Maieſtie: you haue the cables, and the chaines to ſtay theſe frantickes: and how? We haue already told you,
                  
                     Not to giue any more Pardons.
                  
                  Yet that is not all. You muſt make known, and publiſh throughout the Realme your Maieſties intention: make a ſolemne Oath before God, neuer to giue any, vnleſſe they be conformable to the Lawes of God, as we haue remarked; and let it be a perpetuall Edict irreuocable, and another Law Salicke for your Succeſſors. There is yet more, and that is the knot of the matter. It muſt be made knowne wherein true Honour doth conſiſt, and Lawes eſtabliſhed therein, and that they which ſhall violate them be puniſhed, without remiſſion, without exception. Beleeue, it will be very eaſie to ſtay the moſt tickliſh; or to ſpeake better, the moſt hairebraind. Others will be

bridled by apprehenſion of the confiſcations, and mulcts, which waighes them ſo downe, that they be conſtrained to ſay, That they which die in Duell, are in better caſe then the vanquiſhers. It is a Cadmean victory, a lamentable victory, lamentable for all Chriſtendome; a fearefull marke of the anger of God, and an infallible preſage of his vengeances neare at hand.
                  There are not any, how euill ſoeuer they be, but would be very well content, that there were Lawes for the point of Honour; and that there might be no cutting of throates continually for a flies foote. They dare not ſpeake for feare to be reputed cowards, or that they are prouident for themſelues; they incline to the corruption of the time: notwithſtanding not any of good iudgement, and truely generous doe eſteeme, or feare them the more. It is iuſtly a worthy recompence for Hypocrites, and euill Chriſtians.
                  Surely, we muſt particularly cull out, what Honour is, ſeeing it is the ſpring of ſo many miſcheifes. Amongſt a hundred that fight for this faire quality, there will not be found two that know what it is. An argument of their ignorance, and beaſtlines,

a worthy baſis of ſuch a pillar. They are killed they know not why. We ſay then that Honour is a quality raiſed vp, attributed to perſons according to the knowledge that is had of their merit. Place is giuen to Authority, and to few, merit to all ſorts of perſons that haue it. Honour is encloſed (as we haue ſaid) with theſe ſowre tearms; God, the Soueraigne Prince, the Countrey, and Vertue: all the reſt is but ſmoake. Let vs ſee, if in the Duells which be ſo ordinary in France, we can finde theſe fowre lights, which ſhould conduct the actions of men. There is not one of them. For the three firſt it is moſt euident, that ſuch actions are wholly repugnant thereunto: God is thereby grieuouſly offended; the Prince looſeth his Subiects; the Countrey her children. Let vs examine Vertue by her kindes, it may be we ſhall finde it there. Is Prudence there? not at all: Hath it beene her cuſtome to caſt men into infinite miſcheifes? Is Temperance there? in no ſort: cannot ſhe ſuffer the leaſt prickings, nor command paſſion? Iuſtice will not be found there; is it not iniuſtice to take away another mans goods? To take away his life, is it not infinitely more? Magnanimity, and greatnes of courage

is in no ſort there. Is not that voluntary, with knowledge, for a good cauſe for a iuſt ende? Neuertheleſſe there is not any, how groſſe, and brutiſh ſoeuer, but would haue vs beleeue, that in theſe actions there is vertue, at the leaſt the vertue of magnanimity. We haue ſhewed the contrary, and will prooue it by and by, more amply. In generall tearmes we maintaine, that in theſe vnworthy actions there is not any vertue; and doe prooue it by an infallible argument.
                  And that is, That vertuous actions be worthy of praiſe and recompence, and haue no need of Pardons.
                  
                  Oh! Ambitious, that ſlay your ſelues not knowing why: let vs make a diſſection of Honour: you dare not deny but it is acquired by Vertue: and that it is her flowers, fruits, and creature. In theſe Duells there is not ſo much as one ſparkle of Vertue, conſequently no Honour: notwithſtanding let vs graunt to the greife of theſe ſicke minded, that there is Honour. You ſay, that you gaine it by perill, that hauing nothing ordinary, you carry away this aduantage aboue the common ſort. You are very hot. There be a hundred thouſand

ſouldiers in France that be not knowne, and of whom there is no talke, who haue been at it, and are ſtill in a readineſſe to goe to it: So this Honour is very common. If you ſay it is their miſerable condition, or raſhnes, that makes them ſcorne the perill: they will anſwer you, that it is ambition, pride, enuie, reuenge, and other blind paſſions that tranſports you. By conſequence, it is not a vertuous action, which is alwayes voluntary, and is her ſelfe, her owne center, and circumference. We will enforce this matter no further, leaſt we recite that which hath beene treated of, by a diſcourſe of Valour, made by the Author of the Ghoſts, it is worthy to be ſcene: we onely repreſent vnto you, that you doe altogether abuſe your ſelues, to place courage in ſo high a degree, (we ſay, that brutiſh impatient courage, which diſtinguiſheth not, which ſuffereth nothing) ſeeing it is common with beaſts. But Prudence, Iuſtice, and the other diuine vertues which be abſolutely neceſſary, be proper to none but to men, which doc ſurpaſſe the common ſort. True it is, that this courage, ruled, and limited by the knowledge, and reaſon, which makes perill deſpiſed, is infinitely more

rare, then the quarrells be ordinary.
                  For one more familiar and ſenſible proofe that theſe Combates be no effects of Vertue, we muſt conſider, that a man neuer comes by theſe meanes to great charges. Though a man hath fought an hundred times in ſingle Combate, he ſhall be neuer the ſooner Marſhall of France, or great Maſter of the Artillerie. The degrees to mount to the holy Temple of Honour, be theſe. To be faithfull to the Prince, zealous to the Common weale, and for that to hazard ones ſelfe, vpon all iuſt occaſions to preſent his life to a breach, to a battell, to an enterpriſe; to ſhew his good iudgement, his prudence, his diligence, his vigilance, and to haue no other end, but this magnificent ambition, to doe well. It is this that makes a man worthy of fare and great charges. This is a Maieſticall-golden-building, rayſed with all his ſymmetries, which doth dazle, ouercome, deiect, the eies, the forces, the darts of Enuie, Time, and Death. Whatſoeuer be more then theſe, doe proceed of euill humours, that remaine of the diſorder of Ciuill warres, as from a miſchieuous quartane ague, which hath ſo long ſhaken his Eſtate. This ſhort breath yet remaines

of it, this dulneſſe is a remainder of the ſhaking. The concluſion of all this Diſcourſe is, that there is neither pleaſure, nor honour, nor profit, in theſe ſo euill founded Combates. Alas! what is the cauſe that the ſauage plants be not rooted vp.
                  When a man ſeeth one toyle much, hee iudgeth preſently, that it is for ſome profit, and for a good end. The Nobilitie of France caſts it ſelfe out of the windowes, pierceth the walls, ſwimmeth ouer riuers, violateth her faith giuen, and breakes her guards, without reſpect of the Royall Authoritie. If a man aske why: it will be ſaid, It is to looſe her goods, her life, her honour; to make her ſelfe miſerable, to damne her ſelfe. None would foretell this madnes but a Frenchman.
                  Thereupon it is ſaid, That the humour of the Frenchman is ſo compoſed. Behold a cholericke, and an extrauagant humour. We aske how long ſince? It hath been ſo but 45. yeares, or there abouts. It muſt be reduced to good ſence, and a little Helebore giuen to theſe offended brains: what means is there to correct theſe Moones? Thou that art ſo boyling hot, cauſe three ſaucers of thy blood to be drawne; (amongſt the auncient

Romanes it was the puniſhment of the raſh ſouldier:) if that be not enough, draw ſixe. If thou findeſt thy ſelfe ſtill in a heate, faſt, or elſe goe into Canada to temper this heate of liuer; goe into Hungarie to ſatisfie this fantaſticall appetite of a woman with childe, and trouble not the feaſt amongſt thy friends.
                  What ſhall we doe? Anſwer they, there is no more ſpeach of Canada, Peace is throughout all Chriſtendome. How doe our neighbours? Some take their reſt; others doe repaire the ruines of their houſes; others ſpend their time to make themſelues fit to ſerue in the time of neceſſity; others doe trauell: What ſhall we doe? That your Aunceſtors did when they were in quiet: There is wherewith to imploy the time, both for poore and rich.
                  You are ſo abſolute, Great King, ſo admired, ſo redoubted: It will be very eaſie for you, to make your iuſt ordinances to be obſerued, and maintained exactly (for this regard) ſo important for the Commonwealth, ſo Chriſtian, ſo neceſſary: ſeeing they dare not kill Partridge nor Hare without your permiſſion. If this obedience doe proceed for feare of your diſpleaſure, you

loue your ſubiects ſo much, as they ſhould expect it much more towards them, then towards ſenſible creatures. If to be in ſuch a matter carefully, and faithfully ſerued of your Officers; may not a man yet hope for the more care in that which is of ſo great waight, and of ſuch conſequence.
                  The Nobility is the inuincible Rampier of the Kingdome: you are the Head, the other cheife members, which cannot be cut or maimed without your notable loſſe. If you do not ſpeedily feele it, it is to be feared that your Succeſſours will feele it. Stormes, and ſtrange flouds, will ariſe, ouerſlow: and this great body of France will finde it ſelfe ſo feeble by theſe cruell bleedings, that it will haue no meanes to defend it ſelfe, no, not to ſtretch out the arme; yet for all that, it is the Nobility that is the right arme.
                  You tell no newes, will euery one ſay. No man doubts of that, they know well but for the Nobility that France would be griped in the clawes of the Spaniards, and of other nations, wiſer then we. Then is it a great impiety not to remedy it. It is as if a man drownes himſelfe; he is plunged in the water, defends himſelfe, with feet and

hands, hath already drunke much, but no man runnes after. Though they would remedy it, if they doe not haſt ſpeedily, it will be too late. Whilſt they conſult at Rome, Sagunta periſheth.
                  It hath been remarked, that in the onely March of Limoſin, and thereabouts, fiue yeares ſince, there were dead in Duell, ſixeſcore Gentlemen, in ſixe or ſeauen monthes onely. How many are there dead ſince, euen in the ſame place, which is but a flower of this garden? How many through all the Prouinces? How many to this fatall meadow, to this ſhamefull and lamentable ſcaffold for France? The liſt is not ſeene, without teares. There haue paſſed more then ſixe thouſand pardons within tenne yeares. The number is vncredible: A ſufficient number to gaine many battailes vpon the Infidells. An irrepaireable loſſe, for a whole age; a brutiſh blindnes, a deuilliſh madneſſe, that all ages paſt haue not ſeene; a tranſport of vanity, which is not knowne, which is not practiſed, which is not tollerated, but in this Realme: which hath been ſo long the light of Chriſtians, now the obſcurity, the euill example, the ſcandall.
                  Likewiſe ſtrange Nations doe giue to

the Frenchmen, more vnworthy titles, then they doe attribute to all people in particular; whereas the Auncients did taxe them onely of lightnes.
                  This blame is very due vnto them: yet for all that, blinded with their preſumption and vanity, they perſwade themſelues that perfection hath abandoned all Chriſtendome beſides, to dwell with them; wherein there is no likelihood; or elſe other Nations are altogether depriued of wiſedome, which is repugnant to the faire order that maintaineth the greatnes of their eſtates: or elſe they haue no Honour, which is abſurd: or elſe they doe not know what Valour, and greatnes of courage is, like the French: which may be ſeen by the diſcourſe following. Let vs reſt vpon this branch, which is for our ſubiect.
                  The Engliſh doe declare, that they haue held all Spaine in awe; that by ſea and land, they haue left glorious markes of their Prudence, Valour, and Ambition; that hauing but a foote of land, in compariſon of the Caſtillian Monarch, they haue conſtrained them to beg peace: and they doe not fight in ſingle combate.
                  The Spaniards in Africa againſt the Heathen,

and many others, doe teſtifie their high enterpriſes, and their lofty courages, which carries them to the end of the world; and they kill not one another in ſingle combate.
                  The Almanes are continually at handyblowes againſt the Turkes, at whoſe hands they doe ſuſtaine horrible miſcheifes, with an inuincible reſolution, as the firme bull-workes of Chriſtendome; and they doe not kill one another in ſingle combate.
                  The Polonians, and the Tranſiluanians be all red with the blood of the ſame Infidells, whom they doe duely combate, and ouercome worthy Champions of the Chriſtian faith: and they doe not kill one another in ſingle combate.
                  For what (ſay they with a common conſent) are the French men good, but to ruine themſelues by ciuill warres? But to looſe themſelues by lamentable and fearefull conſpiracies? But to kill one another cruelly againſt all diuine, and humane right? But to caſt themſelues into infinite paines, and calamities, by lewd, vnworthy, and ſhamefull quarrells? Now all that is contrary to wiſedome, to true Honour, and to Magnanimity. So that the French be conſtrained

to yeild vnto them this triumphant palme, which they may by good right claime, as hauing better deſerued it, then they. But how? Frenchmen, you haue your ſelues rooted it out of your owne hands, by the furies of the deuill that tranſports you. You haue wrought your ſhame, and forged the armes, which haue taken from you ſo many rare aduantages. You ſhould haue a ſenſible apprehenſion of theſe prickings, and deſpiſe the reſt.
                  It is towards you, Sir, that all France turnes the eyes. It is to you, that it ſtretcheth out the hands. It is vpon you, that all the hope is grounded. Take order, that a ſage prudence, a firme reſolution, a iuſt execution, doe grant vnto it, that which is ſeene amongſt all other Chriſtians, good order, and the obſeruation of it. Be pleaſed to eſtabliſh Lawes,
                  
                     That they that ſhall offend exorbitantly, be puniſhed with baniſhment; or make ſufficient reparation, according to the caſe.
                  
                  For theſe actions are directly repugnant to Chriſtian charity, to humane ſociety, and particularly to the moſt gentile and agreeable vertue that is ſeen among men; which is courteſie, whereof the noble mindes doe

make a Trophe. To offend another, without cauſe, of ſet purpoſe, is a teſtimony of brutiſhnes, or of weaknes of ſpirit: as the one is worthy of puniſhment, the other ſhould haue need of a ſeuere correction: without doubt, if inſolency were rigorouſly puniſhed, it would bury quarrells, for as much as they doe proceed from iniuries, which be moſt commonly flowers and fruites of inſolency and preſumption. This is dayly ſeene. There be ſome that haue courage, and haue beene in good buſineſſes, for the ſeruice of your Maieſty, or elſewhere. But, they bee ſo proud, that they deſpiſe young men, that haue neuer beene in occaſions, or that doe not beare the markes thereof. It is the time that hath denied them this glory, and it doth not follow, but that they may haue as much courage, as euery honeſt man may haue, that is faithfull to his King, and a friend of vertue. For this cauſe is this contempt to be blamed, yea, worthy to be puniſhed,
                  
                     That no man may be diſhonoured, though he doe not fight by way of challenge, hauing beene offended; or beleeuing it, vntill the gouernours of Prouinces, Seneſchalls, or others, haue beene aduertiſed thereof,

and haue ſought all the wayes to make them accord.
                  
                  Some will ſay thereupon, How? will you haue the Challenger goe and complaine, hauing beene offended, and demaund reparation of the iniury, after the faſhion of the vulgar? To what doe you bring him? If you thinke that new, repreſent to your ſelfe, that when Duells beganne to be practiſed, they were new too, and brought to a cuſtome by the tolleration of Princes. So we muſt accuſtome our ſelues to this law, ſeeing it is moſt iuſt, moſt neceſſary, and that it is the Soueraigne that commands it, who is the Head of Iuſtice and Pollicie: without doubt, if the firſt point be well obſerued, they will be wiſer, and few will goe to the ſecond. But if we meete with inſolent people, ſuch as are altogether inſupportable, againſt ſuch, we ſhould be permitted to helpe our ſelues with all: for they are not worthy to conuerſe with men, there is neither Sea-card, nor North, can conduct them. Some will ſay, there be wranglers, who taking aduantages, will aske in what ranke we doe put them. We anſwer, that if the contention doe touch the good manners, the conſcience, or the Honour of a Body, it

ought to be put in the firſt point. If it bee honeſt, and that it doth not regard theſe three heads, we muſt laugh as others doe, learne to talke, or to be patient: and he that is too weake, ſhall take ſome refrigeratiue drugs, or elſe he muſt depriue himſelfe of the ſocietie of men.
                  
                     Let them that ſhall challenge be condemned to die, and let their goods be confiſcate.
                  
                  They are a thouſand times more puniſhable, then thoſe that are troubled, beeing invenomed by the imagination of the offence. For theſe there is ſome feeble ſhadow of excuſe, but none for the other: whether they fight or no, they be alwaies the principall inſtruments of the diſaſter. The firſt motiues be not in the power of man, whoſe fraile choller and blood, doe ſoueraignly command him. Being out of himſelfe full of blindneſſe, he ſweares his owne ruine, and vſes himſelfe like a ſtranger, as an enemie, as being no more his owne; but his furious paſſions, and almoſt alwayes depending more of an others opinion, then of his owne knowledge, and leaſt of all of reaſon. He is for that time, in ſome ſort excuſable. Let men that are wronged, or doe beleeue they are wronged, vpon heate

runne to their ſword, be poſſeſſed, be tranſported with fury, and goe about to hurt themſelues; that is humane, and practiſed euery where. But if they go to their death, after they haue had time to digeſt their choller, vpon cold blood, againſt their own conſcience, knowing that they doe cuill, that is deuilliſh, and not practiſed in any place of the World but in this Realme. From this let vs draw a conſequence. The parties offended, are not without blame, and without crime, when they come to ſuch effects leſſe then ought they to be ſo, who doe execute them not being wronged. This conſideration hath made, that ſince the laſt Edict of Fountaine-blean, no man hath fought with a ſecond; at leaſt, very few: for they haue been aſhamed to put in hazard the life of their friend, without any occaſion. In fight it is neceſſary that the blood be troubled. Now this is a beginning to take the Duell quite away: the reaſon, becauſe that heretofore it would haue been ſuſpected, yea a ſhame, to ſight without a ſecond. So your Edict, and the knowledge of this folly haue corrected this abuſe. The ſeconds then are taken away as a barbarous thing. The concluſion of this ſpeach is notable.

Euen as it hath been a cuſtome not to employ a mans friend in a matter of iniuſtice and impietie; ſo may a man accuſtome himſelfe to demaund reaſon of wrongs, as we haue ſaid. Time brings all, order corrects all, and miſchiefes goe vp and downe by degrees.
                  
                     Let euery ſeruant that ſhall carry a Bill or Challenge of defiance be hanged.
                  
                  When they haue been aſhamed to lead their friends into the Churchyard, and to employ them, they haue recourſe to the bill of defiance. If the remedie that wee propound be not ſufficient, there is no need to ſeeke any other.
                  
                     Let them that ſhall fight in Duell be degraded from Nobility, and them and their poſteritie declared infamous: let their houſes bee raſed, and their goods confiſcate. They that ſhall die, let them not be buried, but drawne through the ſtreetes, and then caſt vpon the lay-ſtall, the common dunghill of a Towne.
                  
                  There muſt be theſe ſtrong ſluces to ſtay the ouerflowing of theſe violent torrents. For extreame miſchiefes, extreame remedies. The example will bring feare to generous ſoules; and apprehenſion of the ignominie

for their name, and for their houſes, will preuaile more with them then death. So in a certaine towne of Greece, the women tranſported with a deuilliſh madneſſe, did hang themſelues ſo ſtrangely, that they knew not how to remedie it. They deuiſed to make them be drawne after their death ſtarke naked through the Towne. This villanous and infamous ſpectacle, ſtayed the deſpaire of others.
                  
                     It were very fitting that Fencing were forbidden.
                  
                  It is the mother of pride, of raſhneſſe, of vanity, for them that haue more force, or diſpoſition then others, or both; and makes them (with hope of grace) more outragious, and more inſolent. For ought elſe it is vnprofitable; for a man is neuer helped therby in Combates, in troupe either againſt ſtrangers or his owne. Yet it may bee vſed for an exerciſe as Tennis, and ſuch like, and would doe no great hurt, if the order which we propound were obſerued.
                  It is well enough known, what miſchiefe this exerciſe hath brought. The Fencers at Rome, deſperate men, condemned men, made the people ſport with the loſſe of their liues. Theſe new Fencers make the

enemies of the Eſtate merry, and make the people of France to weepe. They are full of winde and ſmoake with theſe great words, to ward, to ſhift away, to enter, to plunge, or thruſt farre into, to incartade vpon the left foot, to digge into, to freeboote. They thinke all the world are indebted to them. Can there be any thing more weake, more impertinent?
                  Theſe, Sir, are directions that we thinke fit, to ſmother quite this wicked monſter, if they be well obſerued, with denying of pardon, and other lawes neceſſary, which your Maieſtie can much better eſtabliſh, aſſiſted with the Officers of her Crowne, and other Lords of her Counſell.
                  They that dwell neere the violent fall of waters from the riuer Nile, doe not heare the noyſe; and the wife of the Tyrant of Syracuſa, perceiued not the default of her husband: the one is an effect of cuſtome, the other of ignorance. And a pernitious habite, for want of iudgement, hath made the French deafe, and obſtructed, without reaſon, without ſence, like frantickes, like them that haue the Lethargie; not willing to vnderſtand, not able to comprehend the deplorable eſtate that vanity hath brought them vnto.
                  
                     
The Frenchmen be worſe then the Heathen in time paſt. They ſacrificed euery yeare to their gods ſome humane creature: theſe doe ſacrifice many euery day, to their blindnes, and to their furies, which they hold for their god. They did it to appeaſe their anger: theſe doe it to kindle it more. They did it for the conſeruation of the publique: theſe for the ruine of it.
                  They are more ſauage then the ſauages of America. They eate men, but they are either ſtrangers, or their enemies: theſe kill themſelues among themſelues, kinred, neighbours, friends, conuerſing together; and then are eaten by confiſcations and mulcts. They doe it, not knowing the miſchiefe; theſe doe it, knowing and reproouing it. They doe it vpon ſome cauſe; theſe doe it for the winde, for a ſhadow, for imagination.
                  They that doe wickedneſſe, hide themſelues, ſeeke darkenes: and the French committing execrable murthers, for which there is neither Diuine nor Humane ground, doe runne vpon the Theatre, in the ſight of the Sunne, before the houſe of the Flower de Luce to ſacrifice themſelues, to the end that the wicked fact being more manifeſt, more

exemplary, may be more ſcandalous, and conſequently, leſſe pardonable before God and Men. This is to cut a purſe before the Prouoſt, to coyne money in open market, and to ſerue as a falſe witneſſe before the Magiſtrate. In a word, it is properly to mocke God and their King.
                  Who be they that precipitate themſelues by theſe miſchieuous occaſions? The creame, the quinteſſence, the floure, the ſuttle of the ſuttle; they that tearme themſelues of the race of Iupiter, who deſpiſe all the reſt as the lees and the mire; and diſcourſe ſo hotly of Honour, of Vertue, of Reputation. But yet ſuch as are the moſt firme, and moſt neceſſarie pillers of the Eſtate. This is extrauagant. Yet they are oftentimes thoſe, who haue reaſon to content themſelues with the reputation which they haue bought by a thouſand hazards, in iuſt and lawfull occaſions. Yet for all that, they caſt themſelues with bowed heads, vpon theſe which they embrace with paſſion, as if they were famiſhed for Honour; whereas they ſhould enioy that which they haue acquired with ſo good aſſurance. They do like Aeſop his dog, they leaue the body for the ſhadow, the ſolid glory for that which

is fantaſticall. They likewiſe runne the fortune of Ixion, who in ſtead of Iuno, had to doe with a cloud. In the end, all theſe proud vanities bee reduced into clouds of vanity, and moſt commonly the miſerable wheele of ſhame and loſſe remaines with them for a full recompence.
                  We are ſimple ſhadowes, and cloudes, that haue no diſguiſe. Your Maieſty will not be diſpleaſed, Sir, that we ſpeake without flattery; you neuer loued it. They doe not often tell Kings the truth. It is with that, as it was ere while with your treaſure, when as fifty came to fiue. They diſguiſe it. They plaiſter it, before it hath paſſed ſo many hands, ſo many conuerts, with a lie, with paſſion, with cunning; you haue nothing but the ſhadow. Flattery is a mortall plague, cheifely in a man of ſtate, that is in credit with his Maſter; ſuch a one neuer ſpeakes true. A coozening of greateſt conſequence, and worthy of puniſhment. Theſe paraſites, are very pernicious. We then that haue nothing but ſimplicity will ſpeake truely.
                  They call the Kings of France moſt Chriſtian; ô excellent, ô venerable title! It ſurpaſſeth the magnificence of all the Diadems,

and Thyaras of the world. This Diuine title hath beene attributed, for ſome great cauſes, to your auncient predeceſſors. They had well deſerued it. But the diſorders, the Eclipſes of ciuill warres, haue much ſhaken, and much obſcured the foundations and light thereof. Among ſuch a prodigious multitude of arguments, as ſtrangers aleadge, this holds the firſt ranke, that the Nobility is abandoned to butchery by the Prince. It is true (as we haue ſaid) that your Maieſty haue found this diſorder, and many others, which it deſireth to take away: It is your Maieſties greateſt ambition. What marke is it (ſay they) of moſt Chriſtian, to ſuffer ſuch impieties? This is the ſhamefull reproach, they giue to all France.
                  They be miſerable ſacrifices, that you offer daily ſo freely to death. Is it not becauſe you are more aſhamed of the cenſure of mad men, who haue put dreames and giddy conceits, for principles of Honour, then for feare to be rebells to God? You would not doe that for his glory, which you doe for the opinion of braine-ſickemen. You would not for that ſuffer a ſcratch. And you are paid according to your

deſerts: For after your death, the moſt part of your inward friends, and euen thoſe, who in appearance doe fauour ſo wicked a cuſtome, doe make a conſcience to aſſiſt at your funeralls, to lament you, to ſpeake of you: yea thoſe, who the next day after, would hazard themſelues for as feeble an occaſion. They lift vp the ſhoulders, turne the eyes, knock with hands, and feet, grieuing and deploring this end. You are to feele eternall puniſhment, and you make your memorie alſo infamous to poſteritie. Had it not been better neuer to haue ſeene light? You are farre from your accompt, if you beleeue that your name is thereby more famous, or more illuſtrious. If you knewe the iudgement that they make of your end, you would die yet an other time. Some doe attribute theſe effects to enuie, others to reuenge, others to a foule and furious paſſion of loue: the moſt part, to the hope to remaine victorious, by the aduantages of naturall force, or dexteritie: ſome to the hope to be hindred. There is no mention of vertue in theſe actions. How abiect, how ſhamefull a thing it is? And all men generally ſpeakes of them, as it were of dogs and beares that ſhould ſtrangle one an

other. Is it not a triumphant Epitaph to celebrate the laſt effects of men? what men? Such as thinke themſelues aboue other men, by brutiſh compariſons? Proude ſoules, mad ſoules. If you could againe reueſt your bodies, how you would deſpiſe theſe actions, how you would be offended with your ſelues, how you would hate your falſe iudgements, and your abhominable reſolutions. No man praiſeth you after your death, no man eſteemes you, few bewailes you, if it be not in conſideration of the loſſe of your ſaluation; and then you are alwayes blamed, for beeing ſo irreligious. If ſuch an action were vertuous, the Hiſtoriographers would make volumes thereof, would praiſe you, would exalt you; you ſhould finde Homers, and Virgils. But alas! your hiſtory is, as of people loſt. If any bewaile you, it is as of damned ſoules. (Theſe words ſhould be an earth-quake, for theſe miſerable quarrellers.) If any write your accident, it is for an example of terrour in time to come; a mirrour of temerity, and of the corruption of the age; a teſtimony of the wrath of God, and not to approoue, much leſſe to exalt ſo execrable a folly.
                  You that be vpon the bloody Theatre of

France: in danger euery moment, to repreſent pittifull tragedies of your ſelues, conſider this: Euery thing is done to ſome end; euery ende is profitable, delectable, or honourable. Let vs ſee for your contentment, what ende they propound to themſelues, that hazard themſelues, without iuſt cauſe in Duell. If both remaine there, men preſently play vpon this great ſtring. It is for their ſinnes; it is a iuſt iudgement of God. If the one die, and the other remaine conquerour, let vs exactly calculate, the honour and profit that they reape thereby. For him that is dead, there is none of theſe three ends: Let vs enquire of the conquerour, if he doe better his condition thereby? He anſwers, that he is forthwith in danger of his life, executed if they take him; in the meane time condemned, proclaimed, hang'd in picture. What a hard thing is this to digeſt? he muſt haue recourſe to his Soueraigne; the onely remedy is a Pardon. He muſt haue it whatſoeuer it coſt, with ſo much toyle, with ſo many ſubmiſſions begging the fauour of great ones. He muſt paſſe it with ſo much feare, with ſo much diſquiet, with ſo many difficulties; it is the true image of hell. They

that haue paſſed through the examination of Father-Confeſſors of the redoubtable Selletta, would ſound you out a lofty word thereupon. This is not all; he muſt haue wherewithall to paſſe it. There bee the greifes: For this effect, the coſts, and the mulcts, be another kinde of Duell, another cut-throate. From thence proceedes the totall ruine of houſes. With all theſe puniſhments, there were yet ſome forme of reſpite, if the roote of the miſcheife were pulled vp. But for a heape of glory, and felicitie, there he is all his life time, with a quarrell vpon his armes, againſt the kinred of him that died, a mortall and irreconciliable quarrell. For all this, by tract of time, there is ſome remedy. For that which is the moſt important, there is none at all. The cruell torture that burſteth his ſoule, by the continuall repreſentation of his offence, receiueth no condition. What Goblins? what tortures? what goate? what Minotaure?
                  But if ſuch a one be puft vp with vaineglory, for that he beleeues that men doe hold him for a man of courage, they ſhall tell him, that that aduantage is very common (as we haue ſhewed.) But how feeble

is it, how ſhamefull, hauing regard to the foundation, which is nothing Chriſtian? Notwithſtanding he that would yeild ſome thing to his opinion, a man might tell him that it is a glory dearely bought, and as it were to take vp at intereſt, a hundred for a hundred. There is then the pleaſure, there is the profit, there is the honour that he reapeth of his hazardes, and vnbridled ambitions.
                  For him that is dead (as hath beene ſaid) there remaineth to him no ſhadow of good; his reputation is extinguiſhed with his life. It continueth but to be odious, ſtinking, and execrable. Ah! how this is to be conſidered: For he that dies for a faire ſubiect, hath comfort for himſelfe, and leaues comfort to his poſterity: why? becauſe his memory hath a ſweete ſauour. They bee more excellent and durable images, then thoſe of Phydias. Oh! how precious be theſe old ſayings; oh! how rare they be! They ſay he was an honeſt man, a vertuous man, fearing God, louing his Prince, and the Common-wealth; that he died in the bed of Honour. Such a one liues in the tombe in deſpight of death; his Vertue ſpeakes within the dumbe ſilence, exalts

him, glorifies him in the midſt of forgetfulneſſe, euen in the cold duſt. They hold another manner of language, of them that are loſt in Duell. What blindnes! (ſaith euery one) what rage! how impious a thing it is? how deteſtable? A notable conſequence ariſeth from this Diſcourſe; that is, That there is ſome honourable death, that a man ought not to ſhun although he could.
                  To vnderſtand this, we muſt conſider the ſpeach following, in preſuppoſing this maxime: If they which fight in Duell, did beleeue they ſhould die there, a man might well ſay, they would not goe thither. Imagine then, that two men of great courage be in preſence, their weapons in their hands kindled with fury, reſpiring nothing but blood; that a man whom they both know to be an excellent Soothſayer comes in the way, and ſaith vnto them, You ſhall die both at this conflict, and the profit that ſhal redound thereby, is, that the Commonwealth ſhall looſe much, your houſes ſhall be deſolate, your memory deteſtable. There is likelihood that they beleeuing theſe words, would bee appeaſed, and ſhake hands. But if theſe magnanimious men, were in an army neere Henry the 4. the glory

of Kings, and great Thunder of Warre; and that he himſelfe ſhould come ſay vnto them; My friends, thinke with your ſelues this day muſt be the end of your dayes. But in truth, it ſhall bee the ſauing of your Prince; on whoſe life dependeth the conſeruation of this great Eſtate. No man doubts, but that generous men would bee the more enflamed; but they would bee all poſſeſſed with a laudable impatience to bee grapling, to produce ſuch an action, ſo vertuous, ſo glorious. Moments would be ages vnto them. They would be like Antheus, touching the earth; they would take new forces: they would be all trasformed, body and ſoule, into heart and ambition; and the feare of death would haue much leſſe power ouer them, then the deſire to make themſelues famous to future ages, inuited, forced, by the conſideration of this act, pleaſing to God and men. They would thinke themſelues very happy: it would be Scepters, and Crownes vnto them; for as much as the end is holy, and profitable, and conſequently honourable, as beeing a perfect worke of Vertue. They will ſay, that there will be found no plenty of theſe faire ſoules. It is true. But there would bee found amongſt

the Nobilitie of France, ſome that haue Horaces, Scevolaes, and Curtiuſſes, as well as the auncient Rome. So we conclude, that there is ſome death very honourable; that is to ſay, That which ſerueth to the glory of God, to the honour and profit of the Prince, and of the Common-wealth. Now the end of them which goe to Duell, without lawfull cauſe, is ſimply to ſatisfie their paſſion, to reuenge their particular iniuries, to content themſelues. It followeth, that that is not onely blameable, but alſo worthy of rigorous puniſhment.
                  In this the Prince ſhould know, that ſuch combates doe abſolutely derogate from his Authoritie, for as much as it belongs to Him, or to his Magiſtrates, to doe reaſon for offences; for which, the violent ſatisfaction is not permitted to particular perſons in any Common-wealth well polliced.
                  They follow theſe ſteps, & the miſchiefe groweth inſenſibly, and of ſuch a faſhion, that in the ende, all Diuine and Humane Lawes ſhall bee baniſhed out of France. They fight in Duell for the ſeeking of marriage, for homages, for ſutes, for precedence in Churches, in politique Aſſemblies; in the end, for all ſorts of differences. This

is daily ſeene. So did in old time the Scytes, ſo did the Tartarians, people without faith, without God, without humanity. If this continue, we muſt ſpeake no more of Iuſtice nor of Pietie. All France ſhall be a Chaos, a denne of theeues. So we ſee a generall ſubuerſion of all Orders. No man containes himſelfe in his own iuriſdiction, the ſtormes whereof hath ouerthrowne all. They be ſo execrable before God, that ſince they haue been tolerated, there haue bin ſeen nothing but prodigies in France. Before the Duells, was there euer ſeen blood ſo horribly ſhed as hath been ſince? The Sunne hid it ſelfe thereat, the Earth mooued at it, and the Sea ſtayed the courſe thereupon. Was it euer heard that a great King, moſt great, moſt magnificent had been driuen out of his houſe, and afterward murthered by one of them that daily preachet peace? Waigh this well, From the Duell they come to the contempt of Lawes, and Orders; from this, to contemne the Soueraigne; then to conſpire againſt the Eſtate; and after that, to attempt the ſacred perſon of the Prince. The reaſon is, becauſe ambition, accuſtomed to blood, becomes a ſauage beaſt, which hath neither bounds nor limits, hauing no

other moouing but it owne extrauagant deſire; and then ſoone or late, God doth chaſten the Princes which doe ſuffer ſuch miſchiefe among their people. This conſideration ought to be graued in letters of gold, in the hearts of Kings.
                  That it is true, that Duells doe thruſt the French to conſpire againſt the State, we wil alleadge (among ſo many lamentable examples) but onely the laſt complot, which conſtrained your Maieſtie to goe take order therein. Is it not better (ſay they) to die in a Ciuill warre, going about to aduance and dignifie a mans ſelfe, then to kill one an other fooliſhly euery day, without any hope of a better condition? So likewiſe, all the reſt doe enioy the benefit of peace, but we. Ah, wretched men! you ſpit againſt heauen, you enterpriſe againſt yout naturall Prince, to whom you doe owe all. Ye perturbers of the publike reſt, where is your iudgement? To contend with this excellent Monarch, ſo long a time in poſſeſſion to deſtroy his enemies, there wants nothing but his preſence, to put all at his feet. It is the fable of the Pigmies and Hercules. Who be the chiefe of your ſide? what bee your meanes? The Duke of Sauoy ſaith,

Luke-warme water to a ſcalded cat. The Arch-Duke hath a ſute in hearing, which is not ready to be decided. The King of Spaine with his faithfull Counſell, takes the height of the Aſtrolabe, and attends an other ſeaſon. The wiſe and magnanimious King of England, holds his finger on his mouth: who ſhould be then your Captaines? And put the caſe, that they that call themſelues friends of France, would put themſelues in collar, what ſhould be your meanes? what Townes, what Comminalties would aſſiſt you? They will tell you with a cōmon conſent, that they will not eate of it. They ſweat, and pant yet with trauels paſt. Likewiſe your deſignes haue had as much vanity, as iniuſtice, and preſumption. Now all theſe peſtilent feauers be growne, by the iniquitie of Duells, which makes their courage barbarous, and accuſtoming them to blood, makes them enemies of humane ſocietie, and conſequently of all pietie.
                  Doubtles your Maieſty, may very eaſily take away theſe pernicious and deplorable confuſions. Would your Maieſty make it ſelfe culpable of ſo much blood ſhedde, for want of making obedience? They meddle with an imaginary Honour: Is it not in the

Soueraigne Prince to make this errour knowne, and to take the Honour of his vpon himſelfe? Belongs it not to the head to guide the body, when as from the conduct of the other members, a man can expect nothing but miſerable falls. When as the reſolution of your Maieſty, to giue no more Pardons ſhall be knowne, and publiſhed, (we ſay a zealous reſolution, with a ſolemne Oath before God) there is no man will dare to importune it: when you are diſpleaſed, they dare not looke vpon your cabinet doore, they dare not breath within your Chamber, they dare not ſo much as imagine that there is any thing to ſay to you although it concernes you. From whence comes this humble reſpect? From the Honour that they beare to your Vertue, which they reuerence, acknowledging it, for that it hath conquered, ſaued, and relieued this Eſtate. Behold the ſweete fruits that Vertue brings, that faire tree of life: But after that your Maieſty hath made Lawes, they goe and humble themſelues, they caſt themſelues at your Maieſties feet, they preſſe your Maieſty, and your Maieſties nature which is gentle, (not regarding the conſequence) is very often carried away,

at the prayers of ſuch a one as is ſheltered from blowes, and hazard. So your Maieſty doe breake the precious tables of your iuſt decrees, or rather of the decrees of heauen. To let ones ſelfe be vanquiſhed, at the particular importunity of iniuſt ſupplications, which abſolutely doe import the Commonwealth, and to haue the magnanimity, and clemency of Henry the 4. who hath ſubdued, and reſtored this Eſtate, is incompatible. That cannot agree. To derogate from ones owne ordinances, is like Penelopes webbe, and the Caſtles of ſand, which they faine to be done, and vndone, vpon the ſea ſhoare by little children. It is to be alwaies beginning. So the authority of the Prince is deſpiſed, and all good gouernement troden vnder feet; likewiſe they ſay aloude when they publiſh them, that it is for foure dayes. The importance is, that the King muſt anſwer for all: and that ſhould awaken them that are moſt drowſie.
                  What muſt hee doe then? let him be firme and inflexible in theſe ordinances. There muſt be none, if they be not iuſt and equitable. If they be ſo, they muſt obſerue them exactly. Two or three examples after

the publication of them, will ſtay, will extinguiſh theſe ſpoiles, theſe fires which haue ouerthrowne, which haue conſumed the faire polices, and the good cuſtomes of this Realme. A worke worthy to blot out a multitude of ſinnes; a ladder to climbe heauen, a triumph which will make all your fore-paſſed Victories to ſhine, will readuance them, and be as it were a ſecond birth vnto them.
                  Two moneths after a rigorous obſeruation of your Edicts, there will be no more ſpeach of quarrells. It was ſeene by experience, after the publication of that which was made at Fontaine-bleau, that they ſtayed foure moneths throughout the whole Realme, and not a man budged. Not one durſt ſound the forde, for feare hee ſhould be loſt, and ſerue for an example. They kept ſentinell, to ſee what would be the crackes of this threatning thunder. Folly ſlept: what a notable thing is this. The firſt deſperate man that hazarded the packet, hauing obtained his pardon, opened the doore of the Temple of Ianus, which had been ſhut foure moneths; wherby entred greater diſorder, and more fearefull then before: on the contrary this example

alone, this only bleeding, ſo ſeaſonably, would haue kept all this great body from a plureſie.
                  Quarrells beeing taken away, your Maieſty ſhould be at reſt, and not in diſquiet, as it is ſo often for furious folkes. Strange Princes haue a great aduantage ouer your Maieſty: They be dayly buſied to know what victories their ſubiects haue had vpon the common enemy of the faith, or againſt the particular enemies out of their Dominions: And your Maieſty is in a continuall alarum with your owne ſubiects, who are alwayes ready to fight, at feaſts, at dauncings, at play, at hunting, yea euen in the holy places, preſently after they haue receiued their Sacraments. O malediction! and wherefore? for ſpiders webs.
                  Your Maieſty is brought to a meruailous ſeruitude: it may redeeme it ſelfe, by making her ordinances to be punctually executed. The apprehenſion of puniſhments will ſtay them, and there will be none ſo deſperate, to put themſelues into an infinite Labyrinth of miſeries for a fantaſie of honour. If there be any (as hath been ſaid) he ſhall ſerue for an example. Is it not better to cut off an arme, then to let all the Bodie periſh?

That ſhall not be rigour, it ſhall be clemencie; it ſhall be the moſt high, and moſt profitable Iuſtice that can be imagined. The great ones (whoſe counſell you ſhall haue taken to make good lawes) ſeeing this holy reſolution, will be aſhamed to ſue vnto you, to deſtroy that which you ſhall haue built by their owne iudgement. If they do importune you, they ſhall be worthy to be denied, and that deniall ſhall deſerue the glory due to your vertue. But how? would they dare to preſſe you to doe that within your Realme, which they would not ſuffer in their owne houſes?
                  Knowing and deteſting the malediction of this cuſtome, if we could returne, how happy ſhould we be, to offer our ſelues in ſacrifice for all France; and that your Maieſtie would put vs to death vpon condition, that that which we propound might be exactly obſerued! How glorious would this curſe be? to giue two liues, to ſaue ſo great a body. It would ſurpaſſe all renowned deeds, both auncient and moderne.
                  But if the death of ſome few ſeem cruell, we ſay it is reaſonable, that a ſmall number ſhould bee ſacrificed for an infinite: ſome muſt neceſſarily ſuffer for the publique. It

is to preuent a thouſand inconueniences. Your Nobilitie is wholly diuided by means of quarrells. If your Maieſtie had occaſion to raiſe armies (as it may ariue) let men iudge what miſchiefes would come thereby. At the meeting of the friends, kinſfolkes, and allies of them which be daily killed with the homicides. What coyles? what outrages? what furies would there be? By this counterpoiſe, a man might know, that it would bee a very Chriſtian pitty, to cauſe ſo great a gaine by a little loſſe. If your Maieſty do not redreſſe theſe diſorders, we muſt neuer hope for it. This worke with many others, is reſerued for your goodneſſe and good fortune. Alas! for ſo many Gentlemen as die in France, there are made ſo many bone-fires in Spain, and amongſt the other enemies of the French name. They ſet vp their Trophies with your blood, they build with your ruines, and make themſelues great with your loſſes.
                  We know with all the world, that you are not a Nero; you haue pardoned euen thoſe, that haue attempted your owne perſon. It is certaine that you neuer looſe any one of yours, but you haue great ſence of

it, aboue all you are ſenſible of the loſſe of them that haue hazarded their liues to defend yours, and to maintain your Lawes. That is not enough, you muſt not ſtay in ſo faire a way. What is to be done more? to make it appeare by the effects, which doe ſpeake of themſelues.
                  There be certaine laughers that fight not, who lets eſcape this ſaying, that there is no hurt to draw blood from a body full of euill humours. It is the moſt caniball and bleeding maxime of the world. Which ſauours with a full throate the Democraſie of the Switzers, an impious maxime, and full of ignorance. Impious, for it is againſt all Lawes, diuine, and humane. Full of ignorance, for as much as it is not onely the choler, and ſleame that goes out, it is the good blood, let vs ſay the beſt oftentimes. They anſwer, that quarrells ariſe commonly from the raſh, and inſolent; and that modeſt men who vſually are moſt valiant, doe not begin them. It is a worthy obiection. Is not the world fuller of fooles then of wiſe men? The French Nobility who accompts 
                        Ʋalour her ſummum bonum, is ſhe not as ready as a flaſh of lightning? It comes to paſſe then that the peaceable, by

beeing in company, either for that they are friends, kinsfolkes, allies, or neighbours, be wrapped in theſe diſorders: not of their owne motion, but by the inſtigation of others. So the 
                        •
                     ood blood, is mingled with the euill. It were a high ſecret to know how to ſeparate them. No Alchimiſt is capable of it. See, how France is wounded, and torne with her owne hands; behold how ſhe fills her ſelfe with deſolations; in ſuch ſort, that there is not a houſe in this kingdome, exempt from one of theſe two miſerable ſcourges, or from both together; from ſuite, or bloodſhed. A lamentable thing worthy of commiſeration. But who craues the remedy, which is denied him by an euill deſtiny; what meanes is there to abate theſe fumes, to temper theſe dog daies? We haue ſaid it ſo often: good Lawes, and well obſerued, to buſie and content great mindes, and to imploy them. There be many iuſt occaſions, and faire meanes enough.
                  Let vs now conſider the euent of our miſery, and let vs waigh the good that comes of it. Ah! how remarkeable it is: the faire ſchoole, the fearefull example, God hath ſhewed in this prodigious effect, two things worthy to be noted. The one, that

he is iuſt, and true, in that which he hath ſaid: Who killeth, ſhall be killed. Alas! we had rooted out the ſoules of others, from their bodies, with an vnmercifull iron, againſt the Law of God; and we haue beene puniſhed by our ſelues, by the ſame wayes. Iudges, and parties, executioners, and criminalls, infringers of mens repoſe, and in danger to be depriued of the heauenly reſt. The other point remarkeable is, that it muſt be a vowed by force, that nothing is ſo deteſtable before the Maieſty of God, as the Duell, as it is practiſed in this Realm. Oh iuſt, oh admirable, oh redoubtable iudgements!
                  Doe not you enter into this conſideration? Yes, you doe Sir: it penetrates all your ſoule. Though you did not, yet ſhould you caſt your eyes, vpon this lamentable veſſell your Nobility, peirced from ribbe to rib, which takes water at all ſides, which periſheth by little and little, in all mens ſight, ready to make a pitifull ſtrip wracke. The heart cannot faile, but the other members muſt be without force, and all the world knowes, the inuincible heart of this great Body cannot be ſubdued, but by it ſelfe. You are the Head, you are the eies, ſuccour

this noble part, which beeing weakned by ſo many concluſions, by ſo much loſſe of blood, you can haue neither moouing, nor light, nor conduct, nor vigor againſt the miſcheifes, which grow ſo often within the entralls of this Realme, nor againſt them, which may ariue from without.
                  Whoſoeuer will narrowly marke to what a brutiſhnes the furies of the French are mounted, he will tremble in the ſoule, he will finde himſelfe turned topſie turuy, quite out of himſelfe. When they ſpeake of cauſes, which doe engage to Duell, they confeſſe that according to God it is damnable wickednes, and yet for all that they goe to it. So as to practiſe Honour, as they doe in theſe dayes, it is iuſt not to be a Chriſtian: to make a glory of homicide is to loue Vertue, to heape vp whole families with miſery, with deſolation, it is to be a light of men: to conclude, it is to be the image of all gentlenes, to know well, how to efface, without cauſe, from the world the image of God.
                  They that haue the dropſie of pride, that are puffed vp with vanity, and ignorance, will ſay this is ſpoken like Diuines. In the eſtimation of this age, it is an ill argument,

to alleadge God, or to be a Chriſtian. That is too ſtale. Supporting our ſelues then with the reaſons of the world, we ſay (to them which had rather be beaſts then men) that ſuch combates are not only againſt the Lawes of God, but againſt all Humane lawes; not onely of Chriſtians, but of Infidells, which are now, or euer haue been. Aſſyrians, Egyptians, Perſians, Medes, Greeks, Romanes, and French. We goe further, and maintaine, that this confeſſion (that that which they doe is euill according to God) is not only impious and execrable for Chriſtianitie; but is alſo agreeable to the auncient Romane heathen, who had myſtically made two Temples; the one of Honour, the other of 
                        Ʋertue; with ſuch induſtry, that they could not enter into the Temple of Honour, but by this laſt. Now among them, the principall, the higheſt, and moſt triumphant Vertue, was, the reuerence of their gods. Is not this then a blaſphemy, worthy of all ſorts of puniſhments. For the conſideration of God beeing taken away may there be had any Vertue among men? It is as if a man ſhould boaſt of his ſoundneſſe, and confeſſe himſelfe a leper. From all this doth ariſe a neceſſary conſequent:
                  
                     
                        That true Honour cannot ſubſiſt without Vertue, which is his ſprout, his root, his body; as the other his branches, his flowers, and his fruit.
                  
                  Our pitifull accident deſerues to be culled out by particularities. Enuy, reuenge, and other looſe paſſions, whereof we haue ſpoken in the beginning, naturall to man, and borne in his owne Territorie, were not the principall organes of our miſchiefe. There was no enuy; we were neither companions, nor neighbours, neither were wee acquainted: deſire of reuenge there could not be, choler muſt be firſt exhaled, there were blowes giuen on both ſides. What is it then? I his effect is worthy to bee digeſted. We were both of vs peaceable, ſhunning quarrels, deteſting them, bearing both of vs a perpetuall remorſe, a worme of conſcience, for thoſe we had formerly had, knowing the euill we had done, and repenting of it. Yet for all that, a choller, not of ſet purpoſe, but by chance-medley, hath cauſed our death. How?
                  
                     By the conſideration of Lawes, of a falſe Honour, againſt our knowledge, againſt our conſcience.
                  
                  It is then this weake imagination that

hath depriued vs of the light. Here is the great ſecret which vpholdeth ſo many calamities.
                  The circumſtance following, is to bee conſidered: The play at Tennis makes a man impatient, and raſh; an ordinary choller ſhould be excuſed almoſt in all perſons, in ſuch exerciſes. We ſhould alſo pardon a choller, which is vſuall with all them that be wronged; or that doe perſwade themſelues they are ſo. The one thought he had iudged well, the other beleeued the contrary: the one in paſſion with the play; the other (though without paſſion) yet deceiued it may be, by his eare. This was accordable: The foundation thereof was ſo feeble: It was for a thing of nothing. Let vs examine this. A third, which ſhould haue brought a plaiſter, brought a ſword. This is the ſecond piece of our misfortune.
                  
                     Which concludes; That the office of Challengers, is a moſt wicked and damnable introduction.
                  
                  Our choller met with this fatall commoditie; without which, we had preſently bin at peace. For this firſt motiō it is moſt common: they doe vſe it euery where. They be miſerable characters, and imperfect ſeales

of humane weaknes. But this being appeaſed, and the firſt brunt qualified; to haue a third, which ſhould haue brought water, to caſt brimſtone into the fire; to haue a third, which ſhould haue ſerued as a barre, to be a furtherer of the miſchiefe; to haue a third, which ſhould haue bin the rampier, to be the key to open the gates of death? being not wronged, neither hauing any part in the accident: it ſurpaſſeth all the impieties of the heathen. This blindnes is followed with an other. A man dares not hinder his friend, for feare to doe him wrong; to what end will a man reſerue the teſtimonies of a good will? to what faire occaſion? But all theſe edifices built vpon foundations of error and vanity, what can they be but pure folly?
                  They ſay, We muſt not iudge of right or wrong by the euents. They are moſt commonly as letters ſealed vp for the ſpirit of man; notwithſtanding in this, the iudgement of God is very manifeſt. There is a man, charitable, diſcreete, ſincere in all his actions; in a word, the very modell of all Chriſtian vertues: The generall blindneſſe, as a throng in a faire of inſolent people, thruſts him forward, and carries him to the

combate, againſt his intent and deſire; he himſelfe blames and condemnes his owne action: Heauen ſees his heart; a man would thinke that ſuch an one would carry away the victory. There is he deſtroyed, there rooted out from amongſt men, as the moſt depraued. Ye curious folkes, that goe diuing into the Centre of moſt profound ſecrets; ſeeke not the cauſe any where els but in the Iuſtice of God, who hateth and deteſteth theſe wicked ambitions. Our example ſhould make the haires of all them that are poſſeſſed with diuells, to ſtand vpright, who caſt themſelues vpon death ſo deſperately. This lightning ſhould dazle, aſtoniſh, and ouerthrow, the eies, the hearts, and the deſignes of the moſt enraged. For ſeeing that the beſt doe die there, what ſhould they expect, whole life is wholly infected with malice and impurity?
                  God ſaid to Dauid, Thou ſhalt not build my Temple, thou art a man of blood. Strangers (oh great King) ſome yeares ſince, do accuſe the Kings of France to be ſuch, becauſe they doe ſuffer theſe accurſed combates. They ſpeake it aloud in publique, they aggrauate this tolleration ſome pittying it, ſome laughing at it. Theſe iudgements,

theſe motiues cannot be preuented, but by taking the cauſe from the effect. Be pleaſed then to efface and root out this opprobry, this ſcandall: diſperſe theſe fearefull Comets, hanging and flaming with horrour ouer the heads of your ſubiects, and threatning your Eſtate with totall ruine. There is not any that hath ſo much hurt by theſe mortall exhalations, as your Maieſty. So ſhall ſhe ſurpaſſe her Predeceſſors, in good and holy policy, as ſhe hath done in greatnes of courage, and in happy ſucceſſe. There had need be a ſpeedy remedy, and order giuen, to haue the Gouernours of Prouinces, the Kings Lieftenants, the Seneſhalls, and others, to ſtrangle theſe infernall Hydra's.
                  
                  This peſtilentiall feauer, doth runne through all the Prouinces of the Realme. It is a contagious malady, but it is ordinarily moſt violent in Guyenne. They fight there, tenne againſt tenne, twenty againſt twenty, as if they were in the ſtrength of the warre. They force them which be at peace in their houſes, to be of the match, as if they were iniured, and wronged in their Honour. The Arabians are more like Chriſtians, then theſe people. Who did euer ſee, in the life

of a conquering Monarch, victorious, abſolute, in an age full of vigour, and in a time of peace, men to make ſuch combates? The conſequence is great for this prouince. This Bulwarke, ſo neare a neighbour to the retrograde aſpect of the Saturne of Caſtile, muſt not be ſuffered to be vndermined. In the ſpace of foure moneths, there were killed fifty Gentlemen in ſingle combate, and abundance were hurt. The Nobility of this Country, beeing ſo Martiall, deſerues well to be husbanded with care.
                  Sir, you are the common Father of all your Subiects; principally, of your Nobility: what can you doe more Maieſticall or more magnificent, then to preuent the loſſe of ſo many ſoules, who would ſerue you in honourable occaſions, and doe deſtroy themſelues in vnworthy, and ridiculous actions?
                  For our parts, we doe not bewaile the loſſe of our life; a life, full of trouble, of fraud, of miſery in an age ſo corrupt. There is no way, but hath an iſſue, ſoone or late; we muſt haue been let downe to the hauen. We lament onely for the offence we haue committed againſt God, our King, and Country. If it had beene for the glory of

God, againſt the Mahomets, that we had brought thither our ardors, ſtretched out our armes, planted our feet: that our hands, and our courages, had imployed their forces, and their ambitions to defend the Chriſtian faith, and that we had remained in the throng, peirced with blowes, couered with blood and with duſt, we ſhould haue thought our ſelues very happy. So many blowes, ſo many drops of blood, would haue beene ſo many Palmes, ſo many Laurells in heauen. There it is, where magnanimity ſhould thunder, and fulminate; it is there, that a man ſhould ſurmount all the infirmities of man. If it had beene for the ſeruice of your Maieſty, and of the Country, againſt the ſworne enemies of the Eſtate, we ſhould haue ended our courſe with contentment. We knew we were not borne onely for our ſelues. The end of euery thing is the good of it: we were deſtinated for theſe cauſes: If any of theſe had ended the laſt act of the tragedy, we ſhould haue had wherewithall to comfort and glorifie our ſelues. But alas, it was for a light and weake occaſion, from which patience, and good iudgement ſhould haue defended vs. After we had eſcaped from ſo many

great combates, from ſo many hazards, in a peaceable time for all the reſt: knowing the fault was hainous which we did, and againſt our owne conſcience: obſcuring (oh miſerable blindnes) the former good actions, by the laſt, which ſhould haue crowned the worke: we accuſed, we condemned our ſelues, as witneſſes, and iudges of our crime, beeing bewitched, and enchaunted, by the fooliſh opinion of mad men, and fearing more their reproaches, then the diuine iuſtice: ô profound, ô redoubtable iudgement of God!
                  Be pleaſed then to thinke vpon an order: doe this cheife worke (magnanimious King) as you haue brought many others to an end, though neuer any more notable, more neceſſary, more glorious. For the reſt it did particularly concerne your Maieſty: Fortune, neceſſity and ſhame, were mingled therewith, they were vapours, and clouds before the ſunne, in this it ſhall be all radiant, there ſhall be nothing but the ſhining of your Vertue: all the worke ſhall be your Maieſties, all the glory hers. What glory? to be triumphant ouer fortune, time, and death. But what can be imagined more

exquiſite, then to take away this pernicious cuſtome brought forth by hell? to remit the Nobility, as it was before, to reſerue theſe lofty and heroyicke ſpirits for the ſeruice of your Maieſty, and the Common-wealth? They be not borne for themſelues onely. If that were ſo, they ſhould haue no more priuiledge then the common ſort: but the end of their advantages, and of their greatnes, is the good of their Countrey: and theſe advantages haue neuer been acquired by Duell. Who knowes it better, or ſo well as your Maieſtie? Who knowes it like your Maieſtie? who haue a thouſand times hazarded your life to ſaue this Kingdome; who haue runne ſo many miſerable Fortunes to make happy this Eſtate? who haue forgotten her ſelfe, onely to be mindfull of the good of France? a generous obliuion, and truely Royall. Why? becauſe ſhe hath fetched backe her name from the gulphes of forgetfulneſſe. This conſideration enclines too much to the vaine man: it was common with the auncient Greekes and Romanes. There is another more Chriſtian conſideration that is, That ſhe hath redeemed ſo many thouſand perſons from all

ſorts of calamities, and from deſpaire. The end of the gouernment of Kings, and the marke of their waighty charges, is, to conſerue the people, and to make them happy; that is likewiſe the end of them, who are ordained to execute their iuſt commandements for the maintenance of the Eſtate; and which is more, it is the obligation of them both.
                  It now concernes your Maieſtie by her Prudence, and Wiſedome, to eſtabliſh good and holy Lawes vpon this ſubiect. How? Are they not publiſhed thoroughout all France? It belongs then to her Authoritie, to make them to be obſerued from point to point, as we haue ſaid. All depend of her: they expect and hope for it from her goodneſſe and iuſtice.
                  
                     A faire Order, and the execution of it.
                  
                  From theſe two, will proceed a remedy, a profit, and a glory. The firſt, for all the Eſtate; the laſt, for your Maieſtie; but the profit will bee the Common. This can no way be compared but to it ſelfe, conſidered in the conſeruation of the moſt excellent Kingdome of Chriſtendome; and the glory that You ſhall get thereby, ſhall bee

meaſured by the ſpace of all the ages to come.
                  So (inuincible King) if you doe conſerue your Nobility for your ſeruice, and for the common good, you ſhall baniſh the ſcandall of the Realme, you ſhall take away this euil example, of a ſtinking ſmell to all Chriſtendome, yea euen to the Mahomet Infidells. You ſhall cleanſe it from abundance of blood, ſo barbarouſly ſhed continually, you ſhall efface in part her ill reputation, you ſhall turne backe the fury of heauen, and keepe your ſelfe from blame before God, which is of greateſt importance for the ſaluation of your Maieſty. What trophies, what triumphes for one onely effect! What effect? an effect as eaſie to execute, as to ſpeake of. For it, the World will giue you Crownes of Palme, but Heauen wil reſerue for you Crownes of Cedar, which are incorruptible.
                  Marke what the Ghoſts doe ſay to the greateſt and moſt Magnanimious of Kings. If they haue ſpoken with any defect, as obſcure, they are excuſable. If they haue giuen any holy aduiſe, it ought to be receiued and embraced, but chiefly to be executed.

And be it knowne, that the higheſt knowledge of mortall men, (aboue all of great ones) is, (hinking of the end) to exerciſe Pietie and Iuſtice: for they be heauenly buildings, by proofe of time and death, which doe abide firme and ſtable. The reſt, euen to the Septers and Crownes, is a Shadow.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     
                     
A DISCOƲRSE OF VALOVR: WHEREIN IS EXACTLY ſhewed in what it conſiſteth.
                  
                  By the Sieur de CHEVALIER.
                  
                     DEDICATED TO THE FRENCH KING HENRY IIII.
                  
                     And tranſlated by THO. HEIGHAM, Eſquire,
                  
                  Printed by Cantrell Legge. 1624.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the KING.
                  
                     SIR,
                  
                  
                     TO the moſt Iuſt, the Ballance; to the moſt Valiant, the Sword. To whom may this Diſcourſe of Valour be more lawfully dedicated, then to your Maieſtie? Kings and People giue Her place. They all with one conſent doe giue Her this advantage without enuie, knowing that Shee hath well deſerued it. It was dedicated to your Maieſtie eleven yeares ſince; ſince which time, there hath not one yeare paſſed, but I haue giuen your Maieſtie ſome thing, and you haue not giuen me any thing. This diſproportion did put me backe: your Maieſtie hauing done me the honour to ſay often, That I was one of the olde ſeruants of her houſe, and an honeſt man. At this ſecond Edition I would addreſſe it to

ſome other. I looked among Srangers, among 
                        〈◊〉
                     : In the ende, I found it behooued not to change the North. Strangers doe atttribute this glory vnto You, to bee the perfect modell of Valour; Your owne doe confeſſe, that that which they know of this excellent Vertue, hath been learned vnder the lightnings and invincible force of your Armes: they bee Triumphes vnto them, to haue profited in ſo famous a Schoole. So I doe canſecrate it to your Maieſtie, for the ſecond time. The Worlds eyes are vpon your Maieſtie for Valour: The World lookes vpon you for Iuſtice. Men doe attend to ſee how your Maieſtie will effect the ſolemne Oath you made, to take away the horrible confuſion of Quarrels. They hope for the execution of it, and then the complaint which I make for my particular, (whereof I doe attribute the cauſe rather to my ſelfe, then to your inclination, abſolutely Royall and Heroicall) and that which Chriſtendom makes for the generall, ſhall be effaced, by the moſt rare Trophy that euer was erected to any Prince of the earth. Euen as you are the Greatest, I pray God proſper your Maieſtie for euer: remayning
                  
                     SIR,
                     Your moſt humble, moſt obedient, and moſt faithfull ſubiect, and ſeruant: CHEVALIER.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A DISCOVRSE of VALOVR.
                  
                     THe Ignorance of the Time, is the firſt cauſe of all Miſchiefes: It is admired, becauſe it pleaſeth, followed as a Law; a teſtimonie of the brutiſhneſſe of the Age: entertained by obſtinacie, an infallible argument of her continuance, as alſo of the blindnes of ſoules. To driue away the falſe appearance of Vertue, and to bring in the true knowledge of it: to pleaſe ones ſelfe with that which is only worthy of admiration: to reſolue to a firmeneſſe of the knowledge, which wholly lighteneth the vnderſtanding; were very hard, in a time wherein violence onely raigneth with hypocriſie; wherein that aboue

all is perfect which contents the weake, and wherein error is defended by paſſion onely, and reuerenced as an Oracle. Yet we muſt not forbeare to take away the vayle, to ſhew the way, and to giue light to theſe darkeneſſes. For him that doth enterpriſe it, there can nothing happen worſe: For the others, they that wil not vnblindfold themſelues, nor enter into a good courſe, nor follow the true ſhip-lanterne, though they remaine confuſed, though they goe aſtray, though they fall through this darkeneſſe; yet will it be a pleaſure to them, whoſe ſoueraigne good is blindnes and error.
                  Among all the falſe opinions that haue ſlid into vs, and that this beaſt without eies Ignorance, hath brought in with ſo much authoritie; there is not any one, either more remarkeable, or more important, then this that they haue now of Valour, of this Vertue the Queene of Vertues; of this ſtable baſis of ſoules, of this rampier from miſchiefes, of this ſcourge of fortune, of this contempt of death. There is nothing more common amongſt vs, then theſe words, of 
                        Ʋaliant and Valour; ſo many people are honoured with this venerable title, and ſo few deſerue it. This is the Philoſophers ſtone

which men ſeeke no more: But which hath been found by many thouſands. If this conqueſt be ſo eaſie, let faire ſoules, firme, and full of iudgement, ſpeake their opinion thereof, when I ſhall haue traced out the ground-plot of it.
                  There be three neceſſary pillars to this Vertue, and builded with ſuch ſymmetrie and proportion, that if you take but one of them away, you ſhall haue ruine in ſtead of building. For her accompliſhment, and entire perfection, the pieces required be compriſed in this diuine number, wherewith heauen is ſo well pleaſed, they be matter, forme, compaſſe, and the rule of this excellent Pallace of Wonders. There be three principles neceſſary to the action of all Vertues, and more particularly to this, then to all the reſt; that is to ſay knowledge, will, and habitude. Magnanimity, greatnes of courage, or 
                        Ʋalour, as men doe commonly call it, hath for her ſubiect, things which bring feare: that is, her iuriſdiction: there is the extent of her dominion. He then that goeth in danger muſt firſt know it, or elſe the effect that followeth ſhall be a worke of Fortune, or of raſhnes. Will comes after, which is the firſt iſſue of our affections,

and of our deſignes. The third part, is Habitude (that is to ſay) an action done many times. Theſe circumſtances muſt be waighed, to ſee, in what principally conſiſteth, a Vertue ſo diuine. Knowledge, which is the eye of the vnderſtanding, as this is of the ſoule; this radiant light is firſt required, as the guide which ſheweth the way, and the iuſt Sunne-dyall, which conducteth by the true way with certaine knowledge. Ignorance of the perill, makes an infinite number hazard, by want of Iudgement, and experience; that happneth to young men, that are tranſported with paſſion, who giue themſelues no time to conſider of that they enterpriſe. It commeth alſo to others, for that they doe not comprehend how hot a buſineſſe it is. Let vs leaue the firſt branch, to repreſent the ſecond in all the parts.
                  It is requiſite that he that goeth to a danger, which he knoweth, which he hath well waighed; that he doe it willingly, and not be forced thereunto, by any ſtrange, and forraine cauſe, that no other conſideration, but onely the vertuous action doe put him forward. Then Will (the beginner of our actions) comes after Knowledge. This inflaming

of our ſoule, this violent loue to laudable things; this firſt wheele which turneth all the parts of the ſoule; it muſt be ſimple and pure, not mooued but of it ſelfe. It muſt not enterpriſe vpō that which is out of her gouernement, that is, it muſt follow that which is moſt perfect: It muſt containe it ſelfe within her owne bounds, and iuriſdiction: Vertue onely, muſt be her ſacred and inuiolable Law, ſhe knowes no other way but that. If the intention to make a mans ſelfe immortall by renowne; if deſperate neceſſity, if the defence of his life, and of his liberty; if the hope of gaine, if loue, if iealouſie, if ambition, if deſpaire, if obſtinacy, if enuie, if the preſence of the Prince, and other forraigne cauſes, doe make a man goe into a perillous action: this is no action purely vertuous, and worthy of praiſe. Now Vertue is content with her ſelfe, ſhe hath all at her owne home, ſhe borroweth not; is infinitely rich with that which groweth in her owne territory, her rents doe ſuffice her to operate according to her flight, although in certaine things ſhe may haue need of Fortune. Yet I doe not ſay, that ſhe is in perfection, or that ſhe may be; for then a man ſhould put

off his humanity, and that were to ſeeke a 
                        Ʋalour in the aire, as the Commonwealth of Plato, or the perfect Oratour of Cicero. But I ſay, that the firſt and principall end of him that doth vertuouſly, ought to be an action ſimple and purely vertuous. That ſhould be the end of it. Let not the firſt intention of him that goeth to an exploit of danger (knowing it well) be the hope of immortality; but let him goe thereto, although he ſhould know, that that effect would remaine in the graue; that his birth, and death, ſhould be both at a time: that he ſhould haue his reward with the wormes, and ſad ſilence; let him not forbeare to doe well, becauſe it is his duty.
                  Among the heathen, they were perſwaded, that they ought to die for the Commonwealth, and that that voluntary ſacrifice of their liues for the publique (which they did in a moment) brought vnto them a perpetuall ſacrifice among men, who put ſuch men in the ranke of the gods. It was not onely a prouocation; it was a furious tranſportation, a deſperate madnes, which rapt them to all ſorts of dangers, by the hope of immortality. It was a ſweete vſury. So Curtius caſt himſelfe into the fearefull

gulph of Rome, to make the inundation ceaſe, which (following the anſwer of the Oracle) could not be ſtayed but by that meanes. So Sceuola went into the Campe of Porſena to kill him, thinking by the death of this King to make the Romanes victorious: So Horace, who was called one eyed, ſince that remarkeable effect, ſtayed alone vpon the bridge of the town of Rome, and ſuſtained the violent aſſault of enemies, with aſtoniſhment of all: So the three twinbrothers, did fight againſt three puiſſant Frenchmen, to decide the difference betweene them, and the people of Rome, by the mutuall conſent of both armies. It was the hope to make themſelues immortall, by a famous renowne. It was the ſtatues, and temples of Honour, which were promiſed them, that cauſed in them the contempt of death. If a man ſhould haue come and ſaid, to the firſt poore Romane Knight; When thou ſhalt be caſt into this horrible gulph, which threateneth all thy towne with ſhipwracke; there ſhall be no more remembrance of thee; thou ſhalt haue no other oblation, but thoſe of thy ſelfe and thy horſe: And thou Sceuola, thou deceiueſt thy ſelfe, to thinke that the Romanes doe erect

ſtatues and altars to thy Vertue. Horace, if thou dieſt to defend thy Country, the earth, the common Sepulture, or Tiber, ſhall be thy proud monuments, and the only trumpets of thy glory. You twin-brothers, who runne to death, for the Commonwealth of Rome, all the Laurells that ſhall remaine vnto you, ſhall be the complaints of your kinred, and the teares of your wiues. It is to be preſumed that Curtius vpon the brimme of that fearefull gulph would haue giuen a muſroll to his horſe. The ſecond beeing ready to roote out this barbarous Kings ſoule from his body, would haue told him the ſecret in his care; ſo farre would he haue been from puting his hand in the fire with ſo incredible a conſtancy. The third would not haue loſt his eye as he did, he would haue bin troubled with a phillip as a man would ſay, not caring otherwiſe for the iournall of Land, which he ſhould haue had in recompence of ſo admirable a proweſſe. He would haue caſt himſelfe at the beginning into the water all whole, as he did at the end all peirced with blowes. The three brothers would haue all eadged their wiues, their children, and the vnmeaſurable greatneſſe of thoſe

French-bodies to be exempt from fightings, or rather would haue faigned themſelues ſicke: But the deſire to make themſelues as gods to poſterity, made them hazard their liues, by a fooliſh hope, and a vaine opinion of immortality. It was then a falſe Valour. In that caſe, the Honourable deſire to ſerue the Commonwealth, ſhould onely haue put them forward; the deſire to doe well, and not to get a famous name after death, or recompence after victory. Yet, notwithſtanding that is the leaſt imperfect 
                        Ʋalour which is built vpon the beleife of a perpetuall renowne, a worke of faire laudable hope, and worthy of reward, becauſe of the example, and of the profit that may come thereby to Commonwealths. The Turkes, who are ſo couragious, and make no account of their liues; doe not deſerue by this meanes, in any faſhion whatſoeuer, the name of Valiant; becauſe they hazard themſelues, vpon the hope that they haue to taſt the agreeable delights, which are promiſed them, in that pleaſant Paradiſe of Mahomet. They be workes of faith, the ſtrong wings of a falſe perſwaſion, that hath ſo charmed them; and hauing plucked out the eyes of their ſoule, doe couer alſo

the eyes of their body, to make a bloody ſacrifice of all. Should they haue the apples, and the faire maides of the Alcoron taken from them; they would haue much more affection to life, then now they haue of brutiſh reſolution to death.
                  If the deſire to gaine glory, and to perpetuate a mans name, doe not deſerue a perfect praiſe, comming alone in conſideration; much leſſe is the effect which proceedeth from a deſperate neceſſity worthy of Honour. The baniſhed men at Antwerp beeing but ſixe thouſand did wonders, becauſe they knew well, that by the military Lawes of Spaine, they ſhould neuer finde mercy with their Prince, no more then the Engliſh with the Spaniards at Sea; who for that cauſe haue recourſe to the cruell element of fire. But if pardon might be for the one, and courteſie for the other, it is to be ſuppoſed they would not make ſo good reckoning of their skins. There be a thouſand conſiderations in this deed, which would be too long to deduce, of which we muſt waigh ſome onely.
                  Ambition, Loue, and Couetouſnes, doe produce great effects, cheifely Ambition at the Courts of great ones. It is furie, that

carrieth away the ſoule, that troubleth the braine, that bewitcheth; a ſtrange Magitian, which ouerthroweth all, and ſometimes giues the lyons courage to Harts. To enter into credit, to be honoured, and eſteemed of great Ones, and likewiſe of the Prince; to attaine to gouernements. There be ſome that doe deſpiſe death, and oftentimes theſe three cauſes, that I haue named, doe concurre to end the tragedy the ſooner. All theſe effects, be falſe Valours, becauſe they be forced; and if not altogether, at the leaſt ſomewhat like thoſe of pyoners. It ariueth alſo vnto them, as to thoſe that play vpon Theaters, who haue the headbands royall, and the clubbe of Hercules; but this is neither ſo heauie, nor ſo maſſy, as that of this great mans was; neither doe theſe Purple-robes, and theſe Scepters, make them Kings that doe weare them. At the Court neare the ſhining lights of the world, there be fooliſh and blinde ſoules, which doe ſwell, mooue, lift themſelues vp, and beeing thruſt forward with vanity, ſo naturall to man, and ſo familiar at the Courts of Princes, doe enterpriſe with hazard. See what the deſire is to be greater then others, and to go before them,

not in laudable and vertuous actions, but rather in dignities. Marke this chace to pride. Ambition and enuie be the weake ladders by which ſome doe aſcend to reputation. This is to take Honour by a Scalado. Sometimes the ladder breakes, and ſo they eſcape it; there are they in a litter for euer, an vndoubted teſtimony of a baſe and artificious ſoule; reſembling the woman, that in old time gaue the Oracles; beeing animated by the deuill ſhe propheſied; and as as ſoone as he had forſaken her, the gate was ſhut againſt her, for things to come. It is a deuilliſh 
                        Ʋalour, which doth neither mooue, nor breath, but by the moſt blinde and furious paſſions. If by theſe wayes, beeing raiſed on high, they can catch Honour, and ſome gouernement, according to their minde; they make knots like reeds: they reſt themſelues, beginne to play Doctors with the furred gowne, and caſt themſelues vpon diſcourſe; ſaying, That there is a time to get; a time to keep the thing gotten, that a man muſt play the good husband, and not be alwayes thus, that they know, that the excellent aeconomie of a generous and noble ſoule, is to be alwayes prepared, in the duty of a man of honeſty

and Honour, which cannot be iuſtly reiected of any age, of any, quality, nor of any ranke. There be no letters of Chancery can helpe therein.
                  Loue alſo, doth admirably whet the courage, it doth animate it, and while the feuer continues, it putteth on violently; the fit beeing paſt, there remaines nothing but a ſhadow. Paris looſing himſelfe with contemplation of the rare beauties of his Helen, admiring ſo many meruailous things in this cheife worke, ſo ſoone as ſhe repreſenteth vnto him the reputation of Menelaus, the highnes of his courage (ſhewing him thereby that generous women are not friends of cowards) enterpriſeth a combate againſt him. The ſweete words that loue, and beauty made ſlide downe from her lippes; happy Arabia that reſpired nothing but heauenly Manna, ſlid into his ſoule with ſuch force, that he found himſelfe wholly mooued, quite altered, and returning as from a ſwound, reſolueth (to make himſelfe worthy of the loue of ſo faire a Miſtris) to aſſault this excellent champion: He thinkes long to be at handy blowes, remembers no more Cipres powder, nor the curling iron for his haire; hee

hath nothing in his vnderſtanding but the ruine of his enemy; he burieth him already by hope, he giueth him the mortall blow, rids himſelfe at one time, of a troubleſome man; and getteth for euer a pleaſing ſhefriend. This inſpiration of Loue, beeing vaniſhed away; and the fumes of the altar of Venus beeing paſt, he remembers himſelfe of his Helen, not to be pleaſing vnto her, and to make himſelfe worthy of ſo rare a poſſeſſion, but indeed to make himſelfe ſure of her. He hath recourſe to flight, and hath great need to be couered with the cloud of Venus, in which he ſheweth, that the Carpet-Knights, are not ſuch friends of the ſword, as of perfumes. This is a falſe Valour, that makes this ſpruce adoe to aſſault one of the ſtrongeſt and moſt redoubted men in the world. He gained no Honour thereby, becauſe the feare of death had more power ouer him, then either the deſire of immortalizing his name, or the conſideration of his duty.
                  Iealouſie, and Enuie, which be two deuilliſh inſtruments, haue no leſſe power; and there haue beene ſome found, who (thruſt on by their rages) haue done miracles. The couetouſnes of all times, hath held

a great ranke among men; and more in this corrupt age then euer it did. It hath ſhewed notable effects, in times paſt, and doth dayly produce extraordinary ones. Notwithſtanding, there is not any of ſound iudgement, that doth call the actions of ſuch as are maſtered, with theſe monſters of vice, Valour.
                  
                  Deſpaire hath alſo a great ſhare thereof, and the deſire to die; whether it commeth of Loue, or of any other malady, corporall or ſpirituall, from which a man cannot bee deliuered. The example of the Souldier of Cyrus, is as notable as well knowne: Neare that ſame great King, who made the ſecond Monarchy, whom the heauen had enriched with ſo many graces, who was accompanied with ſo many vertues; whoſe luſtre was both the wonder and aſtoniſhment of the World. There was a ſimple Souldiour, who amongſt all was remarked to haue an vndauntable courage, and to be ſo reſolute in the moſt dangerous encounters, that it ſeemed he was a Faerie, like Achilles; ſo as the opinion to be invulnerable; made him contemne the hazard. The admiration of this ſo rare a Valour, gaue a deſire to this great Monarch to enquire more particularly

of this man, whom he found to bee afflicted with a ſtrange maladie, whereof hee made him to be dreſſed ſo carefully, that in the end he was healed. After that, he was neuer ſeen to hazard himſelfe as he vſed before: he was not the man he was wont to be. Cyrus asking him the reaſon, he anſwered, That he that cauſed him to bee healed was the onely cauſe thereof; and confeſſed vnto him, that the maladie which he had before was ſo inſupportable, that to rid himſelfe of it, he ſought his end in that manner. The health of his body made his ſpirit ſicke. He ranne after a common euill, to ſhun a thouſand extraordinary: he ſought one death, to ridde himſelfe of many. It was deſpaire, which proceedeth onely from weakeneſſe. You ſhal not ſee any of theſe vulgar ſpirits, and which are not debonaire, but at the firſt griefe grow faint, and deſire their laſt ende to be deliuered thereof.
                  So there be a thouſand paſſions which do animate, and doe not doubt but outward things doe ſerue thereunto. Flutes were in vſe amongſt the auncient Lacedemonians when they went to fight, as at this day trumpets and drummes: but without doubt it is more for courages which are not firme,

and for irreſolute ſpirits, then for the generous, which haue no need of ſauce to get them a ſtomacke. Amongſt all that mooueth ſo much, the preſence of great Ones, and chiefely of the Prince is one. He that is aduanced vpon the Theatre, abutted neere the Sunne, and the Starres, illuminated with the great lights of the Kingdom; though he were a puſillanimious Adon, he would become a Roger; a Larke there would play the Eagle, a Hare the Lyon; eſpecially when there is a magnanimious King, ſuch an one as Ours, the light of all Chriſtian Princes, the admirable and inimitable example of 
                        Ʋalour; a thundring tempeſt in combates, whoſe heart is ſo high, that no mortal thing can ſhake it. He that ſhall come before ſo excellent a Prince, that ſhall be ſeen of Iupiter, and ſhall not be as hardie as Theſeus and Samſon, hath a courage lower then the Centre of the earth, and is vnworthy euer to lift vp his head, and to behold the Sunne. Let this wretch that ſhall come and play ſuch a cowardly tricke before this great Warriour, bury himſelfe aliue for a iuſt puniſhment: let him pull out his eies, as in old time the Emperours of Conſtantinople did one to another; or let him go and be a dead

pay in Hungarie all his life; pierce there the armes of thoſe Infidels, paſſe vpon the point of their pikes and of their ſwords, to repaire ſuch a fault.
                  Truely, Death is a terrible and fearefull image: there is no ſpirit ſo high, ſo reſolute, ſo diſdainefull of perill, but doth apprehend ſome ſhadow of the graue: but a man muſt not put himſelfe to this trade, if he do not know that he is of a good ſtampe. Vertues be not naturall; we haue indeede ſome diſpoſition, ſome more, ſome leſſe, to receiue them. Valour beeing a Vertue, ought to bee conſidered in that manner; her birth is feeble, ſhee is not in perfection, blood is not capable alone to draw this picture to the life, this picture ſo rare, ſo excellent, ſo diuine. The liuely colours muſt be taken from example and meditation. If Valour were naturall, all men ſhould haue it from their birth, as alſo the other Vertues: but it is acquired by knowledge and habitude. We muſt not finde it ſtrange, if for the puniſhment of pride and preſumption, the ſtrongeſt cords of courage be ſometimes looſed, and men admired for this Vertue doe commit notable faults; and beſides, men are not diſpoſed at all times alike. I will recount the memorable hiſtory

of the Lord D'Auſſun, as it was repreſented vnto me by a Gentleman of Honour and Qualitie, who was at the battell of Dreux, becauſe it ſerueth to this purpoſe. This generous Caualier, who had acquired ſo faire a name, that in a commendation of excellency, they would ſay, The ſtoutneſſe of d'Auſſun, in this battell fled with the reſt: returning to himſelfe, (as a Lyon, who paſſing through the Forreſt, hearing the noiſe of the branches, flieth vntil he be out, then turning his head, ſtrikes himſelfe with his tayle to enter into fury, and returnes to the ſame place from whence he came) this hardie Lyon returned to the combat, where in the middeſt of the throng, he ſhewed that he did not beare ſo honourable a Title vnworthily; he appeared like thunder, made himſelfe to be felt like a tempeſt that ouerthroweth all; made himſelfe redoubtable to his enemies, and admirable to both the armies. The combate being ended, and he as full of honour, as mad with deſpight, extolled of his friends and enemies, went to bed, and reſolued to die for the diſpleaſure he tooke for his flying. Monſieur de Guiſe that then was, went to ſee and comfort him, and attributed much glory to him in the

preſence of all. To which hee anſwered: How (Sir) you that are the moſt Valorous Prince that liues at this day, haue you taken paines to viſit the moſt cowardly and baſe that euer was borne, a man vnworthy to ſee the light? No, no: I am worthy of a cruell puniſhment, and not of the praiſe that you giue me, which I doe iuſtly reiect becauſe I doe not merit it, and will make another man of my ſelfe, becauſe I haue too well deſerued it. He died a while after for want of eating. A man could not Chriſtianly praiſe this exceſſe: but the reſt teſtified a ſoule truely vertuous, and a courage without doubt magnanimious. It is to be conſidered, that in this exploit almoſt all the Army-royall, were put to flight. To retire, ſeemed rather wiſedome then cowardlineſſe: and if there had beene a fault in it, he repaired it againe, if it be true as I haue ſaid, that he returned to the Combate. If not (as ſome beleeue the contrary) yet his fault was common and well accompanied. He was rauiſhed with this confuſed diſorder, and carried away by the multitude of flyers. So many honeſt men, couragious, reſolute, and full of reputation, did fall into the ſame inconuenience, that hee might

haue attributed it to the good fortune of the enemies, haue ſupported it with patience as others did, haue comforted himſelfe in the repreſentation of ſo many notable proofes, which he had giuen of his Valour, and vpon the common opinion, that armes are vncertaine. But his conſcience ſerued him as a thouſand witneſſes, his heart was the great comptroller, he found he was a ſtranger to himſelfe, not hauing been accuſtomed to fall into ſuch defaults. This change of his courage, ſhaken with a wind of feeble humanity, which feareth death, had afflicted him; being one that had a ſenſe ſo exquiſite, and ſo tickle in things of Honour, and in actions of Vertue. An Heroique ſpirit, and iealous of it ſelfe, who choſe an extraordinary and vniuſt death, not for any fault committed, but for omitting the cuſtome of doing well, and according to the meaſure of that ſtoutneſſe ſo much eſteemed. Hee would content himſelfe, and not an other; in his manner, not to the mind of others; according to his owne rule, not to the rule of ſtrangers; it was the feare to haue done amiſſe, which is a pricking prouocation to doe well. There haue been found ſome at Court, who hauing giuen

good proofes of their Valour in a day of battell, and made others beare the markes of their courage, and inuincible reſolution; becauſe they eſcaped the buſineſſe, and did not die with their friends, feared that they did ill. We muſt avow, that ſuch perſons be wel borne to Vertue, which is not fed either with publique ſmoake, or with another mans opinion, but with her owne knowledge, beeing balanced, and knowing her ſelfe, her waight, and her price. There be not amongſt a hundred ſuch faire ſoules.
                  Now the feare not to doe well, is the firſt motiue that carrieth away the generous ſpirit, and which mooueth it with more force, then the crownes of Oake, and the triumphes did the auncient Romanes. They that goe about to content themſelues firſt, though they were in dennes, in the graue (if it were poſſible) will neuer faile in their duty. When they haue exploited effects, admired of all; they doe not reſt vpon the generall voyce, the common iudgement doth not fill them, they beleeue aſſuredly, that this action is not exactly accompliſhed. Phidias for his workes, was in an incredible reputation; and not any

thing of that he did moſt perfectly did content him. His houſe beeing on a fire, he cried to ſaue the Satyre, which was an admirable peice, not that he eſteemed it perfect, but rather imperfect in his fantaſie. I will ſay, that thoſe ſpirits haue Ide'as of formes, and proportions, which doe rauiſh all the reſt, in ſome ſcantling of their beauty. But for their contentment, it is not ſufficient, they haue remaining yet a great hunger.
                  Obſtinacy alſo, which is a terrible wilde beaſt, that no reaſon can appeaſe; hath done ſtrange things, which doe approach the magnificent workes of Vertue, and be but ſhadowes, idols, and fantaſies. There be a thouſand examples in hiſtories of the obſtinacie of the Iewes. This great Towne of Paris would furniſh out one, not onely extraordinary, but fearefull. They be helliſh rages bringing forth prodigious effects; which for that reſpect, are neither laudable nor immitable, becauſe they are without Vertue. A thouſand Apoſted-manſlayers, haue deſpiſed death, and knowing well that they could neuer eſcape, yet haue not forborne to execute their deſignes. They be in the Chronicles for an example of abhomination,

and not of imitation: But Iudith, and Debora, who did hazard themſelues for their people, whoſe ende was good and holy; haue left their memory glorious, with as much aſtoniſhment at the greatneſſe of their courage, as a laudable enuie to follow them in ſo laudable a careere.
                  There is yet a moouing cauſe, which is called Emulation, which may be defined; a deſire to doe better then others, or in deſpight of others. Emulation is the leauen of all faire deeds, if it be married with the feare to faile, as we haue already ſaid. It is the heauenly ſeed of Actions, truely worthy of praiſe, and of perpetuall memory. It is the ſacreed ſeed, which thruſts out the Palmes, the Laurells, and the Cedars; but for that it was not well ruled, nor vnderſtood, it hath often been an inſtrument of ſhame, and ruine. Alarum of the moſt ſleepie, quick-ſiluer of young and old, rauiſhment of the moſt vnmanly. If thy beauty were not painted, if thy Nectar were not poyſoned, if thou wert not giſguiſed and apparelled with borrowed garments, how excellent ſhouldeſt thou be Diuine Princeſſe, liuely, light of ſoules: but thou art

quite changed, and through the ignorance of men; more of an other, then of thy ſelfe. The feare of failing, muſt accompany this moouing: Into which whoſoeuer will narrowly looke, will iudge, that the good will to doe better then others, hath beene the Viper, which beeing borne, doth deuoure that which did beget it. Emulation the efficient cauſe of Vertue hath deuoured her part; hath deſtroied Vertue it ſelfe: they haue put to this drinke venemous ingredients, they haue troubled the cleare ſpring, they haue couered with a cloud, a faire Sun. Emulation ſhould giue a deſire to a man to doe perfectly well, according to Vertue; ſo as no man may doe better (at leaſt in will) with knowledge of the cauſe; and onely becauſe it muſt be ſo, and not becauſe others doe it. Although he onely ſhould remaine in this action, that no other ſhould trauell with this winde, that no other ſhould run at this tilt; moreouer that there ſhould no aduantage come to him thereby, either of greatnes or profit: yet notwithſtanding let him not leaue to ſeeke it with as much paſſion and vehemency. This ſhining flame of Vertue hath beene ſpoiled by ignorance, and by pride, deuilliſh ſerpent, ſo naturall

to man, this firſt reſort of ſinne; this father of death which hath mingled all the cards. Enuie is entred with it into this Prouince, theſe monſters haue foraged all: Men runne into hazards, they goe thereunto hanging downe their heads, they precipitate themſelues thereby, beeing not able to ſerue the Common-wealth; carried with rage they find nothing too hot; to exceed others they would haue wings, or feet of wind, as Achilles had. To him that asketh to what this tranſport tendeth; euery one will ſay (masking his intention) that it is a deſire to doe well. Vice neuer accuſeth it ſelfe. See the end which iudgeth of all. It was againſt a wall, at the ſhadow of ſmoakes of the Canon, and of the Harquebuzes, in a place where they could not annoy the enemies, where the hazard was all of raſh men, to the detriment of the Prince, and of the Common-wealth. From whence come theſe ſtormes? It is pride, it is ambition, violent paſſions, which do beare ſuch fruit. The deſire to ſee a mans ſelfe in greater eſteeme by fooles, thinking that therein conſiſteth the true glory, and the point of Honour. Valour is no foole, ſhe regardeth the beginning, the middeſt, and the end. This

faire triangle, is the rule of her motions and ſteps; ſhe knoweth the danger, ſhe goes thereto by the good way; her end is, to profit her King, or her Countrie, in doing her duty. Shee mockes at them, that makes themſelues be peirced for pleaſure, without beeing able to be profitable: ſhee ſaith, that they haue too much blood, (which they drew in old time from the Romane ſouldier that had beene raſh) ſhee vaunts that ſhee will ſell her ſelfe very deare; that they ſhall not haue her cheape, and that her Cypres trees ſhall not be alone, nor without fruite. If theſe furious courages, as I haue ſaid were corrected by iudgement; they would be without doubt, fit for all high and hard executions. They doe imploy themſelues moſt commonly in that which is leaſt neceſſary: and this gallant, and actiue humour is vnfitly loſt, with actions which are neither faire nor profitable.
                  Theſe are the principall outward cauſes, which doe thruſt the ſoules, guide the eies, carry the hands to great executions, and makes them ſee falſe actions of Vertue. There remaineth one, and the mother of all the artificiall 
                        Ʋalours. It is the Honour,

the Lanterne of the ſhip, the Pilot, and the Port. I ſay the appearing Honour, and not the true Honour. The appearing, or vulgar Honour is by force, to content others: the true Honour is voluntary to content ones ſelfe: the one, will onely ſhunne blame and reproach; the other leades to dangers, not only not to faile, but to doe well: the one lets himſelfe be drawne thereunto by feare of reproach, or elſe by this ſo martiall a zeale of a Gentleman: the other runnes thereunto by a laudable and gallant will, to profit the Commonwealth, and to doe vertuouſly. In which there is a notable difference. But if a man could read within their hearts, there be many that doe runne the fortune of their life (defending their bodies) that would haue no will to be at ſuch banquets, if they were not afraid, that they ſhould be afterwards made bluſh with ſhame. When ſuch people doe light vpon ſo hot worke, how they looſe their iudgement, how they goe all aſtray, how their heart doth pant, and their blood is all icie. They ſhould make imprecations in their ſoule againſt that heretique, which inuented theſe faire titles of duty and Vertue. Such men ſhould be diſpenſed withall for

wearing of ſwords, ſeeing they be ſo ill fitting thereunto, and Kings and Commonwealths ſhould alſo be diſpenſed with, for not giuing them any aduantage aboue other men. In which, notwithſtanding it muſt be conſidered, that there is a difference of thoſe, and the like actions of Vertue, as of white to black, and of the day to the night. He that is pricked forward only with a deſire not to fall into reproach and infamy, doth a laudable act, with ſome little beame of Vertue, and a feeble colour. The life whereof is kept by the apprehenſion of the blame. Theſe be ſoules halfe lightened. There be many that doe thus meete with hazards, beeing therein engaged, either for their ranke, or by reaſon of their places, or by ſome other occaſions they encounter-with, who goe to blowes gallantly in ſhew, yet would be glad to be out of it, what aduantage ſoeuer might come vnto them thereby. Be it, that they be borne great enough of themſelues, and happy without aſpiring further; or that their inclination doth not agree with this troubleſome trade. They watch perpetually, that their play may not be diſcouered. What a miſerable life is this? It is to giue a great aduantage

to fortune ouer them, making themſelues ſubect to a thouſand troubleſome accidents, in which men truely vertuous, and deſirous to doe wel, haue no ſhare. For marke you how they worke. They beleeue they are borne to doe well, not to be of the common ſort of men, to ſerue their Prince, and their Countrie; to aſſiſt the weake, to puniſh the wicked, to maintaine iuſtice. They know that they are obliged thereunto, by diuine and humane Lawes, as alſo by the Lawes of nature. What they doe is voluntary, hauing no other end but to doe well, expecting no recompence, carrying this incorruptible modell of true Honour in their vnderſtanding, which lifts them vp, inflames them, and tranſports them, with all the gracious inchauntments, with all the amarous bates of Vertue, which is the moſt rauiſhing figure that can be imagined. They goe to death without feare, and without apprehenſion, ſo much as humane nature can permit, not onely becauſe duty doth oblige them (that is too common) but becauſe they will produce a faire action. Others doe keepe themſelues from failing and doing euill, by carrying themſelues vertuouſly, becauſe duty doth

conſtraine, and ſtraightly binde them therunto; and theſe doe not expoſe ſo precious a gage as life, onely for the conſideration of that effect; but for the deſire they haue to profit others, and to approach the nearer by ſuch actions to the diuinity. Not to faile in things of great importance, not to fall into ſhame, and to keepe themſelues from reproach, is a common thing with the moſt part. But to make himſelfe remarkeable by doing well, to goe about to make himſelfe famous by faire actions; is not proper, but to them onely, that are wholy Vertuous. Thoſe ſoules girt about with the diuine beame, can bring forth nothing that is common, baſe, or vnworthie. Great things doe appertaine vnto them, and it is for them that the Cedars be planted.
                  The third pillar that ſuſtaineth the holy worke, of the moſt worthy Vertue that is amongſt men, is Habitude, that is to ſay, An action repeated, and done many times, which ought to be conſidered, as the true touch of armes, and the Soueraigne Iudge, which iudgeth in the laſt reſort of all faire actions. It is not all to know the danger, and to goe thereto willingly, as I haue ſaid, with all the circumſtances; but a man muſt

goe many times one maſters tricke onely: how bould ſoeuer he be, makes not a good artizan, neither doth one onely act of Vertue make a man vertuous. It is this Soueraigne ſounding plummet of hearts, that makes a man ſweat blood, and water. It is it that culleth out moſt curiouſly, it is the expert workman which endeth this triumphant portall, with all the dimenſions. There be an infinite number, who for that they haue not ballanced this high conſideration; or (to ſpeake better) not hauing conceiued, or imagined it, after one vertuous action only, haue ſounded the retreate, and ſo contented themſelues. There be others, after two or three faire actions, beſides their owne particular contentment, haue come to a preſumption, meaſuring themſelues by their ſhadow, full of pride: for the opinion they haue that they are of a good ſtampe, not knowing that the end iudgeth of all our life, and that there is no time limited to vertuous effects, but that which commeth with the coffin, and the burning torches. Not that I wil ſay, that they which are heaped vp with Honour, & by a thouſand ſufficient teſtimonies of their Valour, haue been made famous,

ſhall ſeeke all occaſions, and hazard themſelues like young men, or ſuch as haue done no great extraordinary matter. But whē occaſion ſhall be offred, & that the loſſe which they may make of themſelues ſhall not be ſo preiudiciall, as the profit of the Common-wealth ſhall be thereby great; they muſt doe like other men. This Carreere of Glory is infinite; a man muſt find no end of it, but by the laſt end; nor euer be weary or filled therewith, ſo long as his hand can furniſh his courage. We muſt not, for all that, come to ſuch vnmeaſurable paſſions, and vnruly motions of ſuch a blind and madde ambition, as Marius had; who ouerloaden with many yeares, as well as with victories; and buried (as a man would ſay) with the multitude of his Triumphes, did notwithſtanding beare enuy to young men. Too much is alwaies to be blamed. Habitude then is the laſt peice in order, and in perfection, it is one of the principall. There bee ſome, that once in their liues before their Prince haue done wonderfully. They were prepared for that blow: They would die, or goe out of the mire of their aunceſtors; enrich, and put themſelues to eaſe. The artifice was not euil, if they ſaued themſelues,

and reaped the fruit of hope; vnleſſe death had faſtened a nayle to their deſignes, from which beeing eſcaped, they had yet at the leaſt this pleaſure, to haue once in their liues done wel, and to hold that in common with the moſt honeſt men. Thoſe people flie at nothing but the Larke. They ſhould haue been in danger many times, furniſhed with all things requiſite, with all the armes of vnderſtanding and courage; heauenly armes of the proofe of ſhots of death, deſpiſing the graue, and not eſteeming any thing equall to the deſire of doing well, if they would haue been honoured with the triumphant Crowne, which is giuen to the vertuous. Among the muske of Canon-powder, all couered with the Aromatique perfumes, which the ſmoake of Harquebuzes doth caſt vpon the points of ſwords and pikes, the generous ſpirit doth exerciſe it ſelfe; there ſhe takes her meaſure; at this rigorous ſchoole ſhee learnes a diuine Miſtrisſhip: there ſhe gets her durable orders, not once, nor thrice, nor fowre times, but a thouſand times; euen as often as need is for the Common good. They which doe not meaſure themſelues by this ell, are friuolous ſhadowes, and (if I may ſay ſo) fantaſies

of true Vertue, whereof they haue but a vaine appearance. That likewiſe doth not endure.
                  All theſe things being exactly waighed, I am of opinion, that the cleare-ſighted wil pronounce a ſentence which cannot be retracted: that is, That there be very few men adorned with this incomparable vertue in perfection. Notwithſtanding ſome do approach thereunto more then others, and an infinite number may haue ſome ſeeds and ſprigs thereof, like weake beames from ſo ſupernaturall a light. Thou that goeſt, ſeeking by the conſtellation of ſtarres, by the compoſition of humours, by the quality of the blood, ſo rare a treaſure, know thou art an Heretique. This ſparkling Planet of Mars doth not influe vigour enough. The fowre elementary qualities doe not know what it is to go to blowes; they hate them, the bloud cannot vnderſtand ſo high a leſſon, quite contrary to his beeing. This apprentiſhip doth come from elſewhere. It is true (as I haue ſaid) that there bee ſome ſoules better diſpoſed to Vertue, then others; and likewiſe ſome bodies more fit to receiue the faire influences of the ſoule.
                  Yet for all that, all men generally and

naturally doe feare death. It is a grieuous thing to forſake this pleaſing light of the day, and to goe with wormes, whatſoeuer is imagined. This default comes from ſin, this weakeneſſe hath drawne from thence her beginning. It brought death, which is irkeſome to man, becauſe it was not ſo at the firſt creation. Without going any higher in Theologie, I will follow my point. The feare of death, mans perpetuall Hoſteſſe, whoſe efficient cauſe, matter and forme, be within the bones, the blood, and the arteries, is a miſerable worker of all the irreſotions which doe ariue for this ſubiect. Feare to die, the hereditary maladie, the domeſticall weakenes, the naturall falling-ſickeneſſe to man, is the beginner of all infirmities, to them that doe not thinke to liue well. Now to liue well, a man muſt caſt his eyes vpon his carriage, he muſt thinke of the end, he muſt meditate vpon this common and laſt paſſage of men. It was all the Philoſophy of the Auncients, which in truth is a good part of perfection, though not the principall. To meditate vpon death, to imagine that after this ſhort and painefull life, there is an eternall and bleſſed life, is to enter into the way of Vertue, though not

to goe to the ende. This anſwereth to that diuine ſentence, Know thy ſelfe, repreſent thy ſelfe that thou art a cleare beame of God, that thy houſe is heauen, that the diuine eſſences doe pertaine to thee of proximitie, that thou art a paſſenger in this miſerable life, that Vertue is the onely image, whereof thou muſt bee an Idolater, and which muſt wholly gouerne thee. Theſe conſiderations doe open the barre to faire actions, but the gate is yet ſhut. This Vertue is excellent without doubt, which prepareth the ſoules to good, & lifteth vp thy vnderſtanding to all high & worthy things. It is not enough for all that: To command a mans ſelfe is more then all that. The other hath the tongue, this the hand; one the word, the other the effect; the one prepareth the ſoule to the diet, the other is the diet it ſelfe; the one mooues humours, the other purges them; the one guides, the other executes: To conclude, the one beginneth, & the other endeth the work. To know a mans ſelfe, anſwereth to the meditation of death: to command a mans ſelfe, anſwereth to the contempt of death. The auncients made their Philoſophy and loue of wiſdome, meditation of death only, whereas they ſhould

haue ſaid, that it was the meditation and contempt both together. For theſe two be ſiſter-germanes, and inſeparable, to conduct to the ſacred Temple of Sapience. But what is this attracting brightnes? what is this charmious figure? what is this diuine ladder, which when in hath inlightened by the diſcourſe of reaſon, and by the knowledge of our ſelues, and burned by the pleaſing flames of the loue of it, doth make vs enter into heauen? It is Magnanimitie, which is the contempt of death. What is the end of it? to doe alwaies well. If they aske, what Temples, what Sacrifices ſhee deſireth? She will anſwer, that ſhee is all that, that ſhe hath all in her ſelfe. If they doe preſſe her, to tell what mooueth her; ſhe will ſay, That it is onely her affection to cary her ſelfe in all things vertuouſly. Why ſhe doth not feare death? Becauſe ſhe feareth her ſelfe more. Why ſhe doth not deſire the conuerſation of life, ſo ſweete? Becauſe to liue without Vertue, is to be dead, without any hope to liue againe. Let them queſtion her euery manner of way, ſhe ſhall be as ready and wiſe to anſwer, as firme and couragious to reſiſt. Now as you ſee, to know a mans ſelfe goeth not ſo forward as

to command a mans ſelfe: ſo it muſt be ſaid, that to meditate vpon death is not ſo much as to deſpiſe it. Many doe know their own infirmities, they haue euen drawne the very picture of them with all the liuely colours, there wants nothing. They know that they are ſubiect to a thouſand looſe paſſions; they reſolue to combate theſe domeſticall enemies; they prepare themſelues thereunto; and euen in the very inſtant that they are ready to come to handy-blowes, they do as Dolon did in Homer, who caſt away his Buckler in the cheife time of the skirmiſh; or like to him, who after hee had made proud marches cries out againſt his follies; I ſee the beſt and like it, and doe follow the worſt. It is cowardize, they haue not force enough to reſiſt, hauing but one feeble obſcure ſparke of Vertue, which hath not the power to heate, though it giue light. They which commaund themſelues, doe ſhewe that they haue beene longer exerciſed in this faire Academy, that they haue beene vpon the iuſting, or fencing place: that they haue wreſtled againſt the prodiges of vice, and throwne them to the ground: which makes them worthy of praiſe, and to haue their names

graued in letters of gold in the holy Temple of Honour. This then anſwereth to the contempt of death, which cannot bee familiar with a man but by 
                        Ʋalour, which doth not conſiſt onely in marſhall actions, neither is encloſed with thoſe walles alone; becauſe there bee a thouſand other inſtruments of this cruell enemy of nature, beſides thoſe of warre. Socrates who ſwallowed hemlocke, did as much contemne death, as Alexander in the middeſt of his combates. The one was, as it were tranſported with marſhall fury; and the other was no more mooued, ſeeing his death prepared, then if they had come to inuite to runne at the playes of Olympus: The one was almoſt out of himſelfe with choller: the other was altogether in himſelfe, and quite out of the frailty of man, through a firme and conſtant reſolution to this laſt ſtep. Both of them did it through greatneſſe of courage; Valour was in them both, all the worke was hers. Notwithſtanding, the one of them was inflamed with the ardour of young blood, with ambition and with the deſire to make himſelfe venerable to poſterity: the other was not ſtupide, nor inſenſible, but he had a conſtant coldnes,

a firme reſolution, with diſcourſe, iudgement, and meditation, hauing no other end, but manfully to reſiſt fortune, and death, without beeing thruſt on by conſideration of worldly vanities. Wherein is to be noted, that theſe latter parts be euen as neceſſary as the others; and that the great and vnheard of effects of Vertue, doe proceede cheifely from the vnderſtanding, and intelligence. Truely, they which haue not learned this magnificent Science, but amongſt Piſtolls, and Pikes, haue a 
                        Ʋalour, more brutiſh, leſſe conſidering, and leſſe wiſe. They which haue exerciſed their forces onely in Plato his walke, in the ſtudy, haue a more ſoft ſpirit, and which doth not ſeeme ſo vigorous againſt euill (becauſe experience aſſureth weaknes, and is ordinarily ſeene, among the blood and the ſword) it maketh the courages more cowardly, and ſupporteth the moſt imbecill; for as much as cuſtome is another nature. The contempt of death for them is by imagination in the aire, not meeting as others doe, among them that are hurt, ſlaine, and daily at blowes. True it is that Socrates had married his ſpirit with his hand, the greatneſſe of his courage with his ſword, and his high

imaginations with execution and proofe. After he had meditated and layed the foundations of this faire Pyramides, by the diuine Idea's of his vnderſtanding, and by that proud proiect which carried him away in his thought, he put his hand to the worke. Wee muſt not meruaile, if by this band which is not common, he brought forth no common thing.
                  Now, I haue ſaid that it is not at the Warre only that magnanimity is exerciſed; a long impriſonment, pouerty, maladies, the loſſe of friends, and other accidents, be proofes of a courage manly, and oftentimes more aſſured then of death it ſelfe. In the meane time, a man muſt well conſider what contempt of death is. A man doth not feare death, onely for the griefes that it brings vs, which are ſoone paſſed; but for the pleaſure whereof it depriueth vs, and for the delights of life; which comes of follie, ignorance, and want of meditation. That which ones leaues, giues more paine, then that which one feeles; and whoſoeuer would take away the apprehenſion of this bitterneſſe, ſhould but onely taſt it. The euill comes from the fantaſie, which hath moſt force where there is leaſt reaſon.

Death is made ſo redoubtable, becauſe it takes from vs the ioyes of life, and for that we are tied to that which doth leaſt appertaine vnto vs. For feeble pleaſures, the long vſe whereof ſhould be odious vnto vs: For lewd deſires which haue found our taſt ſicke, to the end to gaine yet ſome dayes, and to haue a miſerable delay, and a ſhamefull reſpite; a man would lengthen the parchment, and deferre the matter; ſo loath is a man to ariue. All that proceeds from want of iudgement, for as much as we haue lodged our Soueraigne good where it is not, and that we ſeeke it for the moſt part by his contrary. To haue then the contempt of death, we muſt rather haue knowledge of the life that is truely worthy of man. Neither could the lot of Africa, nor Circes, nor the Syrens, nor all the attracting delights of the nymph Calypſo, retaine the wiſe Greeke. His deſignes were more lofty, he was tyed with more ſtrong bonds; the knowledge which he had of a greater bleſſe, made him enter into an extraordinary diſdaine of theſe vnworthy pleaſures. Contraries one neare the other doe ſhine moſt: So the diſcourſes of reaſon, be cleare Lampes, which ſhew the way in the darknes

of our blindnes; it is by them that we vnderſtand what to follow, and to take our reſolution to doe that which doth moſt carry a man beyond man. There is no Vertue that can lead through theſe thornes, through theſe rugged rockes, and through theſe fearefull ſolitarineſſes to perfection; but magnanimity. Shee is without ignorance knowing all things, hauing digeſted all doubts, chaſed all clouds, taken away all ſcruples, by the faire and agreeable Theorique meditation, which would haue beene vnfruitefull, if it had not beene put in vſe, by this Queene of Vertues. This heauenly Queene then, hauing carried her intelligence, vpon all that concerneth man, and hauing ſported her ſelfe through all this great Theatre of the world, after ſhee had waighed, 
                        •
                     ounded, and calculated all: Shee knew that well-doing was the higheſt point at which humane nature could ariue. Glad of this knowledge, and wholly tranſported with admiration of her owne diuine eſſence; ſhee hath made choice of this golden ſleece, and there erected her conqueſts. She is ſo reſolued. This is not all, ſhee is gone into action. Shee is in the conflict, ſhe remaines glittering with victorious

glory ouer her enemies. To this beginning a thouſand difficulties are oppoſed to her deſignes. Feeble nature, in a traunce with feare, ſo ſenſible, open to all ſorts of euills, perfumed ſoft laſciuious pleaſures, couered with amber and muske, with bodies without armes, and legges, with maymed ſhapes, with ſad goings, in ſome, ioyes, and griefes, pell-mell, will violently pull the armes out of her hands. Shee hath ouerthrowne all, ſhee hath vanquiſhed all, ſhee remaines Miſtreſſe of the field. Let them cut, ſlaſh, burne, let all the world come together to fall; a man accompanied with this incomparable Vertue, remaines without looſening, ſtiffe, and firme, as marble. Admirable rampier againſt misfortunes, and moſt ſtrange euents; how diuine thou art faire Vertue, ſeeing thou doeſt draw men from the gouernement of humanity, how high and eleuated thou art, ſeeing thou doeſt roote from the center of the earth, the earth it ſelfe; how ſtrong thou art, ſeeing thou doeſt giue the forces of Sampſon, to the imbecillity of humane nature, which is weaknes it ſelfe; how aboue humane thou art, ſeeing thou doeſt make our ſenſes leape ouer the barres of ſenſe;

and how rare thou art, ſeeing thou art ſo difficill. If I did thinke to be exempt from the blame of preſumption for enterprizing to ſpeake of ſo high a ſubiect; I would produce for an example, a ſpirit wholly royall, (that is to ſay) fully perfect. Let a man behold it on all ſides, he will iudge it ſuch as I deſire it in this Diſcourſe.
                  Sir, You that are a man, and aboue men, (as ſuch an one) giue me leaue to be ſo bold to ſpeake of this Vertue, which is admired and reuerenced in you, with many others which haue adiudged you the prize, aboue all Princes of the World. As a man ſuffer me to ſpeake of your Vertue. As aboue men, for that you are glittering with ſo many perfections aboue humane. Pardon my preſumption, in conſideration of the zeale which I haue to honour that which deſerues it. As a King permit me to ſpeake the truth. Let a man looke on all ſides, with the eyes of enuy, and euill ſpeaking that ſpares nothing; and with the eyes of iudgement, which doe waigh all things as is meet, taking away thoſe domeſtique ſorcereſſes of Kings Courts, flatterie and paſſion; he ſhall ſee, that the magnanimitie of our great Henry is incomparable, and ſuch

as a man would deſire in perfection. The deſire to make himſelfe immortall, by the renowne which preacheth the faire deedes after the Tombe, hath not made him produce ſo many famous military acts. For he that hath his vnderſtanding as cleare, as his courage heroicall, knowes right well that Princes may make themſelues ſo by a thouſand other effects of Vertue. Adrian, Traiane, Seuerus, and many other the moſt famous Emperours, without giuing one blow with a ſword, by iuſtice, ſweetnes, magnificence, prudence, and liberalitie haue gotten to themſelues, offerings and ſacrifices in the Temple of Memorie. Neither hath ambition and couetouſneſſe giuen him ſo many hats of triumphs. Theſe are the three ſtrongeſt and violenteſt paſſions, which do moſt rule men. After that God had called him to this Eſtate by a lawfull ſucceſſion, what along time were all his actions rauiſhments to all the World, and monſtrous workes? His hand, and his vnderſtanding did euery day miracles. The deſire to raigne could neuer ſhake his ſoule: when all were banded againſt him, and that (becauſe hee would not be ſprinckled with holy-water) all ſwore his ruine in the moſt part of Chriſtendome.

During theſe ſtormes, and thunder-bolts, he made a counter-battery, he thundered, he ſtormed by the invincible force of his courage, which could not be vanquiſhed, but by his owne force. Forſaken of ſtrangers, betrayed of his owne, depriued of meanes, he ſuſtained a waight which was not to be borne but by him. He ſurmounted all mortall accidents, he trode time and fortune vnder his feet, he executed that which was iudged of all moſt impoſſible. He relyed vpon few, but his lofty ſpirit, which thought it ſhould faile in forſaking his firſt way, held it ſelfe immoueable among the torrents. It was Magnanimity, which as a celeſtial anchor did ward ſo many ſea blowes, in ſo horrible & ſudden a ſeatempeſt. That very thing, by a more high cōſideration, made him obedient to reaſon, to gaine by a iuſt change the reputatiō to be equall and iudicious; and to take away the imagination, to be vnpitifull and obſtinate. Behold two notable victories, he hath ſurmounted his friends, and his enemies, he hath vanquiſhed himſelfe. If theſe two frenzies of men that I haue ſpoken of, Ambition and the deſire of riches, had had aduantage ouer him; he would from the firſt

day (to auoid ſo many troubles, to deſtroy wholly ſo many cruell Hydraes, againſt which he was forced to conteſt ſo long) haue yeelded: but hee beleeued hee ſhould haue done wrong to his Vertue.
                  Not any of the other accidentall cauſes alleadged, did make him perſeuere in that high reſolution but one onely, which is, the preſence of the King. He was alwaies with him. This continuall repreſentation, increaſed his courage, raiſed vp his ſpirit, and ſtrengthened his armes. He did feare to do any thing vnworthy of the King, he would alwaies be like himſelfe. Becauſe I haue diſcourſed at length, of this particularity, in the treatiſe which I made vpon the conuerſation of his Maieſtie, I will ſpeake no more of it. After that this excellent Prince had the Flowre de Luce aſſured, and the Crown well faſtened vpon his head, let a man mark all his actions; he ſhall ſee that he hath alwaies been the ſame man he was before, with the ſame greatnes of courage, hauing no other aime, but to doe well, nor other end but the ſafetie of his people. It would require many Volumes, to deſcribe worthily the high and incredible executions of this great Captaine. With what induſtry,

with what inuentions hath this admirable King, raiſed ſo many faire Pyramides, erected ſo many Coloſſes, built ſo many Theatres, and Amphi-theatres of his glory? with the magnanimity, which hath not carried, but wrapt him to infinite perils, made his body of marble with continuall toyling, his ſpirit alwaies watching in the ambuſhes of fortune, his heart infatigable to all ſorts of trauells, and as vnconquerable by his enemies, as by the infinite paines which he ſuffred in this perpetual torment. Among ſo many miſeries, as enuy, fortune, the corruptiō of the age, the vnheard of obſtinacy of his ſubiects, who would haue buried themſelues aliue haue ſhewed, with ſo much cōfuſiō: let vs a litle behold the incō
                     parable greatnes of the vertue of this Chriſtian Hercules. At theſe earthquaks, at theſe ouertures of the deeps, at theſe inundations, at theſe furious and enraged winds, he continued firme as a rocke. By his Prudence he hath brought a ſleepe the waking Dragons; by his force he hath put in peices the moſt ſtrong; by his liberalitie, he hath troden vnder foot the moſt inſatiable, to chaſe them as Harpyes, to the comfort of his people; by his ſweetneſſe he hath hazarded

his life a thouſand times, to keepe it for his owne; and by his mercie, hee hath expoſed himſelfe as a ſacrifice, to redeeme his Kingdome from the captiuity of Egypt.
                  
                  Valourous King, and gentle Father: Among ſo many troubles, the laſt care that he had was of himſelfe, whom he had forgotten for others. Whoſoeuer ſhall well behold all without paſſion, will be amazed, as if he had ſeen the face of Meduſa, and will not beleeue his eyes, much leſſe his eares, and his fantaſie; and will be conſtrained to ſwoone with admiration. In this Table, there is not ſo much as a figure, or lineament, not ſo much as a ſhadow, either of Ambition or Couetouſneſſe: All is Vertue.
                  This laſt proofe, ſo notable, and ſo important to the Eſtate, hath of new ſhewed by good tokens, that this holy fire of Vertue, and of the deſire to doe well, which kindled him with ſo much ardour, hath loſt nothing of his gallantnes and extraordinary vigour. He ran to that fearefull and vnexpected blow, and of Amious, which had ſhaken this Eſtate, filled with aſtoniſhment both ſtrangers and all the Realme, which were but newly recouered from ſo long a ſicknes.

Hee had ſeene at Rouen the Anatomic of France, ſo leane, that it had nothing but skin and bone, hauing the body all couered with vlcers, afflicted with a lingring ague, which the continuall ague had left her, all in a gangrene, full of miſeries, and as it were deſperate of remedy, with a generall ſubuerſion of her Iuſtice and Piety. At this time then, our King, knowing better then any other ſo much neceſſitie, without men, without mony, not ſeeing almoſt any means to remedy this high miſchiefe, which had ſeized this Eſtate in a time ſo dangerous, put on with the zeale to ſuccour his people, iealous of the glory of his ſubiects, as deſirous both of their conſeruation, and of their felicitie, went ſpeedily to beſiege this great and ſtrong Towne; where to ſpeake better he beſieged himſelfe. His ſpirit and courage did neuer find any thing difficil. There was meanes to recouer this faire piece, the way thereto was open. He was called by the repoſe whereof he had need, to breath a little after ſo long trauells. The neceſſity and pouertie of the Realme enuited him. They offered conditions that he might accept, as others haue done in like caſe without reproach. But becauſe hee would not

leaue ſo much as a ſhadow of want of faith to ſtrangers, nor of affection to the dignitie and ſplendor of his Name, and honour of the Kingdome, hee choſe rather to paſſe through the mountaine, then through the plaine. Beeing there, he was furniſhed at all points, expoſing himſelfe to a thouſand dangers to ſaue the Commonwealth. Iudgment guided him. It was to aſſure his people; hee ſhewed himſelfe as hee is; it was needfull for the ſmall number that he had. For the ſpace of fowre moneths, they within tooke more then thoſe without, which they knew wel. The preſence of this French Ceſar ſerued for a mighty army, he found himſelfe ſufficient. His incomparable zeale to the publique good, the neceſſity of the times, and his diuine courage would haue it ſo. All went therein according to the compaſſe of Vertue. There was but one vnequall motion, (I put one knee to the ground) too much courage was the moſt dangerous enemy, both of himſelfe and of France. Theſe high ſpirits, wholly diuine, which doe act by ſome celeſtial inſpiration, doe deſpiſe with diſdaine the moſt dangerous accidents, and doe beleeue that no mortall thing hath power ouer them. The

Commonwealth cries, let there be regard had to the particular conſeruation, for the generall. This is in this admirable Prince a defect which teſtifieth a rare perfection, and a figure of humanity, which ſurpaſſeth man.
                  I haue ſaid here before; that Magnamity was the Queene of Vertues: I ſay, ſhee is their Mother, and hath engendred them all in our King. It is by her, that the ſpirit making no account of vulgar, and common things, penetrating the obſcurities of ignorance, and diſperſing them, can diſcerne the day from the night, the good from the euill, to be armed againſt all ſorts of euents, with the light of prudence. It is ſhee, that makes a man forgiue his enemies, by ſetting his foot vpon the throate of that deſpitefull ſaluage beaſt reuenge; ſo naturall to man, a Vertue very extraordinary, as being quite contrary to nature; a triumph, which ſurpaſſeth all the triumphs of Marius, a glorious victory, as rare as dificill. It is ſhee, who burying that deformed and inſatiable furie couetouſnes, rendreth to euery one, that which is his due, not retaining the leaſt diſpleaſure for hauing the goods of another man; beeing content with

her ſelfe, and not knowing any thing that may equall her. It is ſhe that driueth away Vanity, deſpiſing all the ſmoakes which the puſilanimious doe adore. Shee flies at the Kite, and at the Riuer, meddles with ſubiects that are moſt ſolide, and thinkes that they which ſtay themſelues at petty things, be not capable of great ones. Which is weaknes, either they doe not knowe them, which is ignorance; or doe deſpiſe them which is folly. It is ſhe which makes no account of the flowers, and fruites of fortune, which be the riches, that ſhee holds as one of her inſtruments, wherewith ſhe diſtributes magnificently, thinking that to doe good to others, and to make many happy, makes a man approach neareſt to God. It is ſhe, that baniſheth cruelty, preſumption, pride, and all the other deformities, which makes the ſoule vnknowne to it ſelfe. It is ſhe that mockes at Fortune that afflicteth by her perſeuerance the afflictions themſelues, that braueth neceſſity, that laughes among hurts, in the gulphes of death, in the middeſt of blood, fire, ſulphure, the ſhip-pitch, & the harquebuſſes. In inſupportable maladies, ſhee makes her ſelfe inſupportable to the ſicknes it ſelfe,

which cannot ſuffer her, ſhe findes her ſelfe inuincible throughout: why? becauſe ſhe beeing not accuſtomed to be ſubdued, doth not know any thing in the world higher then her ſelfe, ſhe aſpireth to heauen, from whence ſhee beleeues ſhee is come, ſhee makes enuie, and all other follies of men, to burſt with deſpite, which ſhee contemneth, and driueth farre from her. In good fortunes, and happy ſucceſſes, which oftentimes, makes the moſt temperate diſordered, ſhe ſhewes her ſelfe modeſt. So is ſhe the Mother of courteſie, and of mercy. In the greateſt croſſes, and moſt furious blowes, of miſcheifes, ſhee is inconquerable, high eleuated, by her conſtant reſolution. Shee giues place to none, either in bounty or force, alwayes in the ſame ballance, that is to ſay, alwayes like her ſelfe. It is no meruaile, if fewe men be indued with this ſo perfect a Vertue, ſeeing that all that is within and without in man, is bent againſt it, whole man is repugnant vnto it. Nature, (as I haue ſaid) doth learne the quite contrary, to that ſhee ſheweth; fleſh and blood be her mortall enemies; imagination, and apprehenſion, her capitall enemies. She paſſeth further, and makes

her ſelfe place, offring a terrible drinke of gall to the naturall diſtaſt of man. That is the reaſon, the Auncients did make Altars, erect ſtatues, build Temples, iudge of triumphes, eleuate Pyramedes to the memory of them which had employed their liues for the Commonwealth. The Scepters, the Crownes, and all the orders of Honour which be in the world, were inuented for this end, to giue courage to men to looſe themſelues for others. Theſe be the dazelings and the magicke inchauntments, that humane weakeneſſe hath need of, not onely to incite, but to tranſport them to dificill, and perillous actions, ſo troubleſome is this leſſon to man. Yet all this preparation, is onely for courages leaſt noble, and for ſpirits leaſt accompliſhed: for Vertue regards nothing but her owne action, ſhee ſees no further, ſhee is her ſelfe the bounds of her partition, no other thing belonging to her, ſhee giues ouer her part to weaknes, neither hope of reward, nor the apprehenſion of any blame, nor the feare of puniſhment, nor any other common, or ordinary conſiderations doe mooue her. One thing onely commaunds her with a wand, the deſire to doe well. Yet my meaning

is not, that a vertuous man ſhould refuſe the iuſt Honours that are done vnto him, as did the auncient Cato, who would neuer ſuffer any Statues to bee erected for him: but I ſay, that ſhould not be his intention, but the conſideration onely of the vertuous action. The moſt magnanimious themſelues haue need of ſome prouocation, to awaken their ſpirits, which otherwiſe would be more ſleepie, and more ſoft. They be men It is a default of humanity. Man that is wholly borne to miſerie, hath need of outward obiects to mooue his ſtupidity, and to warme his ice. Hee hath neede of a wheele, with a great ſpring and a very ſharpe fire. But if there may be found any ſpirits of this diuine ſtampe, it muſt be in this Kingdome: Although ambition, and anarice, haue almoſt corrupted all. There remaines yet of theſe incorruptible Virgins, which be all of fire in laudable actions. Among this faire Nobility of France, there may be ſeene ſome, who haue this Vertue within a little, euen as I doe repreſent it; and abundance that doe approach vnto it. It is alſo the light of the world, the quinteſcence of men, the admiration of the earth, the firme foundation of this puiſſant

Eſtate, the ſoule of the Royalty, and the gliſtering day of this great Court. She is borne wholly to Vertue: Shee of whom I ſpeake is her familiar. Shee hath but too much tranſport in perill, ſhee would caſt her ſelfe into the deepe, ſhee ſhould rather be deiected, ſhee flies with gallantneſſe, which carries her too often to timerity, and to quarrells. Theſe be two maimes, which doe hinder the perfection of this Vertue, which is neither fooliſh nor quarrelſome; which intruth cannot ſuffer an iniurie, but doth well waigh it, before ſhee be prouoked; which hath no pride, and will not take any aduantage vpon another, but by worthy actions; which is neither a ſwaggerer, nor contemptuous. Becauſe ſhee contents her ſelfe with effects, and mockes at the reſt. If theſe two defaults were cut off, what great perſons would France bring forth? What excellent pollitiques? What worthy Captaines? Our King is happy to haue ſo many faire lights to lighten this Eſtate; ſo many vnmooueable vaults to ſuſtaine it, ſo many ſtrong baſtions to defend it. And you Nobility, how you are fauoured of heauen to haue ſuch a Head, ſo ſhining

with a thouſand Sunnes of Honour, and ſo couered with Crownes of glory. It is the greatneſſe of Kings, to haue neare them a multitude of perſons famous by excellent markes. The glory of Iupiter had beene ſmall, if he had raigned ouer the Cyclops, the Centaures, and the Satyres onely. The inuincible Mars, the venerable Saturne, and thoſe other gods, made his Empire redoubtable. One Lyon had rather obey another, then to haue no commandement, but ouer the Foynes of Alexandria, and the Apes of the great Caire.
                  
                  If any man thinke, that I doe ſet out an imaginary Vertue, and which cannot be in man, in that faſhion that I deſcribe it, but by diuine inſpiration; let him know (if he pleaſe) that extraordinary actions alſo, doe not come but from heauen. In truth I confeſſe, it is very hard in this ſo peruerſe a time, wherein the foundations of all Vertues, be turned topſie-turuie. But let a man behold the auncient Romanes, the Lacedemonians, and the Athenians, they ſhall there marke out Scipio's, Epaminondaſe's, and Ariſtide's, who haue had this Vertue of Magnanimity, with all the conditions and circumſtances

alleadged. Why ſhall not the Frenchmen be as capable, ſeeing they haue inherited by their great Vertues, to thoſe of the auncients? I will not ſpeak of Charlemayne, and of the worthies. During the raigne of King Francis the 1. how many notable, and admirable perſonages did honour France? In that time there was the moſt magnificent, and triumphant Colledge of Honour, that was vnder the heauens, to make Vertue be beloued, to daaw a man from the Centre, and to make him a demygod among men. It was the order of the King. This temple of glory, and of Vertue, was ſo ſacred, that at that time, there were found in all the Realme but thirteene, that were worthy to enter therein. It is another diſcourſe, which I will leaue for this time, and will ſay only, that this high, excellent, and diuine mother of Vertues, Magnanimity, may be acquired by diſcourſe, and by vſe, and that a man may make himſelfe capable of it. Ignorance, for that it knowes her not in all her parts, is one of the ſtrongeſt barres, that doth hinder the laudable deſignes of them, which doe aſpire to effects, which doe drawe out of the mire, and

out of the ordinary high-way. Pride mingles it ſelfe there among, with other defects which doe ſtrangle the faireſt actions at their birth, and makes abortiues thereof inſtead of perfect formes. The moſt part haue an opinion that it muſt be ſo, others are perſwaded thereunto becauſe they are brought vp in that errour. A long cuſtome hath made them ſo ſicke of the Lethargie. It is but want of curioſitie, to ſeeke out wherein lyeth cheifely the point, which raiſeth a man moſt high. If that were very exactly waighed, one ſhould roote out all the euill rootes, one ſhould cut off all the rotten branches, one ſhould cleanſe this faire tree of life, which makes a man deſpiſe death, beate fortune and time to the ground, and triumph ouer all humane things. There is nothing impoſſible to a generous ſpirit. If it bee guided by a ſolide iudgement, it will alwayes chooſe the beſt. All the circumſtances aboue-ſaid, are to be neerely conſidered in this Vertue ſo rare, and dificill, that her name is prophaned, which I will paint out, as it ought and may be, and as it muſt be apprehended.
                  
                     
Let them then, that are in the heate of the skirmiſh, couered with blood, earth and ſmoake, preſſed of all ſides, thruſt, ſtrooke, and peirced, ſay in their conſciences how they doe there, how they like: let them ſound themſelues, let them not flatter, nor pardon themſelues any fault: let them behold themſelues, in all their looks, if their hearts remaine aſſured, firme, and without feare; if they keepe their iudgement; if they be neither tranſported with furie, nor rage; if all their ſteps bee compaſſed according to the time, the occaſion, and the place; if the eye doe accompany the hand, the hand the foote, the vnderſtanding, and the courage, all three, without doubt they may be called Gentle companions. Theſe be good teſtimonies, but yet a man may reiect them, if they be not accompanied with other proofes. If the deſire of Vertue onely, and the conſideration, of the ſeruice of the Prince, of the good of the Commonwealth, of the protection of the weake, or other very iuſt cauſes, doe leade them to theſe tragicke feaſts, they are worthy of Laurell. But if they haue many times rendred ſuch proofes, and that

the end be altogether for the faire action, and neither ignorance, ambition, nor vanities, haue part in the worke; they muſt Crowne them with palme, and conſecrate ſtatues vnto them. Let not them that haue not yet attained, the third ſtep of this faire ladder, by which men do climbe to immortality, be out of heart, and let them know, that the diſcourſe of reaſon, meditation, and experience, will bring vnto them with the time, if they will imploy their vnderſtanding, and take paines therein, that which the firſt haue acquired. Let others that ſhall haue but ſome weake tract of this faire table, and ſimple mouldes of ſo rare a building, reuerence the firſt, honour the ſecond, and endeauour to imitate them. or make their vowes to ſome other Saint, that may be more fauourable vnto them. Alſo let not the firſt thinke that there bee certaine regular limits in doing well. Let them beleeue, that Vertue neuer waxeth old, to the end that their laſt act may anſwer to the former. Let not them that doe ſecond the Vertue of the moſt excellent, be rauiſhed with ioy, for that they haue giuen ſome good teſtimony of their Valour; neither

let them be reiected becauſe they haue not in perfection the ornaments of others. Let not the laſt deſpaire in this rough roade, becauſe they know themſelues a little hindred therein. So the moſt vertuous following their way, ſhall continue to the ende, which Crownes the worke; the others ſhall endeauour with the time to ſucceed them in faire actions as in will, and knowledge: And the laſt ſhall change their deſignes by deſpaire, or their condition by their amendment.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   