
      
         
            
            
            A TRYALL OF FAITH: BY THE TOVCH-STONE OF THE GOSPEL, THE WORD OF FAITH.
            WHEREBY CHRISTIANS MAY diſcerne whether or no, they have a ſaving FAITH.
            Firſt preached in the Pariſh Church of St 
               Nic. Col. Abby London, by WILLIAM CHIBALD Paſtor there; and now publiſhed for the further benefit of that his Congregation, and all other that confeſſe with their mouth the LORD IESVS, and with their heart beleeve on him vnto Salvation.
            
               1. THES. 5.21.
               Try all things: hold faſt that which is good.
            
            LONDON, Printed by G.P. for Iohn Teage: and are to be ſold in Pauls Church-yard, at the Signe of the Golden Ball. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, D. LANGTON, D. of Divinitie, and Preſident of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford; and to all the Fellowes and Students of that worthy SOCIETIE.
            
               Right Worſhipfull and worthy,
            
            
               TO dedicate Books,Luk. 1.1, 2, 3, 4 ſpecially ſuch as concern the Goſpell, is both ancient, common, and commendable, in the Churches of Chriſt. The ends thereof are, the Authors ſhewing reſpect to the Patron, and the Patrons giving countenance to the Authors Work:

and the meane to attaine unto both theſe ends, is relation in ſome kinde or degree betwixt them both. In which reſpect, having penned a Treatiſe concerning the Faith of the Goſpell, and upon requeſt printed it, I made bold to dedicate it unto your Worſhips, as beeing the fittest perſons to bee Patrons thereof; not onely becauſe you were the firſt in my conſultation, and the laſt in my reſolution about the dedicating of it; but alſo, and chiefly, in reſpect of ſome relation betwixt your Worſhips, and the matter and Author of the Booke. In reſpect of the matter, I preſumed you would countenance it, becauſe the Subiect thereof, is generally a point of Divinitie, whereof ſome of you are Doctors, many Batchelors, moſt

Preachers, and all Students (I hope) more or leſse, ſpecially it is that point of Divinity that is Faith in Chriſt, which (as Proteſtants) you all profeſſe; and more particularly it concernes that point of Faith that is Tryall, which (as Chriſtians) I truſt you doe all practiſe. In regard of the Author likewiſe, I thought you would protect it, becauſe as hee is now a Miniſter of the Church, ſo was he once a Student and member of your Houſe. Vouchſafe therefore, I pray you the Head and Superiour members, to looke downe upon an inferiour part of your body, bending it ſelfe to doe you reverence and obeyſance. Amongſt you I received the firſt ſeeds of Divinitie; unto you therefore I offer the firſt fruits of

my Miniſterie for the Preſſe, not doubting but that you will taſte, relliſh, and well digeſt the ſame. My purpoſe herein is, not to reade you a Lecture of what you know not: but to render you ſome account of that little I know in this point, which may be a Remembrancer unto you of what you haue already learned. Neither yet do I tender it, becauſe I thinke, it doth in it ſelfe deſerve, to be a Preſent, but that it may in time ſerve to bee a Preſident unto others, who may teſtifie the like duty, upon the like occaſion. In hope of your free favour herein, I humbly ſubmit my Tryal of Faith, to your Tryall and Cenſure; and heartily commit your perſons, and ſtudies, to the protection, & direction of God, who giue unto you all,

the comforts of a ſaving Faith in this life, and the end thereof, at the end of this life, by Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               
                  From my houſe in Old-Fiſh-ſtreet, London.
                  
                     April 20. 1622.
                  
               
               Your Worſhip in all Chriſtian duty at your ſervice, W. C.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            TO ALL MY LOVING NEIGHBOVRS, THE Inhabitants of the Pariſh of St 
               Nic. Col. Abby in Old-Fiſh-ſtreet, London: W. C. their Paſtor wiſheth that they may be kept, by the power of GOD, through faith unto Salvation, by IESVS CHRIST.
            
               
                  Beloued in CHRIST:
            
            
               OVT of the ſecond Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the thirteenth Chapter and fifth Verſe, I haue taught you to try your Faith, by Reaſons I haue exhorted you vnto it, and by Rules I haue directed you in it; many things were propounded for that end, and it is ſome time ſince they were deliuered: wherefore fearing the frailety of your memories to retaine many things long, and fore-ſeeing the hurt that might enſue by the forgetting of them; I haue thought good to adde

vnto the preaching of the point in your eares, the preſenting of it printed before your eyes, to the end you may more readily remember that you haue heard, more cleerely vnderſtand that which you doe remember, and more conſcionably practiſe that which you vnderſtand in this point. I deſire no requitall, but loue, paines, and conſcience: Your loue in accepting, for mine in giuing; your paines in reading, for mine in writing; and your conſcience in practiſing, for mine in teaching; that you may haue profit by me, and I comfort in you. The Lord bleſſe the reading of this Treatiſe, and hearing of my Sermons, and your partaking in all other my miniſteriall duties, ſo to his glory,
                  Heb. 13.17. and your good, that I may bee able to giue vp my account of you to God with ioy and not with griefe,
               2. Cor. 11.2. 
               and to preſent you a chaſte Virgin unto your Spouſe Ieſus Chriſt, in whom, I reſt
            
               Yours, and the Lords vnworthy ſeruant, W. C.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE.
            
               The Preface containing chiefly an opening of one Text of Scripture, that gaue occaſion to the writing of this Treatiſe, and which is alſo one of the principall grounds of the doctrine taught therein.
            
            
               BEcauſe men are loth to bee deceiued in the things of the world, therefore doe they trie before they truſt: For they try their Gold by waight and touch, before they take it, becauſe all is not Gold that gliſters. Now if in ciuill things, tryall be ſo good, to preuent loſſe by beeing deceiued; then in ſpirituall matters it is moſt needfull, becauſe in them it is both moſt eaſie, and alſo moſt dangerous to be deceiued.
            Among other ſpirituall things the gifts and graces of the Spirit are to bee tryed, becauſe euery gift is not a ſauing grace; and amongst

other gifts and graces of the Spirit, our faith is to be tried; becauſe euery faith is not a ſauing faith, as ſhall be proued hereafter. For Satan, who by his fall,2. Cor. 11.14. is become an angell of darkneſſe, can transforme himſelfe into an Angel of light; not to be one, but to ſeeme to be one, to the end hee may deceiue: therefore much more can hee by the ſame his ſubtill power, transforme that faith, which is but an hiſtoricall faith, and which euery member of the Church militant hath; yea, which himſelf hath,Iam. 2.19. into a ſauing faith; not to bee it, but to make it ſeeme to be it, to the end hee may deceiue them that haue it, with a preſumption of ſaluation without any true ground.
            For this, and other like cauſes, I thought it needfull and profitable to teach my Congregation to try their faith: and becauſe the Goſpel,Rom. 8.8. 1. Ioh. 3.23. which is the Word of faith, and which doth command it, is the beſt meanes, to direct vs in this triall, and to perſwade the conſcience thereunto. Therfore did I make choyce of a Text, that is a part of the Gospell, to preach on, that doth earneſtly exhort vnto it: and it is written in 2. Cor. 13.5. in theſe words: Examine your ſelues whether you be in the faith; proue your owne ſelues.
            
            In handling of this portion of Scripture, I propounded theſe foure things: 1. I ſhewed the coherence of the words, which wee call the

Context: 2. I declared the ſumme and parts, with the circumſtances of the ſame, which is tearmed the Analyſis: 3. I deliuered the ſenſe, by interpreting the words and phraſes. And laſtly, I propounded and proſecuted the doctrines.
            Touching the firſt, I take the coherence twofold, generall, and ſpeciall. Generall, as it agrees with the matter handled in the three Chapters immediatly going before, and it is thus: Becauſe the reports of the meaneneſſe of a Preachers calling and gifts, are a likely meanes to diſgrace his preaching, and the doctrine he deliuers: therefore S. Paul hauing by his preaching conuerted many to the faith in Corinth; the Diuell labours to hinder the progreſſe of his Miniſterie, by rayſing vp ſome to report of him, either that he was not an Apoſtle of Ieſus Chriſt, becauſe hee was not called by him immediatly while hee liued on the earth, as the other twelue were; or that he was no ſcholler, becauſe he vſed no vaine ostentation of humane learning in his Sermons, or that he was but a meane man, becauſe hee liued in no outward port and pompe in the world, as did the Scribes and Phariſes: by theſe or the like ſlanders many weake Chriſtians being ſeduced, and Pauls Miniſterie alſo traduced by the ſame: vpon the hearing of it, he doth by many arguments in the 10,

11, and 12. Chapters maintaine his Apoſtleſhip, and hauing at large formerly proceeded in his iuſt defence, he doth in this 13. Chapter conclude his whole diſcourſe of it.
            The ſpeciall dependance is after this manner: Many of the Corinthian Christians being by falſe ſuggeſtions brought to thinke meanely of Paul, and to doubt of the efficacie of his Apoſtleſhip, they are ſo bold with him, as to demand a proofe of Chriſt ſpeaking in him, chap. 13. verſ. 3. For anſwer hereunto, firſt in the 3. and 4. verſes, he doth peremptorily affirme, that Chriſts power was not weake in him, but mighty towards them, viz. by his Miniſtery. Secondly, he ſhewes them how they may finde a direct proofe of Chriſts power in his Miniſterie, viz. if they do but examine themſelues, whether they be in the Faith or no, verſ. 5. intimating thereby, that if they doe but examine themſelues, whether they bee in the Faith, they ſhall find themſelues to bee in the Faith; and by finding themſelues to bee in the Faith,, they ſhall find Chriſt to haue beene in him, becauſe by Chriſts power on his Miniſtery, they had beene begotten therunto. And ſo much of the Coherence of the words, by which the Reader may diſcerne the drift of the Apoſtle in them; from whence (beſides the principall Doctrine of the Text, which I reſerue

to be handled at large in the Treatiſe following) I thinke it proper to obſerue two ſeuerall duties both for Preachers and Hearers.
            
               1.
               Doctrines from the Coherence. Preachers Dutie. Preachers are hence taught from the Coherence, not to ſtagger, if they heare their Miniſtery cenſured, to be weake and fruitles; yea happely queſtioned, whether a lawful Miniſtery or not, euen by them, whom (through Gods bleſſing) they haue begotten to the Faith, or confirmed therein, ſeeing Paul an Apoſtle, was no better vſed of the Corinthians, his Hearers, especially if they ſhall withall well conſider, that Hearers now, are men aſwell as the Corinthans then, and that the diuell now deſires to hinder the ſucceſſe of the Goſpel, as much as euer hee did, and hath ſtill as good hope to diſgrace preaching, by the diſgrace of Preachers as euer he had.
            
               2. If it be their lot, to haue their Miniſtery, and Sermons ſo cenſured, and thereby themſelues ſo diſgraced; then to learne by S. Paules example, to bee able, and ready to maintaine the ſame by a iuſt defence. And for that end to direct their Hearers, how they may finde ſome arguments to iuſtifie the ſufficiencie of their Miniſtery, by the worke of knowledge, beleefe, ſauing Faith, repentance, loue, patience, and the like in themſelues or others: to the end, that they may thereby, either be fully ſatisfied, or left without excuſe

if they ſhall wittingly ſhut their mouthes, and not confeſſe, or their eyes and not ſee, the power of Gods ordinance among them.
            Theſe poynts, if they were well known and marked by many Ministers, they would not he ſo ſoone weary of painfull preaching, nor ſo forward to leaue their paſtorall charge, vpon ſuch diſcontentments, eſpecially if they did well lay to heart, not onely the example of Paul, who was not mooued vpon this diſgrace to leaue the Corinthians: but alſo the commandement of God deliuered by the Apoſtle, which is,2. Tim. 2.25. That the ſeruant of the Lord muſt not ſtriue, but bee gentle vnto all men, apt to teach, patient in meeknes, inſtructing thoſe that oppoſe themſelues, if God peraduenture will giue them repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth.
            
            Hearers alſo, and ordinary Chriſtians may hence learne their duty:
            
               Hearers Duty.
               1. To examine themſelues of the fruit and effect of the Sermons of their owne Paſtors and Preachers, and to try themſelues, if thereby happely, knowledge, and beleefe, repentance and faith in Chriſt, with other graces, haue beene wrought in them, that ſo they may either iuſtifie Gods ordinance in its ſufficiencie, for their preſent comfort, or condemn themſelues for their owne ſlackneſſe and vnproficiencie

for their future amendment.
            
               2. If by examination they ſhall find the Miniſtery of their Preachers to haue beene effectuall among them, by the worke of the fore-named, and other like Chriſtian graces: then thereupon to conclude infallibly, that the Lord Ieſus hath beene in their Preachers; his power hath beene ſeene in their weakneſſe, his bleſſing hath beene vpon their Sermons, wherby they may ſafely conclude, that God hath ſet his ſeale to their calling and gifts,1. Cor. 9.2. and thereby approoued them, not only as a lawful, but as a powerfull Miniſtery.
            Theſe points, had they beene well vnderſtood, and weighed by our brethren and Countrymen that are gone from England to the Low-countries; from London to Amſterdam, for a lawfull Miniſtery, (as they pretend) they might haue ſaued themſelues a great deale of trouble and expence in their remooue. For if Paul in his time, by willing the Corinthians to examine themſelues, whether they were in the Faith, did purpoſe, they ſhould by that examination, find themſelues to be in the Faith, to the end he might thereby alledge a good argument, to prooue the efficacie of his Miniſtery by Chriſts power, working through it, Faith in them: then in theſe dayes thoſe Chriſtians, that by examination find, that the Miniſtery of the Church of England hath

wrought Faith in them, (I ſay) they may ſee, and they muſt acknowledge it, a ſound argument to proue the lawfulneſſe and efficacie of our Miniſtery here; or elſe the Apoſtles direction and exhortation were to no purpoſe.
            There be many that are gone on pilgrimage from England to Amſterdam, to look for Christs Church, I wonder, whether or no, they had a ſauing Faith, when they went from vs to them, and what they will anſwere to this queſtion: will they ſay, no? then (ſay I) it is well they are gone, and that we are fairely rid of them. But it is impoſſible they ſhould deny it: for how can they, who pretend ſuch zeale for Gods glory, in leaving their Country, calling & friends, to enioy Christs kingdom, (as they vſe to ſpeake) and to liue vnder a lawfull Ministery, to iudge and ſpeake ſo meanely of themſelues, that they haue not a ſauing Faith? What will they ſay then? will they affirme, they had a ſauing Faith when they departed? then (ſay I) it was very ill done, to goe away from their Mother-Church, the Miniſtery wherof had begotten them to the Faith. For if they had the Faith, then was it wrought in them by the Ministery of the Church of England; if ſo, then was that Miniſtery powerfull in them; and then was Christs power in it; then was it Chriſts owne ordinance, and why then did they go from hence thither for it? And ſo

much briefly for the coherence of the words, and the collecting and applying of that which is obſerueable out of the ſame for our inſtruction.
            The ſecond thing propounded in opening of the Text, was, to ſhew the ſumme and parts thereof.
            The ſumme is an exhortation; and in the exhortation, an argument, to prooue the power and efficacie of Pauls Miniſtery among the Corinthians, namely, becauſe by Gods bleſſing thereon, they had beene turned from Heatheniſme and infidelity, to the Christian Faith; which (ſayth hee) they ſhall eaſily diſcerne, if they do but examine themſelues whether they be in the Faith.
            The parts of the exhortation are three:

                  
                     1. The perſon exhorting Paul.
                  
                  
                     2. The perſons exhorted, the beleeuing Corinthians.
                  
                     3. The duty or action to which they are exhorted; ſet downe by two words, examine and proove; amplified by the Obiect, their Faith, or whether they were in the Faith, or no.
                  
               
            
            Come we now to expound and interpret the Text, which was the third thing promiſed, and ſhal be done, by anſwering certaine queſtions; and the questions ſhall bee propounded firſt touching the ſimple words of the Text. 2. Concerning

the compound phraſes that are framed of two or more words together, by my anſwer whereunto the ſenſe and meaning may appeare, and may eaſily be vnderſtood.
            The ſimple words are three, namely, examine, prove, Faith, which are to be diſtinguiſhed into three queſtions, whereof the firſt is this:
            
               
                  
                     Queſtion. 1
                  What it is to examine here?
               
               For anſwer whereunto I ſay, that though it bee not hard for Engliſhmen to conceiue what is meant by this word examin, namely, to make proofe or tryall of our ſelues in ſome thing: yet becauſe the Originall Greeke word is not alwaies in the New Teſtament ſo tranſlated, nor vſed in the ſame ſenſe for the ſame kind of Tryall; therefore do I thinke it needfull to ſay a little more of the propriety of the word, becauſe it will ſerue for the better vnderſtanding not onely of this Text, but of other alſo in the New Teſtament where it is vſed.
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .I would haue the Reader therfore to know, that the word in the Originall, is ſometimes taken in the beſt ſenſe, for a good tryall, and ſometimes in the worſt, for a bad one, according to the circumſtances of the Text where it is vſed, and the good or bad meanes and end of that tryall.
               In the worſt, when it is vſed for a bad tryal,

it is in our Engliſh Tongue properly called tempting; and tempting, is an uſing of ſome euill meanes, to effect an euill end, (that is) to try if thereby men will be perſwaded to doe that which is euill: and ſo was Chriſt led by the Spirit into the wilderneſſe, to be tempted of the Divell, that is,
                     Mat. 4.1. to bee tryed by thoſe meanes he then vſed, if happely hee might bee perſwaded to ſin, and do that which is evill. Now this kind of tryal is not vſed in this text, becauſe tryall by temptation is alwayes exerciſed about that which is euill on the tempters part, and is forbidden in the Word; but tryall by examination mentioned in the Text, is occupied about that which is good, namely, their Faith, and it is commanded therein.
               In a good ſenſe, when it is vnderſtood of a lawfull tryall, it is an vſing of ſome lawfull meanes, to effect a good purpoſe, namely, to try if by thoſe meanes we may know the nature and condition of the perſons, or things that we try, whether they be or no, or be good or no, or be ſo good as we expect or no; to the end we may accordingly approoue or diſallow them: and ſo the Angell or Paſtor of the Church of Epheſus is ſayd to try or examine thoſe that ſaid they were Apoſtles,
                  
                     Revel. 2.2. 
                  and were not, namely, by examining through the Word, their Doctrine they preached, and the liues which they led;
                     Mat. 7.20. that by theſe fruites hee

might know them, and diſcerne them, not to be Apoſtles indeed. And ſuch a tryall was this in the Text, becauſe it was an vſing of good meanes to a good end, namely, that thorowly they might know themſelues to be in the Faith; and conſequently, know, that Chriſts power had beene in him, and in his Miniſtery among them, which was the thing they ſeemed doubtfull of: and for clearing whereof, he wils them to try and examine themſelues, whether they were in the Faith.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Quesſtion. 2
                  What it is to prooue in this Text.
               
               The ſecond word to bee opened followes, which is proove; concerning which, the queſtions ſhall be three: viz. 1. What is meant by prooving. 2. Why hee addes this word to the former, and 3. why he ſaith, Prooue your owne ſelues.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .The word in the Originall Greeke hath many meanings, but moſt vſually it doth ſignifie to prove; but not to proove by Arguments, as the word in Engliſh is often vſed, but to prove by tryall and experiment. So we prove or try oxen,
                  
                     Luke 14.19. 1. Pet. 1.7. 1. Tim. 3.10. to ſee whether they will beare the yoke and draw; we proove or try gold in the fire, to know whether it be pure; and Miniſters are to be prooved or tryed, whether they haue gifts competent for that calling: and in this ſenſe the Corinthians were to prove themſelues, whether they be in

the Faith, namely, by experiment and tryall.
               And as touching the ſecond branch of this Queſtion, which is, why he vſeth two words to expreſse one action: I ſay, that hee addes proove to examine, for one or more of theſe reaſons, (as I ſuppoſe) either becauſe it is his manner to vſe variety of words, to expreſſe the ſenſe of one by another,
                     Hebr. 6.9. the former by the latter; or becauſe both words doe ſignifie but one dutie or action, in regard of the thing, which is Faith, to which they are ioyntly applyed, namely, tryall: or in regard of the duty it ſelfe, to ſhew the neceſſity of examining our ſelues, whether we be in the Faith; or in regard of Paul, to manifeſt his deſire to haue them practiſe it; or laſtly, in regard of the Corinthians, to teach them the great care, diligence, and conſcience that they ought to vſe in practiſing of this Dutie.
               And concerning the reaſon why he ſaith, Prove your owne ſelves, (which is the 3. branch of this Queſtion) I ſay, he addes thoſe words, either becauſe themſelues principally were the parties, by examining whereof they might beſt find a proofe by the efficacie of his Miniſtery, for their owne ſatisfaction: or becauſe thereby he would giue them a cloſe, (but withall a mild reproofe) for beeing ſo eager and forward in ſeeking a proofe of him, and of Chriſt ſpeaking in him: as if he would

ſay, Turne the edge from me to your ſelues, ceaſe ſeeking proofe of me any further, and begin to examine and proove your ſelues, whether you be in the Faith, and you ſhall eaſily diſcerne the faith of Chriſt in your ſelves, and the power of Chriſt in me.
               Now followes the laſt of the ſimple words, which is Faith; and of it the queſtion ſhall be, what manner of Faith it was whereof they were to examine themſelues.
            
            
               
                  
                     Queſtion. 3
                  What is the Faith here ſpoken of?
               
               For anſwer to this queſtion, I ſay, that by Faith in this Text, is to be vnderſtood, any kind of Faith, which in thoſe dayes was vſually given to the members of any Church, and conſequently to any of the members of the Church of Corinth, whether a ſaving faith, an hiſtorical, or a miraculous faith; for all the members of the Church of Corinth had an hiſtoricall faith, which was a beliefe of the Doctrine of the Goſpell: and in the iudgement of charity, (for ought that can be proved to the contrary) every member thereof alſo had a ſaving faith, and (at leaſt) many members of that Church at that time had a miraculous faith.1. Cor. 12.9.10. & 13.1.2. The reaſons of my opinion are two, both taken from my Text: 1. Becauſe they were to examine themſelves of any kind of faith; by the finding whereof in themſelves, they might find Chriſt to be in them; for ſo

he ſaith, Know yee not your ſelves,
                  verſ. 5. 
                  how that Chriſt is in you? Now by the finding of an historicall and a miraculous faith, (as well, though not ſo much) as by finding of a ſaving Faith, the beleeving Corinthians might find Chriſt to be in them; for by an hiſtoricall Faith Chriſt was in them by his wiſdome, making them to vnderstand and beleeve the Gospell,1. Cor. 1.23. though it were once fooliſhneſſe vnto them: by a miraculous Faith Christ was in them by his power, cauſing ſome of them to doe ſtrange and miraculous works, though they were weake men; even as by a ſaving Faith Christ was in them by his grace and goodneſſe vnto ſalvation.
               The ſecond Reaſon to prove, that by Faith in this Text is meant any kind of Faith, is this; becauſe the Corinthians were to examine themſelves of any Faith, by the finding whereof in them they might finde a proofe of the efficacie of his Ministery: for that is the end wherefore Paul wils them to examine themſelves, whether they were in the faith, viz. becauſe thereby they might find it to have bin wrought in them by his Ministery,
                     Rom. 1.16. 1. Cor. 3.5. & 4.15. for the proofe of Christs power in it. Now not onely a ſaving Faith, and an historicall Faith were wrought in the Corinthians by the preaching of the Gospell, but a miraculous Faith alſo, as is plaine by the Epistle to the Galathians,

where doing of miracles, (which were done by a miraculous Faith) is ſaid to bee wrought in them, (and therefore it was accordingly wrought in the Corinthians) by the hearing of the Gospell,
                     Gal. 3.2.5. or by the hearing of Faith preached. So that Christ being in the Corinthians by an historicall, and a miraculous Faith, as well as by a ſaving, though not in the ſame manner, nor to the ſame end; and the finding of an historicall Faith and a miraculous, being a good argument to prove the efficacie of Pauls Ministery among them; therefore doe J thinke, (ſaving other mens better iudgements, vpon better proofes) that the Faith whereof the Corinthian Chriſtians were to examine themſelves, was any kind of Faith, an historicall, and miraculous, as well as a ſaving Faith; and the rather, becauſe by all three kinds a greater proofe will be gained for Christs power in Paul, and for the efficacie of his Apostleſhip thereby, then by any one alone, though it were a ſaving faith. And thus much for opening and interpreting the ſimple words of the Text, I deſcend now to expound the phraſes thereof, which are two, namely, 1. What it is to be in the Faith: and 2. why he ſaith, Whether you be in the Faith: and firſt of the first.
            
            
               
               What is meant by the Corinthians being in the Faith?
               
                  It ſeemes at first ſight,Anſwer. a ſtrange manner of ſpeaking, as if Faith were ſome locall thing that did comprehend in it all beleevers; as the place doth containe in it the thing that is placed there; the houſe, the inhabitant; but we may learne, that to be in the Faith, is nothing elſe, but to have Faith to bee in them; and the exhortation is in effect no more, then if the Apostle had ſaid, Examine your ſelves whether Faith bee in you, or whether God hath wrought Faith in you: and I proove my expoſition,
               
                  1. By other Scripture phraſes, namely, becauſe to be in the Spirit, is to have the Spirit in them; ſo to be in Chriſt,,
                  
                     Rom. 8.9. Rom. 8.1. Epheſ. 3.17. is to have Chriſt to be in them, namely, by Faith: to dwell in loue, is to haue the love of God,1. Iohn 4.16. and our neighbour dwelling in them:
                     Rom. 8.8. to be in the fleſh, is to haue the corruption of nature dwelling, and raigning in them.
               
                  2. I prove it by other phraſes commonly vſed in our Engliſh tongue, as when a man loves a mayd, we ſay he is in love; when hee hates his neighbour, we ſay, he is in malice; when a man is drunke, we ſay, he is in drink: ſo that the beeing of the Corinthians in the Faith, is the being of Faith in the Corinthians, or the having of Faith in them: the reaſon of which manner of ſpeech, I take to bee one of theſe; either becauſe he had before ſpoken

of Chriſt being in him, and anſwerable to that would ſpeake of their beeing in the Faith; or elſe, becauſe hee would intimate to vs the certainty of the Corinthians beeing beleevers, and of their having of Faith; even ſo ſurely, as if they had bin in the faith it ſelf.
            
            
               
                  
                     Queſtion. 2 The next Question is, Why he ſayth, Examin your ſelues, whether you be in the Faith? ſeeing the word whether ſeemes to imply a doubting, and making ſome question, whether they had the Faith or no?
               
                  Anſwere. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .I anſwere: in the Originall, the words are, If you be in the Faith, of you bee in the Faith, is all one in ſenſe with Whether you be in the Faith: and neither if you bee in the Faith, nor whether you be in the faith, doe imply any doubting of their ſaving Faith. J grant, that in ſome places it may, but in all it doth not: and therefore it is not neceſſary it ſhould in this, except the circumſtances of the places did manifestly ſhew it; which they doe not here. That neither whether, nor if, doe in all places of the New Testament imply Doubting, I proove by one, where Paul ſaith, he wrote to the Corinthians, that hee might know the proofe of them, and whether they would bee obedient in all things, yet did he not write this, as if he doubted they would not be obedient in all things,2. Cor. 2.9. becauſe in the third verſe of the

ſame Chapter, (which hee could not forget) he ſayes he was confident in them, that his ioy was the ioy of them all;
                  2. Cor. 2.3. which he would never haue ſaid, if he had not beene confident of their obedience. And that the circumſtances of this Text doe give no light to intimate, that whether or if did imply my doubting, I proove thus: If they did, then this doubting muſt either be in Paul, or in the Corinthians; but Paul could not doubt, whether the Corinthians had the Faith, becauſe hee could not forget what he had written of them in the first Epistle, where he ſaith, that in Ieſus Chriſt hee had begotten them through the Goſpell:
                  1. Cor. 4.15. 1. Cor. 3.5. neither could the Corinthians doubt thereof, becauſe after hee had ſaid, Examine your ſelves whether you be in the Faith, hee addes in the very next words, Know you not your ſelves? that is, Know you not your ſelves to be in the Faith; implying, that Paul was ſure they could not chooſe but know themſelves to be in the Faith. 2. Becauſe the end of this examination was, that they might more clearely diſcerne themſelves to have it, that ſo they might thereby find an evident proofe of Chriſts power in the efficacie of his Miniſterie, for the iustifying of the ſame; which they could not doe, if they had not knowne themſelves to be in the faith, but had doubted of it.
               
                  By my anſwere to theſe fiue Queſtions, the interpretation of theſe words and phraſes may be gathered; by the interpretation, the ſcope and ſenſe of the Scripture collected; and by both, the Doctrines may be better rayſed, which was the fourth and laſt thing propounded in handling this Text.
               The points obſerveable out of the coherence and drift of the Apostle, have already beene touched. That which is to be collected out of the words as they ſtand by themſelves, is but one ſentence, or propoſition, and conſequently but one Doctrine; for it is but an exhortation to one Duty; and that one Duty is examining & trying themſelves concerning their Faith; whence the Doctrine of the Text, (ſpeaking according to the Hypotheſis, and particular both perſons and matter) is properly thus:
The Corinthian Chriſtians muſt examine and prove themſelves, whether they be in the Faith.
               
               But foraſmuch as the Exhortation was not written for them onely, although it were written to them onely, therfore from the Hypotheſis to the Theſis, from the particular to the generall, I rayſe and propound the Doctrine thus:

                     It is the Duty of all Chriſtians to try and examin themſelves, whether they be in the Faith, or whether they have a ſaving Faith.
               
               This Doctrine ſhall bee the Subiect of the enſuing Treatiſe, whereunto J have added this Preface, even this Diſcourſe vpon the opening of that Text, vpon which it is mainly founded, not onely for an Introduction vnto the Treatiſe; but for a maine pillar and proofe of the Doctrine, to which I perſwade in the Booke it ſelfe.
               Now (for a concluſion of my Preface) I humbly pray the Chriſtian and iudicious Reader, as to peruſe with patience the whole, and with brotherly kindneſſe to cover or correct all faults eſcaped the Author, or Printer, in any part thereof: ſo by the ſpirit of meekeneſſe to informe me, of whatſoever by the ſpirit of diſcerning he ſhall obſerve, to bee inſufficiently prooved, or vnſoundly propounded, vpon a ſincere purpoſe, and faithfull promiſe, (the Lord knoweth) to altar any thing in that kind, at the next Impreſſion: (if ever in the iudgement of the Church it be thought worthy of it) if I ſhall not be able to ſatisfie them, by bringing better reaſons for the proofe of that I have written, then they for the reproofe thereof.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A TRIALL OF FAITH. THE FIRST BOOKE.
            
               It is the Duty of Chriſtians, to try their Faith: or to examine themſelves, whether they have a ſaving Faith.
            
            
               GOld is a precious Metall; the world eſteemes it ſo: therefore do men dig deep into the Myne where it is, to finde it; and they labour much in the fire, to purifie and refine it: even ſo, a ſaving Faith is a precious thing; the Apoſtle Peter calls it ſo:2. Pet. 1.1. therfore ought Chriſtians, by examination (as it were) to digge into their hearts to finde it there, and by the Word, as

by fire, to try whether it bee a ſaving Faith or no:1. Pet. 1.7. that ſo the tryal of their Faith, which is much more precious then Gold that periſheth, (though it be tryed in the fire) may be found vnto their prayſe, and honour, and glory, at the appearing of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            To teach ſome Chriſtians this Triall, and to perſwade them to the practice thereof, I haue heretofore preached the point, for the private good of a few, and becauſe the preaching of it was well accepted, to the profit of many that heard it: therefore haue I written a Treatiſe of it, for the common good of all that can reade.
            Now, foraſmuch as Method is both a good ornament to a Book, and a great light thereunto: not onely for the directing of the Author to write more orderly: but alſo for the teaching of the Reader to underſtand and remember more readily: therefore haue I thought good alſo, before I goe on to the handling of the point intended, to make known that maner, and order of handling the point in proofe, which I propounded to my ſelfe in the proſecuting thereof: and my Methode (by Gods aſsiſtance) shall be this:
            
               The whole Treatiſe containes, a declaration of the Reaſons, and Rules, of the Triall of Faith.
            This Declaration shall bee comprehended in two Bookes.
            The firſt Booke shall be an Exhortation to the Triall of Faith: and the ſecond a Direction thereunto.
            To exhort men to try their Faith, I will alledge certaine Reaſons, grounded on the Word, which may perſwade them thereunto: and anſwer ſome Obiections, that may be brought, to diſſwade them from it.
            The Reaſons to perſwade Chriſtians to try their Faith, shall bee referred to three heads. Firſt, the Neceſsity, ſecondly, the Equity, and thirdly, the Vtilitie or benefit of this Triall.
            The Neceſsity of the tryall of our Faith, shall be shewed in the firſt Chapter by ſeuen Reaſons: and each Reaſon shal be diſtinguished into a ſeuerall Section in the ſame Chapter.
            The Equity shall bee declared in the ſecond Chapter, by two Reaſons: which ſhall bee diuided likewiſe into two Sections.
            The Vtilitie, or profit of this Tryall of Faith, shall be manifeſted in the third

Chapter, by three Reaſons: which shall be ſevered likewiſe, by three particular Sections.
            The Obiections that may be brought, to diſſwade Chriſtians from the tryall of their Faith, shall be reduced to three Heads likewiſe: firſt, the Needleſneſſe: ſecondly, the Inconveniency: and thirdly, the Impoſsibility of this tryall of Faith.
            The ſuppoſed Needleſneſſe shall bee anſwered in the fourth Chapter: wherin shall be contained three Obiections: each Obiection, with the anſwer therunto, being diſtinguished into ſeverall Sections.
            The deemed Inconveniencie of it shall bee anſwered in the fift Chapter: wherein shall bee comprehended two Obiections, with the anſwer therunto in two Sections.
            The imagined Impoſsibility alſo, that Chriſtians shal ever be able to try their Faith, shall bee anſwered in the ſixt Chapter: wherein shall bee placed two Obiections; each, with the anſwere thereunto, being ſevered likewiſe by two particular Sections.
            Of the particular diſpoſition of the ſecond Booke, I will ſpeake diſtinctly,

when I come unto it.
            In the meane while, let me craue, and obtaine pardon of the learned Reader, for more then ordinary plaineneſſe, in handling the points conteined in the firſt Booke: and of the Reader that is not ſo learned, for ſome difficulty, that he shall find, to underſtand the Contents of the ſecond Booke. I would haue neither of them diſcouraged, from reading the whole; becauſe the fault that may be ſuppoſed to be committed in the one, is amended in the other. And the rather am I bold to craue this fauour, becauſe my manner of handling, followed the nature of the matter handled in both: ſo that as I could not be plaine, where the matter is difficult; ſo neither was it needfull I should bee difficult, where the matter was plaine.
            
               
               CHAPTER I. Of the Neceſsitie of the triall and examination of our Faith.
               
                  REASON 1.
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 1 It is neceſſary for Chriſtians to examine themſelues whether they haue a ſauing Faith: becauſe the Word of God exhorts them to this Tryall and examination.
                  
                  THE reaſon is good, becauſe though wee diſcerne not the reaſon why God ſhould command, or exhort vs, vnto any duty: yet muſt wee performe ſimple obedience to all his precepts,
                        Gal. 1.15. without conſulting with fleſh and bloud,
                     
                        Heb. 11.8. like Paul; and as Abraham did, who when he was called, obeyed God, and went, not knowing whether he went.
                  
                  And that the Lord in his Word exhorts Chriſtians to try their Faith, and to examine themſelues concerning it, is plaine.

Firſt, by the words of Chriſt, when hee ſaith to his Diſciples, Where is your Faith?
                     
                        Luk. 8.25. Secondly, and more cleerely, by the words of Saint Paul (the Text at large expounded in the Preface) Examine your ſelues whether you be in the Faith,
                     2. Cor. 13.5. 
                     proue your owne ſelues: For why ſhould not Chriſtians now examine themſelues whether they bee in the Faith; as well as Chriſts Diſciples, and the Chriſtian Corinthians did in thoſe dayes?
                  If any obiect againſt the firſt proofe,Obiect. that it is not pertinent, becauſe it ſpeakes of a miraculous Faith, whereas the point to bee prooued by it, is touching a ſauing Faith:
                  I anſwer, though that be true: yet ſeeing by that queſtion of our Savior Chriſt,Anſwere. his Diſciples were to examine thēſelues where their miraculous faith was, therefore by neceſſary conſequence muſt Chriſtians examine themſelues vvhere their ſaving Faith is; becauſe a ſaving Faith is more neceſſarie for Chriſtians, then a miraculous Faith could be to the Diſciples: in as much as the Diſciples for not hauing, or not vſing their miraculous faith, could haue bin but drowned in the Sea, which is but a bodily deſtruction: But Chriſtians for not having or not uſing a ſaving faith,

ſhall be drowned in perdition and everlaſting deſtruction both of Soule and Body for ever, which is the ſecond death.
                  Or if any chance to reply vpon the latter proofe, out of the Epiſtle to the Corinthians, that it is not ſufficient, either becauſe it is not a command: but an exhortation onely; or if it bee a commandement, yet it is but a particular precept to the Corinthians onely, and given to them but upon a ſpeciall occaſion.
                  I anſwere: Firſt there is no difference in reſpect of obedience betwixt an exhortation to a Morall religious Chriſtian Duty, (ſuch as this is) and a flat precept, that directly commands the practiſe of it, as appeares by this inſtance. Where Paul ſaith,2. Theſ. 3.12. 
                     Wee command that are ſuch, and exhort them by the Lord Ieſus, that with quietneſſe they worke and eate their owne bread. Secondly, becauſe Chriſtians ought to obey ſuch exhortations, as well as precepts, as is plaine by another place of the ſame Apoſtle,1. Theſ. 4.2. where hee ſaith, Wee beſeech you Brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Ieſus, that as you haue receiued of vs how you ought to walke, and to pleaſe God, ſo you would abound more and more: for you know what commandements we gaue you by the Lord Ieſus. Thirdly, becauſe the mildneſſe of the

Apoſtle in exhorting to the Duty, namely by requeſt, rather then by Precept, ſhould rather gaine obedience; in as much as it is to be conceived, that therefore Paul doth exhort, and not command; not becauſe he had not authoritie (as an Apoſtle) to command: but becauſe hee hoped,2. Cor. 10.8. by that kinde manner of exhorting, he ſhould the ſooner perſwade them to obey the matter of the exhortation.
                  Secondly, I anſwere, touching the ſecond part of the obiection, that it is to as little purpoſe as, the former; becauſe though the exhortation were written to them: yet was it not written for them only, which I proue; firſt, becauſe it was not written to them as they were Corinthians, but as they were Chriſtians: therefore may the dutie concerne all other people, that are Chriſtians like themſelves. Secondly, becauſe the Apoſtle ſpeaking of the writings of the Old Teſtament, ſaith,
                        Rom. 15.4. that whatſoever was written afore-time, was written for the learning of the Churches in the Apoſtles time; therefore whatſoever was written by the Apoſtles and Evangeliſts in the New Teſtament, was written for the learning of Chriſtians in theſe dayes: and therefore Pauls commandement, or exhortatiō, to will the Corinthians
                     
to examine themſelves whether they were in the Faith, doth binde us, who are Chriſtians now, as they were (and conſequently all Chriſtians to the worlds end) to the practiſe of the ſame dutie of examining our ſelves whether wee be in the Faith.
                  3. And as concerning the third part of the obiection, which is, that therefore the exhortation in the place alledged, ſhould not binde us now, becauſe it was given to the Corinthians, upon a particular occaſion, which is not every mans caſe, in theſe dayes: I anſwere, It is to no purpoſe, becauſe the exhortation of the ſame Apoſtle Paul to the ſame Corinthians, where hee wils them to examine themſelues before they come to eate of the bread,
                     1. Cor. 11.28. 
                     and drinke of the Cup of the Lords Table, was given vpon a particular occaſion of their unreverend, unbrotherly, and profane comming to the Lords Table then, as appeares by comparing the 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 33, 34 Verſes of the eleuenth Chapter of the Epiſtle to the Corinthians: and yet for all that, it ought to be a generall precept to all Chriſtians in theſe dayes, to examine themſelves before they come to the Communion now; leſt they bee guilty of profaning the Lords Table in ſome kinde: though not in the ſame manner of profanation, of

which the Corinthians were. And ſo much for the firſt Reaſon of this Doctrine, and the Confirmation thereof. The ſecond followes.
               
               
                  REASON 2.
                  
                     It is neceſſarie for Chriſtians, to examine themſelues, whether they be in the Faith:
                           §. 2 becauſe euery faith is not a ſaving Faith.
                  
                  The reaſon is good. Becauſe without this Tryall, any faith may be taken for a ſaving faith: an Hiſtoricall, for a ſaving faith; yea, a falſe faith, for a true. Indeed if euery faith were a ſaving, then were it ſufficient to ſalvation to haue ſome faith, for in having ſome faith, hee muſt bee accounted to haue the ſaving faith; and therefore for a man to examine himſelfe, whether he had a ſaving faith, were needleſſe: as long as he had any faith; but becauſe euery faith is not a ſauing faith (as ſhall bee proved God willing by and by) therefore it is neceſſary for Chriſtians to examine themſelues whether they haue a ſaving Faith.
                  And that every faith is not a ſaving faith, I proue thus:
                  Firſt, becauſe a ſaving faith will 
                     
                        Epheſ. 2.8. 
                     ſaue them that haue it, for by it they are 
                     1. Pet. 1.5. 
                     kept by the power of GOD through faith

unto ſalvation: but every faith will not ſave them that have it. For there is a faith of 
                     
                        Iam. 2.19. 
                     Divels, who beleeve and tremble: and yet will not their faith ſave them, becauſe notwithſtanding they are Iud. ver. 6.
                      
                     reſerved in everlaſting chaines of darkneſſe, vnto the Iudgement of the great Day.
                  
                  Secondly, a ſaving faith never failes, for Chriſt hath 
                     
                        Luk. 22.32. Iob. 11.22. 
                     prayed for it that it might not faile, and they that haue it, doe not draw backward unto perdition; but 
                        Heb. 10.39. 
                     follow faith to the ſalvation of their ſoules: but there is a temporarie faith in ſome, who 
                        Luke 8.13. 
                     for a time beleeue, and afterwards in temptation fall away: and none that fall away can be ſaved, becauſe it is 
                        Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. 
                     impoſsible they ſhould be renued by repentance.
                  
                  Thirdly, a ſaving faith, is a liuely faith, making thoſe that haue it to liue the life of grace, for 
                        Gal. 3.11. 
                     the iust do liue by their faith: and a ſaving 
                     
                        Gal. 5.6. 
                     faith workes by loue, namely, to God firſt, and then for Gods ſake to our Brethren, yea, to our enemies; but the Apoſtle Iames ſpeakes of a 
                     
                        Iam. 
                        
                           •
                        .20, 26. 
                     dead faith, that is not liuely: but is without workes, and ſo is not a ſaving faith.
                  Fourthly, there was in the Churches of Chriſt in the Apoſtles time a miraculous faith, which many had, that neuer were ſaued. For the Holy Ghoſt affirmeth, that

the Lord at the Day of Iudgement will ſay to many of thē, who by a miraculous faith haue caſt out divels and done greatworks:
                        Mat. 7.22.23 
                     Depart frō me ye workers of iniquitie, I know you not: which he will never ſay to any of them that ſhal be ſaved; for to them he wil ſay being his childrē by faith in him.
                        Mat. 25.34. 
                     Come ye bleſſed of my Father, receiue the Kingdome prepared for you frō the beginning of the world.
                  
                  Fifthly and laſtly, the Apoſtle Paul ſpeakes twice of an vnfained 
                     1. Tim. 1.5. 2. Tim. 1.5. Tit. 2.2. 
                     faith; and of ſome that are ſound in the faith, from whence wee may eaſily and ſafely conclude: that there is in ſome members of the Church a fained or counterfet faith, and that there are ſome which are vnſound in the faith. Euen as it is eaſie to conclude, that there is in ſome Chriſtians a fained loue, becauſe hee ſpeakes of an 2. Cor. 6.6. 
                     unfained loue in others; and exhorts the Romanes that their loue may bee without 
                     
                        Rom. 12.9. 
                     diſsimulation. Now not a counterfet, but an unfained; not a rotten: but a ſound faith will ſaue us, and is a iuſtifying faith.
                  But though there were no more kindes of faith then one, and that faith were only a ſaving faith: yet if every man had a ſaving faith, or were ſure to haue it, before he dyed: they might ſhift well enough as they thinke; let us therefore take uiew of

another reaſon, that will proue the neceſſitie of this tryall of Faith, and it is this.
               
               
                  REASON 3.
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 3 It is neceſſarie for Chriſtians, to examine themſelues, whether they haue a ſaving faith: becauſe every one hath not a ſaving Faith.
                  
                  The reaſon is good: becauſe without this tryall, a man may be one of thoſe, that haue not a ſaving faith, nor euer ſhall haue it, and yet preſume he hath it. Indeed if it were true, that every man or woman that comes into the world, ſhall haue a ſaving faith wrought in him before he dye: then were this examination needleſſe, becauſe though he had it not at one time, yet hee might bee ſure to haue it at another: and therefore were this tryall needleſſe, as long as he were ſure to haue it, at ſome time: but becauſe every one that comes into the world, hath not a ſaving Faith, (as ſhall be proved by and by with Gods help) therefore it is neceſſarie to examine our ſelues whether we haue a ſaving faith.
                  And that every one hath not a ſaving faith, I proue: Firſt, becauſe the Apoſtle ſaith,2. Theſ. 3.2. 
                     All men haue not faith: and no marvell, ſeeing all men haue not that which is

inferiour to a ſauing faith, and more common then it, viz. an hiſtoricall faith, or a beliefe of the Goſpell. Witneſſe many of the Iewes, to whom it was a 
                     1. Cor. 1.23. 
                     ſtumbling blocke. How ſhall we then thinke they can haue a ſaving faith, which is more excellent and more peculiar to the Elect of God?
                  Secondly, all men haue not a ſaving faith, becauſe very few haue it; for ſo ſaith our Saviour Chriſt,
                        Luk. 18.8. 
                     When the Son of Man commeth, ſhall he finde faith on the earth? He ſayes not, when Chriſt comes againe, that hee ſhall finde no faith at all on the earth: for hee ſhall finde as many kindes of faiths as there bee kindes of Religions in the world; nor doth Chriſt meane that hee ſhall finde when he comes to Iudgement, no ſaving faith at all in men, for hee ſhall finde it in many that ſhall bee alive at Chriſts comming, who ſhall bee caught vp in the clouds with them 1. Theſ. 4.15, 16. 
                     that haue dyed in the faith of Ieſus, to bee ever with the Lord; which could not be, if when Chriſt came, hee ſhould not finde faith in them: but his meaning is, that when he comes to iudgement, he ſhall finde few in earth that haue a ſaving faith, in compariſon of them that haue it not.
                  Thirdly, all men haue not a ſaving faith,

becauſe a ſaving is the faith of the 
                     
                        Tit. 1.1. 
                     Elect onely, and all men are not Elect, for then how could there be any Reprobates at all?
                  Fourthly, all men haue not a ſaving faith, becauſe all men ſhall not bee ſaved; for as many as are ſaved, are ſaved by faith, and thoſe are but a few, in compariſon of the Reprobate; for 
                        Rom 9.27. 
                     though the number of the children of Iſrael were as the ſand of the Sea: yet ſhall there but a remnant bee ſaved; becauſe 
                        Mat. 7.13. 
                     wide is the way, and broad is the gate, that leades to deſtruction, and many there bee that goe in thereat: but ſtreite is the gate, and narrow is the way, that leades vnto life, and few there bee that finde it.
                  
                  Fifthly, and laſtly, all men haue not a ſaving faith; becauſe the Apoſtle ſpeakes of ſome that make 
                     1. Tim. 1.19. 
                     ſhipwracke of faith, 1. Tim. 1.19. of ſome that 
                     1. Tim. 4.1. 
                     depart from the faith, of ſome that 
                     1. Tim. 5.8. 
                     deny the faith, 1. Tim. 5.8. of ſome that 
                     1. Tim. 5.12. 
                     caſt off their firſt faith: of ſome that 
                     1. Tim. 6.10. 
                     erre from the faith: and of ſome that are 
                     2. Tim. 3.8. 
                     reprobate concerning the faith, which cannot be verified of any that hath a ſaving faith, becauſe they are founded on the Rock Ieſus Chriſt, who never 
                     
                        Heb. 13.5. 
                     failes thoſe, that by faith put their truſt in him, and becauſe their 
                     1. Theſ. 5.23. 
                     whole ſpirit, ſoule and body, are preſerved blameleſſe, vnto the

comming of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. So that the conſideration of this, that every one hath not a ſaving faith, doth eaſily proue it neceſſarie for us, to examine our ſelves whether wee haue a ſauing faith; ſeeing that without this tryall we may be Reprobates for ought we know or can giue evidence to the contrary. And thus much for the third Reaſon, the fourth followes.
               
               
                  REASON 4.
                  
                     It is neceſſary that Chriſtians try their faith,
                           §. 4 and examine themſelves, whether they haue a ſaving faith: becauſe God himſelfe tryes their Faith.
                  
                  The reaſon is good, becauſe Man himſelfe hath more cauſe to try his owne faith, then God hath: in regard hee hath more need of that tryall. God hath not, becauſe God knowes their faith without tryall, ſeeing he is the Author of it: but man cannot know it without tryall;
                        Epheſ. 2.8. as alſo in regard man is to haue more benefit by it, then God can be imagined to haue.
                  That Chriſtians haue need to try their faith, hath beene ſhewed in part before, and ſhall hereafter bee further declared: and that this tryall will bee beneficiall to

them will bee proved hereafter likewiſe: but that God himſelfe doth need, or ſhall haue benefit by the tryall, can bee proved by no reaſon: ſo that becauſe it is for our need and benefit, that God tryes our faith, it is worth our paines, that after his example we try our owne faith.
                  Indeed God is pleaſed (ſpeaking in the Word after the manner of men for our capacitie) to take notice of the truth of our faith, upon the tryall thereof, as appeares in the booke of Geneſis, where, after Abraham had obeyed Gods commandement in offering to kill his Sonne (which commandement he gaue him for the Tryall of his faith) hee ſaith,
                        Heb. 11.17. 
                     Now I know that thou feareſt God,
                     
                        Gen. 22.12. 
                     ſeeing thou haſt not withheld thy Sonne, thine onely Sonne from mee: but God doth not ſpeake this, as if he were before ignorant, or not ſo well certified of the truth of his faith:
                        Heb. 4.13. for all things are naked and open before God, who is the ſearcher of the heart, Heb. 4.13 but to teach us to try our faith, and alſo to inſtruct us, that upon tryall we ſhall certainly know, whether we haue a ſaving faith or no.
                  And that God tryes the faith of Chriſtians, I proue; becauſe he tryed the faith of Abraham.
                     
                        Heb. 11.17. For ſo faith the Apoſtle, that by faith, Abraham, when he was tryed, offered vp
                     
Iſaac: and how can ordinary Chriſtians thinke to bee free for Gods tryall of their faith, one way or other: ſeeing the faith of him that was the father of the faithfull, was tryed by him?
                  I doe not thinke, nor teach, that God doth, or will try the faith of all Chriſtians with ſo great a tryall as was Abrahams: for the faith of every Chriſtian is not ſo great as was Abrahams, and therfore neither can it need, nor will it endure ſo great a tryall: But this I ſay, that he tryes the one as well as the other: the faith of the weakeſt, as well as the ſtrongeſt, becauſe though in degree of excellency, and in meaſure, Abrahams faith was far ſtronger then theirs: yet is the faith of the weakeſt Chriſtians the ſame in nature with Abrahams. And though hee tryes no mans faith aboue his ſtrength,
                     1. Cor. 10.13. 
                     but will with the tryall make a way to eſcape, that they may be able to beare it. Yet doth he try the faith of all his children, becauſe hee knowes, both that they need the tryall, as alſo that they ſhall reape benefit by it: and therefore ought Chriſtians to try their owne faith for the ſame end: to perſwade wherevnto, this ſhall bee the fifth Reaſon.
               
               
                  
                  REASON. 5.
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 5 It is neceſſary that Chriſtians try their Faith, and examine themſelves concerning it: becauſe Satan will try them.
                  
                  The reaſon is good, becauſe in love to their owne ſoules, and care of their ſalvation, they should try their Faith: to the end they may approve & ſtrengthen it, and thereby take comfort in it, as Satan, in hatred of their ſoules, and envie of their ſalvation, deſires earneſtly to try it, to the end hee may ouerturne it.Simil. For hath not an houſholder reaſon to ſhut and make faſt his doores, when he knowes a thiefe will breake them open? and a rightfull King, to fortifie his Realme, when hee heares an enemy would invade it wrongfully? Surely as in theſe caſes they will, ſo in this they ought: conſidering the danger that comes by the one, is by oddes greater, then poſsibly can come by the other.
                  And that Satan tryes the Faith of Chriſtians, to the end hee may make their Faith to faile, and them faile of their ſaluation, (if it were poſsible) I proove, not onely becauſe he tryes their continency,
                     
                        Gen. 39.7. 1. Cor. 7.5. to the end they might fall into uncleanneſſe: and their patience, to

the end they might murmure againſt God, (therefore much more their Faith beeing a more excellent and neceſſarie grace then they) but I proove it moſt plainely by the words of our Sauiour Chriſt to Peter, where he ſaith, Simon,
                     
                        Luke 22.32. 
                     Satan hath deſired to winnow you as wheate, but I haue prayed, that thy Faith may not faile. And by the words of Peter to all Chriſtians, where hee exhorts them to be ſober and watch, becauſe their enemy the divell, goes about like a roaring Lyon,
                     1. Pet. 5.8. 
                     ſeeking whom he may devoure, whom reſiſt ſtedfaſtly in the Faith. For Satan knowes, that by Faith we ſtand; and that Faith is the victory whereby we overcome the world:2. Cor. 1.24. 1. Ioh. 5.4. Eph. 2.8. Gal. 3.11. hee remembers, that by Faith we liue and are ſaved: he underſtands, that by Faith,2. Tim. 2.25.26. Act. 13.39. 
                     we recover our ſelves out of the ſnares of the divel, and that by it we are iustified frō all things, from which wee cannot be iuſtified by the Law of Moſes: and therefore doth he try us, to ſee if he can perſwade us, either not to beleeve at all, by cauſing us to ſtumble at the difficulty of the points of Chriſtian Religion that are to be beleeued; or if he cannot prevaile with us ſo farre: then will hee try, if by any meanes he can make our Faith, onely to ſwimme in our braine, and no way

worke vpon the hearts and affections any love unto our ſalvation, or any care to uſe the meanes preſcribed for that end: for which purpoſe hee will endevour to fill our hearts with the love of earthly pleaſures, profits, and honours, that there may be no roome for the deſire and care of ſalvation: or if he cannot deceive us this way, then will he terrifie us another way, to make us deny our Faith, and to make ſhipwrack of it, for feare of perſecution and loſſe of worldly things. Or, if by neither of theſe can hee make our Faith to faile, then will hee buffet us with terrours of conſcience, by reaſon of the multitude, and magnitude of our ſinnes, and that we haue no Faith at all, becauſe we doe not ſo ſenſibly feele in our hearts, the comforts of Faith, which are peace of Conſcience, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt, and thereby aſſurance of ſalvation.
                  Indeed it is true, (bee it written to the glory of the free grace of God, whoſe gifts and calling are without repentance,
                     
                        Rom. 11.29. and to the ſure comfort of the faithfull,
                        Ioh. 13.1. 
                     whom the Lord loves to the end, hauing once loved them) that Satan neither by theſe, nor by any other meanes,

can ouerturne the Faith of Gods children,
                        Rom. 9.33. Luke 22.32. becauſe it is founded on the Rocke Ieſus Chriſt, who hath alſo prayed that their Faith might not faile, and God heard him in all his prayers;
                        Ioh. 11.22. but yet Satan deſires to make our Faith to faile; and for that end he ſifts and tryes it: and therefore wee ought to try our owne Faith much more; to the end that finding it weake upon any occaſion, wee may labour in the uſe of the meanes to ſtrengthen, and confirme it; to the practiſe of which, that Chriſtians may bee the rather exhorted, this ſhall bee another Reaſon.
               
               
                  REASON 6.
                  
                     It is neceſſary, that Chriſtians examin themſelues,
                           §. 6 whether they be in the Faith: becauſe they muſt bee ready to anſwer other Chriſtians, that examine them concerning their Faith.
                  
                  The Reaſon is good, becauſe charity begins at home, and every man ought every way to have as much care of his owne Faith and ſalvation, as any other particular man whatſoever. Therefore if another man, for my good, try my Faith, and examine me concerning my

Religion, why ſhould I not try my ſelfe, and mine owne Faith, for mine owne good?
                  Secondly, the Reaſon is good, becauſe if another man try my faith, and examine me concerning the ſame, it will be either great ſhame, or ſmall credit to me, according as after triall, I am found to haue it, or to be without it, to bee able to render a reaſon of it, or not to bee able: to the end then that we may haue credit, by being able to render a reaſon of our faith, wee muſt try our ſelues, whether we haue faith, and are able to render a reaſon of it, for our owne comfort, and the good of others.
                  And that Chriſtians ought to be readie to make anſwere to them, that examine them concerning their faith, is plaine by the Apoſtle Peter; where hee wils the Chriſtian Iewes that had received the faith,1. Pet. 3.15. 
                     to bee alwayes readie to giue an anſwer to every man that asked them a reaſon, of the hope that is in them. Whence I thus argue:
                  1. Chriſtians in S. Peters daies, were asked a reaſon of their faith; therefore in theſe daies, they may bee asked the ſame queſtion: Pariſhioners of their Miniſters, children of their parents, ſervants

of their maſters, ſcholers of their Tutors, yea one Chriſtian neighbour of another, when they meet together for Chriſtian conference.
                  2. Chriſtians in thoſe dayes, beeing asked a reaſon of their faith, were to be readie to render a reaſon of it: therfore in theſe daies alſo, they muſt bee readie to render a reaſon of thair faith, when it is asked them.
                  3. Chriſtians then, could not bee ready to render a reaſon of their faith, except they firſt knew themſelues able to doe it: therfore Chriſtians now cannot be readie, to render a reaſon of their faith, except they firſt know themſelues able to doe it.
                  4. In the laſt place, Chriſtians then, could not know, they were able to render a reaſon of their faith, except firſt they examined themſelves concerning their faith, and their abilitie to render a reaſon thereof: no more can Chriſtians now. So that the faith, and hope of Chriſtians, being the ſame now, which then it was, the cauſes of rendring a reaſon of our faith and hope now, remaining the ſame which then they were; (namely, the glory of God, the profite and encouragement of others, and the

comfort of our owne ſoules) and there being an impoſsibility, that they ſhould ever be able to render a reaſon of their faith, except they try it, and examine themſelves, whether they have it or no: therefore (me thinkes) the ſixt Reaſon muſt needs be good, and powerfull to perſwade Chriſtians to the tryall of their faith: namely, that therfore Chriſtians muſt try their faith, becauſe they muſt be readie to render a reaſon of it: and ſo I proceed to the laſt Reaſon, which prooves the neceſsity of this Tryall.
               
               
                  REASON 7.
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 7 It is neceſſary for Chriſtians to try their faith: becauſe there haue beene, there are in theſe dayes, and ever there will be, Heretickes, that will try; and by tryall, labour to ſeduce them from the true faith.
                  
                  The Reaſon is good, becauſe Chriſtians ſhould haue as much care, to try their owne faith, for the good of it, as falſe teachers for the hurt of it; Chriſtians for the eſtabliſhing of it, as Heretickes for the perverting, and (if it were poſsible) for the ſubverting of it. For if we try not our faith, how ſhall wee be

ſure wee haue the true faith? we may eaſily be ſeduced ſo a falſe faith, by falſe prophets, that may ſet vpon us, whereof there bee many, of many kindes in theſe dayes.
                  And that it is true, that there haue beene, in theſe dayes, and ever will bee many Heretikes that doe try the faith of Chriſtians, and by tryall labour to ſeduce them from the true Faith; is plaine, not onely by the propheſies of theſe times, by Paul,
                     
                        Act. 20.29.30, 31. 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. 2. Pet. 3.1, 2, 3. 1. Ioh. 4.1. by Peter, and Iohn: but alſo by lamentable experience; which teacheth us that even now there bee ſome Iewiſh Heretikes that would ſeduce the world to become Iewes againe, to make difference of meates for conſcience ſake; and that would have us to put our necks once againe under the yoake of the Ceremoniall Law, from which Chriſt hath ſet us free. And by theſe Iewiſh Hereticks many in theſe dayes haue beene dangerouſly ſeduced, and I am afraid that the inſtruments thereof haue hardly yet made amends for the harme they haue done in that kinde.
                  Secondly, in theſe dayes, there bee many Popiſh Heretikes, multitudes of Ieſuites, and Prieſts, that ſwarme like

Locuſts in every corner, that would haue us to turne backe againe to the Egypt of Rome, to revolt to Popery, to turne Catholikes, and to defile our garments, that haue beene waſhed from theſe filthy abominations. It was once ſaid of falſe prophets, that they goe in ſheepes cloathing;
                        Mat. 7.15. but now it may bee ſaid that they goe in Silke-wormes cloathing; not in Cloth, but in Silkes & Velvets, like Gallants and Courtiers, to the end they may with leſſe ſuſpition vent their Doctrines, and with more advantage inſinuate themſelves into the minds of the ſimple: concerning whom my exhortation is, that as they labour to try the faith of Chriſtians, and by tryall to ſeduce them: ſo Chriſtians would try their doctrine and life; to the end they may ſee how unſound and unſavoury it is, and how unlike it is to the doctrine and converſation of the Prophets and Apoſtles of the Lord Ieſus: and to try their owne faith alſo, to the end they may never be ſeduced to the falſe faith, which theſe falſe prophets teach. So then, it being dangerous to be ſeduced from the true faith, to a falſe: the tryall of Heretikes by teaching falſe doctrine, being a meanes to ſeduce, and the tryall

of our owne faith, by examining our ſelves concerning it, being a meanes to keepe us from being ſeduced: what remaines, but that Chriſtians labour to try their faith, to the end they may not be ſeduced to a falſe faith? And ſo much for thoſe Reaſons that prove it neceſſary for Chriſtians to try their faith. Now followes the proofe of the Equity of this tryall.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 2. Of the Equity of the tryal of Faith.
               
                  REASON. 1.
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 1 It is equall and iuſt, for Christians to examine themſelves, concerning their faith: becauſe it is their Duty to examine themſelves, concerning other graces of God, in them.
                  
                  THE reaſon is good, becauſe there is in the Word, as much direction, to try our faith, as to try any other grace whatſoever. And Chriſtians haue as much reaſon to examine themſelves, concerning their faith, as concerning any other grace of God in them: in as much as a ſaving faith is both the moſt excellent grace, that God workes in his children, for their uſe and benefit: and of them all, it is the moſt neceſſarie for them, and their ſalvation; (as ſhall be proved by and by) and therefore

doth moſt deſerve the care and labour that is to be taken about it.
                  That Chriſtians muſt examine themſelves concerning other graces of God in them, I proove by two particulars chiefely: namely, Repentance, and Love.
                  Of Repentance they are to try themſelves; becauſe as there is a true repentance, when in the truth of heart, men reſolve and purpoſe to forſake their ſinnes: they ceaſe to doe evill; and learne to doe well, and returne to God in a new life:
                     
                        Pro 28.13. Iſay 1.16. Lam. 3.40. So there is a falſe repentance, when men onely confeſſe their ſinnes, and profeſſe ſorrow for them, as did Iudas:
                        Math. 27 3. ſhew outward humiliation, as Abab did; yea,1. Reg. 21.29. and in ſome things begin to amend, and to doe many duties, as Herod did:
                        Mar. 6.20. But yet doe not heartily, reſolutely and conſtantly, for conſcience ſake to God and his Word, forſake the practice of all their pleaſurable and profitable ſinnes, reiecting the Divels ſuggeſtions in the beginning, and avoiding all occaſions of returning to their former ſinnes.
                  Chriſtians likewiſe are to try themſelves concerning their loue: becauſe as there is a true and unfained loue,2. Cor. 6 6. 1. Ioh. 3.18. when men loue in deed and in truth: ſo is there a

flattering and fained loue in ſome; elſe the Apoſtle Paul would never haue exhorted the Chriſtian Romanes,
                     
                        Rom. 12.9. that their love might bee without diſsimulation; neither would the Apoſtle Saint Iohn haue exhorted the Chriſtians to whom hee wrote,1. Ioh. 3.18. 
                     that they would not loue in word and in tongue onely. The like may bee ſaid of patience and the reſt, ſo that other graces of God in us, requiring and deſerving our tryall of them; it muſt needs follow, that much more is our ſaving faith worthy of it: and the rather, for the excellency, and neceſsity of it, aboue any other grace, as ſhall be plainely proved by and by, in two diſtinct Propoſitions, for the further confirmation of this ſecond Reaſon. Of theſe two Propoſitions, the firſt is this:
                  
                     The excellent uſe of faith in Chriſt.No grace is ſo excellent as a ſaving faith. I prove it:
                  Firſt, becauſe no grace hath ſo excellent an office, and worke in the Covenant of Grace, as Faith hath. For it onely is the condition of the Covenant;
                        Ioh. 3.16. & 6.29. and it is ſo the condition, that every one that hath faith, ſhall bee ſaved by it, and none of them that haue it not, ſhall be ſaued.
                  I know, God Almighty workes many

other Graces in them that ſhal be ſaved beſides faith; as namely, a beliefe of the Goſpell, and repentance, loue, patience, and new obedience; & he requires the uſe, increaſe, and continuance of them: yet he requires none of them all ſeverally, or iointly, as conditions of the Covenant by which wee claime title and intereſt to the good things promiſed therein, which are chiefely Iuſtification, and Glorification; for that is onely faith,
                     
                        Rom. 3.28. & 10.34. Phil. 3.9, 10. 
                     or faith without workes. But they are required either as preparations afore-going to diſpoſe them to faith in Chriſt, or as fruits and effects following the ſame, the better to try and approve the truth of their faith, & the more to aſſure them of the certainty of their ſalvation by faith.
                  Secondly: No grace is excellent, as a ſaving faith, becauſe to none is there given ſo excellent a priviledge as unto it.
                        Ioh. 1.12. 1. Ioh. 3.1. For by Faith we haue this prerogatiue to bee the ſonnes of God.
                  
                  Indeed, by obedience to the Law, wee might haue beene Gods ſervants, which is ſome priviledge: but through faith in Chriſt (the ſonne of God by Nature) we are made the children of God; namely, by grace and Adoption,
                        Gal. 3.26. then which there can be no greater priviledge: in as much

as by it (that is) by beeing ſonnes, we are made heires,
                        Rom. 8.16, 17. Gal. 3.26.29. and heires with Chriſt of the heauenly inheritance.
                  Thirdly, No grace is ſo excellent, as a ſaving faith; becauſe to no other is there promiſed, ſo excellent a reward, as unto it: for to faith in Chriſt, (that is) to them that have a liuely faith, is promiſed eternall life in Heaven,
                        Ioh. 3.16.17.20▪ 25. to behold the glory of God, and of Ieſus Chriſt, and to be one with him in the ſame glory.
                  
                  Indeed if Adam had continued in innocency, and obedience to God, and had never ſinned; he had alſo continued in life, and immortalitie, and had neuer dyed. For the Tree of Life in the middeſt of the Garden,
                        Gen. 3 22.29. was a Sacrament to aſſure him of it: But the life hee had lived by that obedience, could not have been ſo excellent, as that which is promiſed to faith in Chriſt, becauſe Beleevers ſhal by their faith liue in Heaven; and Adam by his obedience to God, could have lived but here on earth, and enioyed an earthly Paradiſe.
                     
                        Gen. 2.15.
                  
                  In like manner, if Adams poſteritie ſince the Fall, could poſſibly fulfill the Law of Moſes,
                     
                        Gal. 3.21. Rom. 8 3. 
                     (which yet is impoſsible) they ſhould certainly live by it, for the Lord directly ſaid ſo;
                        Deu. 18.8. yet is not that life, the life of glory with Chriſt, becauſe the Apoſtle

plainely ſaith, that the Law cannot giue it,
                     
                        Rom. 4.14. Gal. 3.18. in as much as it is an inheritance.
                  I graunt that the Word of God promiſeth Heaven to Love, Charitie, and Righteouſneſſe: but it is not becauſe our Love, Charitie,
                        Pſal. 15.1.2. & 24.3, 4. or Righteouſneſſe that wee performe, can procure it. (For that which the Law requires, is abſolutely perfect, but ours is wholly imperfect.
                        Pſal. 130.3. Pſal. 143.3.) Nor yet is it becauſe they are the condition of the Covenant of grace, either without faith in Chriſt, or together with it, and as well as faith. (For there is but one condition of the New Covenant, and that is faith in Chriſt, or faith without workes:) that is,
                        Rom. 3.28. Ioh. 3.16. Gal. 3.11. faith only in Chriſt alone. (For faith onely unites us to Chriſt, and onely by our being united to Chriſt, wee are capeable of his glory:) but Heaven is promiſed to theſe graces: either becauſe they are properties of thoſe perſons that ſhall goe to Heaven, that is, the faithfull; the better to aſſure them thereof, or becauſe they are effects and fruits of the faith it ſelfe, by which they ſhall live in Heaven, the rather to aſſure them that their faith is not a falſe and dead faith; but a true and a liuely faith.
                        Iac. 2.27.
                  
                  If any chance to obiect that Paul ſpeaking of Faith, Hope and Love,Obiect. concludes that the chiefeſt of them is Love.
                     1. Cor. 13.13. Which

being true, then cannot faith bee moſt excellent, but (at leaſt) Love will bee as excellent as Faith, if not more excellent.
                  
                     Anſwere.I anſwere. This obiection overthrowes not my aſſertion.
                  Firſt, becauſe the faith which I commend aboue other graces (and conſequently above Love) is a ſaving Faith: but it is uery probable, by the context of the ſame place, that the faith before which Saint Paul commends Love, was a miraculous faith: as appeares: Firſt, in that hee ſpeakes of that faith, the uſe and power whereof was to remoove Mountaines, verſe 2. Secondly, in that it is ioyned with other miraculous gifts, as with the gift of knowing all ſecrets, with the gift of tongues, and of propheſie in the ſame Verſe, which every iuſtified Beleever in thoſe dayes had not; and therefore were they extraordinarie. Now a miraculous faith may well bee inferiour to Loue, ſeeing a Reprobate may haue ſuch a faith: but cannot have that loue hee ſpeakes of; becauſe it is the effect of a ſaving faith, which is peculiar to the Elect onely.
                        Gal. 5.6. Tit. 1.1.
                  
                  Secondly, the Obiection overthrowes not my Poſition, becauſe though S. Paul
                     
in the place alledged, had ſpoken of a ſaving faith, as well as of a miraculous faith; yet cannot he be thought to commend Love above Faith, but in one reſpect onely; namely, in regard of continuance,
                        Calvins Commentary on this place.
                        Ioan. à Lapide in hunc locum Mar. Flac. Illyricus in hunc locum.
                      becauſe (as it is imagined) Love continues longer then Faith, namely, after this life, which Faith doth not, (as is thought) whereas I haue given three Reaſons, why faith is more excellent then love; and three to one is great oddes.
                  Thirdly, in reſpect of continuance, Love is not ſimply more excellent then a ſaving Faith, becauſe (as I ſuppoſe) it doth not vtterly ceaſe after this life, but continues as well as Love; which I will make (at leaſt) very probable by this reaſon, viz. becauſe the body muſt be ſaved as well as the ſoule; but vntill the Day of Iudgement, the body cannot bee ſaved; for till then it lies vnder the dominion of death in the grave; therefore at leaſt till then, the ſoule doth truſt in Chriſt, for that part of ſalvation, which is the redemption of the body, though it ſelf be in heaven.Rom. 8.23. For the act of Faith, which is truſt in Chriſt that he will ſave the ſoule, doth ceaſe with this life; for there is no uſe of

it any more,
                        Eccleſ. 12.7. Luk 23.45. Pſal. 16. when once the ſoule is in actuall poſſeſsion of heaven: (which it is immediatly, aſſoone as it is divided from the body by death) yet for all that, foraſmuch as the body, though it reſt in hope, yet is it not in actuall poſſeſsion of heaven, nor can be, till the Day of iudgement: therefore doe I thinke (ſaving other mens better iudgements upon better reaſons) that faith doth abide ſtill in the ſoule after this life; becauſe the act of faith abideth, whereby the ſoule euen in heauen truſteth in Chriſt, and waiteth for the reſurrection of the body, whereby it may be ioyned together to the ſoule againe, and be perfectly glorified together with it in heaven.
                  4. Though there had beene no uſe at all of a ſaving faith after this life, in reſpect of attaining to the reſurrection of the body: yet were not Love a more excellent grace then Faith, both becauſe the love that we ſhall have in heaven, is but a fruit of the ſaving Faith,
                        Gal. 5.6. 1. Theſ. 1.3. wee had while we lived here on earth; and the fruit is not more excellent then the tree, nor the effect then the cauſe: and alſo, becauſe Love is not that grace, whereby we hold poſſeſsion of heaven, for that is Faith: (for we hold poſſeſſion

of heaven by that right, whereby wee claime it as an inheritance, wee claime our inheritance as heires, we are heires as adopted ſonnes, and wee are adopted ſonnes by faith only) but Love is onely our rent, ſuit, and ſervice that we owe to God, in all duty of thankefulneſſe for the glory of heaven, which in this life wee beleeved by faith in Chriſt.
                  But becauſe ſome care not for pearls, and many eſteeme not a thing for the dignity of it, or becauſe it is excellent; but for the need thereof, becauſe they cannot be without it: therefore let vs take a little view of the neceſsity of a faving faith, that thereby wee may diſcerne how uſefull and profitable it will be for us, to have a ſaving faith, and conſequently to try it, to the end I may make good alſo the ſecond Propoſition, which is, that
                  No grace of God is ſo neceſſarie, as a ſaving Faith.
                  I proove it, 1. becauſe no grace is acceptable to God, namely,The neceſſary uſe of a ſaving faith. Hebr. 11.6, 1. unto ſalvation, without a ſaving faith; for without faith it is impoſsible to pleaſe God, in any thing we have or do.
                  2. Becauſe no grace is ſo neceſſary

for this life, and the life to come; by reaſon, that all good things whereof wee ſtand in need, both for this life, and for the life to come, are ours by the promiſe onely; and the promiſe is made ours by faith onely; and faith onely layes hold on Ieſus Chriſt, in whom they are made,2. Cor. 1.20. and in whom they are all, yea and Amen, and for whoſe ſake the good things contained in the promiſe, are beſtowed vpon vs, and ſanctified to our comfort.
                  3. No grace of God is ſo neceſſary as a ſaving faith, becauſe it is to be deſired and uſed above all other graces. For the Apoſtle ſpeaking of many graces of God, neceſſarie to Chriſtians for their ſpirituall warfare, exhorteth the Epheſians,
                        Epheſ. 6.16. (and in them all Chriſtians) above all to take the ſhield of faith, whereby they may quench all the fiery darts of the divell
                     ▪ which words above all, and quench all, what do they elſe imply, but that a ſaving faith is more needfull then all the reſt? For although by ſome other graces, Chriſtians might happely quench ſome of Satans fiery darts: yet by a ſaving faith, they may quench them all: according to that of S. Iohn to the ſame purpoſe in other word,
                        
                           •
                         
                        Ioh. 5.4, 5. 
                     All that is borne of God overcommeth

the world, and this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith.
                  
                  So that I may ſafely conclude, that as of all the lights that God created, and ſet in the Firmament of Heaven, for the benefit of men vpon earth, none was ſo excellent as the Sunne, none ſo neceſſary as it: ſo of all the graces and vertuous qualities, which the holy Ghoſt breaths into the ſoules of Chriſtians here on earth, to prepare them for happineſſe in heaven, none is ſo excellent as a ſaving faith, none ſo neceſſarie as it.
                  And thus much haue I thought good to adde of the dignitie, and neceſsitie of a ſaving faith, above other graces; not to take from them any thing that is their due: (for they all are excellent, and neceſſarie in their ſeverall kindes, according to their ſeverall ends, and uſes, appointed them by God, the authour of them) nor yet to give unto faith, any right that is not due unto it; as to attribute to the act of faith, which is beleeving in Chriſt, any merit of ſalvation. But I have written it, becauſe it hath pleaſed God to crowne this his owne worke, and in his Word ſo far to grace it, above all other graces, as to make it the onely condition of the Covenant of

grace that is requir'd to be had of al thoſe that are capable of ſalvation; as alſo, becauſe there being good cauſe, why they ſhould try other graces that are not ſo excellent & neceſſary as faith in Chriſt, they might thence learne, that it is equity they ſhould try that which is more excellent and neceſſary then they.
               
               
                  REASON 2.
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 2 It is equall and iuſt, that Chriſtians try their faith, becauſe worldlings take great paines and care in making tryall of earthly and worldly things, whether they be good or no, or as good as others commend them to be: to the end they may not be deceived in their opinion and iudgement of the worth of them.
                  
                  The Reaſon is good: Firſt, becauſe faith is more precious then gold, or all the things in the world.1. Pet. 1.5.
                  
                  Secondly, becauſe to bee deceiued in our faith, is a greater loſſe, then to bee deceiued in any worldly thing whatſoever: even as to be deceived in gold and ſilver, is a greater loſſe, then to be deceived in Braſſe and Yron: therefore wee ought to try our faith, to the end wee may not bee deceived, in miſtaking a falſe faith for a true; and a temporary

faith, for a ſaving faith.
                  Thirdly, becauſe upon this ground,
                        Ioh. 6.26. Matt. 6.33. Chriſt wils his Diſciples to labour for the meat that doth not periſh, and firſt to ſeeke the kingdome of God: whereas worldlings firſt labour for the food that periſheth, and for earthly kingdomes that vaniſh away.
                  And that worldlings do take care, and uſe diligence in making tryall of earthly and worldly things, is plaine, not onely by that excuſe of thoſe men in the Goſpell, who alledge for their abſence from the Kings great Supper, that is, for their negligence of ſpirituall and heavenly things; that they had purchaſed a piece of Land, that they muſt needs goe and ſee it, namely,
                        Luk. 14.18, 19. whether it were woorth their money they payed for it, and were as good land as it was commended to bee; and the other of them had bought fiue yoke of oxen, and that therefore they muſt go prove them, to ſee if they will draw well in the yoke, or no: but alſo it is made plaine by ordinary experience, and common practice of men, who weigh their gold, to ſee if it be currant; taſte their wines, to prove if they be pleaſant; ſmell to their meats, to try if it be not tainted; and try colours,

to ſee if they be in graine, and the like. So that a ſaving faith being more precious then theſe, or any other worldly things; there being as great a poſsibility to be deceived in matters of faith, as in matters of the world, by meanes of our owne naturall ignorance, and Satans ſubtiltie; there beeing greater loſſe by being deceived in matters of faith, then in things of this world; and tryall being the onely meanes to prevent our beeing deceived in holy and ſpirituall matters, as well as in worldly; it muſt be equall and iuſt, that Chriſtians learne to try their faith, and to examine themſelves whether they bee in the faith. And thus much of the equity of this duty. The utility or benefit followes, to be conſidered in the laſt place, in the third Chapter.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. III. Of the benefit and profit of the Tryall of Faith.
               
                  REASON 1.
                  
                     It is profitable for Chriſtians to examin 
                           § 1 themſelves whether they haue a ſaving Faith: becauſe by finding through examination that they haue it, they ſhall certainly know, that the preaching of the Goſpell, hath beene powerfull in them, unto ſalvation.
                  
                  THE Reaſon is good, becauſe it is an excellent comfortable thing, to finde that the Goſpell hath beene powerfull and effectuall in us unto our ſaluation, not onely becauſe they,
                        Act. 13.48. in whom it is effectuall are ordained to eternall life, and are Gods ſheepe,
                     
                        Ioh. 10.27. becauſe they heare his voice; but alſo becauſe they, to whom it is not effectuall, doe therefore not beleeue

                     and obey,
                     
                        Ioh. 8.47. 
                     becauſe they are not of God: but it is a ſigne they ſhall periſh, becauſe the Goſpell is hid unto them:2. Cor. 4.3. namely, if they live and dye in this eſtate. So that if to be aſſured of the power and efficacie of the Goſpell in vs unto ſalvation, be a benefit, then ought Chriſtians to make conſcience to try and examine their faith; becauſe hereby, this benefit among other commeth unto them.
                  And that by examination of our ſelves whether we be in the faith, wee ſhall come to finde that the preaching of the Goſpell hath beene effectuall unto ſalvation, is plaine. Firſt, becauſe the preaching of the Goſpell is the power of God unto ſalvation to them that beleeve.
                     
                        Rom. 1.16. Secondly, becauſe it pleaſed God,1. Cor. 1.21. 
                     by the fooliſhneſſe of preaching, to ſave them that beleeve. Thirdly, becauſe Faith comes by hearing,
                     
                        Rom. 10.14.17. 
                     and hearing by the preaching of the Word of God, which is the Goſpell. Laſtly, becauſe the Apoſtle Paul vpon this ground exhorts the Corinthian Chriſtians,2. Cor. 13.5. to examine themſelves whether they were in the faith; becauſe by examining themſelves whether they bee in the Faith, they ſhould find themſelues to be in the faith, and by finding themſelves to be in the faith, they ſhould find it to haue bin effected by his Miniſterie, to the end it

might appeare to them that his miniſtery had bin effectual in thē to their ſaluation,2. Cor. 13.3, 4, 5, 6. and conſequently, that Chriſt had beene powerfull in his Miniſterie among them.
                  So that examining our ſelves whether we haue faith, being a meanes to finde wee have it; finding wee haue it, beeing alſo a meanes to know that the preaching of the Goſpell hath been effectuall in us to ſalvation, and the knowledge of the efficacie of the preaching of the Goſpell unto ſalvation, beeing profitable to us, becauſe it is a notable meanes to aſſure us of our ſalvation; it muſt needs bee good reaſon to perſwade Chriſtians to examine themſelves whether they have a ſaving faith: namely, becauſe they ſhall finde through examination, that the preaching of the Goſpell hath beene powerfull in them to their ſalvation.
               
               
                  REASON 2.
                  
                     It is profitable for Christians to examine themſelves whether they have a ſaving faith, becauſe hereby they ſhall certainly know that Ieſus Chriſt is in them unto ſalvation.
                  
                  The reaſon is good: becauſe it is a very comfortable thing to the Soule, to know that Chriſt is in us, by his ſauing grace, as

appeares by this; becauſe hereby wee may know that we are Chriſts, and Gods children,
                        Epheſ. 1.13, 14. and conſequently heires of ſalvation: for if Chriſt be in us, then are we united to Chriſt; and if we be united to him by the bond of the ſpirit, then ſhall we never be divided from him, but dye in him, and riſe by him,1. Theſ. 4.16, 17. and raigne with him in eternall glory.
                  And that by examining our ſelves whether we be in the faith, wee ſhall come certainly to know that Chriſt is in us, namely, unto ſalvation, is plaine. 1. Becauſe the Apoſtle ſaith plainely in the Epiſtle to the Epheſians,
                     
                        Epheſ. 3.17. that Chriſt dwels in our hearts by faith
                     ▪ And ſecondly, becauſe upon this ground, the ſame Apoſtle exhorts the Corinthians to examine themſelves whether they be in the faith, becauſe by examining themſelves whether they bee in the faith, they ſhall finde themſelves to bee in the faith, and by finding themſelves to bee in the faith, they ſhall finde Chriſt to bee in them, as is plaine by the Apoſtle, where having ſaid, Examine your ſelves whether you be in the faith, proue your ſelves: he addeth,2. Cor. 13.5. 
                     Know you not how that Ieſus Chriſt is in you; intimating, that by performing this duty of examination, they ſhould finde Chriſt to be in themſelves, to the end, they

may diſcerne a cleere proofe of Chriſt in him, that is, in his Miniſterie, for the credit and iuſtification of it among them, to the full ſatisfaction of all that ſeemed to make doubt of it.
               
               
                  REASON 3.
                  
                     It is profitable for Chriſtians to examine 
                           § 3 themſelves whether they have a ſaving faith; becauſe this examination will further them in the way of ſalvation.
                  
                  The reaſon is good; becauſe men are bound to uſe all good meanes to preſerue their bodily health:
                        Exod. 20.13. Epheſ. 5.29. Heb. 3.13. much more the welfare of their ſoules. Yea, they are bound to uſe all good meanes, to further others in the way of ſalvation: much more themſelves, inaſmuch as their ſoules ought to be dearer to them, then their bodies, and their owne ſoules, then another mans.
                  And that this examination wil be beneficiall to their ſaluation, will apppeare, by the knowledge they ſhall reape by their examination, and by the profit they ſhall reape by their knowledge, in furthering them in the way to Heaven.
                  Firſt, there is knowledge to bee gotten, by examining of our ſelves, whether we be in the faith or no: becauſe both they that haue faith, ſhall by this tryall know,

and bee aſſured they have it, and they alſo that haue it not indeed, ſhall as evidently perceiue they want it: and the ground of this I fetch not from the Apoſtles words onely cited in my former reaſon, (when after his exhortation to the Corinthians to examine themſelves whether they bee in the Faith; he addes in the next words, Know you not your ſelves, &c? intimating that knowledge comes by examination:) but from the generall uſe and end of all tryall, which is more certainly to know the nature, and qualitie of the thing we try.
                  Secondly, there is benefit to bee gotten by knowing our ſelues whether wee bee in the faith or no: becauſe both they that finde they haue a ſaving faith, ſhall thereby bee mooued to comfort themſelves in it, in the midſt of the afflictions of this life, and to uſe all good meanes to ſtrengthen and confirme the ſame: and they that finde they haue it not, ſhal hereby (conſidering the danger of wanting it) be perſwaded carefully to uſe the meanes to attaine it.
                  Now then if the getting and ſtrengthening of our faith bee a great benefit to Chriſtians: as appeares by this, becauſe elſe the Diuell would not ſo labour to hinder

both, leſt they ſhould underſtand with their hearts, and be converted,
                     
                        Act. 28.3. 
                     & God ſhould heale them: then the knowledge that wee have faith, or have it not, muſt needs bee beneficiall to our ſoules, becauſe by this meanes wee are moued to ſtrengthen it, if we have it; or to get it, if we want it.
                  2. If the knowledge that we haue faith, or have it not, bee beneficiall to our ſoules (as hath been ſaid) becauſe hereby we ſhall be encouraged in the uſe of the meanes, either to get it, or increaſe it, as our need is: then muſt the examination of our ſelves whether we be in the faith, bee beneficiall to our ſoules likewiſe; becauſe hereby we come to know that wee haue it, or haue it not, as hath been ſhewed.
                  So that furthering Chriſtians in the way of ſalvation, being beneficial to their ſoules, knowing that they have faith or have it not, being a furthering of Chriſtians in the way of ſalvation; and examining themſelues whether they be in the faith, being a meanes to make them know whether they have a ſaving faith or no; mee thinkes this reaſon is good: That Chriſtians muſt therfore examine themſelves whether they be in the faith: becauſe this examination will bee profitable to them, to further them in the way of ſalvation.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII. An anſwere to ſome obiections, against the former doctrine.
               BEcauſe alwayes there have beene, and ſtill there will be gaine-ſayers of the truth of God, and the evill neighbour will ſow Tares,
                  
                     Math. 13.25. 
                  where the good Husbandman hath ſowed good Wheate; and becauſe the Divell beeing an enemy to the practice of all good duties in generall, will in all likelihood ſuggeſt into the mindes of men, ſome oppoſition againſt the doing of this duty in ſpeciall: therefore doe I thinke it meete to produce and anſwer all ſuch obiections as I can imagine, he, or his inſtruments will make and vrge, to diſſwade Chriſtians from the tryall of their Faith: to the end they may bee wholly careleſſe, or very ſlacke and remiſſe in the doing of it.
               The obiections are taken either from a ſuppoſed needleſnes of this tryall, as the firſt, ſecond and third; or from an imagined inconvenience

of the ſame, as the fourth and fifth; or laſtly, from a perſwaſion of vnlikelihood, or impoſsibilitie to try their faith, as the ſixth and ſeuenth; whereof though none of them bee ſo difficult, that they deſerve or require much labour to anſwere them: yet becauſe they are perſwaſiue, by their ſeeming truth, to deceiue many that are willing to be deceived; therefore doe I thinke it needfull to anſwere them; for the ſtopping of the mouthes of ignorant Cavillers, and for the better ſettling of the minds of conſcionable learners, in the knowledge of the truth of God in this point. And firſt, of the obiections of the firſt kinde; namely, that it is needleſſe for Chriſtians to try their faith. And of them this the firſt.
               
                  1. OBIECTION anſwered.
                        § 1
                  
                  
                     What need wee to examine our ſelves, whether 
                           Obiection. 1 we be in the Faith, or have a ſaving faith: ſeeing we know that our forefathers lived and dyed in the Faith which we now profeſſe in England, wee our ſelves were borne in it, and doe confeſſe our ſelves to be Proteſtants?
                  
                  I anſwere,Anſwere. that all Chriſtians now living in England, cannot certainely

know, that their forefathers lived in the faith we now profeſſe in England: for the anceſtors of many that are now Proteſtants in England, were undoubtedly Papiſts, and Recuſants: now to be a Papiſt, and to be a Proteſtant, is to be of contrary Religions, and of different faiths.
                  2. Though they certainly knew, that their forefathers lived in the faith wee now profeſſe in England, yet can they not certainly know, that they died in the ſame faith, (otherwiſe then by the iudgement of charity, which hopeth all things,
                     1. Cor. 13.7. and iudgeth the beſt, becauſe it knowes not the worſt,) foraſmuch as common experience teacheth, that many who have lived in profeſsion Proteſtants, have died Papiſts; and many alſo that have lived Papiſts, have died Proteſtants.
                  Thirdly, though they knew certainly, that their Anceſtors and Predeceſſors lived and died in the faith profeſſed in England, (which onely is the true faith) and that they came of thoſe beleeving Parents, yet will this doe them no good unto ſalvation, except themſelves profeſſe the ſame faith, as well as their forefathers, for what good did it

to the Iewes in Chriſts time, that they came of the Patriarkes in former ages, to whom the promiſes were made, and who by faith beleeved thoſe promiſes, and truſted in God for the performance of them, ſeeing for all that, Chriſt ſaith of the Iewes in his time,
                        Ioh. 8.44. that they were of their father the divell. For though a man come of never ſo religious parents, yet is he not borne a Chriſtian by naturall generation of them, but is made a Chriſtian by ſupernatural regeneration from the Spirit of God: for that which is borne of the fleſh is fleſh,
                     
                        Ioh. 3.3, 5. 
                     and that which is borne of the Spirit is ſpirit, and except we be borne againe of water and of the Spirit, we cannot enter into the kingdome of God.
                  
                  We are indeed begotten unbeleevers, or miſ-beleevers, of our naturall parents, by the meanes of the ſinne of Adam and Eve, the common parents of us all: and therefore if wee bee ever made true beleevers in Chriſt,
                        Iam. 1.18. we muſt be begotten againe hereunto by our heavenly Father: if ever we be begotten againe to a lively hope,
                     1. Pet. 1.3. it muſt be by the immortal ſeed of the Word of God, which is the Goſpel.1. Pet. 1.23.
                  
                  Let ſuch men therefore conſider, that it will not ſerve their turne unto ſalvation,

to come of beleeving parents, becauſe Paul ſaith, that all Iſrael are not therefore the children of Abraham,
                     
                        Rom. 9.7. 
                     becauſe they are of the ſeed of Abraham: but they are the children of Abraham, that are the children of promiſe;
                        Rom. 9.8. Gal. 3.7. Rom. 4.12. and they are the children of promiſe, that are of the faith of Abraham; even that walke in the ſteppes of the faith of their father Abraham.
                  
                  I grant, it is a priviledge, to come of beleeving parents,
                        Eph. 6.4. if parents make conſcience to bring vp their children in the feare and nurture of the Lord; and, if children will be taught to know the Scriptures from their childhood,
                     2. Tim. 3.15. 
                     that are able to make them wiſe unto ſalvation: otherwiſe, it is ſo farre from beeing a bleſsing to them, that it ſhal riſe up in iudgement againſt them, if they profit not by the meanes affoorded to them of their new birth unto regeneration and ſalvation.
                  4. Laſtly, though thoſe that make this obiection, be profeſſors of the true faith onely, (as all the Proteſtants in England are) yet will not this ſerve their turne unto ſalvation, except they proceed further; for not every one that ſaith, Lord,
                     
                        Matth. 7.21. 
                     Lord, ſhall enter into the kingdome of heaven:
                        Rom. 10.9. for God requireth of them, not onely that they confeſſe with their mouthes

the Lord Ieſus, but that they beleeve on him with their hearts:
                        Iam. 2.18. Tit. 3.8. that they ſhew foorth their faith by their workes: that they make proofe of their beleefe by a good life:1. Tim. 2 15. Revel. 20.10. yea, that they continue in the faith; and be faithfull to the death, that they may receive the crowne of life.
                  
                  For many there be that profeſſe the true faith, which have it not, as Iudas, and Simon Magus, even as many that make themſelves rich in ſhew,
                     
                        Prov. 13.7. 
                     are poore in ſubſtance: many profeſſe it for a while, but forſake it as Demas:2. Tim. 4.10. and many profeſſe the faith, that walke not worthy of it: which profeſſe they know God,
                     
                        Tit. 1.16. 2. Tim. 3.5. 
                     but by their workes deny him: having a forme of godlineſſe, but denying the power thereof.
                  
                  Indeed the profeſsion of the onely true faith, makes us the members of the true Church of Chriſt: which a man may be, and yet be a damned reprobate, as was Iudas: but it is needfull for Chriſtians, to the end they may be ſaved, not onely to bee members of the Church; but that they be members of his myſticall body. Now, profeſsion of the true faith will not make a man a member of Chriſt, but the having & uſing of faith, by continuall reſting on Chriſt for ſalvation, the ſhewing forth of the fruits

of it, and labouring for the comfort of the ſame, with patience under the croſſe, be the meanes that will effect it.
                  So that for all this Obiection, Chriſtians are bound, and haue great reaſon to try their faith, leſt their faith prove but profeſsion; their fruit but leaves, and themſelves ſuch, as for a time beleeve vnto profeſsion, to make them the members of the Church, but not unto righteouſneſſe, to make them the members of Chriſt,
                        Luke 8.13. Matth. 24.13. that for awhile beleeve, and after in temptation fall away; which who ſo doth, never ſhall be ſaved, notwithſtanding hee come of never ſo religious parents, and were himſelfe in profeſsion never ſo forward and zelous, without cleaving to the Lord in conſcionable and conſtant obedience in his whole man. But let vs ſee what may be further obiected againſt this truth.
               
               
                  2. OBIECTION anſwered.
                  
                     
                        
                           § 2 What need we to examine our ſelves, whether 
                           Obiection. 2 we have a ſaving faith, ſeeing we are ſure we have it? For we know wee can ſay our Creed perfectly.
                  
                  
                     Anſwer.I anſwer: 1. Though the Creed containe the Articles of a ſaving faith: yet

I feare me, all that make this Obiection, cannot ſay their Creed perfectly, if they were wel examined, & put to it at the baptizing of their children, or in any publike aſſembly: it is to bee doubted, that many who boaſt they can ſay their Creed, will bee found either afraid to ſay it, or unable to ſay it, or aſhamed to ſay it: ſo that if the having of a ſaving faith conſiſted (as they ſeemed to imagine) in being able to rehearſe the Articles of their Creed, I feare, many would come ſhort of having a ſaving faith.
                  2. Though they could ſay the Creed without booke, and miſſe not a word: yet if many that make this Obiection, were well catechized, it is like they would bee found unable to underſtand it; and the ſaying of it by heart (as they call it) will doe them no good unto ſalvation, except they can ſay it by art, (that is) truly underſtand the meaning of the ſeverall Articles therein contained. For by the repeating of it, without conceiving the ſenſe thereof, little profit or comfort will ariſe to their ſoules; for (for all this) they may prove no better beleevers then little children of three or foure yeeres old, who can ſay it as readily as they, and yet for all that

cannot bee prooved to have a ſaving faith.
                  3. Though they could perfectly ſay and underſtand their Creed, as they pretend, yet were not this ſufficient for their ſalvation. Firſt, becauſe all this proves no more, but that they have an hiſtoricall faith, which onely reſides in the mind and underſtanding, whereas the ſaving faith, whereof they are to examine themſelves, is ſeated in the heart and affections, as it is plaine by the Apoſtle,
                        Rom. 10.10. Epheſ. 3.17. where hee ſaith, With the heart man beleeveth vnto righteouſneſſe: and Chriſt dwels in our hearts by faith. Secondly, to ſay the Creed, though with never ſo good underſtanding, is but to profeſſe the faith, and God requires more of them that ſhall be ſaved, then that they profeſſe the faith, though it be the true faith, as hath beene ſhewed in anſwere to the firſt Obiection.
                  4. Though we could ſay the Creed, and underſtand it, yet were not that enough to ſalvation. Firſt, becauſe neither the ſaying nor the underſtanding of it, are the act of faith whereby wee are ſaved; but onely a relying, or reſting upon, and truſting unto Chriſt (that is) to the merits of his death, and obedience

for ſalvation. Secondly, becauſe with the moſt it is taken for no more then beleeving, that there is forgivenes of ſinnes to be had, and life everlaſting, which the very divels know and beleeve.
                  I grant, that to ſay the Creed is good, and to underſtand it is better; the one is a helpe to the other, and both are furtherances to a ſaving faith: but yet with the heart to beleeve in Chriſt, is to have a ſaving faith; and not to ſay with the tongue, I beleeve in Chriſt. for what though a man did with his lippes ſay never ſo confidently, (which out of a mans underſtanding, iudgement, and memory being well catechized, and taught to ſay ſo, he may doe) With all my heart, and ſoule, I reſt upon the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, for grace and glory; to him I truſt for the remiſsion of my ſinnes, the reſurrection of my bodie, and for eternall life in heaven: yet though he ſay all this with his lippes, and underſtand what he ſayes, yet if he doe not ſo indeed, with his heart, and in truth before God, (his conſcience bearing him witnes in the holy Ghoſt, that hee doth really, actually, and ſincerely from a broken heart, and heavy

loaden ſovle out of feeling of his need of Chriſts merits, and out of an hunger and thirſt for ſalvation by them;) for all his profeſsion with his tongue, hee hath not as yet a ſaving Faith: nor is he yet in Gods ſight a true Beleever in Chriſt.
                  Indeed if wee heare a Chriſtian ſay ſo, and profeſſe ſo, we are bound in Chriſtian charitie to beleeve him, and to perſwade our ſelues that hee hath a ſaving Faith indeed, and is one of Gods deare children, and a member of Ieſus Chriſt; for wee can know nothing to the contrarie; eſpecially, if his life and converſation be anſwerable to his beliefe, and profeſsion: but for all this profeſsion with the tongue, and ſaying the Creed with the lips, it is not impoſsible but that ſuch a man (not meaning it of any one particular perſon, but indefinitely of any ſuch man) I ſay, it is not impoſsible; but for all this ſuch a man may before the Lord, and in his ſight bee no true beleever indeed, nor have a true ſaving Faith: except it were true, that there were no hypocrites in the Church, who like the Scribes and Phariſes,
                        Math. 23.3. 
                     ſay and doe not, which cannot bee as long as wee finde

it written in the Word, that many ſhall ſay, Lord, Lord,
                     
                        Math. 7.21. 
                     who ſhall never enter into the Kingdome of Heaven,
                     
                        Tit. 1.16. 
                     and who profeſſe they know God, but by their workes deny him. So that this Obiection is to no purpoſe; therefore let us heare another.
               
               
                  3. OBIECTION anſwered.
                  
                     It is needleſſe for Chriſtians to examine themſelves 
                           § 3 concerning their Faith; ſeeing 
                           Obiection. 3 their Miniſter by his place muſt examine them.
                  
                  I anſwere; firſt, it is true,Anſwere. that all Miniſters ſhould try and examine their Pariſhioners concerning their Faith and Religion, and labour to know it,1. Theſ. 3.5. eſpecially before they come to the Communion; and I would to God all Miniſters would make conſcience of this dutie: but it is as true, that al Miniſters wil not take this paines with their people, and ſo thoſe people that are deſtitute of ſuch Miniſters, muſt take the paines to examine themſelves, if they will have benefit by it.
                  Secondly, many of theſe obiectors, that with ſuch colours would cover their naked careleſneſſe of their owne ſalvation,

live under Miniſters that would faine take the paines to examine them in matters of Religion, and in the points of their Chriſtian Faith: but they will not ſuffer them, they will count them buſie fellowes for it, and will them to let them alone. For ordinarily the yonger ſort wil be afraid to be catechized, & the elder ſort aſhamed: though I haue beene an eye-witneſſe where both yong and old, men and women, meane and Right Worſhipfull, Maſters and Servants, Parents and Children, have in the open Congregation beene catechized, and queſtioned of their Chriſtian Faith, where they have anſwered readily and diſcreetly, to the great comfort of their Miniſter, their owne great credit, and the encouragement of the hearers.
                  Thirdly, though it were true, that all Miniſters were willing and able, cheerefull and painefull, in trying their people, and examining them concerning the Grounds of Chriſtian Religion; yet will it not follow thereupon, that therefore Chriſtians need not to examine themſelves. Firſt, becauſe it is evident by the exhortation of the Apoſtle,1. Cor. 11.28. that every man muſt examine himſelfe before he

eate of the Bread, and drinke of the Wine of the Lords Table; whether his Miniſter doe examine him or no. For there is no ſuch caution or limitation intended or expreſſed. So that becauſe it muſt abſolutely be done, then at leaſt; therefore is it needfull he ſhould try his faith at other times alſo. Secondly, though it be the duty of every Miniſter to pray for his people, and to edifie them: yet it is the duty of every Chriſtian to pray for himſelfe,
                     Iude 20. ver. and to edifie himſelfe in his moſt holy Faith. Thirdly, becauſe we are better able to know & feele the weakeneſſe or ſtrength of our owne faith, then the Miniſter can: and therefore beeing more privy to it, wee are more fit to ſearch, and try our owne faith, then he can be. Fourthly, becauſe by our priuate and ſecret tryall of our owne faith, and communing with our owne hearts about it, we may be made the more ready to anſwere the Miniſter when hee ſhall try our faith, and examine us concerning it. Fifthly and laſtly, becauſe in other caſes wee will not bee ſatisfied with other mens tryals, of things concerning the world. For though when one payes us money in gold, and we ſee him weigh it before our faces: yet will

we uſually take the Scales in our owne hands, and weigh it our ſelves; which becauſe we doe, if not out of diſtruſt of another man: yet at leaſt out of more truſt in our ſelves then another, and out of care that we be not beguiled: therefore ſhould wee our ſelves, uſe tryall of our ſelves, and of our own faith, though not out of diſtruſt of the Miniſters care, yet at leaſt out of care of our owne ſalvation. And ſo much of the obiections raiſed out of the conſideration of the needleſneſſe of the tryall of our Faith, to diſſwade us from the practice of it. Now to the ſecond ſort of obiections, taken from ſome inconvenience that may bee ſuppoſed to follow upon this tryall. Whereof this is the firſt.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. V. Of imagined inconveniences in trying of our Faith.
               
                  1. OBIECTION anſwered.
                  
                     It is inconvenient and dangerous for 
                           §. 1 Chriſtians to try their faith, becauſe 
                           Obiection. 1 if all Christians, then old folkes muſt examin themſelves whether they be in the faith; and if they ſhould at thoſe yeeres try their faith; they might peradventure bee driven to deſpaire, becauſe by tryall they might happely finde themſelves not to haue a ſaving Faith.
                  
                  I Anſwere: Firſt, though it be true,Anſwer. that they which have not a ſaving faith, may by examination come to finde that they have it not: (for the intent and event of tryall is knowledge) yet it is not true, that their finding of

themſelves not to haue faith, will doe them any hurt in generall, or that ſuppoſed hurt in ſpeciall, which is to drive them to deſpaire. In generall it will do them no harme, but good; becauſe by conſidering the danger of wanting faith, and the benefit of having it, they may be perſwaded to bee carefull in the uſe of the meanes to get it. In ſpeciall it will not doe them that harme that is pretended, namely, to drive them to deſpaire; becauſe deſpaire properly taken, is of two ſorts, neither of which they need to feare.
                  The firſt kinde of deſpaire is of thoſe, who having once had a ſaving faith, and felt the comforts thereof, which are peace,
                        Rom. 5.2, 3. and ioy▪ and thereby hope of ſalvation, have afterwards deſpaired 
                        •
                      (that is) fallen from hope, and for a time loſt the feeling of that meaſure of the hope of their ſalvation, which once they had, namely, through the ſting of conſcience, pricking, and piercing them with feare and terrour for the committing of ſome foule ſinne, not ſoundly repented of,
                        Pſal. 51.8, 9, 10, 11. & 77.7. which was the caſe of David.
                  
                  Now this kinde of deſpaire the obiectors need not feare, becauſe it is of

thoſe that haue a ſaving faith; whereas the obiection, is of thoſe that have it not, and are found not to have it. and beſides, neither doth it befall all the Elect, but ſuch only, as through ſecuritie are overtaken with ſome grieuous ſinne, after their effectuall calling; nor (if it did befall them all) doe they liue and dye in it; becauſe before they dye, they are comforted againe with the Helmet of the hope of their ſalvation,
                     1. Theſ. 5.13. as in the example of Iob and David.
                  
                  The ſecond kinde of deſpaire properly taken, is a perſwaſion that ſome have, whereby they are aſſured that they are Reprobates, and caſt away from Gods favour: that there is no way with them but one, which is Hell, nor any mercy with God for them: to which perſwaſion they come through Satans malice, to whom they are given over by God in this life, to be tormented in ſoule for the ſinne againſt the Holy Ghoſt, or ſome other grievous ſinnes fearefully committed, and not 
                        •
                     epented of.
                  This kinde of deſpaire the obiectors need not ſo much to feare: firſt, becauſe 
                        •
                     t is peculiar to reprobates onely, ſuch as were Cain, Iudas and Saul: but to want

a ſaving faith, or to be found without it, is not peculiar to Reprobates, becauſe there was a time when the elect themſelves had not a ſaving Faith; namely, before they were effectually called. Secondly, they need not ſo much to feare this kinde of deſpaire, becauſe of one Reprobate that dyes in this deſpaire and torment of conſcience, there be millions that dye in preſumption of mercy, without ſenſe of ſinne, or puniſhment: the reaſon whereof is, becauſe Satan (who knowes he hath time little enough in this life to draw men to ſinne, and long enough after this life to torment them for it) doth therefore ordinarily reſerve the tormenting of ſinners till the Day of Iudgement, and till they be in Hell; leſt if he ſhould deale ſo roughly with all ſinners in this world, they might being ſo pincht with terrours, ſeeke after the meanes of ſalvation,
                        Act. 16. & 31.2.38. as did the Iaylor, and the Iewes, and the rather, becauſe the preſumption of Gods mercy, without the worke of Gods grace in our hearts, is a fitte meanes to feede men fat to the day of ſlaughter, in aſmuch as it is a meanes to make men careleſſe of repenting and beleeving in Chriſt,

whereby they may come to be ſaved.
                  Indeed thoſe that make this obiection, may by examination finde they want a ſaving Faith, and the knowledge of this want, may be a meanes to bring them to a two-fold kinde of deſpaire, improperly ſo called; for they may bee brought to ſome anguiſh of minde, and trouble of conſcience, becauſe they haue been ſo long without ſo neceſſarie a grace, and ſo long careleſſe of getting it; yea, they may bee brought to a diſtruſt in themſelves that ever they ſhall bee able, by any goodneſſe or righteouſneſſe in themſelves, to ſave themſelves, to which when men are brought, they may bee ſaid in ſome ſenſe to deſpaire, (ſpeaking after the manner of men.) But they neede not feare either of theſe kindes of deſpaire; becauſe every ſinner muſt thus deſpaire in himſelfe, before hee can be fit to truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation, or to hunger and thirſt after righteouſnes by him, as ſhall be ſhewed hereafter.
                  2. To this Obiection, I anſwer, that though it were true, which they obiect, namely, that if they ſhould examine themſelves, whether they had a

ſaving faith; by examination find they had it not, and by finding they had it not, bee driven to deſpaire: yet are they no whit in worſe caſe before God, nor are they neerer to damnation, for finding themſelves not to have a ſaving faith, then for not having faith, though they know not that they want it. For though they come not in this life to deſpaire, becauſe they are ſo blinded in their minds, that they know not that they want a ſaving faith, and ſo hardened in their hearts, that they feele not the danger of that want, and ſo feared in their conſciences, that are affected with neither: yet in another life ſhall they certainly come to deſpaire utterly, and for ever of ſalvation: yea, they ſhall come to that which is worſe then deſpaire, namely, Damnation it ſelfe, for not having faith, and for beeing careleſſe to get it: ſpecially if they have lived in the cleare light of the Goſpell, which theſe cavillers, and moſt people have done, that now live in theſe dayes, and in the Church of England; ſo that there is no reaſon in the world, why Chriſtians ſhould put off the practice of ſo neceſſary a duty, as is the tryall of our faith, upon a needleſſe

feare of I know not what deſpaire.
                  For is it not a fooliſh thing,Simil. for a ſick man that is ready to die, to be of ſo pettiſh, and froward a mind, that by no meanes the Phiſicians muſt looke on his water, nor feele his Pulſes? leſt hee diſcerne thereby, that there is no way with him but one, which is death? nor muſt he tell him how deadly ſicke hee is, leſt he be troubled, and offended at it; and ſo he dies ſuddenly, without ſetting his heart in order unto God, by faith and repentance; or putting his houſe in order to the world by making his Will? even it is as fooliſh, yea a more fooliſh thing it is for a Chriſtian, to have a perſwaſion hee hath a ſaving faith, when indeed he hath it not; but he will not ſuffer his Miniſter to examine him, nor will he examine himſelfe whether he have it or no, leſt happely it might be found hee had it not indeed: nor will he have his Miniſter or his owne conſcience to tell him he hath it not; leſt (forſooth) hee bee troubled in conſcience about it; and ſo on a ſudden he dies ſecurely in preſumption of faith and ſalvation, and is caſt into condemnation. Wherefore ſuch Obiectors ſhould learne to feare Hell, rather then

Deſpaire, infidelitie, and careleſneſſe of ſalvation, that are ſinnes themſelves more then Deſpaire, which is but a puniſhment of ſinne: and then they need feare neither Deſpaire nor Hell; if by feeling the want of faith, they labour diligently in the uſe of the meanes to get it, as they would doe for a worldly commodity of pleaſure, profit, or honour, that they delighted in, and had not to enioy.
               
               
                  2. OBIECTION anſwered.
                  
                     It is inconvenient for Chriſtians to try their 
                           §. 2 faith, becauſe it makes them doubt, whether or no they haue a ſaving faith. And it implies, that they can never tell when they have it: for if they knew that they had it, why ſhould they examine themſelves about it?
                  
                  I anſwere: 1. Seeing I have already proved, that God commands Chriſtians to try their faith: therefore muſt they not be affrighted from obedience therunto, by any ſcarcrows of ſuppoſed inconveniencie: ſo that the reaſon can be of no force, to diſſwade us from the practice of this tryall, though ſuch an inconvenience might bee likely to fall therein.
                  
                     2. More directly and plainely I ſay, that no ſuch inconvenience (as is pretended) can of it ſelfe fall, upon the triall of our faith, becauſe it could not fall upon the Corinthians tryall of their faith; to which Paul exhorted them,2. Cor. 13.5. whereof we have heard before. If it would have falne thereon, ſurely Saint Paul by the wiſedome of the Spirit which he had, could have diſcerned it; and if he had diſcerned it, hee would never have exhorted them to the tryall of their faith: for he knew wel enough,1. Ioh. 5.20. that thoſe that have a ſaving faith indeed, doe know they have it: and hee himſelfe (ſpeaking of himſelfe as a beleever in Chriſt) ſaith of himſelfe;2. Tim. 1.12. 
                     I know whom I have trusted, and therfore would Paul by no meanes teach thoſe that had a ſaving faith indeed, to doubt whether they had it or no; and to bee perſwaded that they can never tell when they had it. Indeed every one that is a Chriſtian by name and profeſſion hath not a ſaving faith; every one that hath a beleefe of the Goſpell, hath not faith in Chriſt; neither doth every one in his heart beleeve in Chriſt, that thinkes and ſayes he doth;
                        Rom. 9.6. 
                     For all are not Iſrael, that are of Iſrael, neither ſhal every

one that ſaith,
                     
                        Matth. 7.22. 
                     Lord, Lord, enter into the kingdome of heaven: and therfore though thoſe Chriſtians that are ſo, but by name and profeſsion, and that have a beleefe of the Goſpels verity, and doe but preſume they have a ſaving faith, may by tryall come to doubt, whether ever they had a ſaving faith or no; yea to know certainly they neuer had it: yet will it not follow, that hee who hath a ſaving faith indeed, (for of ſuch a one is the obiection to be underſtood, elſe it is to no purpoſe) can come by the tryall of it, to doubt whether ever he had it or no: for he ſhall thereby rather come to know he certainly had it; witneſſe the Apoſtle, who after he had exhorted the Corinthians to try their faith,
                     2. Cor. 13.5. ſaith in the next words, Know yee not your ſelves? intimating, that by this tryall, they could not chooſe but finde, and know they were in the faith.
                  So that as long as rhe fault is not in the tryall it ſelfe, but in the perſon that tryes his faith, namely, that he hath not that which he thought he had: therefore need not true Chriſtians that have this faith indeed, be diſheartened from this tryall, upon a ſuppoſition of this inconvenience.
                  
                     Neither in truth need thoſe Chriſtians that have not a ſaving faith, for that reaſon feare to examine themſelves concerning it, becauſe the doubting whether or no, they have faith; and the knowledge that they have not this faith, wherof they try themſelves, that may come to them by their tryall, ſhall be no inconvenience to them, but rather a benefit and conveniencie; becauſe knowing the want of it, and feeling the danger of that want, they may thereby be moved to ſeeke for it, in the uſe of the meanes, and to obtaine it.
                  That which I have ſaid of the unlikelihood that any ſuch inconvenience ſhal enſue upon the tryal of the faith of true Chriſtians, namely, that they ſhall not come thereby to doubt they had it not, or not to know they ever had it, ſhall be amplified by a familiar compariſon.
                  There is a piece of Land,Simil. unto which two men lay claime, the one hath a true title by Law, as appeares by his ancient Deeds, and Evidences; and the other thinkes he hath a good title, becauſe hee is in poſſeſsion, or becauſe ſome bodie hath told him ſo: if the title of the land bee called in queſtion to be tryed before the Iudge of Aſsiſe, and

to bee determined whoſe it is of right, and by Law: it may come to paſſe upon tryall and iudgement, that hee who thought hee had a good Title (but had it not in deede) may eaſily come to doubt of the Title hee thought he had; yea, certainly to know that it was ſtarke naught: and therefore no marvell if hee bee loth to have his Title queſtioned: but it cannot fall out upon tryall and iudgement, that hee, who had trve right thereunto by his Deeds and Evidences, ſhould come to doubt whether his claime were good: for hee ſhall rather thereby come to know and bee aſſured that it was good in deed.
                  In like manner there is a heavenly inheritance, to which all that are in the Church doe lay claime; ſome thinke they have a good title to it, becauſe by name they are Chriſtians, by profeſsion they are Beleevers, and by Baptiſm they are members of the Church; becauſe they haue a beliefe of the Goſpell, they have been at the Lords Table, and are in poſſeſsion of a preſumption at leaſt of ſalvation: And there bee other, that by the evidence of the Word & Spirit doe know, that they are ſons, & heires with

Chriſt, namely, by the witneſſe of the Spirit, in their Adoption; and by the worke of the Spirit in their Regeneration. If each of theſe try their title to Heaven; it may come to paſſe upon the tryall, that he who had but a beliefe of the Goſpell, and therevpon preſumed hee had a ſaving Faith, and intereſt to Heaven, may not onely come to doubt whether ever hee had a ſaving faith or no; but alſo come certainly to know hee never had it, nor never had any iuſt cauſe to perſwade himſelfe of ſalvation, and therefore no marvell if ſuch a one bee loth to try his faith. Whereas on the other ſide, hee that had a ſaving faith indeed, cannot bee brought by that tryall, to doubt whether his faith were a ſaving Faith indeed or not; but rather certainly to know he had it; and therefore no marvell if he be willing and ready to try his faith. So that notwithſtanding this colourable pretence all Chriſtians have reaſon to try their faith, thoſe that thinke they have it, but have it not indeed; to the end they may know they have it not, and ſo labour to get it: and thoſe that have it, to the end they may more certainly know they have it, and ſo labor more to ſtrengthen it, & to

take more comfort in it. And ſo I paſſe on to the third and laſt kinde of obiections, taken from an unabilitie, or impoſſibilitie that Chriſtians can euer be able to try their Faith: and they are two. Whereof the firſt is this.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI. Of a conceited impoſsibility, that ordinary Chriſtians ſhould ever bee able to try their Faith.
               
                  1. OBIECTION anſwered.
                  
                     Ordinary Chriſtians art the Lay people,
                           § 1 who are ſimple and ignorant men; and to try mens faith, is a worke of wiſedome, that requires vnderſtanding in the Word of God: and therefore they muſt bee ſpared herein; becauſe it is a greater taske then they are able to performe, it is impoſſible they ſhould doe it.
                  
                  TO this I anſwere: 1. that though it be true that many Lay people, and the moſt of ordinary Chriſtians are ſimple and ignorant (the more

is the pitie) yet are not all ſo: and therefore this obiection (if there were any ſound reaſon in it) can but excuſe ſuch onely, whereas under colour of it, all Lay-people, and ordinary Chriſtians, may ſeeme to be freed from trying their faith, and examining themſelves whither they have a ſaving Faith.
                  2. Though all were ſo ignorant & ſimple, as it is pretended in the obiection, yet if they would uſe the meanes with that little wit and underſtanding they have, and beat their braines to learne to try their Faith, as well as they doe to try the goodnes or badneſſe of worldly commodities, and to underſtand which are wares vendible, or refuſe, and out of ſale: they might in time, by Gods bleſſing upon the uſe of the meanes, come to ſight and knowledge in the one, as well as in the other; and thereby to try the one, as well as the other.
                  3. But put caſe they could not by the uſing their naturall wit, come to know how to try their Faith, yet might they learne by the light of the Word which God hath given them, to bee a Lanthorne to their wayes,
                     
                        Pſal. 119.9. 
                     and a light unto their pathes, to know how to try their faith, becauſe God hath ſufficiently and

at large deſcribed the Nature, vſe, and end, fruits and effects of this ſaving faith; as ſhall bee ſhewed in the ſecond booke: by which they may try their faith, and examine whether their faith be a ſaving Faith, by ſtudying and meditating on theſe Rules, and applying themſelves to thoſe meanes, for the trying of themſelves and their Faith thereby.
                  4. Suppoſe they ſhould alledge that the Word of God, and the Goſpel were hard and darke, and themſelves blinde and ignorant, to underſtand the Rules which it doth propound to Chriſtians for that end, to try their faith thereby, yet hath God in his wiſedome, bounty and goodnes, given us many learned and godly Miniſters, to whom they may have recourſe to inſtruct and direct them, in this tryall of their Faith, either by publike preaching, or private conference: and the rather, ſeeing in caſe they have not skill enough to know the goodnes of their Gold, they will not ſticke to goe to the Goldſmiths to tell them whether it want of the purity or waight thereof.
                  5. Laſtly, ſuppoſe they lived under Miniſters, that neither were able, nor

willing to direct them in this tryall: yet in theſe latter dayes, God hath cauſed to ſhine ſuch a cleere light of this and other truthes in bookes written in the Engliſh tongue, that by them this duty might be learned: and leſt it ſhould bee obiected, that they never read any booke made to this end, I have penned this Treatiſe for their direction and inſtruction herein: in the ſecond Booke whereof, they ſhall finde certaine Rules to examine themſelves by; and interrogatories upon which they may queſtion themſelves touching a ſaving faith, by which they may eaſily diſcerne (if they will, and if they lay themſelves to the rule) whether they have any faith at all; or if they have ſome faith, whether it bee a falſe faith, or a true; or if they have a trve faith, whether an Hiſtoricall faith onely, or a ſaving faith; that accordingly they may uſe the meanes to get or increaſe the ſame. Now followes the laſt obiection, which is this.
               
               
                  
                  2. OBIECTION anſwered.
                  
                     Ordinary Christians have trades and occupations 
                           § 2 to follow, and Shops and Warehouſes to looke unto, which require a great deale of time and labour, to get wherewithall they may maintaine their Family: ſo that they cannot ſpare ſo much time from their ordinary buſineſſe of their Callings, as the tryall of their faith will require: therefore it is not poſſible for them to doe it.
                  
                  I anſwere: Firſt, that it may be, ſome who make this obiection, or approve it, have no Callings at all or Trades to follow, as they that live onely vpon Vſury, and therefore they can make no ſuch plea for themſelves for hauing no buſineſſe in any occupation to take vp their time; they may have time enough to employ in trying their faith, and examining it whether it be a ſaving Faith.
                  Secondly, others there bee that have bad trades and courſes of life to be imployed in; as Players and Gameſters, therefore they cannot ſhare in the excuſe pretended in this obiection, to ſhift off the tryall of their faith: for they

are to ſpend no time at all in evill Callings, and therfore muſt they give them ouer, which when they doe, then they ſhall have time enough, to try their faith.
                  Thirdly, thoſe that have lawfull Callings and Trades to follow, to maintaine themſelves by, are not ſo ſtraightned in time: but that notwithſtanding them, they may ſpare ſome, for the trying of their fairh. Firſt, becauſe they ſpare ſome time for ſleepe, for eating and drinking, and for recreations, notwithſtanding all the imploiments of their Trades; and why then ſhould they not ſpare ſome time from them, as willingly, for ſo holy a worke as the tryall of our faith? 2. Becauſe they do not ſpend all their time in buying and ſelling of ware, in receiving and paying of money; but ſome time they take to caſt vp their debt-bookes, & the wares in their ſhoppes, to the end they may ſee how they thriue, or goe backward; & why then may they not ſpend ſome time to caſt vp the booke of their conſciences, and their reckonings with God, to ſee how they grow, or thriue in grace, and in the knowledge of Ieſus Chriſt?
                  
                     Fourthly, graunt that Tradesmen, were unwilling and loth to ſpare from their trades any time for holy and ſpirituall buſineſſes; yet muſt they ſpare it by reaſon of the neceſsitie of the duty, and benefit that comes by the practice therof, as well as they can and will ſpare time from their ſleepe and foode, when they be young; to lay vp againſt a rainy day (as they ſay) and to keep them when they are old: and if they doe not, they cannot bee excuſed before God by this plea of their calling: no more then they were excuſed from comming to the wedding of the Kings Son by pleading that they had Farmes to ſee,
                        Math. 22.5. and Oxen to try, nor can they bee iuſtified herein upon this ground, any more then Martha was iuſtified for not hearing Chriſts Sermon,
                        Luke 10.41, 42. by pleading that ſhee was imployed at the ſame time, in dreſsing Chriſts dinner.
                  Fifthly and laſtly, though Chriſtians could have no time, all the weeke long in the working dayes of it, to try their faith, yet hath God appointed a Sabbath day every weeke that muſt be ſpared from common buſineſſe of our ordinary calling, and muſt be ſpent in religious and holy workes (ſuch as is the

tryall of our faith) and therefore let Chriſtians ſet apart ſome time of that day, for the examining themſelves touching their faith and repentance, and to commune with their own hearts of theſe things by meditation, and with God by Prayer, for direction from his Spirit in this examination.
                  By this which hath been briefely ſaid touching the obiections againſt the practiſe of this duty, and anſwers thereunto, two things may bee obſerved. 1. That howſoever many ſtrong arguments are hardly able to perſwade Chriſtians to the practice of this dutie of examining themſelves whether they be in the Faith or no: yet ſlender pretences and colours of truth are able to diſſwade them from the doing of it, and they will ſuffer themſelves to bee ſeduced by them. 2. We may obſerve, that notwithſtanding all the obiections, which ignorant and carnall men may deuiſe, to nouzle them in careleſneſſe of trying their faith, and to keepe them from diligence in this tryall: yet this remaines a firme truth of God, and a neceſſarie Chriſtian duty; that all Chriſtians, men and women of yeeres and diſcretion, muſt try their faith, and examine

themſelves, whether they have a ſaving faith, or no. What remaines but that with ſo much the more diligence and conſcience, they addreſſe themſelves to doe it accordingly; ſeeing there bee ſo many ſound arguments to perſwade them to it: and not one ſound reaſon to diſſwade them from it?
                  And ſo I proceed to the ſecond Booke of this Treatiſe, and therein to ſet down directions for this tryall: From the proofe of this, that Chriſtians are to try their Faith, to ſhew how they are to try it. From this, that they muſt: to this how they may: from the matter to the maner; and from the Reaſons to the Rules of Tryall.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE.
            
               IN the firſt Booke I have given Reaſons, why Chriſtians ſhold try their faith: and if I ſhould not alſo preſcribe them ſome Rules, to direct them how they might learne to try it: I might peradventure bee blamed with the Scribes and Phariſes,
                  Matth. 28.4. for laying heavie burdens upon the ſhoulders of Chriſtian conſciences, and for not putting to my little finger, to helpe them to beare the ſame.
            To the end therefore I may avoyd this cenſure, I wil in this ſecond Booke not only put to my little finger, but my whole hand, heart, and head, to deviſe and ſet downe directions in this matter; whereby I may make the Lords yoke eaſie, and his burden light, unto his people.
                  Matth. 11.30.
            
            
               And indeed it is very needfull, I ſhould teach them, how they may try their faith, as well as ſhew them why they muſt; becauſe if they underſtand never ſo clearely, and beleeve never ſo ſtedfaſtly, that it is their duty; yet except they may learne how to doe it, they are never awhit the neerer: for (for all this) they may complaine with the Iſraelites, that they were commanded to make Bricke, but they were not told,
                  Exod. 5.7. where to have ſtraw, and ſtuffe to make it.
            For this purpoſe, I will cite Chriſtians into the Court of conſcience, and propound vnto them certaine queſtions, and interrogatories, concerning a ſaving faith: upon which examining themſelves diligently and impartially; they may diſcover this truth, whether or no they have a ſaving faith.
            The interrogatories I purpoſe to propound, are certaine Rules and directions, grounded on the Word of God, and appertaining to the nature and uſe, properties and effects of a ſaving faith; and they are theſe eight in number:
            1. Examine thy ſelfe, whether or no thou underſtand, what faith in Chriſt

is, and wherein the nature thereof doth conſiſt, namely, as it doth iuſtifie.
            2. When thou underſtandeſt what manner of grace it is, then enquire whether or no thou knoweſt, and beleeveſt the uſe, and end of it, namely, that it is ordained by God, to ſave, and iuſtifie ſinners.
            3. If thou underſtand the uſe and end of faith in Chriſt; then try whether or no thou conceive rightly, of the manner how faith doth ſave and iuſtifie.
            4. After this, make proofe whether thou didſt get this faith in Chriſt by the ordinary meanes, by which God uſually workes it in his children.
            5. This being done, enquire whether or no thou wert ever rightly fitted, and duely prepared to beleeve in Chriſt, namely, by the worke of other gifts of the Spirit, that goe before it.
            6. When thou haſt found this, make trial, whether or no thou find in thy ſelf thy faith to be lively, and effectuall, to the ſanctifying of thy heart, and reforming of thy life more and more; and to the cauſing of thee to bring foorth fruites beſeeming new obedience.
            7. Examine thy ſelfe whether or no,

thou labour in the uſe of the meanes, for the comforts of a ſaving faith, namely, to feele them in thy ſelfe, and to to bee affected with them.
            8. In the laſt place make tryal, whether or no, thou uſe the meanes, to ſtrengthen thy faith, and to grow in a greater meaſure thereof.
            All theſe Rules ſhall bee comprehended and handled in this ſecond Booke, according to their number and order.
            In handling of the firſt Part, I will take this courſe. Firſt, I will propound and confirme, the true Definition of a ſaving faith, to the end they may know what manner of grace it is: and this ſhall be done in the firſt Chapter. Secondly, I will confute two falſe Definitions thereof; which ſhall be comprehended in the two next chapters, namely, the ſecond and the third. Thirdly, I will make particular uſe of that I have delivered, in the confirmation of the true, and confutation of the falſe definitions of faith; and direct Chriſtians, how to apply themſelves to the Rule, for the tryall of their faith, and for the examining of themſelves, whether they have a ſaving faith.
            
               
               THE FIRST RULE.
               
                  Examine thy ſelfe, whether or no thou underſtand, what faith in Chriſt is; and wherein the nature thereof doth conſiſt, namely, as it ſaves and iuſtifies ſinners.
               
               OF all the Rules and Interrogatories, I make this the firſt, becauſe it is the foundation of all the reſt: for except we underſtand this, how ſhould we be able to know, whether wee have a ſaving faith or no?
               The meanes to know what a ſaving faith is, is to underſtand the nature thereof; and the way to underſtand this, is to know the Definition that truly deſcribes the nature thereof: therefore will I deliver ſuch a Definition, as ſhall deſcribe the nature of faith in Chriſt, and it is this.
               
                  
                  
                     Chap. 1.CHAP. I. Of the Definition of a ſaving faith, or of faith in Christ.
                  
                     Faith is a grace of God, whereby a ſinner doth truſt vnto Ieſus Chriſt, for heavenly and eternall bleſſedneſſe, according to the Goſpell.
                  
                  IN this definition, or deſcription, two things generally are to bee obſerved:
                  Firſt, the thing that is defined or deſcribed in the nature of it, namely, a ſaving faith, or faith in Chriſt, contained in the firſt word of the Definition, which is Faith.
                  
                  Secondly, that which is ſaid of this faith, or that whereby the nature of this faith is deſcribed, in the reſt of the words following, namely, a grace of God whereby a ſinner truſts vnto Ieſus Chriſt, for heavenly and eternall bleſſedneſſe, according to the Gospell.
                  
                  
                     By theſe words,Rule 1. the nature of faith in Chriſt, is deſcribed two waies: generally, and ſpecially: for as all other things are defined by a deſcription of their nature; and their nature conſiſts in two points: Firſt, in that part of it, which it hath in common with other things, (as to be a living creature is the genus, matter, or common nature of a man, which he hath in common with birds, beaſts, fiſhes, which are living creatures as well as hee.) Secondly, in that part of their nature, which they have proper and peculiar to themſelves, whereby they are diſtinguiſhed from all other creatures, (as to have a reaſonable ſoule, is the Species, forme, and particular nature by which man is differenced from all other creatures living on earth, none wherof are reaſonable creatures but himſelf.) So is it in my Definition: for in theſe words, is a grace of God, is ſet downe the generall nature, or matter of a ſaving faith, which it hath in common with all other graces of God, namely, hope, love, patience, and repentance, which are all graces of God, as well as faith in Chriſt. And the other words of the Definition, whereby a ſinner truſts unto Chriſt, for heavenly and

eternall bleſſedneſſe, according to the Goſpell, do declare the form or ſpeciall nature of a ſaving faith, whereby it is diſtinguiſhed from all other graces of God whatſoever; by none whereof we truſt in Chriſt for this bleſſedneſſe, but by faith onely; wherein wee may further diſcover, 1. the ſubiect perſon that truſts for this bleſſedneſſe, namely, a ſinner: 2. the action of this habit of faith, namely, truſt unto: Thirdly, the obiect of that action, or the perſon in whom faith truſts, namely, Ieſus Chriſt: 4. the end of this faith or truſting, namely, bleſſedneſſe; deſcribed by two adiuncts, heavenly and eternall: and laſtly, the ground or warrant of this truſting in Chriſt for this bleſſedneſſe, namely, the Gospel.
                  
                  This Definition I will propound and confirme, to the end I may both be underſtood in the meaning, as alſo beleeved in the truth thereof. And that which I ſhall deliver touching the expoſition, and confirmation thereof, ſhal be diſtinguiſhed into ſeverall Sections, according to the ſeverall words therof.
                  
                     §. 1. FaithThe firſt word of the Definition is faith, which ſhewes, what it is, that is ſpoken of in the Definition; and what

is deſcribed: now concerning the word faith, or the faith I doe define therein, I would have the Reader to know and remember two things:
                  Firſt, I doe not define every faith: for I doe not define that which is a beliefe of the Word in generall, or of the Goſpell in ſpeciall, called an hiſtoricall faith, whereby men aſſent to the truth of all the written Word; for this will not ſave them that have it:
                        Iam. 2.19. Mar. 1.24. Luke 8.13. but the faith that I define, is a ſaving faith, becauſe it will ſave them that have it:
                        Eph. 2.8. Gal. 3.11. nor yet do I define here, that faith that was in Adam, while for a time he ſtood in innocencie, and whereby he was to reſt upon God for continuance in that ſtate: for that was but a gift belonging to his nature, to make him meet to abide in happineſſe here on earth: but this is a ſupernaturall grace given to men, to make them fit for eternall happineſſe in heaven. Neither doe I here define the faith, that is commanded in the Law of Moſes,
                     Levit. which is a truſt in God as Soveraigne Lord, Creatour and preſerver of mankind, for the obtaining of that life, that is promiſed to them that can perfectly obey it. For that is truſt in God without a Mediator, but this is

with and by one: that is a condition of the covenant of workes, and but a branch of it too; but this is the ſole and whole condition of the Covenant of grace.
                  Secondly, in my Definition I doe not deſcribe the whole nature of a ſaving faith, in al the particulars thereof, and in every reſpect, namely, as it ſanctifies our hearts, and ſtirres us up to new obedience; or as it pacifies our conſciences, and works in us ſpirituall comforts in the greateſt calamities: but in this Definition I ſo farre onely deſcribe the nature of faith in Chriſt, namely, as it ſaves and iuſtifies us, and as it is the condition, required on our part, to make us perſons capable of ſalvation, by Ieſus Chriſt.
                  
                     § 2. is a grace of God,The next words of the Definition to be expounded are theſe, is a grace of God: by which words, I meane not only that it is God that works this faith in thoſe that are ſaved:
                        Hebr. 12.2. Philip. 1.29. for he is the author of it, and he is the giver of it: Thankes is to bee given to God for the worke thereof; and prayers are to bee made to him for the increaſe thereof:1. Theſ. 1.3. Luke 17.5. but alſo that the Lord in mercy, grace, and favour, doth work it in thoſe in whom it is, becauſe Chriſtians

are ſaid to beleeve through grace: and Paul ſaith,
                        Act. 18.27. Eph. 2.8. that by grace wee are ſaved through faith; and that not of our ſelves, it is the gift of God: for our Savior Chriſt doth not onely ſay, that none can come to him, that is, beleeve in him,
                        Ioh. 6.45. Ioh. 6.44. except hee be taught of God, but alſo that none can beleeve in him, except the Father draw him; and except it be given him of the Father;
                        Ioh. 6.55. Ioh. 6.45. and except he have learned it of the Father.
                  
                  In the third Section follow to be expounded theſe words, whereby a ſinner:§ 3. whereby a ſinner by which I do not mean indefinitly any ſinner or every ſinner. For Divels are ſinners, yet can they not have a ſaving faith: becauſe they haue no ſaving promiſe. Secondly, Reprobates are ſinners, yet cannot they have a ſaving faith; becauſe it is peculiar to the Elect. Thirdly, Infants are ſinners, yet (for ought that God hath revealed in the Word) they have not a ſaving faith, becauſe it is wrought by the hearing of the Goſpell, which is never preached to infants.
                        Rom. 10.14. By ſinners therefore I underſtand, not onely ſuch as are ſo in themſelves, (that is) both by nature, and by life,
                        Rom. 3.23.26. & 5.3.16.17. in Adam and in themſelves. But alſo ſuch as know, beleeve, and feele themſelves to

be ſinners, and to have need of Chriſt, and Gods mercy to ſaue them: for ſuch are weary and laden,
                     
                        Math. 11.28. and they are called and invited to come to Chriſt; ſuch are ſicke in ſovle,
                        Math. 9.12. Luk. 18.13. and feele their neede of Chriſt to bee their ſpirituall Phyſicion, and ſuch will goe to him:
                        Luk. 7.47. ſuch will love God for his mercy, when he hath forgiven them:
                        Act. 2.37, 38. & 16.31. Luke 19.10. Math. 9.13. Doth truſt unto ſuch will enquire after the way and meanes of ſalvation; and ſuch Chriſt came to ſave.
                  
                  Now followes the act of Faith, wherby we are iuſtified in theſe words, doth truſt unto: for the opening & proving whereof, it will bee needfull to ſhew foure things. Firſt, what is meant by this word, truſting. Secondly, that the act of faith whereby wee are iuſtified, is deſcribed by this word truſting; or by other words that ſignifie truſting. Thirdly, that God requires truſt in Chriſt of all thoſe that ſhall bee ſaved. And fourthly, that hee will accept of truſt or faith in Chriſt vnto Iuſtification of them that have it, and doe performe it.
                  1. For the firſt. To truſt one, or to truſt unto one, or to put truſt in one, are well underſtood of Engliſh people: they are deſcribed by other words and

phraſes, well knowne among vs, as by putting one in truſt with a thing, or putting confidence in a man, for doing ſome thing; our Engliſh language likewiſe affords vs other words of the ſame ſenſe, viz. to reſt, or rely vpon a man, to build vpon him, to depend or caſt a mans ſelfe vpon one for ſomething.
                  To truſt one ordinarily, implyes three things, that will agree with our preſent purpoſe. 1. A knowledge of the party whom we truſt, and of his promiſe to doe us ſome good turne, elſe we had no reaſon to truſt him. 2. A beliefe, that he did meane as he ſaid, when hee made the promiſe, & that he was both able and willing to performe it: elſe we would never truſt him. 3. A not uſing of meanes, or a forbearing to take ſome courſe, by our ſelves, or others, to effect that for which wee truſt to another to doe it. (For example) I may truſt a man,Simil. that hath promiſed to pay mee ſo much money by ſuch a day, if I know him: and if he have promiſed mee to pay it then, and if I beleeue him to bee ſufficient and honeſt, and if I truſt him, I ſhall be careleſſe to goe abroad elſewhere, to get in money to ſerue my turne; becauſe I builded on his word, who I

perſwaded my ſelfe would not faile me. In like manner, all theſe three are neceſſarily implyed in a ſaving Faith, and are ſuppoſed to concurre thereunto, before a man can be ſaid to truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation. Firſt, hee muſt know and beleeve, that God hath promiſed ſalvation to them that truſt in Chriſt: and that whoſoever truſts in him, ſhall bee ſaved. 2. he muſt ſtedfaſtly beleeve, that God is both willing, and able to perform it. 3. he muſt deny to truſt to himſelfe, or to any goodnes in himſelfe, or any other ſave only Chriſt for ſalvation, before he can rely, reſt vpon, or put truſt and confidence in Chriſt for it.
                  I know many Divines uſe other words to expreſſe the nature of the Act of Faith in Chriſt, whereby we are iuſtified; as namely, to apply Chriſt, to apprehend Chriſt, or to lay hold upon Chriſt, and his benefits, and they are not vnfit, becauſe (as I ſuppoſe) by them they underſtand an action of the ſoule, whereby ſinners intend to honour Chriſt by ſeeking for ſalvation to him alone. But (reſerving reverence to their Iudgements) I thinke the word truſting, is both more eaſie to bee underſtood of Engliſhmen; and alſo it doth better expreſſe

the nature of that act of Faith, whereby wee are iuſtified; namely, a reſting or relying vpon, a depending or building vpon, a putting truſt or confidence in Chriſt for ſalvation, vpon a knowledge and beliefe that there is no meanes in our ſelves, or any other, to truſt unto for it, but in him onely.
                  2. The ſecond point propounded in the opening of this word, truſt, was to ſhew that the act of Faith, whereby we are iuſtified, is in Scripture often deſcribed by the word, truſting, or by other words that ſignifie as much.
                  Firſt, by truſting, as where Paul ſaith of Abraham, that he truſted God, and it was counted to him for Righteouſneſſe,
                     
                        Rom. 4.3. which was more then bare beleeving God ſaid trve, when hee promiſed to bleſſe him in his ſeede, as ſhall bee prooved hereafter; and where hee ſaith of himſelfe, that hee knew whom hee had truſted,
                     2. Tim. 1.12. namely, to bring him to Heauen: and likewiſe where he ſaith of all the faithfull, that if they bee dead with Chriſt,
                     
                        Rom. 6.8. 
                     they truſt that they ſhall live with him.
                  
                  Secondly, the act of faith whereby wee are iuſtified, is deſcribed by other words & phraſes,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Rom. 4.3.5. Act 16.31. that ſignifie truſting as namely, by beleeving upon Chriſt: by

                     beleeving into Chriſt: and by beleeving in Chriſt;
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Ioh. 1.12. Rom. 10.14. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Epheſ. 1.12.13. 1. Cor. 15.19. which muſt needes ſignifie more then bare beleeving, that there was a Chriſt, or that the Sonne of the Virgin Mary was the Chriſt, or that the doctrine concerning the way of ſalvation which he preached, was trve: and therefore muſt needs ſignifie truſting in him; as may further be made plaine by the knowne diſtinction of Credere Chriſto, credere Chriſtum, and credere in Chriſtum. I know, the Holy Ghoſt uſeth other words beſides truſting in Chriſt,
                     
                        Joh. 1.12. to expreſſe the act of our faith, whereby wee are iuſtified; as namely, receiving Chriſt: namely, with the hands or armes of faith;
                        Ioh. 6.40. and ſeeking or looking upon Chriſt, namely, as with the eyes of faith, and going or comming to Chriſt,
                     
                        Math. 11.28. namely, as with the feet of Faith: but all theſe are expounded by beleeving in Chriſt. The two former in the very Verſes & Chapter quoted: and the latter, which is comming or going to Chriſt, in Iob. 6.35. compared with Matth. 11.28. ſo that, by that which I have ſaid, it may evidently appeare, that in the New Teſtament eſpecially, the act of Faith, whereby wee are iuſtified, is ſignified & expreſſed by truſting in Chriſt,

or by ſuch words as doe plainely expreſſe as much.
                  But though we underſtand never ſo well what were meant by truſting to Chriſt; yet if it were not commanded of God, and accepted of him to ſalvation, all this were in vaine: therefore for the further opening and prooving of this part of my definition, I muſt make good theſe two points, which are the two laſt branches propounded to be opened.
                  3. The third point is, that truſting in Chriſt is commanded of God, to be performed of all thoſe that ſhall bee ſaved; and this ſhall evidently appeare, becauſe Chriſt ſaith,
                        Ioh. 6.29. 
                     This is the worke of God, that wee beleeve in him whom hee hath ſent: And the Apoſtle Iohn ſaith,1. Ioh. 3.23. that this is the commandement of God, that wee beleeve in the name of his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt. And anſwerable to both; Paul affirmeth that the Apoſtles received Commiſsion to preach the Goſpell to all Nations, for the obedience of Faith; that is,
                        Rom. 6.26. & 1.5. that they might obey God, by beleeving in Chriſt for ſalvation, according to the Goſpell.
                  4. Now followes the fourth and laſt point propounded to be opened in the

word Truſt; which is, that truſting in Chriſt, is accepted of God unto iuſtification of all that performe it truely; which may evidently appeare, by the many promiſes of God made thereunto in the Goſpell; as namely, where it is promiſed, that they who beleeve in Chriſt, ſhall not 
                     
                        Ioh. 3.16. 
                     periſh, ſhall not be 
                     
                        Rom. 9.33. 
                     confounded, ſhall 
                     
                        Ioh. 5.24. 
                     not come into condemnation; yea 
                        Mark. 16.16. Act. 16.31. they ſhall be ſaved, they ſhall receive 
                     
                        Act. 10.43. 
                     forgiveneſſe of ſinnes, and they ſhall be 
                     
                        Act. 13.39. 
                     iuſtified from all things, from which they could not be iuſtified by the Law of Moſes; and no marvel, ſeeing by faith in Chriſt they are made the 
                     
                        Ioh. 1.12. Gal. 3.26. 
                     ſons of God by grace, and by being ſonnes, made 
                     
                        Rom. 8.16, 17 Gal. 3.26.29. 
                     heires by Ieſus Chriſt of eternall glory. So that truſting to Chriſt, beeing words well underſtood of Engliſhmen, and in Scripture uſed to deſcribe the nature of a ſaving faith, truſting in Chriſt, beeing commanded of God, and by him promiſed to bee accepted to our iuſtification; I hope it will hence evidently appeare, that I had good reaſon to uſe them in my definition, rather then other, to deſcribe the act of faith, whereby wee are iuſtified. And ſo I paſſe on from the act of faith, which is truſting, to the obiect thereof, which is Ieſus Chriſt.
                  
                     In theſe words Ieſus Chriſt, is ſet downe the worthy Perſon in whom we truſt for ſalvation:§. 5. Ieſus Chriſt For the obiect of our faith is not God onely, or ſimply; but God in Chriſt,
                     2. Cor. 5.19. 1. Tim. 2.5. 1. Ioh. 1.1, 2. 
                     in whom he reconciled the world; who is the Mediatour betwixt God and Man; who is our Aduocate with the Father, and who is the propitiation for our ſinnes:2. Cor. 1.20. for in him all the promiſes of God are yea, and Amen: and in him are hid all the treaſures of Gods wiſedome and mercy;
                        Col. 2.3. for hee is both willing to ſave us, beeing Man, and able, being God, if wee reſt vpon him.
                  I know, wee muſt truſt in God the Father, and God the Holy Ghoſt, as wel as in Ieſus Chriſt, but in neither of them as Mediator, for that onely is the Man Chriſt Ieſus:1. Tim. 2.5. but we truſt in God the Father for Reconciliation and Adoption, and in God the Holy Ghoſt for ſanctification and conſolation, by the meanes and merit of Ieſus Chriſt, in whom onely wee are predeſtinate to the Adoption of his children,
                     
                        Epheſ. 3.5. 
                     and bleſſed with ſpirituall bleſſings in heavenly things;1. Pet. 1.18, 19. (becauſe he onely paid a price to God his Father for them, and purchaſed them for us by his precious bloud) all which are underſtood in one word, bleſſedneſſe,
                     
which is the next word to be opened.
                  
                     § 6. for heavenly and eternall bleſſedneſſe,In the ſixt place is ſet downe the end of our truſting in Chriſt; and that is for heavenly and eternall bleſſedneſſe: which conſiſts in our full deliverance from all helliſh and eternall puniſhments, and in the enioying of all heavenly and everlaſting happineſſe, both of grace and glory, in ſoule and body; for all theſe are in few words called the ſalvation of our ſoules; and the ſalvation of our ſoules is called the end of our faith:1. Pet. 1.9. 1. Pet. 1.5. for we are kept by the power of God through faith vnto ſalvation. I call it bleſſedneſſe, becauſe this word comprehends all that can make a man perfectly happy;
                        Pſal. 1.1. as alſo becauſe it is uſed by the holy Ghoſt to expreſſe that, for which wee truſt in Chriſt, and which we hope to receive by truſting, as appears by comparing 
                        Gen. 12.3. Gal. 3.14. Rom. 4.6, 7, 8, 9.. I call it heavenly bleſſedneſſe, becauſe it is chiefly to be had in heaven; and I call it eternall, becauſe it ſhall never have an end, as all worldly bleſsings have. I grant, that temporall bleſsings are promiſed to the faithfull; for godlineſſe hath the promiſes of this life, and the life to come:1. Tim. 4.8. Rom. 8 32. and hee that hath given vs Ieſus Chriſt, will with him give vs all things alſo. But onely ſpirituall bleſsings

in heavenly things, are the treaſures of the Covenant of grace; & as for temporal things,
                        Matth. 6.33. they are but as an advantage to the bargaine, and conſectaries thereupon; as appeares by this, in that they are not abſolutely promiſed in the Covenant; and ſecondly, becauſe they are not to be enioyed perfectly here on earth, where onely we ſtand in need of temporall things.
                  Now in the laſt branch,§. 7. according to the Goſpell. I come to the end of my Definition, wherein is laid downe the foundation of our faith in Chriſt, or the warrant that we have to beleeve in Chriſt, for this bleſſedneſſe, namely, the Goſpel for the Goſpel onely doth promiſe this bleſſednes to all that beleeve in Chriſt. Now by Goſpell, I doe not meane the writing of any one, or all the Evangeliſts, but the promiſe of perfect happineſſe in ſoule and body, made to beleevers in Chriſt, whereſoever we find it in the Old or New Teſtament, in the Goſpels, or Epiſtles expreſſely ſet downe, or by neceſſary conſequence implied.
                  And I adde theſe words, according to the Goſpel, unto my Definition of a ſaving faith: Firſt, becauſe the Goſpel onely is the proppe and ground of our

faith, by which wee are called to beleeve in Chriſt; without which it were great preſumption to ſeeke for pardon, and truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation, had not God in the Goſpell commanded us ſo to doe; and promiſed us ſalvation, if we do ſo; and with which it is Chriſtian boldneſſe, and holy confidence, to draw neere to the throne of Grace, having Gods Word for our warrant, and incouragement to ſeeke for ſalvation by beleeving in Chriſt, ſeeing the dutie is ſo eaſie that is required of us, the thing ſo excellent that is to be attained unto by beleeving, and the perſon ſo worthy and able to procure it, in whom we truſt for it.
                  I grant, the Law of God, and the whole Bible, are to be beleeved as well as the Goſpell; and the Law commands faith in God, as well as the Goſpell: (though not the ſame faith which the Goſpell doth, as hath beene ſhewed before) but no Word is the Goſpell, but the Word of faith; and no Word is the Word of faith, but the promiſe, becauſe it onely teacheth doctrine, concerning the way and meanes of ſalvation; as namely, who ſhall ſave, viz. Ieſus Chriſt; and how, viz. by his death; and

whom, viz. beleevers in him.
                  For the Goſpel only commands men to beleeve in Chriſt;1. Ioh. 3.23. 
                     
                        Ioh. 3.16. the Goſpel onely promiſeth ſalvation to them that beleeve in him; and the Goſpel onely workes this faith in men,
                        Rom. 10.14.17. to make them capable of ſalvation. And thus much for the opening and confirming of the true Definition of a ſaving faith, which (I hope) is ſufficient for that end. For the further proofe whereof, I will adde but one word more, namely this; that therfore my Definition of a ſaving faith is good, not onely becauſe it obſerves the rules of a good Definition, as hath beene ſhewed before; but alſo, becauſe it containes in it all the cauſes thereof; namely, the efficient, God; the materiall, a ſinner; the formall, truſting in Chriſt, and the finall, heavenly, and eternall bleſſedneſſe, together with the foundation and ground thereof, which is the Goſpell.
                  My Definition then containing the true nature of a ſaving faith; and therefore being true, it muſt follow, that all definitions, that deſcribe the nature of it otherwiſe, (that is, not in other words, but in another ſenſe, and to another end) muſt needes be falſe and erronious.
                  
                     Of this kind there be two definitions that are unſound: the one, of the Papiſts in Rome, who require leſſe faith to the iuſtifying of a ſinner, then I have ſaid: and the other is, of ſome Lutherans in Germany, who require more, as ſhall be ſhewed in order: and both theſe I will addreſſe my ſelfe to confute by the Word of God, to the end the Chriſtian Reader may be the better eſtabliſhed, in the true definition of a ſaving faith.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. II. Of the Definition of faith required to ſalvation, among the Papists.
                  BY the Doctrine of the Papiſts, it ſhall evidently appeare, that all the faith, which they require, to the iuſtifying of a ſinner, is, that hee firmely aſſent to the truth of the Word of God; provided, hee beleeve it to bee true, not becauſe by evidence of reaſon he diſcernes it is true, and underſtands well enough how it may bee true; but upon the bare authority of God onely, who hath revealed and written it.
                  Now becauſe I will doe them no wrong, therefore will I cite their owne words; and becauſe it will bee tedious to alledge many teſtimonies, therefore will I content my ſelfe with one, which is the Definition of Bellarmine, a learned Clarke, a valiant Champion, and a Cardinall Pillar of the Church of Rome: his words are theſe:
                  
                     Faith is onely a firme and certaine aſſent 
                        § 1 to all thoſe things, which God hath propounded to be beleeved.Bellar. tom. 4. lib. 1. cap. 5. de Iuſtificatione.
                  
                  And leſt this might be thought to be but one Doctors opinion; therefore let us heare what a Popiſh Councell of Doctors ſay of the point. The Councell of Trent requires no more, but To beleeve to be true,Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 6. cap. 6. all things which are from God revealed and promiſed: by which words, All things that God hath propounded to be beleeved, and that are revealed and promiſed, are meant, not onely all things which are contained in the written Word, called the holy Scriptures, as Bellarmine expounds himſelfe in the booke before named, pag. 742. & 731. but more, even all things which are preſerved in the Church, by univerſall, apoſtolicall Traditions, and which are determined in generall and particular Councels, being confirmed by the Sea-apoſtolike; and which are defined or concluded by the Biſhop of Rome, as he is Biſhop, as it is expounded by another Ieſuite.T
                           •
                        lle
                           •
                        . Inſtru
                        
                           •
                        t
                           ••
                         Sacerdot. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ 
                        
                           •
                         cap. 1.
                  
                  For the confutation of this Popiſh opinion, of the nature of their iuſtifying 
                        § 7 faith, I will bring but two Arguments, whereof the firſt is this.
                  
                     
                     I. ARGVMENT.
                     
                        All the faith required of Chriſtians to iuſtification, is not onely an aſſent to the truth of all his Word, becauſe God requires more of them then this; namely, to beleeve in Chriſt, or to truſt to the merits of his death and obedience.
                     
                     The Reaſon is good, if I can make good theſe three Propoſitions whereon it is grounded, namely, Firſt, that beleefe or truſt in Chriſt is faith. Secondly, that God requires this truſt in Chriſt, of thoſe that are to be iuſtified. And thirdly, that truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation, is more, then onely an aſſent to the truth of the Word of God, yea though it be the Goſpell.
                     1. That beleefe in Chriſt is faith, is plaine, not onely by the notation of the word, in that to beleeve, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , comes of 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , which is Faith; but alſo, becauſe to beleeve, or truſt in, or upon Chriſt, is called Faith, Rom. 4.5. Gal. 2.16. & 3.6, 7.22. Act. 15.9, 11.
                     2. That God requires truſt in Chriſt, which is, reſting and relying on his merits for ſalvation of them that ſhall bee ſaved, needes no proofe here; becauſe

it hath beene largely declared, in the expoſition of my Definition of a ſaving faith, to which I referre you.
                     3. And that truſting in Chriſt, or truſting to him, or putting truſt and confidence in him, is more then aſſenting to the truth of the Goſpel, I prove thus: Truſting to a man is more, then beleeving that he ſaith true; therefore truſting to Chriſt, is more then beleeving the truth of Gods Word delivered by Chriſt. The reaſon is good, becauſe truſting, is one and the ſame action in nature, whatſoever the obiect of our truſt be; and beleeving the truth of any ſaying, is one and the ſame in kind, whatſoever the ſaying be, that is beleeved.
                     And that truſting a man, is more then beleeving he ſaith true, ſhall be evident by this reaſon; namely, becauſe to aſſent to the truth of a mans word, or to beleeve hee ſaith true, is a faith that is common to any ſpeech he utters, be it a truth, or a lye; a promiſe or a threatning: but to truſt a man, is a faith that is proper to that ſpeech which is a promiſe onely. For example: if I tell my neighbour, that I went from London to Dover in one day; and returned home

to London againe the next; he may beleeve I ſaid true, and aſſent to the truth of my ſpeech with one kind of faith, and hee may perſwade himſelfe I ſaid truly, and that I did as I ſaid: But if I ſay to him, that to morrow (God willing) I will give you a piece of gold of twenty ſhillings, to buy you a Bible: in this caſe he may doe more, then onely beleeve I ſaid true, or barely aſſent to the truth of my promiſe; for hee may truſt unto me, and expect to receive it from me, and come to mee the day appointed, to demand it, according to my promiſe. So that truſting in Chriſt being required to iuſtification, as well as beleeving the truth of the Word; and truſting in Chriſt being more then aſſenting to the truth of Gods Word; it muſt follow then, that the Popiſh Definition of faith is unſound; which requires no truſt in Chriſt at all, but only an aſſent of the truth of all things contained in the Word of God. For the further confutation whereof, this ſhall be my ſecond Argument.
                  
                  
                     II. ARGVMENT.
                     
                        All the faith that God requires of Chriſtians, vnto iuſtification, is not onely an aſſent

to the truth of Gods Word, becauſe all the faith that he required of his people Iſrael for the obtaining of leſſer benefits, even temporall deliverances, and bleſſings, was not only an aſſent to the truth of Gods promiſe, but a truſting in Gods power, goodneſſe, truth, and mercy, for the obtaining of good things promiſed.
                     
                     The Reaſon is good, becauſe greater benefits, viz. heavenly and ſpirituall, are more excellent then leſſer, viz. earthly and temporall: therefore are they not ſo eaſily obtained as they; and therefore for the obtaining of them, the Lord requires at leaſt as much (if not more) faith, as for the obtaining of the other.
                     And that all the faith which God required of the Iſraelites, for the obtaining of temporall bleſsings and deliverances, was not onely an aſſent to the truth of his Word, is plaine, becauſe he required of them a truſt in his power, truth, goodneſſe, and mercy, as may eaſily appeare by the 1 Chro 20.20. where Iehoſaphat exhorts the people, not onely to beleeve the Prophets of the Lord; that is, not onely to aſſent to the truth of the doctrine of their Propheſies, but alſo, to

                        trust in the Lord their God, that ſo they may be eſtabliſhed and proſper: as alſo by 1. Chron. 5.20 where the Lord renders the reaſon, why his people Iſrael were not overcome in battel of the Hagarites and others, but that they rather were delivered into the Iſraelites hands; and the reaſon is, becauſe they prayed to God, & put truſt in him: which yet may be further cleared, in that where the Lord renders a reaſon, why his wrath fell upon his people Iſrael; the reaſon was, becauſe they beleeved not in God, and truſted not in his ſalvation.
                        
                           Pſal. 78.21, 22. So that truſting in God, and beleeving in him, being required of his people, for the obtaining of temporall bleſsings, as wel as beleeving the truth of his Word; ſpirituall and heavenly bleſsings, requiring as much faith for the obtaining of them, as temporall; and truſting in God or Chriſt being more faith, then beleeving the truth of the Word: It muſt needs follow, that the Popiſh definition of faith muſt needs be unſound, which requires not to the obtaining of iuſtification, that faith which is truſt in Chriſt, but onely an aſſent to the truth of the Word of God, which is an hiſtoricall faith.
                     
                        This I thinke is enough to have alledged in confutation of the Definition of a ſaving faith, as it is taught in the Church of Rome. Other reaſons I could bring againſt others, (if any other but Papiſts were in this point of this opinion with them) to prove, that a ſaving faith is not onely an aſſent to the truth of the Word of God; as namely, becauſe if it were, then 1. reprobates and deuils,
                           Luke 8.13. Iam. 2.19. Marke 1.24. that never ſhall be ſaved, may have a ſaving faith; for they may aſſent to the truth of the Word, and beleeve the Goſpel. 2. Then an hiſtoricall faith, and a ſaving faith, ſhould bee all one, which hath beene contradicted by many Divines, ancient, and moderne, that have diſtinguiſhed faith into 3. kindes; an hiſtoricall, a miraculous, and a ſaving Faith: but becauſe I intend here a confutation of the Papiſts onely; and I know theſe reaſons would not be ſufficient to confute them, who thinke, that reprobates may have any faith, and yet be damned; and who will yeeld no ſuch diſtinctions: therefore will I omit the further proofe and proſecution of thoſe Arguments, and onely content my ſelfe with the two, that I have formerly produced, as beeing ſufficient (in my

iudgement) to confute the Popiſh opinion, concerning the nature of their faith, which they require of all Catholikes to ſalvation.
                     But becauſe they endevour to maintaine their opinion by colour of Scripture, which ſeemes to countenance it, therefore will it not bee needleſſe altogether, to ſay a little in anſwer of their Arguments, ſpecially the chiefeſt of them, and the rather, becauſe hereby the truth of that I have ſaid, will be further cleered, the Reader more fully ſatisfied, and the Adverſarie (if hee will reade and beleeue) more ſoundly convinced.
                     The Arguments alledged by the Papiſts in defence of their Definition of their ſaving faith, are many: but the chiefeſt of them are theſe foure: which being fully anſwered, the reſt will not deſerve any labour about the confuting of them.
                     A ſaving faith, or all the faith that God requires to iuſtification, is onely an aſſent to the truth of the Word. 1.Arguments of the Papiſts. becauſe it is only in the underſtanding, Heb. 11.1. 2. Becauſe Abrahams faith was this aſſent, Rom. 4.1. 3. Becauſe everlaſting life is promiſed to this faith, Ioh. 21.31. 4. and laſtly, becauſe the

miracles which Chriſt and the Apoſtles did, were all wrought for the confirmation of this faith, Mar. 16.16. to the 20.
                     To theſe Arguments I meane to anſwere generally and particularly: but briefely in both kindes.
                     
                        The generall anſwere to the obiections.The generall anſwere is this: that neither of the foure Arguments doe proue that for which they are alledged. For the point to bee prooved is, that all the faith that God requires of men to iuſtification, is onely an aſſent to the truth of the Word: but the proofe only is, that God requires of them that are to bee iuſtified, that they beleeve his Word, or aſſent to the truth thereof, which I never denyed. Now who knowes not that there is a maine difference, betwixt theſe two ſayings? God requires aſſent, and al that God requires is aſſent? If any man can or will directly conclude out of any of the places alledged, or any other the point in queſtion, I will yeeld the cauſe: in the meane time they are inſufficient. For though it be true that the faith ſpoken of in the foure Texts alledged, be a ſaving faith, and that the beleeving there ſpoken of, were onely an aſſent to the truth of the

Word: Yet all is to little purpoſe for them, as long as God requires more faith then this, in other places of Scripture; namely, beleeving in Chriſt; which I have proved to be faith, as well as aſſent to the truth of the Word of God, and to be more faith then it, except we ſhall ſay, that that which God requires in one place of Scripture, is not as neceſſary to iuſtification, as that which he requires in another, or that God is bound to ſet downe in every place of Scripture, where he ſpeakes of the duties requiſire to iuſtification, all the duties, and all the faith therevnto requiſite; which no reaſonable man can imagine to be true.
                     
                        
                           1. OBIECTION anſwered, particularly taken from Heb. 11.1, 3.
                        
                        Touching the particular anſwere, to 
                              § 5 each Argument of the Papiſts, I ſay,Particular anſweres to the obiection. that the 1. is inſufficient; becauſe in the Text alledged, he doth neither ſpeake of the whole nature of faith, fully in every kind, and of every act thereof, requiſite to iuſtification: neither doth he ſay that every kinde of faith, or every act, of every kinde of faith, is in the underſtanding onely. That the Text alledged,

ſpeakes not fully of the whole nature of faith in every kinde, and of every act of faith requiſite to iuſtification, is plaine by this: becauſe it mentions not, trust or beliefe in Chriſt, which I have formerly proved to be faith, and to bee required of all thoſe that ſhall bee iuſtified.
                        Indeed in other places of the Chapter, hee ſpeakes of it by implication, as verſe 5, 6, 8, 9, 10. but not in the Text alledged; becauſe the Text ſpeakes only of that faith which is in the underſtanding, namely, an hiſtoricall faith, whereby wee beleeve the truth of the Word, concerning the Creation of the world of nothing, ver. 3. and of that faith which convinceth our underſtanding of the truth of thoſe things, of wch we can ſee no reaſon how they ſhould be ſo, ver. 1. But the act of faith, which is truſt in Chriſt, is in the heart, will, and affections. Which I prove by theſe texts of Scripture, and Reaſons.
                        1. Becauſe that faith muſt needs bee in our hearts, whereby Chriſt dwels in our hearts:
                              Ephe. 3.17. but Chriſt dwels in our hearts by faith in him.
                        
                        2. That faith muſt needs bee in our hearts, by which with our hearts wee

beleeve unto righteouſneſſe; but with our hearts wee beleeve in him unto righteouſneſſe.
                           
                              Rom. 10.9.10.
                        
                        3. That faith muſt needs bee in our hearts, by which we draw neere with a true heart, to the throne of grace: but by full aſſurance of Faith, wee draw neere with a true heart to the Throne of grace.
                           
                              Heb. 10.22.
                        
                        4. To beleeve in Chriſt, is to goe to Chriſt, or to ſeeke to him for ſalvation:
                              Math. 11.28. Ioh. 6.35. Act. 15.17. but to goe to Chriſt, or to ſeeke to him to bee ſaved, belongs to the heart, will and affections, by reaſon of the goodneſſe of the thing, which is ſalvation, which drawes our hearts and affections to deſire and ſeeke for it.
                        5. Becauſe to beleeve in Chriſt for ſalvation, is fiducia in Chriſto, or Chriſtum, that is, a truſting in Chriſt, or putting confidence in him, a reſting or relying upon him with all our hearts for ſaluation, as hath beene ſhewed in the opening of my Definition of a ſaving faith: but fiducia in Chriſto, or Chriſtum: that is, truſt in Chriſt, is in the heart, will, and affections,Bell. de iuſtific. l. 1. c. 5. p. 733. c. d. by the confeſsion of Bellarmine himſelfe.
                        And that the Apoſtle in the Text alledged, doth not affirme that euery kind of faith, and every act of every kinde of

faith, is in the underſtanding onely, as is plaine; becauſe the word, only, is neither in the Letter, nor ſenſe of the Text. Indeed one kinde of faith, and one act of faith whereof he ſpeakes, verſe 3.1. is in the underſtanding onely; but neither is that all the faith which God requires to iuſtification, as hath beene ſhewed by two Arguments before (for that is but an Hiſtoricall faith, and God requires more then an Hiſtoricall faith to iuſtification) nor will it follow, that therefore all and every kinde of faith, and every act of faith, muſt bee in the underſtanding onely, becauſe that is. For though that faith which onely hath truth for the obiect of it, and which onely lookes to the truth of the Word, (which aſſent to the truth of the Word as an Hiſtoricall faith doth) be onely in the underſtanding; becauſe the faculty of iudging, and after iudgement, of aſſenting to the truth of any word or ſpeech of God or man, belongs to the underſtanding onely: yet that faith which hath for the obiect of it, not onely the truth of the promiſe of the Goſpell, but the perſon of the Sonne of God to reſt vpon, for ſo good and excellent a thing as is grace and glory: (Which

faith in Chriſt, or a ſaving faith hath) may for al that be, & doubtleſſe is, in the heart, will and affections: ſo that, either the Papiſts muſt deny fiduciam in Chriſto, that is, truſt in Chriſt, to bee a kinde of faith, (wch I have formerly diſproved:) & to be in the will (which is confeſt by Bellarmine himſelf) or they muſt acknowledge that S. Paul ſpeakes not of all,
                              Heb. 11.1, 3. & every kinde of faith, and of every act of faith, requiſite to iuſtification; wch to doe, is in effect to profeſſe plainely, that they cannot ſoundly conclude from the Text in the Hebrewes, that all the faith wch God requires unto iuſtification, is only an aſſent to the truth of the Word, becauſe all & every kinde of faith is not in the underſtanding onely. For though that faith, which is an aſſent to the truth, be in the underſtanding only, becauſe euery aſſent to the truth is the underſtanding only: Yet that faith which is more, then an aſſent to the truth, namely, a truſting, reſting, and relying vpon Chriſt, with all the heart for ſalvation, may be, & certainly is in the will, heart and affections, becauſe truſting, reſting, reying and depending on God, is in the heart, will and affections. And ſo much for a more particular anſwere to

the firſt Argument of the Papiſts, wherby they would proue, that all the faith required of Chriſtians to iuſtification, is onely an aſsent to the truth of the Word. The ſecond followes.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              § 6
                           2. OBIECTION anſwered. From Rom. 4.3.
                        The ſecond Argument likewiſe doth not prooue the point in queſtion; becauſe though Abraham were the father of the faithfull; and Paul ſay, Abraham credidit Deo, which they tranſlate, Abraham beleeved God, as if his faith were nothing elſe, but an aſſenting to the truth of his promiſe: Yet will not their tranſlation proue the point, namely, that all the faith which God requires of thoſe that ſhall be ſaved, is onely an aſſent to the truth of the Word; becauſe thoſe words, Abraham credidit Deo, are to be underſtood not onely of his beleeving the truth of Gods promiſe: but of his truſting to God for the performance of his promiſe, though hee ſaw no likelihood thereof.
                        This I prooue: firſt, becauſe thoſe words, Abraham credidit Deo, are expounded in the fifth verſe, by beleeving or truſting vpon him that iuſtifieth the ungodly,
                           
and truſting vpon God, is more then bare beleeving the truth of his Word, as hath beene proved before. Secondly, becauſe the ſame Apoſtle ſpeaking of Abrahams faith in the ſame Chapter, ſaith, that he was ſtrong in the faith, and gaue glory to God, beeing fully aſſured that what he had promiſed, hee was able to performe, 20.21. yea, that hee beleeved in hope againſt hope, verſe 18. Thirdly, becauſe in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, the Apoſtle ſpeaking of Abrahams faith,
                              Heb. 6.15.12. ſaith, when he had patiently endured, he obtained the promiſe, & by faith and patience inherited them. All which ſhew plainely, that Abrahams faith was more then a bare beleeving that God ſaid true, or an aſſenting to the truth of Gods promiſe.
                        And that the expoſition of the words, credidit Deo, that is, truſted God, or reſted vpon him, with waiting patiently for the obtaining of the bleſsing promiſed, may not ſeem ſtrange, I proue it, not onely by the ſame ſenſe of the ſame word in Heathen Authors,Phocylides verſe 90. 
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              . Populo ne fide, mutabile eſt vulgus. as where the Poet ſaith: Truſt not the common people, the multitude is variable or uncertaine, that is, not to bee truſted, but alſo by the uſe thereof in the ſame ſenſe, of truſting, or putting

one in truſt in the Holy Scriptures, as where Paul ſaith, I know whom I haue truſted,
                           2. Tim. 1.12. 
                           and I am perſwaded, that hee is able to keepe that which I have committed unto him againſt that day.
                        
                        I acknowledge the ſame word or Verbe, with the ſame Caſe, namely, the Datiue doth ſignify to belieue, one ſaith true; as Mar. 16.13. Ioh. 2.22. & 5.46.47. Act. 8.12. & 24.14. Rom. 10.16. but it doth not alwaies ſignifie that, and no more: for it ſometimes ſignifies to truſt one, or put one in truſt, or to commit to ones truſt, as Ro. 3.3. 1. Tim. 1.11. 2. Tim. 3.14. which is more then onely beleeving, one ſaith true, or aſſenting to the truth of his ſaying.
                        So that Abrahams ſaving faith being a truſting, reſting, or relying on Gods power, truth and goodneſſe for a bleſſing in his ſeede, and truſting, reſting or relying on God, beeing more then bare beleeving, he ſaith true; therefore cannot that Text in the Epiſtle to the Romanes proue a ſaving Faith, to be onely a beleeving, GOD ſaith true in all his Word, or an aſſent to the truth of his Word.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           3. OBIECTION anſwered: From 
                              § 7 Ioh. 20.31.
                        In the third, place where they urge that all the Faith which God requires of Chriſtians to ſalvation, is onely an aſſent to the truth of the Word, becauſe eternall life is promiſed to this faith, I ſay the reaſon is not good. 1.
                              Ioh. 3.16. Becauſe eternall life is promiſed to faith in Chriſt; and faith in Chriſt, is more then aſſent to the truth of the Word, as hath beene proved before. 2. Becauſe eternall life is promiſed to the knowing of Chriſt; yet can no man thence conclude,
                              Joh. 17.3. that all the faith which God requires of Chriſtians, is onely knowing of Chriſt; for then what ſhould become of acknowledging Chriſt, or aſſenting to the truth of his Doctrine, which is more then knowing him or his Doctrine? Thirdly, the end of the beleeving ſpoken of in the Text, is to haue life in Chriſts name, and the meanes to attaine life by Chriſts name or merits, is to beleeue in it,
                           
                              Ioh. 1.12. 
                           or to reſt upon them: therefore do I thinke that the beleeving there ſpoken off, may as well bee applyed to the name of Chriſt, as to the word written: to the end, that by beleeuing the Word written,

wee may come to beleeve in the name of Chriſt; and by beleeving in his name, or truſting in his merits, we may haue life thereby.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              § 8
                           4. OBIECTION anſwered.
                        The laſt Argument, whereby the Papiſts would proue, that all the faith required of Chriſtians to ſalvation, is only an aſſent to the truth of the Word, 
                              〈◊〉
                            beleeving the truth of the Word, is, becauſe all the miracles which Chriſt and his Apoſtles did, were done for the confirmation of this faith.
                        This is to as little purpoſe, as the former; except it could bee prooved, that miracles were onely wrought, for the confirmation of that faith, which is a beliefe of the truth of the Goſpell; and not at all, of that, which is truſt in Chriſt: which is contradicted evidently by theſe places of Scripture, Mar. 16.16.20. Ioh. 2.23. & 7.31. & 10.37, 38, 42. & 12.37.
                        I acknowledge that miracles were wrought, to the end men might be the more ſettled in their perſwaſion of the truth of the doctrine of the Goſpel: but I deny that they were wrought, for the confirmation of that faith onely. And

my reaſon is, not onely becauſe the former places gaineſay it; but alſo becauſe even reaſon doth contradict it. For if a ſaving faith, or faith in Chriſt, be more excellent and neceſſary, then an hiſtoricall faith, which is a beleefe of the Goſpell, as hath beene proved before: If the one have need to bee confirmed as well as the other, and miracles were able to confirme one, as well as another; I ſee no reaſon, why miracles ſhould not be wrought, for the ſtrengthening of the one, as well as of the other;1. Tim. 2.15. Revel. 2.10. ſeeing ſtrengthening of our faith is the way to continuance in it; and continuance in it, the way to obtaine the crowne of it.
                        To conclude then my anſwere to theſe obiections; I pray it may be conſidered and remembred, that I acknowledge that in ſome places of Scripture, a ſauing faith is called knowing of God or Chriſt;
                              Ioh. 17.3. eph. 4.13. 1. Tim. 4.3. ſometimes it is expreſſed by knowing and beleeuing the truth; ſometime by acknowledging the truth; yea ſometime it is deſcribed by bare beleeuing,
                           2. Tim. 2.25. as Iohn 1.7. compared with Acts 19.4. yet this is not therefore done, becauſe euery one of theſe phraſes doe of themſelues, in Grammar-Conſtruction, ſufficiently

and fully declare the whole nature of a ſaving faith: for then what ſhould become of beleeuing in Chriſt; into, and vpon Chriſt, or truſting to him for ſaluation, which are often ſpoken of in the Scripture, as well as they, and doe ſignifie more then bare beleeving, knowing or acknowledging the truth of the Goſpel.
                        But I take the reaſon hereof to bee, either becauſe the circumſtances of the place, where a ſaving faith is deſcribed, by ſuch phraſes, doe evidently ſhew, that the holy Ghoſt in a Theologicall ſenſe ſpeakes of it, and of thoſe that have it: or becauſe they who have a ſaving faith, muſt know God and Chriſt; they muſt beleeve and acknowledge the truth of the Word, as well as beleeve in Chriſt, if ever they will be ſaved; yea, they muſt firſt know God and Chriſt, they muſt firſt beleeve and acknowledge the truth of the Goſpel, before they will beleeve in Chriſt to ſalvation, according to the Goſpel: or elſe becauſe it was a great matter in thoſe dayes, to beleeve the Goſpell, which was a ſtumbling blocke to the Iewes, and fooliſhneſſe to the gentiles.
                           1. Cor. 1.28.
                        
                        For the doctrine of the Goſpel was a

                           new doctrine, and therefore it was a ſtrange matter, in thoſe dayes,
                              Act. 17.19, 20. for people to beleeve that, of which there was no ground at all in nature. And therefore no marvell, if the holy Ghoſt doe ſometime deſcribe a ſaving faith by theſe; namely, bare knowing, beleeving, and acknowledging Chriſt and the Goſpel; ſpecially, ſeeing all they that are to be ſaved, are to have this faith, as well as the other; and this faith which is but an aſſent to the truth of the Word, before that faith which is a truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation; wherein notwithſtanding there can be no inconvenience, nor untruth, ſeeing (as hath beene ſaid often) the holy Scripture, that ſpeakes but ſo much of the nature of faith in ſome places, doth ſay more of it in other, to the end no man may be deceived in the underſtanding of the nature of it, if hee take paines to compare one place with another.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. III. Of the Definition of a ſaving faith, given by ſome Lutherans.
                  
                  HAving confuted the firſt Error, concerning the Definition of a ſaving faith, namely, that of the Papiſts; it remaines, that I proceed to the opening and confuting of the ſecond: becauſe it alſo as well as the former, agrees not with the true nature of faith in Chriſt, as it iuſtifies us. For as the former opinion of the Papiſts requires leſſe faith to iuſtification, then God doth require; ſo this of the Lutherans requires more.
                  The ſumme of the opinion is this, That a ſaving faith is a full aſſurance, and certaine perſwaſion of ſalvation by Chriſt; and that to beleeve in Chriſt, is to be fully aſſured, and perſwaded of ſalvation by him: and becauſe it will be ſuperfluous to alledge many teſtimonies, therefore I will content my ſelfe with two, that were otherwiſe famous,

and learned men in their times, namely, Chemnitius and Melancthon.
                  
                  The words of Chemnitius are theſe:
Faith is a particular aſſent, whereby every 
                           § 1 beleever by a firme perſwaſion aſſures himſelf,Chemnit. ex Concil. Trid. in 8. Francofurt. 1590. pag. 380. that the generall promiſe pertaines unto him, and that hee is included, and comprehended in it.
                  
                  
                     Melancthons words are theſe:
To beleeve in Chriſt, is to beleeve,Melanct. Exam. Theol. Neoſtad anno 1587. in 8. De vocabulo fidei, pag. 583. that forgiveneſſe of ſinne is given not to others only, but even to them in particular: with which agrees a Definition well known in the Engliſh tongue, viz. Faith is a full perſwaſion of the heart, grounded upon the promiſes of god, that whatſoever Chriſt hath done for the ſalvation of others, hee hath done it for me, as well as for any other.
                  
                  In this Definition, two things are conſiderable: Firſt, the nature of the action of faith, or of beleeving, which conſiſts in perſwaſion or aſſurance. Secondly, the things to bee beleeved, or the obiect of this action, which are forgiveneſſe of ſinnes, and eternall life.
                  Now though I might except againſt both theſe parts▪ the latter (as well as the former) that makes the nature

of the act of beleeving, to bee perſwaſion, or aſſurance; 
                        〈◊〉
                      the latter that makes the obiect of their aſſurance, perſwaſion, or beleeving, to be ſalvation, whereas it is Chriſt onely, or Chriſt for ſalvation: yet I will not labour in that, but direct my diſcourſe againſt the former part of it, which makes the nature of the act of beleeving, to conſiſt onely in aſſurance or perſwaſion.
                  But before I come to the confutation of the opinion, I will firſt ſhew the occaſion of this opinion. Secondly, I will declare in what ſenſe I write againſt it, viz. againſt that part of their Definition, that makes faith, (as it iuſtifies) to bee aſſurance of ſalvation, to the end I may not be miſtaken.
                  The occaſion that was given, to ſome Divines,Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 6. cap. 9. Bellar. de Iuſtificat. lib. 3. cap. 2. pag. 851. c. d. 852. e. to be of opinion, that a ſaving faith is a full aſſurance, or perſwaſion of ſalvation, I take it to be this: The Papiſts deliver for truth, That none can be aſſured of his ſalvation: but that every one ought rather to doubt thereof.
                  Now to the end this Popiſh doctrine might bee oppoſed, many Divines amongſt them have taught, that faith it ſelfe is an aſſurance of ſalvation, and a full perſwaſion, that our ſinnes are forgiven

us; namely, becauſe ſome texts of Scripture make ſhew of ſuch a point. But (by their leave, and ſaving reverence to their great learning, and ſound iudgement in other points of Divinity) it was not good to oppoſe one untruth with another: for whileſt they intended to overthrow the Popiſh faith, which is ioyned with doubting, they have (ere they were aware of it) ſhaken the faith of many weake Chriſtians; who reading, that a ſaving faith is an aſſurance of ſalvation; and that to beleeve in Chriſt, is to be fully perſwaded of the forgiveneſſe of ſinnes by Chriſt; and withall, finding in themſelves, either no aſſurance at all, or (at leaſt) not ſo full an aſſurance and perſwaſion of their ſalvation, have hereupon concluded (to the great diſcomfort, as well they might, if their Definition of a ſaving faith were true,) that they have not a ſaving faith, though in deed, and in truth they had, as long as they beleeved in Chriſt, truſted to him, and reſted on the merits of his death and righteouſneſſe for ſalvation, in that manner as ſhall be ſhewed.
                  Touching the ſecond point, I would have the Reader obſerve diligently,

that I am ſo farre from denying Faith to be the roote, and foundation of aſſurance and perſwaſion, of the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and ſalvation: that I plainely confeſſe, that it doth bring aſſurance, and perſwaſion thereof, to the faithfull: namely, in that meaſure, and at that time, that the Lord of his wiſedome and goodnes ſees fit, for each of his children.
                  But this I deny. Faith (as it iuſtifies) is not formally an aſſurance or perſwaſion of ſalvation; and this I will endevour to make good, by alledging ſome Arguments in defence of my opinion; and by anſwering the Reaſons that may bee brought in proofe of theirs. And of my Arguments, this is the firſt.
                  
                     REASON. 1.
                     
                        A ſaving faith (as it iuſtifies us) is not rightly 
                              § 2 defined and aſſurance, or full perſwaſion of ſalvation: becauſe aſſurance 
                              〈◊〉
                            full perſwaſion of ſalvation, is an effect of faith, and followes it.
                     
                     The reaſon cannot iuſtly bee denyed, becauſe it is true; that therefore the cauſe cannot be the effect, nor the roote the fruit, becauſe the one followes the other in nature; the effect, the cauſe;

and the fruit, the roote: and therefore if aſſurance of ſalvation follow faith in Chriſt, as the effect and fruit of it: then cannot faith in Chriſt bee the aſſurance it ſelfe, or full perſwaſion of ſalvation.
                     And that aſſurance, or full perſwaſion of ſalvation, and iuſtification followes faith in Chriſt: I proue by theſe Reaſons.
                     Firſt, becauſe aſſurance of ſalvation, or iuſtification comes to us efficiciently, by the teſtimonie of the Holy Ghoſt, that beares witneſſe with our ſpirits, that God is our Father, and we his children,
                           Rom. 8.15, 16. and the Spirit beares witneſſe that we are Gods children, when we are beleevers in Chriſt, and not before, as is plaine by Saint Paul to the Epheſians, where he ſaith plainly,
                           Epheſ. 1.13. that the Epheſians were ſealed with the holy Spirit of promiſe, after they had beleeved in Chriſt: And in the Epiſtle to the Galathians, where having ſaid of himſelf and them,
                           Gal 4 6. 
                        We are all the children of God by faith in Ieſus Chriſt: he addes in the fourth Chapter; And becauſe wee are ſonnes,
                        
                           Gal. 3.26. 
                        God hath ſent forth the Spirit of his Sonne into our hearts, crying Abba Father. So that the aſſurance of ſalvation, following the teſtimonie of Gods Spirit, that wee are his children;

the teſtimony of Gods Spirit, that we are his children, following our being Gods children; and our beeing Gods children, following our beleeving in Chriſt, or our ſaving faith; therefore aſſurance of ſalvation or iuſtification, muſt needs follow a ſaving faith, as an effect or fruit of it.
                     2. Aſſurance of ſalvation followes faith in Chriſt; becauſe aſſurance of ſalvation, or iuſtification, comes to us by feeling certaine graces, wrought in us by faith, namely, peace of conſcience, and ioy in the hope of the glory of God.
                     That peace of conſcience, and ioy in the hope of the glory of God, are means to aſſurance of our ſalvation, it is evident by this, that they are the firſt fruits of our ſalvation, and of the ioyes of Heaven; and that this peace and ioy, are wrought in us, by the meanes of Faith, is as plaine by two places of Paul, where he ſaith, Now then being iuſtified by Faith,
                        
                           Rom. 3.5. 
                        we haue peace towards God, and not ſo onely, but we reioyce under the hope of the glory of GOD:
                           Rom. 15.13. And Rom. 15.13. Now the GOD of hope fill you with all ioy and peace, by beleeving that you may abound in hope, by the power of the Holy Ghoſt.
                     
                     
                        So that aſſurance of ſalvation, following peace of conſcience, and ioy in the hope of the glory of God, and peace of conſcience, and reioyſing in the hope of Heaven, following faith; I may ſafely conclude vpon theſe grounds, that therfore aſſurance of ſalvation doth follow faith: And that therefore conſequently, a ſaving faith in the nature of it as it iuſtifies us, cannot bee a full aſſurance or perſwaſion of our ſalvation. For proofe whereof, this ſhall bee my ſecond Reaſon.
                  
                  
                     REASON 2.
                     
                        A ſaving Faith is not an aſſurance of ſalvation,
                              § 3 becauſe wee muſt firſt haue faith in Chriſt, or a ſaving faith; before wee can haue any aſſurance of ſalvation.
                     
                     The reaſon is good; becauſe a thing cannot goe before it ſelfe, there muſt be ſome other thing that muſt goe before it. Therefore if a ſaving faith goe before the aſſurance of ſalvation, (as needs it muſt if a man muſt haue Faith in Chriſt, before he can be aſſured of his ſalvation:) then cannot faith in Chriſt, nor ſaving faith, bee the aſſurance it ſelfe of ſalvation.
                     
                        To ſay, a ſaving faith is an aſſurance of ſalvation; implyes that a ſaving faith, and aſſurance of ſalvation, are all one and the ſame thing: but to ſay, wee muſt firſt haue a ſaving faith, before we can be aſſured of our ſalvation; implies, that the one goes before the other, and that therefore they are two diſtinct things; ſo that aſſurance of ſalvation cannot be affirmed, or predicated of a ſaving faith, in the Definition of it; becauſe it is not proper to the nature of it, nor is convertible with it.
                     And that we muſt have a ſaving faith and beleeue in Chriſt for ſalvation, before we can haue any aſſurance of ſalvation, I prooue by theſe three Reaſons.
                     Firſt, a man muſt be ſaved, before he can be aſſured of his ſalvation, (for hee cannot be aſſured of that which is not) and a man muſt haue a ſaving faith, before he can be ſaved by faith (for he can not bee ſaved, by that which hee hath not:) therefore hee muſt haue a ſaving faith, before he can be aſſured of his ſalvation.
                     Secondly, a man muſt have a ſaving faith, before he can be aſſured of ſalvation; becauſe ſalvation is promiſed in

the Covenant of Grace, vnder a Condition, and the Condition is faith in Chriſt, and faith in Chriſt, is a ſaving faith: So that he muſt firſt performe the condition of the Covenant, by beleeving in Chriſt, before he can obtaine the thing promiſed in the Covenant, which is ſalvation: For as it is true, that hee which beleeveth in Chriſt by a ſaving faith, is iuſtified, as ſoone as hee beleeveth: ſo is it as true, that before hee beleeveth, he is not iuſtified. For till then, hee hath no reaſon to lay hold on the Tree of Life, or to lay claime unto ſalvation, or the aſſurance of it.
                     Thirdly, we muſt have a ſaving faith, before we can bee aſſured of ſalvation, becauſe we muſt bee united and graffed into Chriſt, that is our Saviour, before wee can bee ſaved, or haue aſſurance of ſalvation by him. Now it is faith onely, or beliefe in Chriſt, that unites us to Chriſt & ingrafts into him, as appeares by the phraſes of beleeving in, into, and upon Chriſt, ſpoken of before, and alſo by this,
                           Ephe. 3.17. Rom. 8.1. that Chriſt dwels in our hearts by Faith; and wee are ſaid to bee in Chriſt; namely, by faith.
                     So that Chriſt Ieſus being the meritorious cauſe of ſalvation, to procure

it; and faith in Chriſt the inſtrumentall cauſe, to aſſure it us; it muſt needs follow, that wee muſt firſt have a ſaving faith, before wee can have ſalvation, or any aſſurance of it. But let us paſſe on to another Reaſon.
                  
                  
                     REASON. 3.
                     
                        
                           
                              § 4 A ſaving Faith is not an aſſurance of our ſalvation; becauſe we are not iuſtified, by being aſſured of our ſalvation.
                     
                     The reaſon is undeniable: becauſe a ſaving faith, and that whereby wee are ſaved, are all one; and ſo are our aſſurance of ſalvation, and our beeing aſſured thereof. Whence I thus argue: If a ſaving faith iuſtifie us, (as themſelves confeſſe) and a ſaving faith bee an aſſurance of our ſalvation, as it iuſtifies us (as their Definition imports) then muſt it needs follow, that we are iuſtified by beeing aſſured of ſalvation; which cannot be for theſe foure Reaſons:
                     1. We are not iuſtified by being aſſured of iuſtification, becauſe then would it follow, that we are aſſured of our iuſtification, before we are iuſtified indeed. (For that whereby we are aſſured of any thing, muſt needs goe before our being

aſſured of it, inaſmuch as it is the meanes and cauſe of it.) But wee are not aſſured of our iuſtification, before wee are iuſtified indeede; becauſe that whereby wee are iuſtified, muſt needs goe before our beeing iuſtified, in as much as it is the meanes and cauſe of it: & we muſt firſt be actually iuſtified in Gods ſight, before wee can be aſſured of our iuſtification, (becauſe we cannot be truely aſſured of that which is not;) wherefore either aſſurance of ſalvation muſt goe before ſalvation it ſelfe (which is as impoſsible as for a man to be aſſured of Land, before there be Land to be aſſured of;) or it cannot bee true, that we are iuſtified, by being aſſured of our iuſtification.
                     2. We are not iuſtified by being aſſured of our iuſtification; becauſe then would it follow, that whoſoeuer hath a ſaving faith, muſt preſently, and continually have an aſſurance of his ſalvation: (for he that once had a ſaving faith, ſhall alwayes have it; and never loſe it) and alſo he that is not aſſured of his ſalvation, is not iuſtified, nor hath a ſaving faith, which is moſt vntrue, ſeeing many of Gods deare children may want the aſſurance of their ſalvation, and that

for a long while in ſome caſes, and yet for all that truſt in Chriſt, & hang upon him for ſalvation.
                     3. We are not iuſtified by being aſſured of ſalvation, becauſe then would it follow, that the condition of the Goſpell required on our part inſtrumentally, for receiving of ſalvation, ſhould be a comfort, and not a duty: (for that whereby we are iuſtified, is the condition of the Goſpell, required on our part to make us capable of ſalvation, and aſſurance of ſalvation is certainly a comfort.) But wee are iuſtified by faith, which is the condition of the Goſpell; not as it is a comfort, but a duty, both becauſe it is called a worke, and a duty of obedience,
                           Ioh. 6.29. Act 6.7. Rom. 16.26. 1 Ioh. 3.23. and a duty commanded; and alſo, becauſe the comfort that comes by faith to the ſoule, is after the act of beleeving in Chriſt, which is the duty of faith; for the comfort of faith, is aſſurance of ſalvation; and aſſurance of ſalvation, ariſeth from peace of conſcience, and ioy in the hope of Heaven; both which follow faith in Chriſt, or our being iuſtified by faith in Chriſt, as hath been ſhewed before, out of Rom. 5.3, 4. & 15.13.
                     4 Laſtly, we are not iuſtified by being

aſſured of our ſalvation, becauſe then would it follow, that the meaning of the Goſpell, or Covenant of Grace, which is this; He that beleeveth ſhall bee ſaved, and ſhall not be damned:
                           Ioh. 3.16. Mar. 16.16. the (meaning (I ſay) of this ſhould be: He that is aſſured of his ſalvation, and is fully perſwaded he ſhall not be damned, ſhall bee ſaved, and not damned (for to haue a ſaving faith, to beleeve in Chriſt, and to be aſſured of ſalvation by Chriſt, is all one with them, if a ſaving faith be an aſſurance of ſalvation.)
                     But this interpretation is abſurd, not onely, becauſe there is no good ſenſe in ſuch an expoſition, but alſo becauſe it may come to paſſe, that ſome man may be ſaved by beleeving an vntruth: for if iuſtification follow beleeving in Chriſt (as it is plaine it doth, becauſe beleeving in Chriſt, is the condition required on our part to iuſtifie us, and therefore muſt goe before it) then if I perſwade my ſelfe I am iuſtified before I beleeve in Chriſt, I am perſwaded of an untruth, and conſequently am iuſtified by beleeving an vntruth. If I perſwade my ſelfe my ſinnes are forgiuen mee, which indeed are not forgiuen, before I have this perſwaſion;

then muſt I beleeue that which is falſe, and conſequently be iuſtified by beleeving that which is falſe. For who knowes not, that there be many carnall Goſpellers, that in their perſwaſion are verily aſſured of their ſalvation: (for they would not doubt of it, they ſay, for all the world, and well they might, if a ſaving faith were nothing elſe but an aſſurance of ſalvation) who yet can indeed haue no ſure ground of any ſuch aſſurance, becauſe they are not borne anew of the Spirit, vnto repentance from dead workes, and faith in Chriſt? Wherefore either theſe Lutherans muſt ſay, we are not iuſtified by faith in Chriſt, which is hereticall; or affirme that the meaning of the Covenant of Grace is, that he which is aſſured of ſalvation, ſhall be ſaved, and not damned, which is ſenſeleſſe, or elſe it cannot be true, that we are iuſtified by being aſſured of our iuſtification, and conſequently that neither is it true, that a ſaving faith is an aſſurance of ſalvation, as they perſwade themſelves. For confutation whereof, this ſhall bee my fourth Reaſon.
                  
                  
                     
                     REASON 4.
                     
                        The Lutherans Definition of a ſaving faith,
                              § 5 who make it an aſſurance of ſalvation, is not good, becauſe it cauſeth needleſſe and fearefull diſcomforts, in them that are afflicted in conſcience, by reaſon they want the aſſurance of ſalvation.
                     
                     The reaſon muſt needs be good, becauſe the nature, uſe, and end of a ſaving faith, is to comfort thoſe, that have it, in as much as it gives them title to Chriſt, and all his benefits; therefore the Definition of this faith ſhould miniſter comfort to the ſoules of Chriſtians: if therefore the Lutherans Definition doe not miniſter comfort, but rather needleſſe feares and diſcomforts, (as ſhall be proved by and by) then cannot it be a good definition of a ſaving faith; for God wil not have by any doctrine of his Word, the bruized reed broken, nor the ſmoaking flaxe quenched;
                           Mat. 12.20. 
                        
                           Mat. 11.28. Iſa. 61.2, 3. but rather by all meanes the weary and heavie loden ſoule to be eaſed; and them that mourne after the Lord to be comforted.
                     
                     And that this Definition of a ſaving faith given by ſome Lutherans, doth cauſe fearefull, and needleſſe diſcomforts,

in them that are afflicted in conſcience, I prove; becauſe it teacheth them, who indeed have a ſaving faith, to doubt whether they have it or no; and conſequently, whether they bee in the ſtate of grace, and ſalvation or no; viz. becauſe they feele they have not ſuch a faith, as the Definition imports.
                     For what will ſuch bee ready to ſay againſt themſelves, through the accuſation of their owne conſciences, and the ſuggeſtion of Satan? I am not a child of God, becauſe I have not a ſaving faith; and I have not a ſaving faith, becauſe I have not an aſſurance of ſalvation; for (will they ſay) I have read in Treatiſes and Catechiſmes, yea I have heard, and beene taught in Sermons, that to beleeve in Chriſt, is to bee aſſured of ſalvation by Chriſt, and that a ſaving faith, is a full perſwaſion of the heart, grounded upon the promiſes of God; that whatſoever Chriſt hath done for the ſalvation of man, hee hath done it as well for me as for any other. Now (alas) I know well enough to my griefe, that I have not this aſſurance; for becauſe I want it, I am thus afflicted in my mind.
                     Wherfore either they muſt confeſſe,

that God will have thoſe that have a ſaving faith, and are tender, or tormented in conſcience, to be more deepely wounded, and more cruelly tortured, which is againſt the Word of God;
                           Luke 4.18. or they muſt graunt that this their Definition of a ſaving faith is a naughty Definition; becauſe it doth ſo as hath beene ſaid.
                     I graunt, if their Definition of a ſaving faith were true and warrantable by the Word of God, it were to be born withall, if it did miniſter by occaſion, accidentally ſome griefe to them that were tender in conſcience: but when it is both unſound, as hath beene proved by other reaſons; and uncomfortable too, as hath beene ſhewed by this; and that not by occaſion or accident onely, but becauſe it miniſters iuſt cauſe of more doubts, and feares, to wound the conſciences of thoſe, whom God would have healed; therefore it is not likely to be true: and ſo I come to my laſt reaſon, which is not to be deſpiſed; and it is this.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              § 6 The Definition of a ſaving faith, that makes it an aſſurance of ſalvation,REASON 5. is not good, becauſe it nuzzels vp profane men, and carnall profeſſors of the Gospel, in a ſtrong perſwaſion, that they have a ſaving faith, and in a vaine preſumption of ſalvation.
                     
                     The Reaſon is very probable, becauſe the nature, uſe, and end of faith, is to overcame the world: therefore to beat downe all prophanenes, and no way to countenance carnal Goſpellers therein; therefore ſhould the definition of a ſauing Faith,1. Ioh. 5.4. doe ſo too; if therefore the Definition of a ſaving faith, doe nouzle men in profaneſſe, and formall profeſsion, though they haue not true faith indeed, then cannot it be a good definition. Now that this Definition of theirs doth nouzle vp men in profaneſſe, in a ſtrong perſwaſion they haue a ſaving faith, and in a vaine preſumption of their ſaluation, I proue; becauſe it makes them, who indeed have not a ſaving faith, to perſwade themſelves they have it, and them who as yet are not iuſtified, that they are.
                     For when ſuch men doe reade in bookes, and are taught what a ſaving faith is, namely, an aſſurance of ſalvation; and what it is to beleeve in Chriſt,

namely, (as they ſay) to bee aſſured of forgiveneſſe of ſinnes by Chriſt; and withall, doe know and feele, that they have an aſſurance, yea a full aſſurance (as they perſwade themſelves) of their ſalvation; (for they would not doubt of it ſay they for all the world;) how can it be, but this definition of a ſaving faith, through the deceitfulnes of their proud hearts, and Satans craft, muſt needes nouzle them up in this ſtrong perſwaſion, that they have a ſaving faith; eſpecially when they can alledge for themſelves, that they have learned it ſo, by the Miniſtery of the Word, of their Paſtors? for if a ſaving faith be an aſſurance of ſalvation, (as their Definition imports) then an aſſurance of ſalvation, is a ſaving faith; and if an aſſurance of ſalvation be a ſaving faith, then why ſhould not their aſſurance of ſalvation be a ſaving faith, as they thinke?
                     If they reply, becauſe the aſſurance of ſalvation that is in ſuch carnall Goſpellers, cannot be a true aſſurance upon good grounds, but a counterfeit one:
                     I anſwer, that for ought their definitiō of a ſaving faith ſaith, it may be a true aſſurance; for it gives no direction to try which is a true aſſurance, and which

is a counterfet: ſo that if a ſaving faith be nothing elſe, but an aſſurance of ſalvation; and to beleeve in Chriſt, be nothing elſe, but to be fully aſſured of ſalvation by Chriſt; and to bee certainely perſwaded, that whatſoever Chriſt hath done for the ſalvation of others, he hath done the ſame for them in particular, and for their ſalvation; then muſt it follow, that he which hath this particular aſſurance of his ſalvation, muſt needs have a ſaving faith.
                     If any chance to make the like obiection againſt my Definition, becauſe carnall Goſpellers may eaſily perſwade themſelves, they truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation, and that their ſinnes are forgiven them for his ſake.
                     I anſwer, that iuſtly they cannot; becauſe both in the opening of my Definition already, as alſo in the Rules hereafter following, I have ſhewed what be thoſe gifts and graces of the Spirit, which he workes in Chriſtians, namely, to prepare them thereunto, before they doe or can beleeve in Chriſt; ſo that by theſe they may know, whether their truſt in Chriſt, be a true truſt in Chriſt or no, and upon good grounds or counterfeit. Whereas by the doctrine

of their definition, & nature of a ſaving faith, they give no ſuch Rules, to try whether their aſſurance of ſalvation bee true or no, in as much as they teach that faith in Chriſt, (that is, if their expoſition of the nature of a ſaving faith be true, a full aſſurance of ſalvation by Chriſt) is the firſt grace that is wrought in Chriſtians; ſo that there is no meanes leſt to try whether their aſſurance of ſalvation bee true or coun
                           •
                        fet; or whether they have any ſound grounds in them, of this their aſſurance of ſalvation.
                     So that there beeing by their Doctrine, no graces of the Spirit, wrought in them, to prepare them to this faith or aſſurance, it muſt needs follow, that they have no grounds of this aſſurance; and conſequently, that this aſſurance and perſwaſion of ſalvation, is not a ſaving faith; and that therefore their Definition of a ſaving faith, muſt for all this, nouzle up carnall Goſpellers in their profaneneſſe.
                     By theſe five reaſons, I hope it may appeare to the underſtanding, and iudicious Reader, that a ſaving faith in the nature of it, (as it iuſtifies us) is not an aſſurance of ſalvation; and that to beleeve

in Chriſt for ſalvation, is not to be fully perſwaded of ſalvation by Chriſt; and that therefore conſequently, the Definition of a ſaving faith, that is made by ſome Lutherans, and which deſcribes the nature of it, to conſiſt in aſſurance and perſwaſion of ſalvation, is not good.
                     
                        
                           § 8 But leſt any man ſhould chance to reade ſome of their Bookes, tranſlated into Engliſh, or ſtumble at ſome places of Scripture, that ſeeme to give light or ſtrength thereunto, therefore will I take a little more paines to anſwere ſome Reaſons, and Arguments, that happely may bee brought in defence thereof; and will alledge them, as Obiections againſt that which I have ſaid.
                     
                        Arguments of the LutheransThe Arguments that may be alledged in their defence, are taken from ſuch places of Scripture chiefly, as attribute to faith; and the faithfull, either aſſured perſwaſion, as Rom. 8.38. 2. Tim. 1.12. or certaine knowledge, as 1. Ioh. 4.16. or full aſſurance, as Heb. 10.22. from whence they would inferre, that faith in Chriſt, is an aſſurance, or aſſured perſwaſion, or certaine knowledge of ſalvation by Chriſt.
                     To all theſe three Obiections I purpoſe

to make one generall anſwere; and the rather, becauſe it will agree fitly to them all, and it will fully anſwere them all.
                     My anſwer is this, That neither any of the Reaſons ſeverally,§ 8. The generall anſwere to the obiections. nor all of them ioyntly conſidered, nor their proofes doe make good that, for which they are alledged. For the point to be prooved is, That faith (as it iuſtifies us) is an aſſurance, or certaine perſwaſion of ſalvation; but the Texts alledged, proove this onely, That faith doth bring a full aſſurance, and certaine perſwaſion of ſalvation to them that have it; as being the effect and conſequent of faith in Chriſt, as ſhall appeare by and by in the particulars.
                     Now who knowes not what great difference there is betwixt theſe two ſayings; To beleeve in Chriſt for ſalvation, is to be aſſured of ſalvation by Chriſt; and this, To beleeve in Chriſt, will bring aſſurance of ſalvation to them that beleeve, who cannot ſee a cleare diſtinction betweene theſe two Propoſitions? Faith is aſſurance of ſalvation, namely, in the nature of it, as it iuſtifies us, and faith will bring aſſurance of ſalvation to them that have it, namely, as an effect of it, which I have

often affirmed, and which is all that can bee concluded, out of the Texts alledged.
                     If any can and will directly conclude more, namely, that the perſwaſion, or the aſſurance, or the knowledge that is there attributed to faith, doe ſhew the very nature, and forme of faith, as it iuſtifies a ſinner, I will yeeld the cauſe; in the meane time, they are all inſufficient, becauſe they ſpeake of perſwaſion, aſſurance, and knowledge in faith, as the effects thereof onely.
                     And that the Texts alledged, doe ſpeake of perſwaſion, aſſurance, and knowledge, not as if they were the acts of faith, whereby thoſe perſons were iuſtified, or were to bee iuſtified, to whom they are applyed, but onely as the effects of the faith of thoſe, who were already iuſtified, ſhall bee made plaine in the particulars.
                     
                        
                           1. OBIECTION anſwered: From Rom. 8.38. 2. Tim. 1.12.
                        
                           § 9. Particular anſweres to the obiection.The firſt Text concernes Paul the Apoſtle, who though hee ſay of himſelfe, that he is certainely perſwaded, that nothing ſhall be able to ſeparate him from Chriſt, yet cannot this proove, that this certaine

perſwaſion of ſalvation was the act of faith, whereby he was iuſtified in Gods ſight: 1. becauſe then Paul ſhould have beene iuſtified, by beeing aſſured of iuſtification, or ſalvation, which I have proved impoſsible before.
                        2. Becauſe the perſwaſion, or aſſurance of ſalvation that was in Paul, was ſuch a thing in nature, and was ſo wrought, as it is in all the reſt of Gods children; but their aſſurance of ſalvation, is an effect or conſequent of their faith in Chriſt, as hath beene prooved by two Arguments before, and therefore muſt Pauls aſſured perſwaſion of his ſalvation be the like.
                     
                     
                        2. OBIECTION anſwered from 1. Ioh. 4.16.
                        The like may bee ſaid of the ſecond 
                              § 10 Text alledged out of the Epiſtle of Iohn, wherein though he ſay of himſelfe, and the reſt of the faithfull, to whom hee writes, that they did know, and beleeve the love of God towards them, viz. in their ſalvation, and therefore were aſſuredly perſwaded therof; yet will it not thence follow, that this knowledge and beleefe of theirs, was the act of faith, whereby

they were iuſtified, becauſe thoſe words doe not ſet downe their firſt knowing, or beleeving their ſalvation, which is the point to be proved. For the firſt act of their ſaving faith, was truſting to Chriſts merits for ſalvation: and this they had done long ago, namely, at their firſt converſion, as appeares, becauſe he wrote this Epiſtle for the confirmation thereof. But the act of their faith, which the Apoſtle mentions in the place quoted, was but an effect of that truſt, as is evident by this, in that it is cauſed by their feeling of their love to God and their brethren, as is plaine by the context; now the feeling of our love to God, and our brethren, muſt needs proceed from the feeling of Gods love to us; and the feeling of Gods love to us, muſt proceed from faith in Chriſt, in whom God hath loved and redeemed us;
                              Gal. 5.6. becauſe faith workes by love.
                        
                        I confeſſe, that knowing of Chriſt, is ſometimes put for beleeving in Chriſt,
                              Ioh. 17.3. yet this is not; becauſe to beleeve in Chriſt, is certainely to know, and to be fully aſſured of ſalvation by Chriſt: (for then would it follow, that every one that knowes Chriſt, ſhould be fully aſſured of ſalvation, which is

evident to the contrary, in tender conſciences) but either, becauſe a certaine knowledge, & perſwaſion of the power and truth of God, begets faith in Chriſt, and makes us truſt to him for ſalvation; or becauſe faith in Chriſt brings in time and meaſure, aſſurance and perſwaſion of ſalvation, to them that have it.
                        I acknowledge,
                              Iob 19.15. that Iob knew his Redeemer lived, but this knowledge onely, iuſtified him not: firſt, becauſe he was iuſtified before, chap. 1.1. 2. becauſe it was knowledge but of Chriſts Reſurrection, and his owne; whereas a ſaving faith, is firſt a beleefe in the death of Chriſt,
                              Rom. 8.34. and afterward in his Reſurrection. Thirdly, becauſe if this knowledge onely iuſtified him, then his truſt in Chriſt did not iuſtifie him at all; which is impoſsible, ſeeing it is the chiefe act of faith, whereby wee are iuſtified.
                     
                     
                        
                           3. OBIECTION anſwered: From Heb. 10.22.
                        The third Text of Scripture, wherein 
                              § 11 
                           Paul exhorts the Chriſtian Hebrewes to draw neere with a true heart, in full aſſurance

of faith, is to as little purpoſe as the former.
                        Firſt, becauſe though hee attribute Plerophory, or full aſſurance to faith: yet will not this prove, that faith in the forme, nature, and being of it, as it iuſtifies, is a full aſſurance or Plerophorie of ſalvation, becauſe the Apoſtle attributes full aſſurance to faith, not as meaning to define a ſaving faith, in the nature of it, as it iuſtifies us (for then hee would have ſaid, Let us draw neere in faith, or full aſſurance,) but he deſcribes it by the fruit; and therefore he ſaith in full aſſurance of faith; as noting, full aſſurance, to be but the effect of faith, which I contend for. So that no man can hence conclude, that a ſaving faith (as it iuſtifies us) is a full aſſurance of ſalvation, which is the point to bee prooved; no more then they can prove, that faith in Chriſt (as it iuſtifies) is ioy; becauſe the Apoſtle attributes ioy to faith, and ſpeakes of the ioy of the faith of the Philippians.
                           
                              Philip. 1.25.
                        
                        They may indeed conclude from thence, that a ſaving faith is a cauſe of ioy,
                              Rom. 5.1. & 15.13. to the hearts of Chriſtians; which is alſo plainely confirmed in other places, even as they may indeed conclude

from Heb. 10.22. that a ſaving faith is a cauſe of full aſſurance of ſalvation: but they cannot proove, that a ſaving faith (as it ſaves us) is an aſſurance of ſalvation, which is the point to bee prooved.
                        Secondly, becauſe if the Text alledged out of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, could prove the point in queſtion, then ſhould the words, Let us draw neere in full aſſurance of faith, bee an exhortation to the Hebrewes, that were not already iuſtified, to teach them, how they might be iuſtified, viz. by drawing neer in full aſſurance of faith; that is, by being fully aſſured and perſwaded of ſalvation by Chriſt; (for that is the point to be proved, viz. that a ſaving faith (as it iuſtifies us) is a full aſſurance of ſalvation, and that to beleeve in Chriſt, is to be fully aſſured of iuſtification by Chriſt;) but the words are an exhortation to the Hebrewes, that were already iuſtified, as appeares by the next words, verſ. 23. where he exhorts them in generall to hold faſt the profeſſion of their faith without wavering, part of which was a ſaving faith; which implies, they had faith already, and therefore were already iuſtified: (for they could not

hold faſt that they had not:) ſo that the Apoſtle ſpeaking not of the nature of faith as it iuſtifies, but of the effect of faith only in them that are iuſtified, nor ſpeaking to them that are not iuſtified, to teach them how they might be iuſtified: but to them that are iuſtified, to teach them how they may with more boldnes, continually craue the pardon of new ſinnes in weakeneſſe committed, and get more aſſurance of the forgiueneſſe of the old: I cannot for my part ſee, how the place alledged can proue faith to be a full aſſurance of ſalvation.
                        There be many other Texts of Scripture,
                              Heb. 11.1. beſides theſe, that attribute perſwaſion, aſſurance & certain knowledge of ſalvation, vnto Faith: but (I ſuppoſe) they may all be ſatisfied by ſome of the anſweres that I have already made to the place before alledged.
                        To conclude then, though it be moſt ſure, that Heaven and eternall life ſhall in the event moſt certainly bee attained by all thoſe for whom it is prouided. Firſt, becauſe they are ordained to it by God,
                              Epheſ. 1.1. and hee cannot faile of his purpoſes.1. Pet. 1.18. Secondly, becauſe it is purchaſed for them by Chriſt, and his bloud cannot be

ſhead for them in vaine. Thirdly, becauſe they are fitted to it,1. Pet. 1.5. and kept for it. Fourthly, becauſe the poſſeſsion thereof is already taken, and kept by Chriſt their elder Brother: yet neither doe the faithfull for whom it is prepared, come to be ſure of it preſently,
                              Ioh. 14.2, 3. and as ſoon as euer they haue faith in Chriſt (wch they needs muſt, if faith in Chriſt for ſalvation, were in the nature and forme of it an aſſurance of ſalvation) nor are they alwayes alike ſure of it; nor are they continually ſo ſure thereof, as that they can never at any time (after they have beleeued in Chriſt) come to doubt thereof; nor yet doth the aſſurance of their ſalvation depend on the nature of their faith, as it iuſtifies them,) or on their faith ſimply, but chiefly on the truth, goodnes, and power of God, that hath made this Covenant with mankinde,
                              Ioh. 3.16. that whoſoeuer beleeues in Chriſt ſhall be ſaved; and upon the worthineſſe & perfection of Chriſt, for whoſe ſake it is freely given us:
                              Rom. 6.21. but aſſurance of ſalvation depends upon faith, onely as it is the condition of the Goſpell, required of us, and wrought in us, to make us capable of the ſame; and this aſſurance of ſalvation is increaſed

in us, by faith, as it is a grace of God in us, producing many holy effects of the continuall feare and loue of God and our brethren; and many comfortable effects of peace with God, and ioy in the Holy Ghoſt, the firſt fruits of the Spirit, and the earneſt penny of our heauenly inheritance.
                        I grant, the faithfull ſhall have aſſurance of ſalvation before they dye, and they ſhall have it by faith; but they haue it not by faith ſimply, as if the promiſe of the Goſpell were,Note. either, that he that is aſſured of ſalvation, ſhall be ſaved, or he that beleeues in Chriſt, ſhall be aſſured of ſalvation; but becauſe the promiſe of ſalvation is made to faith in Chriſt; and ſo they that haue this faith, are perſons to whom ſalvation belongs, God being by his righteouſneſſe, true of his promiſe, by his greatneſſe, able to performe it, and by his goodnes willing.
                        That men ſhall certainly bee ſaved, and that they are ſure they ſhall bee certainly ſaved, are two different things, the former implying a certainty in reſpect of GOD, and of his Word, that becauſe hee hath promiſed ſalvation to them that beleeve in Chriſt, therefore

they ſhall certainly bee ſaved in the event; and this certainty of ſalvation ſhall bee attained, though in this life men never come to bee ſure thereof in their ſoules, as in the caſe of infants, who being elected of God, ſhall certainly bee ſaved, though they were never ſure of it in their ſoules: and the latter implying a certainty, in reſpect of the perſons that are to bee ſaved, that they have an aſſured perſwaſion that wil not deceive them, which they may want for a time, after they have beleeved in Chriſt: and yet bee beloved of God, and bee beleevers in Chriſt and in the end bee certainly ſaved notwithſtanding: and therefore the nature of faith as it iuſtifies, cannot conſiſt in aſſurance of ſaluation, nor the nature of beleeving in Chriſt to ſalvation, in our being aſſured in our ſoules, that wee are ſaved, as is ſuppoſed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IIII. Of the uſe and application of this firſt Rule.
                  AFter the explication and confirmation of the trve Definition of a ſaving faith, and the confutation of the falſe; it remaines that for the cloſing vp of this Chapter, I make ſome application thereof, by way of exhortation, admonition, and conſolation; My exhortation ſhall be to Proteſtants, Papiſts, and Lutherans: the admonition to Atheiſts, Papiſts, and carnall Goſpellers: and the Conſolation to all trve beleeving and ſincere Chriſtians.
                  
                     1. Exhortation.My Exhortation to Proteſtants is, that they would examine themſelves; firſt, whether ever they knew what it is to beleeve in Chriſt, and underſtood wherein the nature of faith (as it iuſtifies) doth conſiſt: namely, as I haue delivered it, that accordingly I may aduiſe them.
                  It may bee, by tryall many ſhall finde that this was all they underſtood of a

ſaving faith, that it was a beliefe, that there was once ſuch a one as Chriſt, that came into the world to ſave ſinners, and that to beleeve in him, is to have a good hope, that he ſhall ſpeed as well as others, and bee ſaved by him, as well as they. Now if by examination they finde themſelves only to be beleevers in this faſhion, and to bee wholly ignorant of the nature of faith, as I have declared it; then have they great cauſe, firſt, to be aſhamed of themſelves, in that they haue been ſo long ignorant of the nature of ſo precious and neceſſarie a grace of God as faith is. Secondly, to feare that as yet they have not a ſaving faith. For I know not how they can have it, and bee wholly ignorant of the nature of it, what it is; ſeeing it is only wrought, in men and women of underſtanding; ordinarily, by the preaching of the Goſpell: and that preaching is made effectuall to the working of it in them, by enlightening of their mindes, with the knowledge and underſtanding of the points of the Goſpell; one whereof is the Doctrine of a ſaving faith, which is the condition of the Goſpell required of all thoſe that ſhall be ſaved by Chriſt. Thirdly, to uſe

all good meanes, for time to come, to gaine the knowledge of this point, to the end they may know they are on a ſure ground for their faith and ſalvation.
                  But if by examination they finde, that they rightly and cleerely underſtand what a ſaving faith is, and what it is to beleeve in Chriſt for ſalvation; then have they cauſe to be thankefull to God for inlightening their minds with this knowledge,
                        Math. 16.17. 
                     which fleſh and bloud, nature and the world hath not revealed to them, but the Spirit of God, who hath left others in the darknes of ignorance and infidelitie; they have reaſon likewiſe to ſettle their iudgements in the truth therof, by arguments from the Word of God, ſuch as theſe be, that I have alledged, to the end they may continue therin, & may not be perverted, & corrupted, with the other two falſe opinions of the nature of a ſaving faith. Yea, they are not to content theſelves herewith, namely, with the knowledge of the nature of a ſaving faith, and with this, that they underſtand what faith in Chriſt is, or what it is to beleeue in Chriſt for ſalvation: but that they never give over, till they get the grace of

faith it ſelfe, to the end they may take the benefit by the knowledge hereof, while they live, and receive the end of their faith when they dye.
                     1. Pet. 1.9.
                  
                  2. Secondly, my exhortation is to Proteſtants, to examine themſelves whether they ſtedfaſtly beleeve, that faith will indeed iuſtifie all thoſe ſinners that have it: and conſequently that it will iuſtifie them, if they beleeve in Chriſt; for except we more then know the nature of a ſaving faith, and except we more then thinke or geſſe that faith will ſave us: viz. except alſo wee ſtedfaſtly beleeue this, for an undoubted truth of God, that every one that beleeues in Chriſt, ſhall be ſaved, we ſhall not have incouragement enough therevnto. For except our ſoules be ſatisfied touching this truth we may ſtill doubt, whether it may not come to paſſe, that for all our faith in Chriſt, wee may bee damned; which whoſoeuer doth, hath little incouragement to beleeue in Chriſt for ſalvation, ſpecially if withall it come into our minds (which it may eaſily doe by Satans ſuggeſtion, and the accuſation of our conſciences) that wee are ſinners by originall corruption, and actuall tranſgreſsion, and therefore lyable

to all Gods curſes: and that therefore it is unlikely that one grace of God, namely, faith, ſhould be ſufficient to ſave us. To ſettle us therefore in this beliefe of this point, that faith in Chriſt will ſave us, we are to meditate:
                  Firſt, on theſe places of Scripture, Act. 13.39.
                        Act. 13.39. Rom. 1.17. & 3.28. Gal. 2.16. & 3.1. 
                     Gal. 3.11. Rom. 1.17. Rom. 3.28. Gal. 2.16. & 3 11. the effect whereof is, that though we be ſinners in our ſelves, yet ſhall wee be iuſtified by faith in Chriſt. Not that we ſhall be pronounced to be iuſt in ourſelves, formally, and properly: for ſo they onely are that never broke Gods Law, as all iuſtified ſinnes ſtill doe, Iam. 3.2.
                        Iam. 3.2. but that our ſinne
                        •
                     s ſhall be forgiven us, and wee accepted as righteous in Gods ſight, by faith, in the death and righteouſneſſe of Chriſt, and ſhall hereby bee as capable of Heaven, through Gods mercifull promiſe, and Chriſts precious merits, as if we had never ſinned.
                  Secondly, we are to conſider, that God having in his wiſedome, and goodneſſe, deviſed and ſet downe a courſe, and way of ſalvation, which is faith in Chriſt, and appointed it, to be the condition on our part, requiſite to ſalvation, and in his Word promiſed, to accept

of it to that end, will ſurely give power to his owne ordinance, to effect that for which hee hath appointed it. So that nothing ſhall let, but that they who have this faith in Chriſt, ſhall undoubtedly attaine to ſalvation by it, according to Gods purpoſe, and promiſe.
                  And let all Proteſtants aſſure themſelves,2. Reg. 5.10. to the 15. that as Naaman whileſt he doubted, whether his waſhing ſeven times in Iordan would cure him of his Leproſie, hee would never uſe the meanes: but afterwards, when he was perſwaded of the truth of the Prophet Eliſha's word, and went, and waſhed himſelfe accordingly, he was cleanſed of his Leproſie: euen ſo, as long as Chriſtians either doe not know, or not ſtedfaſtly beleeve this for a truth, that God will ſave them, if they beleeve in Chriſt, they will have little heart to goe unto him:
                        Heb. 11.6. Rom. 3.26. but when they beleeve that Chriſt is, and that hee is a iuſtifier of them that beleeue in him, then will they willingly ſeek unto him for ſalvation. And ſo much of the firſt exhortation.
                  My ſecond exhortation is to Papiſts, or ſuch as are popiſhly minded (if any chance to reade this Treatiſe:) Firſt,

that they would take notice, not onely how palpably erronious their Prieſts and Ieſuites are in their doctrine of a ſaving faith: but alſo how dangerouſly iniurious they are to the poore & ſimple Catholikes, in that they conceale from them the doctrine of the true faith, that muſt and will ſave them, viz. truſt in Chriſt: and onely teach them that, which neither can, nor will iuſtifie them, namely, a beliefe of the truth of the Word.
                  Herein they ſhew themſelves either groſſely ignorant, in not beeing able to underſtand ſo cleere a point, and then what becomes of the blinde that leade the blind,
                     
                        Math. 15.14. 
                     but that they both fall into the pit? or elſe enuiouſly impudent, in not teaching them a duty ſo neceſſary to their ſalvation: and then may you ſee they are the right heires of the Scribes and Phariſes,
                        Luk. 11.52. 
                     that keepe from men the key of knowledge, and ſhut up the Kingdome of Heaven from them, neither entring in themſelves, nor ſuffering them that would, to enter in: that is, neither beleeving in Chriſt themſelves, nor ſuffering you to beleeue in him, that you might bee ſaved.
                  If the harme that comes hereby, were

to themſelves alone, it were the leſſe; but becauſe it redounds to the endangering of the ſalvation of ſo many millions as are herein ſeduced by them, you had neede looke about you, and provide for your owne ſalvation, when they have no regard of it: except you care not to go to hell, ſo it be with the company of your Prieſts.
                  I pray you therefore conſider (and the Lord open your minds and hearts to regard:) If God have in his Word commanded all Chriſtians (if they will be ſaved) to beleeue in Chriſt, as wel as to beleeve the truth of his Word,See Rhemiſh Tranſlation. as is plaine by Ioh. 3.16, 18. 1. Ioh. 3.23. Will you Catholikes thinke to be ſaved, onely by beleeving the truth of the Word? without beleeving in Chriſt? Can you thinke to bee ſaved by any other way, (that is) by any more, or fewer kindes of faith, then hee commands? Doth God ſay, that a beliefe of the truth of the Word, is not all the faith which hee requires of men to ſalvation; and will you beleeve your Prieſts which teach you it is all? Will you therefore not beleeve in Chriſt, and ſo be condemned, becauſe your Prieſts doe not teach you this faith, but onely a beliefe of the

truth of the Word? What will it doe you good,
                        Ezek 3.18. Luke 12.46. that your bloud muſt be required at their hands, when you your ſelves notwithſtanding ſhall dye in your infidelitie? But you will ſay, you doe beleeve in Chriſt.
                  It may be you beleeve there was ſuch a man as Chriſt, and that hee dyed and roſe againe, and that the Sonne of the Virg
                        •
                     n Mary was he: (all which the Divels doe beleeve) but you doe not beleeve in Him, that is, truſt unto him for ſalvation; and I prooue it thus: You truſt not in Chriſt, except you bee taught it by your Prieſts; your Prieſts doe not teach you to truſt in Chriſt, becauſe they teach you that God requires it not; and they teach you that God requires not truſt in Chriſt unto ſalvation, becauſe they teach you that all the faith which he requires to ſalvation, is onely that they beleeve the truth of the Word, (as hath beene prooved out of their owne Doctors) and it hath beene evidently prooved, that a beliefe of the truth of the Word is not faith in Chriſt: for faith in Chriſt, is a more excellent kinde of faith, then a beliefe of the truth of the Word.
                  In the ſecond place I would exhort Catholikes, not to content themſelves

with their Romiſh faith,
                        Jam. 2.19. Mar. 1.24. (which is no better then the Divels faith) nor thinke that an aſſent to the truth of the Word will be faith enough to ſave them. Will they bee ſaved? they muſt bee ſaved by Chriſt: will they be ſaved by Chriſt?1. Tim. 1.15. Ioh. 3.16. it muſt bee by truſting in him: will they truſt in him?
                        Ephe. 2.8. Rom. 10.14.17. it muſt bee wrought in them by God. Is truſt in CHRIST wrought in them? it muſt be by teaching or preaching: and they preach no ſuch doctrine in the Popiſh church (or if they do in ſome place, & vpon ſome occaſion, they contradict again in, 
                        〈◊〉
                      vpon another) for they teach that God onely requires that faith, which is a beliefe of the truth of the Word; wherefore they muſt come out from the Church that teacheth not truely the way of ſalvation, and ioyne themſelves to that which doth: for though they beleeve the whole Word of God never ſo ſtedfaſtly, and that upon Gods owne authoritie, yet if (over and above this faith which the Church of Rome counts needleſſe, becauſe it doth not teach it as required by God) they truſt not in Chriſt, they cannot poſsibly bee ſaved.
                  For as the Iewes could not enter into the Kingdome of Heaven,
                        Math. 5.10. 
                     except their

righteouſnes exceeded the righteouſneſſe of the Scribes and Phariſes: no more ſhal Papiſts enter into Heaven, except their faith exceed the faith taught by their Scribes and Phariſes, I meane the Prieſts, and Ieſuites of Rome; & as the Lord wil one day ſay to thoſe Preachers that plead, Have not wee propheſied in thy name, and done great workes?
                     
                        Math. 7.22. 
                     Depart, I know you not: ſo will he ſay to ſuch as plead, Have we not honoured thee, by beleeving thy Word, upon thine owne authoritie, without evidence of reaſon? Depart I know you not.
                  I grant, indeed, that ſuch as aſſent to the truth of the Word, and beleeue the Goſpell, are not farre from the Kingdome of God: but are well prepared to beleeve in Chriſt, becauſe they have in them that which is the roote of a ſaving faith. For by beleeving the Goſpel, which promiſeth ſalvation to them that beleeve in Chriſt, men are perſwaded to beleeue in Chriſt for ſalvation, according to the Goſpell:Simil. and yet as he that is ſet out, onward of his iourney, and is gone a good way, ſhal never come to the end of his iourney, if he ſit downe and ſtay halfe way: So thoſe Catholikes that are going towards Heaven by an

hiſtoricall faith, if they ſtay there, and content themſelves therewith, and never labour for faith in Chriſt, ſhall neuer come to heaven; namely, becauſe they come farre ſhort of that faith, which God requires of all thoſe that come thither. For their Hiſtoricall faith ſhall be ſo farre from ſaving them, that it ſhal riſe vp in iudgement againſt them; becauſe being ſo forward towards heauen, by an hiſtoricall faith, or a beliefe of the Goſpell, they notwithſtanding ſtay there, liue, and dye therein, without truſt in Chriſt, which onely is a ſaving faith.
                  That which I have ſaid in confutation of the Popiſh and Lutheran Definitions, of a ſaving faith,§. 2. Admonition. may bee a ground of admonition:
                  Firſt, to Atheiſts (if any ſuch will reade this Treatiſe) that they learne to feare and tremble, becauſe of their Infidelitie: for if they who have ſome faith (as the Papiſts) that come ſo neere to a ſaving faith, that they beleeve the Goſpell, may yet be without a ſaving faith, and be damned; if they live, and dye in this faith only, without faith in Chriſt; then what ſhall become of them, and where ſhall they appeare, that have not

ſo much as a beleefe of the Goſpel, or that the Bible is the Booke of God. Surely Antichriſt himſelfe,
                        Iam. 2.14. Marke 1.24. and the Devils of hell ſhall riſe up in iudgement againſt ſuch Atheiſts, ſeeing theſe beleeve, and ſo do not they.
                  Secondly, my admonition is to carnall Goſpellers, that they bee not preſumptuous, to thinke they have a ſaving faith, viz. becauſe they ſay they are ſure they ſhall be ſaved; and they are fully perſwaded they are Gods children, and that they would no way doubt of it, for all the world; let ſuch (I ſay) feare, leſt their hope make them aſhamed: for this is not the witneſſe of the Spirit of God, but a deluſion of Satan: it is not to comfort them, but to feed them fat to the day of ſlaughter; for as, except Chriſt be the Rocke of the faith of Chriſtians, whereon it is built, their faith will faile them in temptation: ſo except faith in Chriſt bee the foundation of the aſſurance of ſalvation, their aſſurance will faile them alſo.
                  3. To all Proteſtants, that they take heed both of the Popiſh, as alſo of the Lutheran Def
                        •
                     nition of a ſaving faith, which I have confuted: if happely they

may light upon either of them, in bookes tranſlated into Engliſh. If my Booke had beene written in Latine, ſo that it might have come to the hands of the Learned in the Lutheran Churches, I would have intreated them, in conſideration of my Reaſons againſt it, to have expunged, and put out of their Catechiſmes, and Treatiſes of Divinity, ſuch Definitions; and not to have inſerted the like into their Sermons to their people. But becauſe I am out of hope, to prevaile in that kind with them, I will onely content my ſelfe to have admoniſhed my owne Countreymen, to take heed of ſuch Definitions in any of their bookes, tranſlated into Engliſh, when they read them, for feare of the dangerous conſequences thereof.
                  In the laſt place,§ 3. Conſolation. that which I have ſaid touching the confutation of the Lutherans opinion of the nature of a ſaving faith, may be a ſure ground of conſolation to them, that having a ſaving faith, are yet afflicted in conſcience, becauſe they want aſſurance of their ſalvation. For ſuch have no cauſe of deſpaire, or of diſcouragement, as long as with a heavie loaden ſoule, hungring for mercy, they truſt in Chriſt,

and caſt themſelves wholly upon his merits, for ſalvation, according to the Goſpell; for (as hath beene ſaid) the condition of the Goſpell required of ſinners to ſalvation, is not a comfort, but a duty; not an aſſurance that they are ſaved, but a truſt in Chriſt that they ſhall be ſaved. So that, as long as they reſt on Chriſts merits, ſeeke to no other meanes, but with ſuch a heart, as hath beene ſaid, ſeeke to Chriſt for ſalvation; aſſoon as they have beleeved in Chriſt, they are in Gods ſight iuſtified ſinners, though they doe not preſently feele by the witneſſe of the Spirit, a full aſſurance, that they are ſaved.
                  Beſides, what an abſurd thing were this, to ſay, that the meaning of theſe words of the Goſpel, Chriſt died for all thoſe that beleeve in him, ſhould bee this: Chriſt died for all thoſe that perſwade themſelves fully he died for them; and that the meaning of this Propoſition, He that beleeves in Chriſt ſhall bee ſaved, ſhould be this, He that is fully perſwaded and aſſured of the forgiveneſſe of his ſinnes by Chriſt, ſhall be ſaved?
                  On Gods name let Chriſtians labour continually, by the uſe of the meanes preſcribed to that end, to feele the

comforts of faith, and for more aſſurance every day then other of their ſalvation, or that they ſhall be ſaved: but let them not therfore iudge themſelves to be no good Chriſtians, nor to have a ſaving faith, viz. becauſe they have not a full aſſurance of ſalvation; for aſſurance of ſalvation is more faith, then God requires of Chriſtians to iuſtification; and it is not of the nature of faith, as it iuſtifies.
                  For as a tree may bee a good fruitetree,Simil. though in Winter it have no fruit on it: ſo a Chriſtian may bee a true beleever in Chriſt, though at ſome time of temptation hee want the fruit of his faith, I meane, the feeling of the heavenly comforts thereof; whereof, more hereafter, God willing.
                  Wherefore comfort your ſelves, O yee, that are tender-hearted, and troubled-minded Chriſtians, becauſe you feele not the aſſurance of your ſalvation, in aſmuch as the condition of the Goſpell is not, That hee that beleeves in Chriſt ſhall bee aſſured of ſalvation, but that hee ſhall bee ſaved: ſo that, though thou never have in thine owne ſoule a feeling of aſſured perſwaſion, that thou art ſaved, yet as long as with

a heart mourning after Chriſt, and gaſping for him,
                        Pſal. 143.6. as the barren land for water; thou caſt thy ſelfe upon him, and hang on him ſtill for ſalvation, with truſt unto the merits of his death and obedience, thou ſhalt in the end and event certainly be ſaved; becauſe God that hath made promiſe, (that he that beleeves in Chriſt ſhall be ſaved) is faithfull and true, mercifull and good, mightie and able to performe it.
                  Build therefore thy comfort on thy faith, and thy faith on Chriſt, and feare not; and build the aſſurance of thy ſalvation, not on thine owne feeling, which may deceive thee; but on the truth, goodneſſe, and power of God, which cannot faile thee. And thus much of the firſt Rule, or Interrogatorie, by which Chriſtians may examine themſelves, whether they have a ſaving faith, namely, by trying themſelves, whether they underſtand what manner of Grace a ſaving Faith is; in opening whereof, I have beene the larger, becauſe the difficulty of the point required it: for it was neceſſarie, that I ſhould at large make plaine this point; becauſe the true underſtanding hereof, will make all the reſt of the Treatiſe the

plainer. I come now to the ſecond Rule which is this.Rule 2.
                  
               
            
            
               THE SECOND RULE.
               
                  CHAP. V. Whether doest thou underſtand the uſe, and end of faith in Chriſt?
                  I Will be briefer in the handling of this ſecond Rule, then I was in the firſt, becauſe it wil not need ſo long a Diſcourſe; and the rather, for that the former will give light to the latter. For thoſe words of the Definition, (whereby a ſinner truſts in Chriſt for ſpiritual and eternall bleſſedneſſe) doe evidently ſhew, that the end of faith, is to bring us unto ſalvation, and perfect bleſſedneſſe; in which reſpect the Divines generally with one conſent, call it a ſaving faith.
                  Howbeit, becauſe it will not happely ſo clearely be diſcerned of all; therefore for the making of it plainer, I will handle

the point in a diſtinct Rule, and I will handle it thus: Firſt, by ſhewing how needfull it is to enquire after this point. Secondly, by declaring, that it is poſsible for us, by inquiry to find, whether wee underſtand the point or no. And thirdly, by making it manifeſt, that it will be profitable, by enquiry to find out, whether we underſtand, what the uſe and end is of a ſaving faith.
                  1. It will bee needfull to enquire, whether wee underſtand the end and uſe of a ſaving faith, becauſe elſe, wee cannot tell directly, whether we underſtand it or no; for without this tryall we may miſtake it, and thinke it was appointed for ſome other uſe and end, then indeed it was; by reaſon, wee are by nature not onely ignorant of theſe ſpirituall graces, but alſo well enough content to be nouzled up in the ignorance of them. For wee may imagine with the Iewes, that the uſe of our faith is onely to procure us temporall bleſſings, as they beleeved in the Meſsiah for a temporall kingdome onely.
                  To the end therefore, that wee may know, whether we underſtand it or no; and accordingly be affected with it, it is needful that we make enquirie, whether

we know the uſe and end of it to be this, namely, to ſave our ſoules; that is, to procure unto them forgiveneſſe of ſinnes, and eternall life in heaven, (concerning the manner whereof, and how it ſaves us, and is a meanes to that end, ſhall bee conſidered in the next Rule, God willing) onely in this place I thought good to ſpeake of the uſe, and end of it, in generall.
                  2. But although it bee needfull to ſearch for the underſtanding of this point; yet if it were impoſsible by ſearch to find it out, we were never the neerer; therefore will I make it plaine, that by inquiry we may find it out. For if we ſearch the Scriptures, (particularly thoſe that ſpeake of the Goſpell, or the Covenant of grace) they will evidently ſhew, this to be the end thereof; as ſhall appeare by the good things promiſed unto it. For unto faith in Chriſt, (that is) to them that truſt in him, is promiſed, that they ſhall not periſh,
                     
                        Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 5.24. 
                     but have everlaſting life; that they are tranſlated from death to life;
                        Act. 10.43. that they ſhall obtaine remiſſion of ſinnes, and be iuſtified from all things, from which they could not be iuſtified by the Law of Moſes:
                        Act. 13.39. which the Apoſtle Peter alſo doth plainely ſhew, where

ſpeaking of the true faithfull, hee ſaith, they ſhall receive the end of their faith, which is the ſalvation of their ſoules.
                     1. Pet. 1.5.9. So that by theſe and the like places of Scripture, if we commune with our owne hearts, and aske our conſciences concerning theſe promiſes, we may eaſily tell, whether we know the right uſe and end of a ſaving faith, or faith in Chriſt.
                  3. But though it were eaſie for us, to find out the uſe and end of faith in Chriſt, and whether we know, and underſtand it or no, yet if this were not profitable for us, we ſhould have little encouragement to go about this examination. It is therefore fit to ſhew the profit of this examination, which conſiſts in this; that knowing by the Scriptures the excellent uſe and end of it, we may labour to get it, if we have it not, or to increaſe it, and ſtrengthen it, if we have it; yea to uſe and exerciſe it every day, by beleeving in Chriſt, for the pardon of the ſinnes of every day, in faith craving pardon of them.
                  
                     Simil.For as in Playſters and medicinal Receipts, though wee have thoſe that bee never ſo good, for ſpeciall purpoſes, in their ſeverall kinds; yet if we know not their ſeverall uſes and ends, and the

ſickneſſes, or ſores, to which they are properly to be applied; wee ſhall have little heart to uſe them, and therefore they will doe us no good at all, nor any other; nay, they may doe much hurt when they are miſapplyed: whereas on the other ſide, when we have a Plaiſter or Medicine, that we know is good for ſuch a diſeaſe, or ſore, we will willingly uſe it in our need, becauſe wee know the right uſe of it, and ſo it becomes profitable unto us. Even ſo, if we know not the good that will come unto us by a ſaving faith, (as we cannot, except we underſtand the right uſe and end thereof) we will never care to get it. But after the knowledge thereof, we ſhall be careful to uſe it, for that end to heale our leprous, and diſeaſed ſoules, that have beene ſtung of Satan, even unto death.
                  Now then, good Reader, try & examin thy ſelfe, whether thou knoweſt this to be the end of faith in Chriſt or no; and if thou find thou didſt not know it, then be aſhamed of thy ignorance, iuſtly fearing that as yet thou haſt not beleeved in Chriſt: for will a man beleeve in Chriſt to no end? or can hee beleeve in Chriſt to any purpoſe, if not to bee

ſaved by him? No, no, it is impoſsible: wherefore being aſhamed of thy former ignorance and infidelitie, redeeme the time, and now learne the right and true uſe, and end of it. Thou mayeſt know it, if thou wilt ſearch; for God hath revealed it in his Word: it will be needfull for thee to enquire, becauſe without it, thou canſt not tell, whether thou underſtand it or no, and it will be profitable for thee to know the right uſe and end of it; becauſe hereby thou knowing the excellencie thereof, thou ſhalt be mooved by Gods grace, both to labour in the uſe of the meanes to get it, as alſo to increaſe it, for thy unſpeakable comfort and ſalvation: for what will all the world profit thee, if thou beeſt not ſaved?
                        Matth. 16.26. how canſt thou be ſaved without Chriſt? how can Chriſt ſave thee, if thou have no faith? and how canſt thou get faith, if thou doeſt not know the right uſe and end of it, namely, the benefit thou ſhalt receive by thy beleeving in Chriſt, which is the end of thy faith, even the ſalvation of thy ſoule?
               
            
            
               
               THE THIRD RULE.Rule 3.
               
               
                  CHAP. VI. Whether doeſt thou know and underſtand, how faith in Chriſt doth ſave and iuſtifie us?
                  THe knowledge and beleefe of the two former Rules, are very neceſſary, yet are not theſe ſufficient; except withall wee know the manner, how faith in Chriſt doth ſave us: for except we be inlightened with the knowledge hereof, we may erre, by thinking we are iuſtified by it, otherwiſe then indeed we are. Thou art therfore to know and learne:
                  1. That we are not iuſtified by the habit, quality, or vertue of faith, but by the uſe of it, or by the act of faith, which is a beleeving in Chriſt; for ſo runnes the tenure of the Scripture.
                        Ioh. 3.16. act. 10.43.
                  
                  
                     2. Thou muſt know, that the act of faith, which is beleeving in Chriſt, is not one act onely, once for all done, and no more; but that it paſſeth through the whole courſe of our lives, and is renewed and continued every day. For ſeeing we muſt crave pardon of ſinnes every day,
                        Mat. 6.11, 12. as well as begge daily bread; and we may not crave pardon without faith in Chriſt, therefore muſt wee beleeve in Chriſt every day.
                  3. Thou muſt know, that the act of faith, which is beleeving, or truſting to, or in Chriſt, doth not iuſtifie us, for any merit or vertue that is in it, but for the merit and the worthineſſe of the perſon in whom faith truſts, or in whom we truſt by faith, which is Ieſus Chriſt, the Sonne of God, and of the Virgin Mary, who is the onely proper, and immediat Obiect of our ſaving faith.
                  
                     Simil.For even as it is not the hand, that layes on the Playſter upon a ſore, that cures and heales it; but the Plaiſter it ſelfe, and the healing vertue that is in the Plaiſter, laid on by the hand; ſo is it not faith, (whereby we lay hold on Chriſt) that cures and ſaves our ſoules, but Chriſt who is layd hold on,

by the hand of faith that cures us.
                  Wee are to know therefore, and to beleeve, that faith iuſtifies us onely, as the condition appointed by God, and required on our part, to make us capable of ſalvation, in this ſence;
                  Whereas by the firſt Covenant, which was the Covenant of the Law, and of Workes, no man could attaine eternall life, becauſe they are breakers of it; and therefore without the righteouſneſſe required in it. And whereas God notwithſtanding will have ſome to live eternally, and yet not without righteouſneſſe, therefore hath it pleaſed God, who as Soveraigne Lord of all, can appoint what meanes he will, to make us capable of life; to appoint in the ſecond Covenant (which is the Covenant of Grace) that faith ſhall be our righteouſneſſe; that is, that he will accept of our faith in Chriſts righteouſneſſe and death, inſtead of the righteouſneſſe of the Law; and that wee ſhall by faith in Chriſt, be as capable of eternall life, as if wee had in our perſons actually and fully kept the whole Law, and had never ſinned. So that faith in Chriſt iuſtifies us not of merit, but of fauour; not of it ſelfe, but by Gods appointment;

not as it is in us, but as it reſts on Chriſt; becauſe now by the ſecond Covenant, God requires no more at our hands, to give us intereſt to eternal life, then that we ſhould honor his Sonne, by truſting to him alone for ſalvation: for God will accept of this on our part, in ſtead of the righteouſneſſe of the Law, and by faith in Chriſts perfect obedience unto all Gods ſecret and revealed will, all our imperfect obedience ſhall be accepted of him, and crowned by him in the kingdome of heaven.
                  If any chance to aske, why faith in Chriſt, above all other Graces, ſhould be the righteouſneſſe, which God requires in the New Covenant, to make us capable of eternall life, and which he appoints and accepts to our iuſtification?
                  I anſwer, Though we could give no reaſon, yet muſt wee beleeve it to bee true, becauſe God hath ſo revealed it. But the Apoſtle gives one reaſon, where he ſaith,
                        Rom. 4.16. that the inheritance of Heaven comes by faith, that it might be by Grace, to the end the promiſe might bee ſure to all the ſeed: that is, the promiſe of ſalvation was made to faith, or to them that have faith in Chriſt, that the ſalvation promiſed,

might come to men, by the free grace and mercy of God, and it might be ſure to them, which it could never have beene, if it had come by the works of the Lawe, becauſe none ever could doe them.
                  And (if I may bee bold, according to Analogy of Scripture, to give another reaſon) I coniecture, that therfore faith in Chriſt doth iuſtifie us, and that we are accepted as righteous by faith in Chriſts righteouſnes and ſufferings, rather then by any other grace of God; becauſe faith in Chriſt doth (more then any other grace) both moſt abaſe mans worthineſſe, to whom the Covenant is made, to the end he may go out of himſelfe, and emptie himſelfe wholly of all truſt and confidence, in any meanes within himſelfe for ſalvation; and alſo becauſe it doth moſt magnifie Gods free and rich mercie, and the worthineſſe, and al-ſufficiencie of the death and obedience of Chriſt, in whom the Covenant is made, to the end they may honour him onely,
                        Rom. 4.20. 2. Theſſ. 1.11. Ioh. 3.33. by truſting to him ſo much the more confidently for ſalvation.
                  And yet leſt thou ſhouldeſt collect from hence, that if thou have faith in

Chriſt, thou ſhalt be ſaved, though thou hadſt no charity, or obedience in thy life: I ſay, for the preſent (till I come to the ſixt Chapter) that though faith alone doe iuſtifie before God, yet doth it not before men; though faith alone doth iuſtifie, in the act of Iuſtification; and when it doth iuſtifie, yet is it not alone in the party that is iuſtified: but workes doe accompany the ſame, to teſtifie the verity of the Iuſtification, and the truth of the faith it ſelfe.
                  Now then (good Reader) examine thy ſelfe concerning thy knowledge and underſtanding, of the manner how faith doth iuſtifie; and if thou haſt thought that it doth iuſtifie, as a part of inherent righteouſneſſe, (as the Papiſts doe) or as having any vertue in it ſelfe to procure it, as Libertines may imagine, (that have no good workes) then haſt thou beene deceived all this while: and therefore now learne to know the true manner, as I have ſaid, to the end thou maiſt know both when thou beleeveſt to Iuſtification, and that thou beleeveſt truly, and effectually thereunto: aſſuring thy ſelfe, that though God hath ordained faith to iuſtifie us, yet ſhall it not be effectuall to that end, except

thou uſe it to that end, in that order, and after that manner as himſelfe hath appointed; perſwading thy ſelfe, that thou ſhalt not attaine ſalvation by faith, for the worthineſſe of the grace it ſelf; but of the obiect of the grace, which is Chriſt; who is the Perſon, in whoſe merit faith reſts and truſts for ſalvation: neither that thou ſhalt obtaine ſalvation by thy faith, if it be not lively, to ſtirre 
                        〈◊〉
                      thee to holines both in heart and life before God and men.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Rule 4.THE FOVRTH RULE.
               
                  CHAP. VII. Whether diddeſt thou get thy Faith by the ordinary meanes, by which God uſually workes Faith in the hearts of his children?
                  THough we beleeve, faith will iuſtifie us, and underſtand how it doth ſave us, yet is not this ſufficient, except we know how we came by it; and therefore is it neceſſary that we ſhew by what meanes wee attained unto it. For except we can tell this, it is in vaine for us to boaſt of our faith.
                  
                     Simil.For as when the title, and tenure of Land we hold, is called in queſtion, it is not enough to ſay it is ours and we will hold it, except we ſhew how we hold it,

and that by Deeds of conueyance good in Law, from them that had power to give, let, or ſell the ſame. Euen ſo, when God or Satan ſhall try our faith, it is not enough to ſay wee have a ſaving faith, except wee can proue how wee came by it: viz. how it was wrought in us by him, that had right and might to worke it, & by the right meanes whereby he vſually workes it.
                  For as it is not wrought by the meanes, or inſtrumentall cauſe, without the efficient,1. Cor. 3.6. (becauſe Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but God muſt give the increaſe:) So neither in the eſtabliſhed Church of Chriſt, is it wrought by the efficient, without the inſtrumentall; becauſe faith comes by hearing.
                     
                        Rom. 10.14. Now the efficient cauſe, is God onely; and the inſtrumentall cauſe, is the preaching of the Goſpell.
                  That God is the Author of a ſaving faith, and the worker of it in his children, I prove, not onely becauſe it is generally attributed to the whole Deity,
                        Ephe. 2.8. where it is expreſly ſaid to bee the gift of God: but alſo, becauſe in the New Teſtament it is particularly attributed to each perſon in the Trinitie: to the Father, as where our Saviour Chriſt ſaith,

                     No man can come to mee, except my Father draw him, Ioh. 6.44, 65.
                        Ioh. 6.44. Verſe 65. or except it bee given him of my Father: To God the Son, where Paul cals him, the Author and finiſher of our faith:
                        Heb. 12.3. and To God the Holy Ghoſt;1. Cor. 12.9. where Paul ſaith, To one is given faith by the ſame ſpirit: and therefore it is called the ſpirit of faith; becauſe it is given by the Spirit;2. Cor. 4.13. there being a different worke of each Perſon, in the giving of faith: becauſe God the Father giues faith, for his Sonnes ſake, by the operation of the holy Spirit.
                  And indeed how can it chooſe but be the worke of God, ſeeing it is a worke above Nature; I meane not only aboue Nature corrupted, to which it is fooliſhneſſe: but euen aboue the nature of man,1. Cor. 1.21. before his fall; for though Adam in his innocency had a faith wrought in him, whereby he might truſt in God (if he would) to keepe him, in that eſtate of innocency, wherein he was created: yet had hee not then this faith in Chriſt; becauſe faith in Chriſt, is faith in a Saviour or Mediator. Faith in a Saviour, ſuppoſes need of a Saviour: Neede of a Saviour, ſuppoſes ſinne committed; and Adam committed no ſinne, as long as he continued in his innocency.
                  
                     If any chance to aske mee how faith can bee the gift of God, and why it ſhould not be in our power to beleeve in Chriſt, when we are called to it, ſeeing God doth exhort and command men therevnto:
                  I anſwere, that the Lord doth therefore uſe ſuch exhortations to perſwade men to beleeve in Chriſt (though of themſelves they be not able to beleeve) becauſe the power of God doth ſo accompany ſuch commandements of his, that by, and together with them, hee doth move, and incline their hearts to beleeve in Chriſt, and thereby workes it in them. The practice and experience whereof, wee may evidently ſee in the Acts, where when Paul & Barnabas preached the Lord Ieſus, and exhorted them to beleeve in him: the Text ſaith,
                        Act. 11.20, 21. 
                     that the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number beleeved, and turned to the Lord: ſo that it can no more truely be collected, becauſe Chriſt bids and exhorts them to beleeve in him, that therefore they have power of themſelves to beleeve, then it can be inferred, that Lazarus had power of himſelfe to reviue, and come out of the graue; becauſe Chriſt bid him come forth;
                        Ioh. 11.43. in aſmuch as the power

of Chriſt, accompanying his own commandement, was the efficient cauſe of making him come forth.
                  As touching the meanes or inſtrument, by which God workes faith in Chriſt, which is the ſecond point: I ſay, it is the preaching of the Word of God; for ſo ſaith Paul,
                     
                        Rom. 10.17. 
                     Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God: (that is) faith comes by hearing the Word of God preached.
                  For the cleering of which point, two things muſt bee diſtinctly handled and confirmed, Firſt, what doctrine of the Word it is, that muſt worke faith in Chriſt, namely, the Goſpell. Secondly, how that doctrine is made effectuall to the begetting of Faith? namely, by preaching.
                  The doctrine to be delivered, for the begetting of faith in Chriſt, muſt be the Word of faith:
                        Rom. 10.8. Gal. 38.18. Ro. 10.8.15, 16. Act. 11.20, 21. Rom. 16.26. the Word of Faith, is the Word of promiſe: the Word of promiſe, is the Goſpel; and the Goſpel, is the preaching of Ieſus Chriſt crucified: (that is) the preaching of that doctrine that promiſeth ſalvation to them that beleeye ih Chriſt.
                        Act. 13.39. 
                     For through Chriſt is preached forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and by him, all that beleeve, ſhall bee iuſtified from all

things, from which they could not be iuſtified by the Law of Moſes: For although all the Word of God be good, and to be beleeved; and though other parts of the Word of God (beſides the Goſpell) being preached, may by Gods bleſsing worke in us faith in God, for temporall bleſsings: yet can no part of the Word worke in us faith in Gods mercy by a Mediator, or faith in Chriſt for ſpirituall and eternall bleſsings in heavenly things: but the Goſpell onely,
                        Rom. 1.16. which is the power of God to ſalvation to them that beleeve.
                  
                  Indeed the Law may bee a Schoole-maſter to drive us vnto Chriſt: for the Morall Law may driue us to Chriſt, by convincing us of ſinne,
                        Rom. 3.20. Rom. 4.15. and of condemnation, the iuſt deſert of ſinne; yea, the Ceremoniall Law may draw us to Chriſt,
                        Rom. 10.4. by telling us that Chriſt was the end of the Law; becauſe all the ſacrifices, and offerings thereof pointed at him, that was to come to be the trve Paſchal Lambe, or Paſſeouer,
                     1. Cor. 5.7. 
                     that was to bee ſacrificed for our ſinnes; and all the waſhings and purifyings of the Law taught us,1. Ioh. 2.7. Heb. 9.14. 
                     that the bloud of Chriſt ſhould cleanſe us from all ſinne: and yet for all this, cannot the Law worke in men, a ſaving faith;

becauſe it doth not ſo much as command it, and the Law doth not command it, becauſe it preſuppoſeth perfect obedience to it, which whoſoever doth performe,
                        Levit. 18.5. 
                     ſhall live without faith in a Mediator.
                  The ſecond point conſiderable, in the working of faith by the Word, is touching the manner how the doctrine of the Goſpell becomes effectuall to the working of a ſaving faith, and this is to be ſhewed in two particulars. Firſt, in reſpect of the Miniſters & preachers of it. Secondly, in regard of the hearers.
                  That faith may be wrought in men by the Word, two things muſt be done. Firſt, Miniſters muſt preach the Goſpel (that is) expound and make plaine to the capacitie of the people, that there is mercy with God for ſinners; and that hee hath made a Covenant with mankinde, that though they bee loſt in Adam,
                     
                        Luk. 19.10. yet ſhall they bee ſought, and found againe in Chriſt: though damned in themſelves, yet ſhall they bee ſaved in him; and for this end they are to publiſh, and expound, how fit a perſon Chriſt is to ſave them, beeing wholly righteous, and without ſpot; and how

able, being the Sonne of God, in whom God is well pleaſed;
                        Math. 3.17. as alſo what hee hath already done for them and their ſalvation: namely, that hee dyed a bitter, and a ſhamefull death on the Croſſe, that by his death, hee might overcome him that had the power of Death,
                     
                        Heb. 2.14. 
                     which is the Divell, and reconcile them perfectly unto his Father.
                  Theſe points (I ſay) and ſuch points as theſe, are to be propounded, and expounded to the people, by the Miniſters of the Goſpell,2. Cor. 5.19. 
                     to whom is committed the Miniſterie of Reconciliation: for how ſhall the people heare without a Preacher?
                     
                        Rom. 10.14.
                  
                  But though Preachers teach never ſo painefully, and lay open theſe things never ſo plainely; yet except the people heare theſe points preached: how ſhall they beleeve in him of whom they haue not heard?
                     
                        Rom. 10.14.
                  
                  Now if any man be deſirous to know more particularly, how God workes a ſaving faith by the Miniſters preaching, and the peoples hearing, (I ſuppoſe) the courſe is this:
                  Firſt of all, when the Goſpell is preached, (that commands us to beleeve in Chriſt, & promiſeth ſalvation to them that truſt in him:) and when people

come to heare, the Spirit of God doth move thoſe that heare it, to attend to the Doctrine of ſalvation preached. For ſo we reade he did to Lydia, whoſe heart the Lord opened,
                     
                        Act. 26.14. 
                     that ſhee attended to Pauls preaching. For except they diligently marke the doctrine, how ſhould it doe them good?
                  Secondly, upon this diligent attention, and together with it, GOD inlightens the minde to conceiue, and underſtand the way of ſalvation taught by the Goſpell;
                        Act. 1
                           •
                        .18. 
                     He turnes them from darknes to light: that the eyes of their underſtanding being enlightned,
                     
                        Ephe. 1.18. 
                     they may know what is the hope of Gods calling, and the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints.
                  
                  Thirdly, upon the enlightning of the minde, with ſome knowledge, and underſtanding of the Goſpell, the Lord by his Spirit alſo perſwades the mindes of Hearers to beleeue the Goſpell, and to aſſent to the truth thereof. For ſo wee reade, that the Lord choſe Peter, that the Gentiles by his mouth ſhould heare the Word of the Goſpel,
                     
                        Act. 15.7. 
                     and beleeve: yea, Paul and Apollos were Miniſters of Chriſt, by whom the Corinthians beleeved.
                     1. Cor. 3.4.
                  
                  Fourthly, after God hath wrought in men, a beliefe of the truth of the

Goſpell, he inclines their heart alſo, to bee affected with the goodneſſe of the thing promiſed therein, which is ſalvation,
                        Math. 6.33. and thereupon to hunger and thirſt after it, that is, earneſtly to deſire it.
                  Laſtly, the Lord perſwades the heart, to truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation, according to the doctrine affected, beleeved, underſtood, and hearkened vnto: as is plaine by that of the Apoſtle to the Epheſians, of whom he ſaith, that they truſted in Chriſt,
                     
                        Epheſ. 1.12, 13. 
                     after they heard the Word of truth, the Goſpell of their ſalvation, in whom alſo after that they beleeved, they were ſealed with the ſpirit of promiſe.
                  
                  Now if any man deſire to bee reſolved, whether the reading of the Goſpel, and other good bookes expounding it, may not worke in men a ſaving faith:
                  I anſwere: though in the time of perſecution, when there is no publike preaching of the Goſpell permitted, and in places where there is no poſsibilitie of hearing the Goſpell preached, a ſaving faith may through Gods bleſsing bee wrought by the reading aforeſaid; that is, by the reading of ſuch good bookes as expound and apply the Goſpel, in the duties and comforts of it; elſe muſt we

of neceſsity hold, al that lived, and dyed in the darkneſſe of Popery, and in the perſecution of thoſe times, to live and dye without a ſaving faith, and conſequently, without ſalvation, (which is too hard a cenſure to paſſe upon them) becauſe they had no preaching but reading only: they could heare no Sermons, but onely reade good bookes in ſecret: yet, I ſay, that in a ſetled Church (ſuch as England is) where there is a Miniſterie eſtabliſhed, and authoritie given to preach the Goſpell, and where there is preaching to be had; in this caſe, the preaching of the Goſpell is the ordinarie meanes, whereby God is pleaſed to worke in men a ſaving faith.
                        Rom. 10. For when Paul ſaith; How ſhall they beleeve in him, of whom they have not heard? and how ſhall they heare without a Preacher? and when hee affirmeth, that it pleaſed God by the fooliſhneſſe of preaching,
                     1. Cor. 1.21. 
                     to ſave them that beleeve: what can wee collect leſſe, then that the preaching, that is, expounding and applying of the doctrine of the Goſpell, is the ordinarie way which God hath appointed to worke faith in Chriſt withall; ſo that whoſoever may have preaching, but will content himſelfe with reading; I

know not how faith in Chriſt ſhould be wrought in him, that deſpiſeth the ordinance of Chriſt, which he hath appointed for that end.
                  Now then, to the end I may upon theſe premiſes, draw to a concluſion of this Rule; I humbly pray the Reader to examine himſelf by this Rule: Haſt thou lived, where the Goſpell hath beene preached, and in a Pariſh, where the Doctrine of the way and meanes of ſalvation hath beene publiſhed, and laid open? examine thy ſelfe whether thou haſt come to heare it, and being come, haſt attended to it, and by attention haſt underſtood it; and after the underſtanding of it, haſt beleeved it, and aſſented to the truth of it; and upon the beliefe thereof, haſt been affected with the deſire of ſalvation offered in it. If thus God haue wrought in thee, and after this worke, thou haſt come to caſt thy ſelfe on Chriſt for ſalvation, according to the Goſpell: then haſt thou a good evidence indeed, that God wrought kindly upon thee, and thou maiſt ſafely perſwade thy ſelfe, that thou cameſt rightly by thy faith in Chriſt; and that it is truely wrought in thee; becauſe it hath beene wrought by the direct

meanes, which is the preaching of the Word, namely, the Goſpell; and by that manner of efficacie▪ by which it becomes uſually powerfull to the working of a ſaving faith in others.
                  Otherwiſe, if thou ſay thou beleeveſt in Chriſt for ſalvation, and truſteſt to Him alone for it, and thou commeſt by this faith but by tradition onely, either becauſe thy Parents and friends that brought thee up, are of this faith, and Religion; or becauſe the King of the Country where thou liveſt, doth publikely profeſſe, and defend this faith: If thou haſt never been a diligent hearer of Sermons, but one that haſt contented thy ſelfe with bare prayers, ſervice and reading, and contemned preaching; or if thou haſt heard any Sermons, they have beene matters of Hiſtory onely, or Moralitie, and not the Goſpell; or if thou haſt come to heare the Goſpell preached, thou haſt uſually ſlept, or lookt about, or read on ſome other prayer booke, or thought on ſome other matters: ſo that thou couldeſt not attend; or if thou didſt attend, yet thou careſt not for the underſtanding of points delivered, or doubteſt of the truth of them;

or if thou didſt beleeve them, yet wert not affected with them, to deſire ſalvation earneſtly in the uſe of the meanes: then cannot I ſee how thou ſhouldeſt have a ſaving faith wrought in thee.
                  Wherefore my exhortation hereupon is; firſt, to Miniſters, that they in zeale of the glory of God, and of the ſalvation of ſoules, be painefull in preaching the Goſpell ſpecially, becauſe it onely is the meanes to worke in their people a ſaving faith. Secondly, I exhort all people which have the preaching of the Goſpell, (but as yet have not faith in Chriſt wrought thereby through their owne careleſneſſe,) that they attend unto Gods ordinance, that they labour to underſtand the doctrine of the Goſpell, and to beleeve it; yea, to bee affected with it, that ſo they may bee moved to beleeve in Chriſt, for that ſalvation that is offered them therein: aſſuring themſelves that God having already ſet in his Church a way to ſave ſoules by, and to worke faith in men for the attaining of ſalvation; and having ever ſince the Apoſtles time, ordinarily followed that courſe onely, in the Church of Chriſt: Hee will not now for their ſakes deuiſe a new way

to worke a ſaving faith in them; and the rather becauſe they are open neglecters, and contemners of the ordinary meanes.
                  
                     Simil▪
                     For as when the Lord having created and appointed the creatures that grew out of the earth for mans foode, and commanded the eating and drinking of them, for the continuance and preſervation of life; if any man ſhall neglect theſe ordinary meanes, and will not eate and drinke of them, but expect new creatures, and meanes for foode and maintenance of health and ſtrength, the Lord will not give them, but iuſtly ſuffer that man to die, becauſe he willingly ſtarues himſelfe: euen ſo now that the Lord hath ordained, and appointed meanes of ſpirituall foode, to nouriſh the ſoule to eternall life, which is the preaching of the Goſpell, and given us the ſame, hee will not deuiſe nor raiſe vp a new meanes to thee that deſpiſeſt the old; not an extraordinarie to thee that contemneſt the ordinarie, becauſe thou imagineſt the meanes to bee either needleſſe, or fruitleſſe, idle or inſufficient. Specially when thou mayeſt (if thou wilt peruſe the Scriptures) ſee aboundance of

examples of Chriſtian men, in whom this ſaving faith hath beene wrought by the preaching of the Goſpell; as namely, Act 4.4. & 8.12. & 13.12. & 14.1. & 15.7. & 17.4 & 19.9. wherefore if thou wouldeſt have a ſaving faith wrought in thee: my counſell to thee now is (for it is not too late at any time to mend truely) that thou come to Gods ordinance, which is the preaching of the Goſpell, and that thou come to it,1. Theſ. 2.13. as to the ordinance of God appointed to ſave thee, that ſo thou maiſt be ſaved by it, and have a ſaving faith wrought in thee by the ſame, and it may be a ſauour of life unto life unto thee.
                     2. Cor. 2.16. Pray God to make thee attentiue to it; by attention to make thee underſtand it; by underſtanding to perſwade thee to beleeve it; and by beleeving,to moove thee to be affected with the good thing offered in it, that ſo the Lord may make thee truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation according to the Goſpell.
                  And to thee which art a trve Chriſtian, and not onely a member of the trve Church, by profeſsing the trve faith, but a member of Chriſt, by having it; to thee my exhortation is,

that as thou haſt beene already begotten to Chriſt,1. Pet. 1.18. 
                     by this immortall ſeed of the Goſpell, ſo thou wouldeſt indevour to bee preſerved in this ſpirituall life by the ſame: and that thou wouldeſt as a new-borne Babe,
                     1. Pet. 2.2. 
                     ſtill deſire the ſincere milke of the Word of God, that thou maiſt grow thereby, in the comforts of faith in this world, untill thou attaine the end of thy faith, which is the ſalvation of thy ſoule, in the world to come.
               
            
            
               
               THE FIFT RULE.Rule 5.
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII. Whether waſt thou rightly prepared to beleeve in Chriſt, by other gifts of the Spirit, that hee worketh in men, before they have a ſaving faith?
                  THAT a ſaving Faith is not wrought in men all at one inſtant, before the Spirit of God worke any other worke of grace in them, is evident, both becauſe Iohn the Baptiſt was to prepare the way to Chriſt;
                        Luke 3.4. and alſo becauſe Chriſt himſelfe ſaith, None can come to him, (that is, beleeve in him, Ioh. 
                     
                        •
                     .
                        •
                     5.
                        Ioh 
                        6.44.
                     ) except his Father

draw him; that is, incline his heart thereunto, by ſome meanes teach him how to beleeve, give him power to beleeve, of one that is unfit, unable, and unwilling to beleeve in Chriſt, make him fit, able, and willing thereunto, and worke in him ſome graces, that diſpoſe him thereunto.
                  
                     1. Cor. 1.21.For ſeeing Chriſt was a ſtumbling block to the Iewes, and fooliſhneſſe to the Gentiles, how could they ever come to beleeve in him for ſalvation, except the Lord firſt wrought a change in them, by enlightening their mindes to vnderſtand and beleeve the Goſpell, and alſo incline their hearts to ſeeke for ſalvation by it; not by compelling them againſt their wils, but by bending their wils, and (as it were) drawing them by certaine cords thereunto?
                  The cords by which God drawes men to beleeve in Chriſt, are generally two, (each beeing twined of many threds, that is, each motive perſwading to beleeve upon many grounds.)
                  1. The Spirit of God drawes men to beleeve in Chriſt, by making them to know and beleeve, that they have need of Chriſt to ſave them; for they that are ſicke, who feele the need of a Phiſician,

will ſeeke unto him to be cured.
                  2.
                        Matt. 9.12, 13. Gods Spirit drawes men to beleeve in Chriſt for ſalvation, by cauſing them to know and beleeve, that there is ſalvation to bee had for them, who feeling their need of Chriſt, doe goe unto him, that is, truſt in him for ſalvatition. For the knowledge and beliefe, that the Prophet in Samaria could cure diſeaſes,2. King. 5.7.14. moved Naman to goe to him to be cured of his Leproſie.
                  1. To make men know and beleeve they have need of Chriſt to ſave them, the Lord ſends them his Word, by the preaching and attentive hearing wherof, he workes in them a knowledge and beliefe,
                        Rom. 3.20. Pſal. 51.5. Rom. 5.12. not onely that they are ſinners originally in Adam, and by nature, and actually in their owne perſons, and by converſation, but alſo that for their ſinnes, they are in a miſerable,
                        Rom. 3.9. to the 19. Gen. 2.17. Rom. 6.21. & 4.15. and curſed eſtate, becauſe of the wages of ſin, which is eternall death and condemnation.
                  Which points of their ſinfull and damnable eſtate,Legall preparations t
                           •
                        o faith in Chriſt. the Lord cauſing them to lay to heart, and to be affected with them, by reaſon of the danger wherein they are: the laying of them to heart, cauſeth them by Gods bleſsing, 1. To

feare Gods iuſtice, and to tremble at the conſideration of his heavy diſpleaſure,
                        Act. 9.6. & 16.29. leſt it ſhould fall on them, as they have iuſtly deſerved. 2. To ſorrow for their ſinnes, with a mournfull lamentation,
                        Zach. 12.10. Act. 2.37. as if they were prickt at the very heart with the point of a dagger, and to grone under them,
                        Mat. 11.28. as if they were oppreſſed with ſome unſupportable burden. 3. To confeſſe their ſinnes▪ and their unworthineſſe of ſalvation;
                        Luk. 15.17, 18. & 18.13. Mat. 5.3. luk. 4.18. luk. 15.17. by reaſon of them. 4. To bee poore in ſpirit, and to acknowledge their unability to ſave themſelves by any righteouſneſſe of their owne in themſelves. 5.
                        Act. 2.37. & 16.30. To conſult what to doe, in this wofull and wretched caſe, and to enquire; whether or no, there be any meanes of deliverance for them. 6. And in the laſt place to have ſome thoughts of leaving their former evill wayes, that have brought them into this wofull plight.
                        Luke 15.18.
                  
                  And by theſe ſixe workes of the Spirit (for nature onely doth not worke them, ſeeing they are wrought by the Word, and are not in all naturall men) upon the minds and wils of men, they are forwarded, and prepared to ſeeke for ſalvation, and driven thereunto, for feare of puniſhment, even as they

are compelled and moved to ſeeke for a pardon from a King, who know themſelves condemned to die, for ſome theft or treaſon.
                  2. But this is not preparation enough to faith in Chriſt; for if this were all, it were to little purpoſe: and therefore after this, there followes another worke, (mentioned before) which is a knowledge and beliefe of the Goſpell, which is this, That notwithſtanding their ſinfull and curſed eſtate in Adam, and in themſelves, yet is there ſalvation to be had for them, who feeling their need of it, with weary and heavy-loaden hearts, do ſeeke and repaire to Chriſt to be ſaved; which was the ſecond cord mentioned before, by which I ſaid, Gods Spirit drawes men to repent and beleeve in Chriſt for ſalvation.
                  Now to make men know and beleeve, that there is ſalvation to be had, for them that ſeeke it, the Lord by his mercifull providence ſends them the preaching of the Goſpell, wherein is promiſed ſalvation, by the expounding and applying whereof, they come to underſtand theſe points of Chriſtian Religion: namely, Firſt, who it is that

muſt, will, and can ſave them, viz. Ieſus Chriſt onely,1. Tim. 1.15 & 2. c. 5. 1. ioh. 2.1. the Sonne of God, and of the Virgin Mary. Secondly, how hee comes to be a Saviour to mankind, namely,
                        Ioh. 3.16. & 6.27. by the appointment of God the Father. Thirdly, whereby it is that he will ſave, namely, by offering himſelfe up a ſacrifice to God his Father,
                        Mat. 10.28. act. 20.28. 1. pet. 1.18. & 2.24. revel. 1.5. Ioh. 3.16. act. 10 43. & 13.39. mat. 11.28. and giving his life for the world. Laſtly, whom he will ſave, namely, all thoſe that beleeve in the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, whom God hath ſent, and truſt unto him onely for ſalvation.
                  
                     Evangelicall preparations to faith in Chriſt. Act. 13 48.Theſe points of the Goſpel, and ſuch as theſe be, when men have heard, underſtood, and beleeved, then doth the holy Ghoſt cauſe them (that are ordained to eternall life) to lay them to heart, and to be affected with them, by reaſon of the great benefit (which is ſalvation) that is ſo freely and graciouſly offered to them therein, and the laying of them to heart by holy and ſerious meditations, moves them, 1. highly to eſteem of the ſalvation offered them in the Goſpell:
                        Mat. 13.44. 2. earneſtly to deſire it, and to hunger after it:
                        Mat. 5.3. 3. to ſeeke diligently in the uſe of the meanes preſcribed to that end,
                        Mat. 6.33. ioh. 6.27. to attaine it: 4. and laſtly, ſomewhat more reſolutely to be incouraged,

in hope of pardon, to turne from their former evill wayes, and to purpoſe to returne to God, who offers himſelfe ſo gracious unto ſuch wretched ſinners.
                  And when people are thus wrought upon by Gods Spirit, when their mind is enlightened with the knowledge and beliefe of theſe points of the Goſpell, and their hearts affected with the neceſsity of having, the poſsibility of getting, and the excellencie of enioying ſo worthy a thing as is ſalvation; by ſo worthy a Perſon, as is the Lord Ieſus; and for ſuch ungracious perſons as themſelves are; how is it poſsible, but they ſhould bee more fitted and prepared to ſeeke for ſalvation by Chriſt; and by this beliefe of the Goſpel more forwarded to beleeve in Chriſt; and drawn thereunto in hope of pardon; even as the Syrians were mooved and drawne to ſue for a pardon of Ahab the King, becauſe they had heard, the Kings of Iſrael were mercifull men.
                  Having drawn out at length theſe two cords,1. King. 10.31. and faſtened them both to the head, and underſtanding, as alſo to the heart and affections, to the end men may be drawne by them unto Chriſt,

to ſeeke for ſalvation by faith in him. It remaines, that I exhort the Reader, to lay himſelfe to this line, and to exaamine himſelfe by this Rule, to the end he may diſcerne whether he hath beene thus wrought upon or no.
                  Now then try thy ſelfe (good Reader) hath God prepared a way in thy heart to beleeve in Chriſt, by cauſing thee to know, beleeve, and feele thy need of ſalvation by Chriſt, by reaſon thou art in thy ſelfe, in a curſed eſtate through ſinne? doeſt thou feele the burden of them in thy conſcience, and is thy heart pricked and afflicted therewith? doeſt thou feare Gods iuſtice, and art thou ſorry for thy ſinnes? doeſt thou acknowledge thy ſelfe unable and unworthy to ſave thy ſelfe? doeſt thou bethinke thee, whether there bee any hope of remedy, and enquireſt thou after it? and (to conclude) doth thy heart begin to bethinke of taking a new courſe, and of living no more ſo wickedly? then art thou not farre from the kingdome of God, but in a good forwardneſſe in thy way to heaven, if withall (having heard of the Goſpell) thou beleeveſt there is ſalvation to bee had, thou heartily deſireſt it, thou earneſtly

ſeekeſt for it, and by the hope of pardon, through the beliefe of the Goſpell, thou purpoſeſt in the truth of thy heart, without hypocriſie, to leave thy former evill wayes, and to turne to God: otherwiſe, if thou haſt felt none of theſe preparing workes of the Spirit, to fit thee for Chriſt, and for faith in him, and thou haſt nothing to ſay for thy ſelfe but this, that thou haſt a generall perſwaſion, (hand over head, and in groſſe) that thou ſhalt ſhift as well as others, that is, goe to heaven, and ſcape hell as well as they, becauſe God is mercifull, and Chriſt is dead, riſen, and aſcended into heaven; and becauſe thou beleeveſt the Goſpel: then art not thou as yet fit to goe to Chriſt, nor to truſt in him for ſalvation: and therefore thou muſt labour in the uſe of meanes to be ſo inlightened in thy mind, and ſo affected in thy will, as I have ſaid, if ever thou wilt duely and truly, comfortably in thy ſelfe, and acceptably unto God, beleeve in Chriſt for eternall life.
                  But if by the preaching of the Law and Goſpell, Gods Spirit did thus worke upon thy mind and will, as hath beene ſaid before, to beleeve in Chriſt, then waſt thou rightly prepared to beleeve

in Chriſt, and mayſt boldly and ſafely ſay, thou haſt a ſaving faith ſpecially, if withall there have followed the fruites of it, in thy holy life, whereof more at large in the next Chapter.
                  I doe not ſay, that this preparation is wrought in all men in the ſame degree, but men are made to feele their need of Chriſt, according as God is pleaſed to make them ſenſible of their ſinnes and miſery; for ſome are more ſubiect to be caſt downe, and troubled in mind, then other are; and conſequently more forward to hunger and thirſt for Chriſt, and for ſalvation by him: but this I ſay, that all Chriſtians are thus prepared, more or leſſe, to faith in Chriſt, before they can, or will beleeve in him.
                  Neither will I contend ſo eagerly about the order of this preparation, as to goe about abſolutely to determine, that this grace is alwayes wrought in the firſt place, and that in the ſecond, in every Chriſtian; nor yet to diſpute, and decide, whether or no, they bee all wrought at one inſtant time, in every particular man or woman alwaies, but I am of opinion, that they are all wrought in men in ſome kind or other,

in one meaſure and degree or other, before they can or will bee fit and able to truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation; and that moſt uſually they are wrought in them in that manner, as I have ſaid.
                  Having declared, how men are fitted to beleeue in Chriſt; and in that declaration affirmed, that a beginning of repentance, is one meanes to prepare them thereunto, (namely, a ſmaller beginning of purpoſe to forſake former ſinnes, upon the preaching, underſtanding, beleeving, and laying to heart of the Commandements, and threatning of the Law broken, which convince them of their ſinne and miſerie; and a greater worke thereof, upon the preaching, underſtanding, beleeving, and laying to heart, of the promiſes and comforts of the Goſpell, which offer grace and mercy:) It will be very needfull to inſiſt more at large upon the point, (the rather) becauſe there be many that make much doubt of that point and many that are grounded and ſettled in a quite contrary opinion.
                  For this end, I will doe foure things: 1. I will ſhew how farre-forth repentance is wrought before faith in Chriſt, to the end I may not be miſtaken, and

thought to be of opinion with ſome other in the precedencie of repentance unto faith, 2. I will proove it by reaſons grounded on the Word, that repentance is ſo farre begun indeed, as I ſhall ſay, to the end I may not miſlead any into errour. 3. I will anſwere the maineſt Obiections againſt it. 4. And laſtly, I will make particular uſe and application of the point. And theſe foure ſeverall points ſhall bee comprehended in foure ſeverall and diſtinct Sections.
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 1 Of the ſtate of the Queſtion, and how farre I affirme Repentance goes before faith.
                     Touching the firſt point, I humbly pray, it may be diligently obſerved, and remembred, what I hold, concerning the precedencie of repentance unto faith: and that for this purpoſe, they would conſider generally, of what repentance I ſpeake in this queſtion, namely, of a true change of the heart, conſiſting in a purpoſe of leaving our former ſinfull courſes, and ſerving God better; and alſo of what faith, namely, of faith in Chriſt, or that act of faith whereby ſinners truſt unto Chriſt, reſt,

and rely upon him for ſalvation.
                     This that I have ſaid in generall of the nature of that repentance and faith, (whereof the queſtion is to bee underſtood) ſhall be better conceived in foure particulars:
                     1. I doe not hold, that repentance is wrought in men, before a beliefe of the Word, that is, either of the Law which convinceth of ſinne and puniſhment, or of the Goſpell, which offereth hope of pardon; for I thinke it is impoſſible a man ſhould repent, before hee beleeve this for a truth; that if he goe on in his ſinfull life, and repent not, the Lord will puniſh him; and if hee doe repent, the Lord will forgive him: but this I hold, that repentance muſt be wrought in men, before they can beleeve in Chriſt, or truſt in him for ſalvation.
                     2. I doe not meane, that the, practice of repentance, in doing good workes, and bringing forth fruits worthy amendment of life, go's before faith in Chriſt, but that a true purpoſe of the heart to leave our former wicked lives, (which is properly repentance, as appeares by the notation of the Word) goes before faith in Chriſt.
                     3. Neither doe I affirme, that ſo full

and perfect a worke of repentance is wrought in the heart before faith in Chriſt, as is afterward wrought therein; when by beleeving in Chriſt, and by being iuſtified through beleeving, wee feele the comforts of faith in our ſoules, which are the ſtrongeſt motives to perſwade to the accompliſhing of it; but this I affirme, that onely a beginning of repentance is wrought before faith in Chriſt; which though it bee but weake, in compariſon of that which is wrought after faith in him; yet is it a true and ſincere purpoſe of heart, (as truth is oppoſed to hypocriſie and diſſimulation) to forſake the practice of the former wicked life, and to leade a new.
                     In the laſt place, I doe not ſay, that this begun repentance can be ſufficient to ſalvation, if we could imagine a man could die before hee had beleeved in Chriſt: but this begun repentance, and purpoſe of heart, to turne from ſinne and Satan and to returne to God, and new obedience is to bee manifeſted by practice, according to the purpoſe, and both are to be made acceptable to God,
                           Heb. 11.6. and comfortable to our ſalvation by faith in Chriſt, when it is wrought

within us, without which it is impoſſible to pleaſe God unto ſalvation.
                     I ſay then fully and plainely, that before ſinners can truely truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation, or with any confidence craue pardon of their ſinnes by Chriſt; they muſt begin, truely to reſolue, and purpoſe in their hearts, to leaue their former euill courſes, and to leade a new life.
                  
                  
                     Of the proofe of the point, that Repentance 
                           §. 2 is begunne before faith in Chriſt.
                     This point doth deſerve proofe, becauſe it will bee of great uſe, in that being well prooved, it will bee a good ground to try our faith in Chriſt, and whether or no, wee truely beleeve in Chriſt for ſalvation: for if this repentance be begun in us(of which I ſpeake) then are we well fitted to beleeve him, elſe wee may not perſwade our ſelves (except we wil deceive ourſelves) that we have a ſaving faith.
                     And the point likewiſe will require proofe, not ſo much in it ſelfe; but becauſe many ſtand doubtfull of it: for whoſe ſatisfaction I have intended, and directed this Diſcourſe and diſputation.
                     
                        In both theſe regards, I crave of the Chriſtian Reader diligence, to peruſe that I have written; and patience, in regard of the length thereof: and the rather, becauſe I have not done it haſtily, but upon great ſtudy, and mature deliberation: nor have I done it vainely, out of any affected humour of ſingularitie (God is witneſſe:) but onely in zeale of Gods glory, and the ſalvation of mens ſoules, for the good of the Church of God. For I know by good experience, that the underſtanding, beleeving, and laying to heart of the truth of God, which I have written in this matter, will be beneficiall unto many, in that, thoſe that have not this repentance begunne in them, ſhall hereby be convinced plainely not to have a ſaving faith, to the end they may labour to get both, and in that order that I have ſaid: and thoſe that have, ſhall bee ſoundly and undoubtedly aſſured they have a ſaving faith, and may boldly go to Chriſt for ſalvation; namely, becauſe they have begunne to repent, and therefore are perſons qualified for it, and rightly prepared thereunto, as ſhall bee ſhewed more at large (God willing) in the concluſion of this Diſcourſe, and in the application

of the ſame, and finiſhing of this fift Rule.
                     But before I come to the proofe of the point by Arguments, I thinke it meete to cite the words of a uery Reverend, Learned, and godly Divine of our Country, and time, to the end it may not ſeeme ſtrange which I affirme.
The Authour is that worthy Maſter Perkins, who in the ſecond Volume of his Workes, pag. 257. Col. 2. B. C. in his Commentary upon the Epiſtle to the Galatians, chap. 3. ver. 28. hath theſe words:
                           Perkins 2. volume, p. 257. 
                        Wee muſt as good Diſciples obey the Commandement, which bids us turne, and beleeve, before we can have any benefit or profit by the promiſes of God. And afterward he ſaith againe more plainly:
Laſtly, we are here taught in the working of our ſalvation, to keepe the order of God, which he hath ſet down unto us, in Baptiſme. Which is firſt of all to turne unto God according to his Lawes; and ſecondly, upon our converſion, to lay hold on the promiſe of God, and the confirmation thereof, by the Sacraments. Thus ſhall wee finde comfort in the promiſes of God, and have true fellowſhip with God, if wee beginne where hee begins in making of his covenant with us, and end where he ends. And this wee muſt

doe not onely in the time of our firſt converſion; but alſo afterwards in the time of our diſtreſſe and affliction; and at ſuch time as by frailety wee fall and offend God. In a word, if for practiſe wee alwayes keepe our ſelves to this order, we ſhall finde true comfort both in life and death.
                     
                     I could not have deſired this worthy Divine to have ſpoken more fully, nor more plainely for mee then hee hath done. Out of his words therefore I thus reaſon:
                     Firſt, if that Commentary upon the Epiſtle to the Galatians bee the Worke of Maſter Perkins, as it is, except hee have great wrong, or except it can bee diſproved.
                     Secondly, if he in this place alledged doth ſpeake of true repentance and ſaving faith, as he doth, becauſe he ſpeaks of that repentance which is a cōverſion and turning to God according to all his Lawes, and of that faith which is a laying hold on the promiſes of God, for the finding of trve comfort to our ſoules, both in life and death; and for the having of trve fellowſhip with God.
                     Thirdly, if hee ſay plainely and directly, that this is the order of God,

which he hath ſet downe in Baptiſme, that men muſt firſt turne to God; and ſecondly, and upon that converſion lay hold upon the promiſes.
                     Fourthly, and laſtly, if he ſay this muſt be done, and this order of repentance and faith is to bee kept both in the firſt converſion (which is repentance from dead workes;) as alſo from ſins which we commit after our firſt converſion, and our firſt beleeving in Chriſt: All which are cleerely laid downe in the teſtimonie alledged: then may it from thence eaſily and truely bee collected, that it was Maſter Perkins opinion and iudgement, that repentance is truely begunne before a ſaving faith, as I have affirmed.
                     But becauſe in matters of doctrine, we are not to reſt in mens iudgements, nor in their teſtimonies, (becauſe they are but probable Arguments) but one Reaſons, taken from the teſtimonie of God, which is his written Word: Therfore for the better ſatisfying of the Reader, I will produce ſome Arguments to make that good which I have ſaid, and I will produce them in that forme, that the ſimple may conceive the better of them; & each Argument

ſhall bee contained in ſeverall Sections. But firſt of the Arguments of neceſſarie conſequence: and then of them that are very probable.
                  
                  
                     ARGVMENT. I.
                     
                        Repentance is begunne before faith in Chriſt, becauſe the repentance of the Publicans and Harlots, Math. 21.32. was begunne before their faith: and theirs was true repentance, and a true ſaving faith.
                     
                     The reaſon is good; becauſe there is but one true repentance, and one ſaving faith that is required of all them that ſhall be ſaved: So that if the repentance and faith of the Publicans and Harlots in the Text alledged, were the trve repentance and faith that God required of them to ſalvation, and their repentance were begunne before their faith, then is the repentance of other Chriſtians likewiſe begun before their faith.
                     To make good this reaſon, two points muſt bee further confirmed. 1. That the repentance of the Publicans and Harlots, Math. 21.31, 32. was begunne before their faith. 2. That their Repentance and Faith, were true repentance and ſauing Faith: and each point I will prove by Reaſons. But firſt,

of the proofe of the firſt point.
                     1. The repentance of the Harlots and Publicans, Math. 21.32.1. Point proved. was begunne before their faith,1. Proofe. becauſe their repentance was a meanes unto it, or was to it as a meanes to an end.
                     The reaſon is good: becauſe the meanes to an end, are alwayes before the end it ſelfe, in aſmuch as it is the beginning or cauſe thereof: for the beginning muſt alwayes bee before the end; and the cauſe before the effect. So that if the repentance of the Publicans and Harlots were to their faith as a meanes to an end; then muſt it needs be begun before their faith.
                     That the repentance of the Publicans, &c. was to their faith as a meanes to an end, I proue, becauſe it is neceſſarily implyed in the Text, that they repented, that they might beleeve.
                        
                           Ioh. 19.35. Ioh. 20.21. For where the Holy Ghoſt ſaith; Iohn bare record of Chriſts death, and Iohn wrote Chriſts miracles, that his Diſciples might beleeue: hee implyes neceſſarily, that the bearing record of Chriſts death, and writing of his miracles, were to the beliefe of the Diſciples, as a meanes to an end, and conſequently were before it: therefore where the Holy Ghoſt ſaith,

                        The Publicans and Harlots repented, that they might beleeve; hee implyes neceſſarily, that their repentance was to their faith, as a meanes to an end, and conſequently was begun before it.
                     And that the Publicans and Harlots repented, that they might beleeve, I proove from the Text by a neceſſarie conſequence,
                           Math. 21.31, 32 thus: The Evangeliſt Matthew in the place alledged, ſets downe the effect of Iohns Miniſtery, by two contrarie euents, in two different ſorts of people: viz the Scribes and Phariſes, the Publicans and Harlots. If then the Evangeliſt, in ſetting downe the effect it had in the Scribes and Phariſes, ſaid plainely, they repented not that they might beleeve: then on the contrary it muſt needs be implyed, that the Publicans and Harlots repented, that they might beleeve, and conſequently, that their repentance was to their faith, as a meanes to an end, and therefore was begunne before it. And ſo much for the proofe of the firſt point: the ſecond followes, which I will make good: firſt ioyntly of them both together; and then ſeuerally of each of them apart.
                     
                        2. Point proved: firſt generally of them both.The repentance and faith of the Publicans and Harlots were trve repentance

and ſaving faith. 1. Becauſe they were that repentance, and that faith, tha
                           •
                         profeſsion, whereof was required of all them that came to Iohns Baptiſm, as it is plaine by comparing, Math. 21.31, 32. with Luk. 7.28. for Iohn required the profeſsion of repentance,
                           Mat. 3.6.8.11. Joh. 1.7. act. 19.4 and of faith; therefore hee required the profeſsion of the true repentance, and of the ſaving faith. 2. The repentance of the Publicans and Harlots, Mat. 21.31. and their faith was the trve repentance and the ſaving faith; becauſe it was that whereby they entred into Gods Kingdome:
                           Math. 21.31, 32 and for want of which the Scribes and Phariſes could not enter: for no repentance and faith can entertaine into Gods Kingdom but the true; and for want of none but thoſe, are men excluded thence.
                     More ſpecially and particularly I ſay,2. Point proved: ſpecially of each of them. that the Repentance of the Publicans and Harlots, Math. 21.31, 32. was true repentance, becauſe it was that which is required of all thoſe perſons that are to receive forgiveneſſe of ſinnes: for forgiueneſſe of ſinnes belongs to none,
                           Mar. 1.4. Luk. 3.3. nor is promiſed to none, but to thoſe which repent truely of their ſinnes. Secondly, the repentance of the Publicans

and Harlots was true repentance, becauſe it was that repentance that was to be teſtified by the fruits of it;
                           Math. 4.8. Luk. 4.8. to 15. for true repentance onely can bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life: and theſe Publicans and Harlots did profeſſe to bring forth theſe fruits, elſe he had never baptized them.
                     
                        
                           Obiection. 1 But it will bee obiected that true repentance is 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , and the repentance of the Publicans and Harlots, Matth. 21.31. was but 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , that is, penitency.
                     
                        Sol.True: there is no other word there uſed to expreſſe the repentance of the Publicans and Harlots, but penitencie: yet that word ſignifies true repentance in that place. 1. Becauſe the repentance of the elder ſonne is commended for true repentance, Mat. 21.24. and yet is it but penitency in the phraſe.
                     Secondly, becauſe it is ſaid, verſe 32. that the Scribes and Phariſes did not 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , the meaning is, they did not repent truely: therefore where it is ſaid, the Publicans and Harlots did repent, the meaning is, they did repent truely.
                     
                        
                           Obiection. 2 But ſome may reply, Iohns exhortation was 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . (that is) repent: not 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         (that is) be penitent.
                     
                        True: it was no more in word, but it was more in effect.Sol. For Matthew expreſſely ſaith, the Publicans and Harlots were penitent, and no Evangeliſt ſaith, they did repent. Therefore either becauſe Mathew ſaith, they were penitent, it muſt be conceived they did truely repent; or elſe becauſe no Evangeliſt ſaith they were repentant, it muſt be affirmed, they did not truely repent at all: which will prove a diſcredit, not to Iohn onely; as if hee would baptize any that did not repent truely, or profeſſe true repentance; but alſo to the Publicans and Harlots, as if they were not ſaved: for without true repentance none can be ſaved, Luk. 13.3.
                     But ſome will ſay, the meaning onely 
                           Obiection. 3 is, they repented not of their Infidelitie, that they might beleeve in Chriſt.
                     Grant it; then repentance from ſome ſinne: viz. infidelitie,Sol. goes before beliefe in Chriſt: and why then may not repentance for all ſinne bee begunne in men, before they beleeve in Chriſt, if they bee diſcovered to them as well as their infidelitie?
                     But it will be ſaid, that by the penitencie
                        
                           Obiection. 4 of the Publicans and Harlots, are to

be underſtood onely the preparations to repentance.
                     
                        Solut.I grant, in ſome places it may be, but not in this, Math. 21.31. becauſe there is none other word uſed in any part of the New Teſtament to expreſſe the work of trve repentance it ſelfe in them after ſuch preparations. Wherefore in the place alledged, either by penitencie the whole worke of true repentance muſt be underſtood, and then I have my purpoſe, which is, that the repentance of the Publicans and Harlots, was trve Repentance;
                           Mat. 21.32. or elſe will it follow, that they never had trve repentance wrought in them, but onely the preparations to it; which were to call into queſtion the graces of God in the Saints that are now in Heaven, and to affirme that preparations onely to ſaving graces, will ſerve our turne to carry us to Heaven, without the ſaving graces themſelves.
                     Laſtly, that the faith alſo of the Publicans and Harlots, Math. 21.31.32. was a ſaving faith, I proove; becauſe it was a faith in Chriſt, or a beleeving in Chriſt for ſalvation. For ſuch a faith is a ſaving faith.
                           Ioh. 3.16. Act. 13.39. Act. 19.4. Such a faith was required of all thoſe that came to Iohns baptiſme.

The Publicans and Harlots came to Iohns Baptiſme, and were baptized of him, therefore they profeſſed this faith, elſe hee would never have baptized them.
                     But ſome will ſay,Obiect. their faith was onely a beleeving Iohn; beleeving Iohn, is nothing but beleeving the doctrine which Iohn preached to bee trve, and a beliefe of the truth of Iohns doctrine, is nothing but an Hiſtoricall faith.
                     Though Matthew ſpeake onely of beleeving Iohn; and beleeving Iohn,
                        Solut. by bare Grammar conſtruction, bee no more but beleeving the truth of his doctrine, yet by Logicall, and Theologicall conſtruction it muſt ſignifie more; viz. a beleeving in Chriſt, or a reſting upon him for ſalvation, according to the doctrine beleeved: And I prove it thus:
                     It is certaine that Iohn required more faith (that is, profeſsion of more faith) then beleeving his doctrine to bee trve of all that came unto his Baptiſme: for he required faith in Chriſt, or that they ſhould beleeve in him that was to come. And to beleeve in Chriſt,
                           Act. 19.4. or to truſt unto him for ſalvation, is more then to beleeve the truth of Iohns doctrine

concerning Chriſt. But if the Publicans and Harlots that came to Iohns Baptiſme, had no more faith in them then is Grammatically underſtood by beleeving Iohn, or beleeving the truth of Iohns doctrine, then had they no more but an hiſtoricall faith. For there is no Text of Scripture that ſaith they had any other.
                     Wherefore by beleeving Iohn, Mat. 21.31. either there muſt be underſtood more faith, then beleeving the truth of Iohns doctrine, (namely, a truſting unto Chriſt for ſalvation, according to the truth of Iohns doctrine concerning Chriſt which they beleeved:) and then it will follow that the faith of the Publicans and Harlots, Math. 21.32. was a ſaving faith, which is the thing I labour to prove; or elſe there muſt bee underſtood onely a beliefe of Iohns doctrine; and then will it follow that the Publicans and Harlots had no other faith, then that; viz. then an hiſtoricall faith. Which if it were trve, then was an hiſtoricall faith ſufficient to ſaue the Publicans and Harlots; and if ſo, then not only is the diſtinction of faith into hiſtoricall, and ſaving meerely idle: but (which is worſe) then would it follow,

that an hiſtoricall faith, and conſequently a Popiſh faith will ſave ſinners in theſe dayes, as well as it did the Publicans and ſinners in thoſe.
                     Wherefore (to conclude this firſt Reaſon) I cannot ſee why it ſhould not directly follow as a good reaſon, that becauſe the repentance of the Publicans and harlots was begun before their ſaving faith; therefore the repentance of Chriſtians in theſe dayes, is begun likewiſe before their ſaving faith; except we ſhal ſay, that God hath divers kinds of repentance, and faith to ſave men, in the ſeverall ages of the Church, or divers manners of working them accordingly. And ſo I paſſe on to a ſecond Reaſon or Argument like the former.
                  
                  
                     ARGVMENT. II.
                     
                        Repentance is begun before faith, becauſe God gives men repentance, to the end they may beleeve in Chriſt.
                     
                     The reaſon is good, becauſe the meanes are alwaies before the end; therefore if God give men repentance, to the end they may beleeve in Chriſt; then muſt they repent, before they can beleeve in Chriſt.
                     
                        And that God gives ſinners repentance, to the end they may beleeve in Chriſt, I prove by the words of Paul to Timothy, where hee ſhewes, that Miniſters muſt with meekneſſe inſtruct ſinners,
                        2. Tim. 2.25. 
                        if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, 2. Tim. 2.25. that is, to the end they may acknowledge the truth. Now by acknowledging the truth, in that place, a ſaving faith, or faith in Chriſt, is to bee underſtood: 1. Becauſe it is ſuch a faith, whereby ſinners come out of the ſnares of the devill; out of which they can come by no faith, but by a ſaving faith. 2. Becauſe in other Texts he deſcribes a ſaving faith, by an acknowledging the truth.
                           Col. 2.2. 2. Tim. 2.4. Epheſ. 4.13. 3. Becauſe the Apoſtle in another Epiſtle, cals the acknowledging of the truth, The faith of the Elect.
                     
                        
                           Tit. 1.1.I grant, that in ſome Texts of Scripture, and by Grammar conſtruction, acknowledging of the truth of the Goſpell, is but a beliefe of the truth of the doctrine of the Goſpell; and that is no more but an hiſtoricall faith: but an acknowledging of the truth muſt here ſignifie more, (as alſo it doth in other places) or elſe will it follow plainely

and directly by the Text, that repentance is wrought before a beliefe of the Goſpell, which is impoſsible: for the repentance ſpoken of in the Text, is a meanes to worke in them an acknowledging of the truth; (for ſo runnes the Text, If God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, that is, to the end they may acknowledge the truth) and it is impoſsible a man ſhould repent, before he beleeve the Goſpell, (which is, that if they repent indeed, they ſhall be pardoned.) So that they muſt, by this place, needs confeſſe, either that repentance is begun before a ſaving faith, (which is the point I labour to prove) viz. becauſe it is unto faith in Chriſt, as a meanes to an end; or elſe acknowledge, that repentance is wrought before a beliefe of the Goſpel, which I know they will utterly deny: for there can bee no other reaſonable ſenſe of the place.
                  
                  
                     ARGVMENT. III.
                     
                        Repentance is begun before faith in Chriſt, becauſe men cannot beleeve in Chriſt, as long as they live in their ſinnes.
                     
                     The reaſon is good, becauſe to live

wilfully in ſinne, and to repent of ſinne, are contrary: ſo that if men cannot beleeve in Chriſt, as long as they live in their ſinnes, then cannot they beleeve in Chriſt, as long as they repent not: then muſt they repent before they beleeve in Chriſt; and therefore conſequently, repentance muſt be begun before faith in Chriſt.
                     And that men cannot beleeve in Chriſt, as long as they live in their ſins, is true in the Scribes and Phariſes; who therefore could not beleeve in him, becauſe they lived in their ſinnes, and repented not; which I prove by two teſtimonies of Chriſt himſelfe concerning them; who ſhewing why they beleeved not in him, gives this for a reaſon of it.
                     The firſt teſtimony is in S. Iohns Goſpell, where he ſaith of the Scribes and Phariſes,
                           Ioh. 5 43, 44. compared with Ioh. 1.12. 
                        How can ye beleeve, that receive honour one of another? that is, Your purpoſing to live in your worldly honour and pompe, and not to leave your pride and ambition, is the cauſe why you beleeve not in me.
                     The ſecond is in S. Matthew, where he ſaith,
                           Mat 21.31.32. Revel. 9.20. that the Scribes and Phariſes repented not that they might beleeve: where

our Saviour gives a reaſon, why they beleeved not in Chriſt, as well as the Publicans and harlots, namely, becauſe they repented not as well as they.
                     And that this is a good reaſoning, or arguing, I prove by two other Texts of Scripture, in the booke of the Revelation, where the holy Ghoſt ſaith, They repeated not, that they might not worſhip devils: and they repented not, that they might give glory to God. Whe
                           •••
                         thus argue: If in the firſt Text there be a reaſon rendred why ſome ceaſed not to worſhip devils, (that is, idols) namely, becauſe they repented not firſt of their former idolatry: and in the ſecond there be a reaſon rendred, why ſome gave not glory to God; namely, becauſe they repented not firſt of their former diſhonouring of him: then by proportion muſt it be true, that where our Saviour ſaith, the Scribes and Phariſes repented not that they might beleeve, there is a reaſon rendred, why they beleeved not in Chriſt, namely, becauſe they repented not firſt of their infidelitie. and other grievous ſinnes, as pride, ambition and covetouſneſſe; which being true, then will it follow, that men cannot beleeve in Chriſt, as long as they live in their

ſinnes: and therefore repentance muſt be begun before faith in Chriſt.
                  
                  
                     ARGVMENT IIII.
                     
                        Repentance is begun before faith in Chriſt, at the firſt converſion; becauſe ſinners muſt firſt repent of ſinnes committed after their firſt converſion, before they can truſt in Chriſt for the pardon of them.
                     
                     The reaſon is good, becauſe a ſaving faith, and truſt in Chriſt for pardon of ſinnes are all one; and the true repentance and faith in Chriſt, that is wrought in men after their firſt converſion, is one in nature and kind, with that which is wrought at the firſt, when they are firſt turned to God, though there may be ſome difference betwixt them, in regard of the meaſure and degree of their excellencie. So that if ſinners may not truſt in Chriſt for the forgiveneſſe of thoſe ſinnes, which they have committed ſince and after their firſt converſion, before they have repented of them: then may they not truſt in Chriſt for the forgiveneſſe of their ſinnes, which they committed before their firſt converſion, before they have repented of them: and if ſo, then

is repentance in men before faith in Chriſt; for they cannot begin to repent, before repentance be begun to be wrought in them.
                     And that ſinners muſt firſt repent of ſinnes committed, after their firſt converſion, before they can truſt in Chriſt for the pardon of them, I prove, 1. Becauſe the promiſe is made to the repentant, 2 Chron. 7.14. Iſa 1.16.17. & 55. 7. Ier. 31.18, 19.34. 2. Sam. 12, 13. Act. 2.38. & 3.19. & 5.31. & 8.22. 2. Becauſe hell and condemnation is threatned to the impenitent and unrepentant, Luke 13.3. Deut. 29.20. Rom. 2.4, 5, 6. Epheſ. 5.6 Coloſſ. 3.6. 3. Becauſe experience teacheth us, that men are aſhamed to aske forgiveneſſe of them, whom they have offended, except they firſt proffer repentance for their faults committed. And therefore they that offend God, muſt firſt repent of their ſinnes committed againſt him, before they can with any boldneſſe truſt in Chriſt for forgiveneſſe of them; and out of that faith, begge the forgiveneſſe of them for his ſake.
                     If any chance to except againſt the 
                           Obiection. 1 ſoundneſſe of my Reaſon, becauſe it is founded on this, that the repentance,

and the faith in Chriſt that is wrought in men after their firſt converſion, is the ſame with that which is wrought at the firſt. Diſproving this, by urging, that that which is wrought at the firſt converſion, is but Legal; but that which is wrought afterward, is Evangelicall: now Legall repentance is not the ſame in nature and kind with Evangelicall.
                     
                        Solut.I anſwer, If by Legall repentance they meane that which is taught and commanded in the Law, then I ſay, there is no ſuch repentance at all: (for the Law that commands perfect obedience, ſuppoſeth perfect obedience; and therefore cannot imply, or ſuppoſe any breach or diſobedience of it; which it muſt doe, if it command repentance, becauſe repentance is for the breach thereof) and therefore their diſtinction is naught, and conſequently their Obiection.
                     But if by Legall repentance, they meane that, wherein they may bee furthered by the doctrine of the Law, which convinceth us of ſinnes committed, for which wee muſt repent, and threatens puniſhment, for the committing of them, to drive us to repentance, then I grant there is ſuch a kind of repentance:

but withall I deny, that the repentance wrought in men before the firſt converſion, and before faith in Chriſt, is onely Legall repentance, as by their obiection they would make us to beleeve; and my Reaſon is this:
                     If that be repentance Legall, which is wrought by the Law, that is, a beliefe of the Law, then muſt that bee repentance Evangelicall, which is wrought by the Goſpell, that is, a beliefe of the Goſpell. Now I have plainly ſhewed, in ſetting downe the ſtate of the queſtion, that the repentance which I ſay goes before faith in Chriſt, doth neceſſarily follow a beliefe of the Goſpell; and therefore their firſt obiection can bee of no force againſt my Argument.
                     Or if any chance to reply, ſaying, Indeed if a man doe never repent, he can never truſt in Chriſt for pardon of his ſinnes, with any hope thereof: but (wil they ſay) hee may repent after he hath beleeved in Chriſt; which if hee doe, it is as well, as if he had repented before:
                     I anſwere, To the end we may be capable of pardon by repentance, it is required, that it be duely wrought; and it is not onely wrought after a ſaving

faith, but either before it, or at the very inſtant time, that a ſaving faith it ſelfe is wrought, and I prove it thus:
                     Aſſoone as ever a ſinner hath beleeved in Chriſt with his heart, hee may begge pardon of his ſinnes,
                           Act. 10.43. becauſe it is promiſed to ſuch beleevers; and that which is promiſed by God, may lawfully be craved of him: but if a ſinner crave pardon, not beeing at the ſame time a repenting ſinner, hee hath little hope to obtaine it; becauſe pardon is promiſed to the repenting, and denied to the unrepenting ſinner, as hath beene ſhewed a little before in this Argument.
                     If then a ſinner begge pardon of his ſinnes, aſſoone as ever hee beleeves in Chriſt, with any hope of obtaining it; he muſt be a repenting ſinner, aſſoone as ever he is a beleever in Chriſt; and if he be a repenting ſinner, aſſoone as he is ſuch a beleever, then muſt his repentance be wrought in him, either before his faith is wrought, or at the ſame inſtant time that it is wrought.
                     For if it be not wrought till after his faith in Chriſt, then is hee not a repenting ſinner, aſſoone as he is a beleeving ſinner; and conſequently, cannot by

faith crave pardon, aſſoone as hee hath beleeved in Chriſt.
                     So that either a ſinner may not crave pardon of God for his ſinnes, aſſoone as he hath beleeved in Chriſt, (which I thinke unreaſonable) or a ſinner may by faith in Chriſt begge pardon of his ſins, before he hath begun to repent of them, (which to me is ſenſleſſe) or repentance cannot be wrought in ſinners after their faith in Chriſt, (as is ſtiffely maintained by ſome.)
                     Now if it bee not wrought after it, then muſt it bee wrought either before it, or at the ſame inſtant time together with it, to the end they may be repenting ſinners, aſſoone as they are beleeving ſinners, and thereby bee made fit perſons to begge and receive forgiveneſſe, aſſoone as ever they have beleeved in Chriſt for it, by a ſaving faith.
                  
                  
                     ARGVMENT. V.
                     
                        Repentance may bee begunne before faith in Chriſt, becauſe as hard a worke as the beginning of repentance, is wrought before Faith.
                     
                     The Reaſon is very probable, becauſe it is ſuppoſed, that therfore repentance

cannot be begun before faith, becauſe it is too great a worke, to be wrought before a ſaving faith be wrought.
                     And that as hard a worke as the beginning of repentance, is wrought in men before faith, I prove, becauſe the taking out of mans mind, ignorance, and unbeliefe of the Goſpell, and planting in it the knowledge and beliefe thereof, is wrought in men before they can beleeve in Chriſt; and this is as hard, and as great a worke as the beginning of repentance.
                     For by the light of Nature men know many actions to be ſinnes, and that they ſhould not do them, they beleeve that if they doe them, they offend God, and deſerve his iudgements for them; and that therefore they ought to repent of them, and leave them: yea, upon theſe and the like conſiderations, many are moved (at leaſt for a time) to refraine the committing of many ſinnes: but there is no light in Nature, to make men know and beleeve the Goſpell or the way of ſalvation, that is ordained in the new Covenant, viz. that if ſinners beleeve in Chriſt Ieſus, they ſhalbe ſaved:1. Cor. 1.23. 
                        For Chriſt was both a ſtumbling blocke to the Iewes, and fooliſhnes to the Gentiles:

why then ſhould it bee thought more impoſsible for men to beginne to turne to God by the working of the holy Spirit, through the preaching of the Word, before they beleeve in Chriſt; then it is for them to underſtand and beleeve the myſterie of the Goſpell before they beleeve in Chriſt. Specially, ſeeing before men beginne to repent, there are wrought in them (by Gods Spirit through the preaching of the Word) certaine preparing graces that doe begin repentance: whereas they come to beleeve the Goſpell, there be no ſuch preparations wrought, to fit them thereunto.
                     Before the repentance (I ſpeake of) can bee wrought in men, firſt, God workes in men a knowledge and beliefe that it is his will they ſhould repent; and this is done by the preaching of the precepts of God, that command men to repent. Secondly, God workes in them a bethinking them of their former ſinnes,
                           Ezek. 20.43. Ier. 8.6. Lamen. 3.40. 2. Chron. 6.37. 2. Cor. 7.10. Ioel 2.12. Zach. 12. Act. 9.6. a ſearching and finding them out, an acknowledgement and confeſſion of them, and hearty ſorrow for them, and feare of condemnation due unto them; and this is done by the threatnings of God, which denounce

condemnation to the impenitent, which drive them to repent. Thirdly, God workes in them a deſire to repent, and an hope of pardon, which is done by the promiſes of God, that freely offer forgiveneſſe to the repentant, which drawes and allures them to repent. Laſtly, God workes in them a perſwaſion of a poſsibility for them to bee pardoned: a good hope that God will forgive them as well as others; and this is done by the examples of the faithfull that have beene pardoned upon their repentance; and this animates and encourages them to repent: (now who can deny, but that theſe graces prepare men to repentance, and that where theſe are wrought, repentance muſt needs be begun in men by theſe preparations?)
                     But before a beliefe of the Goſpel is wrought in men, there are no ſuch preparing graces wrought; for before this be wrought, there is nothing in mens minds and underſtandings, but darkneſſe and ignorance,
                           Act. 26.18. eph. 1.17. Rom. 8.7. infidelitie and unbeliefe, which are enmity to the beliefe of the Goſpel;1. Cor. 2.14. and therefore it is a wonderfull great worke to cauſe naturall men (who cannot receive the things of the Spirit) to

aſſent to the doctrine of the Goſpell, as the Word and truth of God;1. Theſ. 2.13. when before this there is no other worke of the Spirit to lead and prepare them thereunto, but hearing and attending to the Word of God. And therefore theſe points conſidered, I cannot ſee, (for my part) but that repentance may very well bee begun before faith in Chriſt, ſeeing as unlikely, and as great a worke as that is wrought before it, namely, a ſtedfaſt beliefe of the Goſpell; and that upon Gods owne authority, without any evidence of Reaſon. And ſo I paſſe unto my ſixt and laſt Reaſon.
                  
                  
                     ARGUMENT VI.
                     
                        Repentance is begun before faith, becauſe it was preached before faith: for repentance was the firſt doctrine that was preached by Iohn Baptiſt, by Chriſt, by Chriſts Diſciples, and his Apoſtles.
                     
                     The Reaſon is probable, becauſe the preaching of it firſt, implies the practiſing of it firſt; and the practiſing of it firſt, implies the working of it firſt, in thoſe to whom it was preached: for God by the preaching of any duty, did worke uſually the grace that muſt enable

them to doe it, to the end they might practiſe the ſame accordingly.
                     And that all theſe preached the doctrine of repentance firſt, and before all other doctrines, is evident in the pa
                           •
                        ticulars:
                           Mat. 3.2. act 19.4. 1. Iohn the Baptiſt did ſo, it is plaine: for by that doctrine he prepared the way to the Lord, in the hearts of the people;
                           Mat. 3.3. and that doctrine is by Marke called the beginning of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt.
                        
                           Mar. 1.2. act 10 36. Mat. 4.17. 2. Chriſt himſelfe did ſo, as is cleare by the Evangeliſt S. Mathew. 3.
                           Luke 10.9. marke 6.12. 
                        Christs ſeventy Diſciples did ſo, as is manifeſt by the Evangeliſts S. Marke and S. Luke. 4. And the Apoſtles of Chriſt did preach repentance firſt both before Chriſts death and reſurrection,
                           Mat. 10.17. marke 5.12. Act. 2.38. luke 24.47. and after his reſurrection alſo. So that repentance being the firſt duty that was preached by them, preaching being the meanes to worke the duties that were taught, and the graces that were required of hearers,
                           Rom. 10.14. and the meanes of preaching being effectuall, according to the doctrines were taught and preached;
                           Act. 11.20. & 14.5. what ſhould hinder, but that repentance ſhould be firſt wrought by preaching, ſeeing it was firſt taught by preaching?
                     I might here alledge a place out of the

Acts of the Apoſtles,
                           Act. 26.18. where taking infidelity and ignorance out of the minds of the Gentiles, and planting in them a knowledge and beliefe of the Goſpell, is called a turning of them; which will eaſily prove, that ſome turning or repentance is wrought before faith in Chriſt: (for turning, or converting, and repenting, are all one action, Act. 3 19.) Likewiſe I might cite a Text out of the Epiſtle to the Corinthians,2. Cor. 3.16, 17. where the Apoſtle ſaith, that before the vaile of infidelity (whereby the Iewes did deny to beleeve in Chriſt) hee taken from them, their hearts muſt bee turned to the Lord; which implies, that before the Iewes will beleeve in Chriſt, their hearts muſt be turned to the Lord: for they muſt mourne for their infidelity, before they can looke upon him whom they have pierced,
                        
                           Zach. 12.10. that is, beleeve in him for ſalvation.
                     Alſo I might produce a place out of Mathew where Chriſt wils thoſe that are weary and heavy laden to come unto him;
                           Mat. 11.28. and to beleeve in him, Ioh. 6.35. For I know not how men ſhould ſo be weary and heavie laden with ſinne, (as the people are ſuppoſed to be, whom he invites to 
                           •
                        ome to him) and have no purpoſe to leave their former evill courſes,

that ſo preſſe and perplexe their conſciences, before they come to Chriſt to be eaſed.
                     In like manner I might quote Hebr. 6.2. Act. 20.21. Marke 1.15. which I take, muſt be underſtood of the precedencie of the purpoſe of the heart to leave our former evill courſes, and to leade new lives; ſeeing other reaſons from the Word doe plainely prove it: and then the place in Act. 11.21. which ſeemes to ſpeake of beleeving before repenting, muſt be underſtood of the precedency of that faith, which is a beliefe of the Goſpell unto repentance; or of the precedencie of faith in Chriſt, unto the practice of repentance in the life.
                     And many other ſuch Texts I could alledge, but that I hope theſe ſixe Reaſons that I have alledged, will bee ſufficient: and I am loth to be too tedious, in dwelling any longer upon the proofe hereof; wherefore I leave the proofe of it, and come to clearing of the point, by anſwering the Obiections againſt it.
                     
                        OBIECTION 1.
                        
                           
                              
                                 §. 3 Repentance is not begunne before faith in Chriſt, for then repentance ſhould be ſinne.
                        
                        The reaſon (they thinke) is good,

becauſe if repentance bee begunne before faith, then is it not of faith; and if it bee not of faith, then is it ſinne: for whatſoever is not of faith, is ſinne, Rom. 14. laſt Verſe.
                        
                           Solution.
                           The reaſon is not good: becauſe though repentance bee begunne before faith, and therefore be not of it, yet is it not ſinne for all that; no more then an hiſtoricall faith, which is a beliefe of the Goſpel, is ſinne, becauſe it goes before a ſaving faith, and therefore is none of it.
                           In like manner, the proofe of the reaſon, out of the fourteenth to the Romanes is not to the purpoſe.
                           Firſt, becauſe the queſtion is of faith in CHRIST for iuſtification, but the proofe is onely of a faith that is a perſwaſion of liberty, or warrant to the conſcience, to eate of the meates there ſpoken of: with which wee have nothing to doe in our queſtion.
                           The Apoſtles meaning is not (as it ſhould have been, if the proofe were to purpoſe:) whoſoever eates the meates there ſpoken of, before hee have a ſaving faith wrought in him, doth ſinne, (for he takes it for granted, that all the

                              Romanes, before hee wrote this Epiſtle, had a ſaving faith, and therefore the caueat comes too late.) But the Apoſtles meaning is, that whoſoever he be of the Church of Rome, that eates of the meats then ſpoken of without faith; that is, before he have a beliefe or aſſurance to his conſcience, upon ſome good ground or warrant of the Word, that hee may lawfully eate thereof, hee ſinnes in eating. Why? namely, becauſe he doubts whether hee may eate or no; and yet eates (for to eate with doubting whether hee may lawfully eate, and to eate without faith, that is, without warrant to the conſcience from the Word whether he may eate or no, are in that place all one.)
                           And that this faith there meant is plaine by this reaſon: becauſe though the Romanes had a ſaving faith, whereby they truſted to Chriſt for ſalvation: yet if they had not the faith Paul ſpeakes of, whereby they certainly beleeved, and aſſuredly perſwaded themſelves they might lawfully eate of them, but did doubt whether they might or no, they did certainly ſinne: for whatſoever is not of this faith, is ſin (ſaith the Apoſtle.)
                           Secondly, I anſwer, that this repentance

is of faith, in the Apoſtles ſenſe; becauſe it is that wee are perſwaded in our conſcience wee have warrant and precept for, out of the Word of God. So that this firſt obiection with the proofe is to no purpoſe; but let us heare another.
                        
                     
                     
                        OBIECTION 2.
                        
                           Repentance is not begunne before faith in Chriſt: becauſe then repentance ſhould proceed out of an heart vnpurified.
                        
                        The reaſon is taken for good: becauſe the heart is purified by faith;
                              Act. 15 9. whence they thus argue: If the heart be purified by faith, then is the heart impure, till it have faith wrought in it: and if the heart be impure till it have faith wrought in it; then if repentance be wrought before faith, it muſt needs proceede out of an heart impure, or unpurified: and conſequently be unacceptable to God; which cannot be affirmed of trye repentance, Pſal. 51.
                        The reaſon is not good,Sol. for all the ſhew it makes: becauſe though repentance be begunne before a ſaving faith, and though faith purifie the heart, yet will not repentance proceede from an heart unpurified, that is wholly & altogether impure, (for ſo much the reaſon

neceſſarily implyes, elſe it is to no purpoſe.) For before repentance bee wrought in men, the Spirit of GOD, through the Word preached, workes in them certaine preparing graces, that fit them to repentance, and begin it in them (whereof we heard a little before) which alſo doe beginne the purifying of the heart, and doe in part cleanſe it, though it bee more purified, by a ſaving faith when it is come, as ſhall be ſeene in the next Chapter, God willing.
                        The proofe likewiſe of the reaſon, is inſufficient; becauſe it is not to purpoſe. For the point to be proved by it, is, that faith purifies the heart, with the purifying of ſanctification, (for it ſuppoſeth that before faith be wrought in the heart, it is wholly impure with the filth of ſinne; and purifying from the filth of ſinne, is ſanctification) whereas the proofe is not meant of purifying by ſanctification, but by iuſtification, wch I proove thus:
                        Firſt, the words, purifying their hearts b
                                 •
                               faith, are not meant of purifying by ſanctification, becauſe they are an anſwere to a queſtion, and the queſtion was not touching the neceſsitie of Circumciſion,

and other Legall purifyings unto ſanctification, that is, whether they were neceſſary to ſanctifie the beleeving Gentiles, (for there is not a word of that in all that Chapter:) but whether they were neceſſarie to iuſtification, (that is) to make them capable of forgiveneſſe of ſinnes, and eternall life.
                        Secondly, the words of purifying the heart by faith; muſt be underſtood of purifying by iuſtification.
                        1. Becauſe it is onely interpreted of purifying it by iuſtification, as is plaine by the 11. Verſe following; where the Apoſtle ſaith, We beleeve that through the grace of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt we ſhall bee ſaved as well as they, that is, though wee beleeving Gentiles be not circumciſed: yet doe we truſt to be iuſtified and ſaved by the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, as well as the beleeving Iewes that are circumciſed.
                        2. Becauſe they are a reaſon of an anſwere to a queſtion, and the queſtion was onely concerning iuſtification, as appeares by the ſcope of the Chapter. Now then the queſtion beeing whether the beleeving Gentiles were bound, if they wil be ſaved, to be circumciſed, and

to keepe the whole ceremoniall Law (as▪ appeares by the fifth and tenth Verſe of that 15. Chapter of the Acts. The ſumme of the anſwere to this queſtion beeing that they are not bound (as appeares by verſe 10, 19, 24, 28) and one reaſon why they are not bound, beeing given in theſe words, purifying their hearts by faith, verſ. 9. What can we imagine Peters meaning to be but this: that therefore the beleeving Gentiles are not bound to bee circumciſed, nor to keepe the whole Law to iuſtification; namely, becauſe they are purified by faith, that is, they are iuſtified and ſaved by faith?
                              Rom 3.10. & & 4.11. Act. 10.43. & 13.39. Gal. 2.19.20, 21 For ſo the Apoſtle uſes in many places to oppoſe iuſtification by faith, to iuſtification by the workes of the Law, to confute the one by the other.
                        And to the end no reaſonable man may thinke ſtrange of this interpretation: I pray them well to conſider theſe three points.
                        1. That the word purifying is in other places of Scripture underſtood of purifying, by iuſtifying or ſaving: as where the Apoſtle Iohn ſaith, that the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt purifyeth or cleanſeth us from all ſinne:1. Ioh. 1.7. that is, iuſtifies and ſaves

us from the puniſhment of ſinne.
                        2. That the manifeſt uſe and end of the Legall cleanſings, and Ceremoniall purifyings was, to teach us that wee are iuſtified and ſaved from our ſinnes, and the puniſhment of them,
                              Heb. 9.14. Act. 10.22. by the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt.
                        3. That the Apoſtle in that place of Acts the 15. doth (as I conceive) therefore uſe the word purifying, for iuſtifying or ſaving, by occaſion of the perſons and things, about which the queſtion was made; to which the words purifying their hearts by faith, were in part an anſwere.
                        The perſons were Gentiles, whom the beleeving Iewes eſteemed impure, and conſequently uncapable of ſalvation, becauſe they were not circumciſed, and keepers of Moſes Law.
                        The thing or matter was Circumciſion, and other Ceremoniall purifyings, by obſerving whereof, the Iewes thought themſelves pure, that is, capable of ſalvation. Now the Apoſtle beeing to ſhape an anſwere to this people of the Iewes, concerning this point of Circumciſion, and other Legall, purif
                              •
                           ings, that they are not neceſſarily bound to obſerve them; and one reaſon

of the anſwere beeing given in theſe words, purifying their hearts by faith. What can wee imagine the effect of that anſwere to be but this; that therefore they are not to ſeeke to bee iuſtified by the workes of the Law: viz. becauſe they are purified, that is, iuſtified by faith and by it, they are accepted as righteous in Gods ſight, and conſequently capable of ſalvation, though bodily, they bee not circumciſed, nor legally waſhed in the fleſh, by Ceremoniall purifyings?
                        And why then ſhould it bee thought ſtrange for the Apoſtle, to uſe the word purifying, for iuſtifying: ſeeing the matter of the queſtion was, concerning ceremoniall purifyings: and the perſons that moved the queſtion were beleeving Iewes, who well underſtood what was the uſe and end of ſuch purifyings? the perſons concerning whom the queſtion was moved, were the Gentiles, whom the Iewes eſteemed impure and uncleane, Act. 10.1. that is, not within the Covenant of ſalvation. Seeing the anſwer to the queſtion was, that they are not bound to obſerve them: namely, to the end they may bee capable of ſalvation, by the obſerving of them; and the reaſon of the anſwere

being in effect, becauſe they are iuſtified by faith.
                        So that the Obiection beeing of one kinde of purifying, viz. from the filth and corruption of ſinne, which is ſanctification: and the proofe of another, viz. from the puniſhment and guilt of ſinne, which is iuſtification; it can prove nothing at all againſt my queſtion: And ſo I proceed to another Obiection.
                     
                     
                        OBIECTION 3.
                        
                           Repentance is not begunne before a ſaving faith; becauſe then repentance ſhould be acceptable without faith.
                        
                        The reaſon is thought good, becauſe if repentance be begunne before faith, then it is begun without faith; and if it be begun is without faith, then is it acceptable without faith; but it cannot bee acceptable without faith; becauſe without faith it is impoſsible to pleaſe God,
                           
                              Heb. 11.6. Heb. 11.6.
                        
                           Solution.
                           The reaſon is not good; becauſe in all the Elect (in whom onely trve repentance is wrought) a ſaving faith doth alwayes follow the beginning of

trve repentance: for God that begins in his, that good worke, whereby they may be made capable of ſalvation, will continue and perfect the ſame.
                                 Phil. 1.9. So that as long as a ſaving faith ſhall certainly bee afterward wrought in them: and where it is wrought, the begunne repentance may be made acceptable therby, as well by the working of it after repentance, as by the worke of it before: I can ſee no reaſon why it ſhould bee more needfull to worke faith in Chriſt, before repentance, to the end that repentance may be made acceptable unto God thereby: then it is needfull to worke faith in Chriſt before a beliefe of the Goſpell, and other preparing graces, that fit men to beleeve in Chriſt, ſeeing they alſo (and therefore repentance as well as they) are made acceptable to God; namely, unto ſalvation by faith in Chriſt, when it commeth, afterward, as well as if it had gone before it.
                           The proofe alſo of the reaſon, taken out of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, is to no purpoſe: becauſe the point to bee proved by it, is, that repentance can no way bee acceptable to God, without faith in Chriſt: for of ſuch an unacceptableneſſe,

muſt the obiection bee underſtood, elſe it prooves nothing in the queſtion: but the proofe is, that nothing can be acceptable unto God unto ſalvation, without faith in Chriſt: for he ſpeakes of ſuch a pleaſing of God as was in Enoch, who ſo pleaſed God by faith, that hee was tranſl
                                    •
                                 ted into heaven thereby, Verſe 5. and therefore pleaſed God unto ſalvation.
                           I freely grant, that Repentance cannot be acceptable to God without faith in Chriſt; becauſe it cannot be acceptable without Chriſt; and Chriſt doth not make us acceptable without faith.
                           I confeſſe alſo, that no man can pleaſe God, ſo as to bee ſaved, without he beleeve in CHRIST, no though it were poſsible for him to ſorrow for his ſinnes never ſo heartily; to purpoſe to leave them neuer ſo reſolutely, and to beleeve the Goſpell never ſo ſtedfaſtly: (for therefore faith onely pleaſeth God, becauſe faith onely truſts in Chriſt, in whom onely God is well pleaſed, Mat. 3.17. Ioh. 8.16.) but it is not true, that a man can no way pleaſe God without it, (that is) before hee have a ſaving faith, and beleeve in Chriſt for ſalvation.
                           
                              And my Reaſons are: 1. Becauſe the prayers and Almes to Cornelius, were vnacceptable to God ſome way, before hee had an expreſſe and ſpeciall faith in Chriſt, or had ever heard the Goſpell diſtinctly preached which ſhould work it in him, as is plaine by comparing the fourth and thirty fourth Verſes of the tenth Chapter of the Acts, with the fourteenth Verſe of the ſame Chapter.
                           Secondly, becauſe Ahabs repentance, and Iehues obedience, were acceptable to God in ſome kinde and to ſome end; namely, as they were the doing of Gods commandement, and as they were meanes to procure temporall bleſsings to them; though wee reade not in the Scripture, that either of them had a ſaving faith, when they did thoſe acceptable actions, or all their life after.
                           Thirdly, becauſe a knowledge and beliefe of our ſinfull and curſed eſtate in Adam; and thereupon ſorrow and humiliation for ſinne; after this, a beliefe of the Goſpel, and a deſire to repent and be ſaved, are all wrought in men, before a ſaving faith, for they are meanes and preparations to it: (as hath been ſhewed:) yet are they ſome way acceptable unto God, namely, as they are commanded,

and commended of God, as they are fruits and effects of Predeſtination, and Election, as they are wrought in us by the holy Spirit of God, through the preaching of the Word, and as they prepare us to beleeve in Chriſt, though none of them all ſeverally, or ioyntly, can be acceptable to ſalvation, or ſufficient to ſave us; if beſides them, wee have not faith in Chriſt to make us acceptable to God. So then, the Obiection beeing of one kinde of acceptableneſſe, and the proofe of another, it can proove nothing to ouerthrow my queſtion; and therefore I will try another.
                        
                     
                     
                        OBIECTION 4.
                        
                           Repentance is not begunne before a ſaving faith, becauſe then repentance ſhould bee begunne in men, before they have any ſpirituall life in them.
                        
                        The reaſon (they ſay) is good: becauſe if repentance be begunne before faith in Chriſt, then is it begunne without it; and if it bee begunne without faith in Chriſt; then is it begunne without ſpirituall life; for faith onely is the ſpirituall life of Chriſtians.
                              Gal. 2.20.
                        
                        
                           The Reaſon is not good, becauſe it begs the Queſtion: for it takes that for graunted (which is the point to be proved by the Text alledged) that faith in Chriſt is ſo the ſpirituall life of Chriſtians, that there is no ſpirituall life begun in Chriſtians, before they beleeve in CHRIST by a ſaving faith; whereas the proofe out of the Epiſtle to the Galatians is onely of the ſpirituall life unto iuſtification and ſalvation: For whereas the Apoſtle ſaith; In that I now live, I live by the faith of the Sonne of God. His meaning is not (as it muſt bee if the proofe be to purpoſe;) in that I have had at any time by the preaching of the Word any beginning of grace wrought in mee, any ſight of ſinne and ſorrow for it; any beliefe of the Goſpell, and inclination to repentance; any feare of God, or care to pleaſe him, or any worke of the Spirit tending to ſalvation, I have had it by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt; that is, I had it not wrought in me till I beleeved in Ieſus Chriſt, my faith in Chriſt was the inſtrumentall cauſe to work it
                        But his meaning (as appeares by the ſixteenth Verſe; and the drift of the whole Epiſtle) is this: the ground I have

that I ſhall bee ſaved, and attaine to eternall life, is not, becauſe I am an obeyer of the Law: for I am dead unto it, verſe 19. (that is, I renounce it to iuſtification, and will by no meanes ſeeke to bee ſaved by it) but the hope and hold I have, is this, that I am a beleever in Chriſt, and by this faith in the Sonne of God, I live in Gods ſight, and by this onely, I claime title and intereſt unto Chriſt and all his benefits; and therefore, in that in this life, I have hope of a better life, I have it by faith in the Sonne of God.
                        I grant, that repentance cannot bee begunne in men, before they have ſome ſpirituall life wrought in them: but I deny that there is no ſpirituall life wrought in men at all, till they beleeve in Chriſt, and truſt in him for ſalvation.
                        I acknowledge alſo, that there is not ſpirituall life enough, and ſufficient to ſalvation wrought in men, when they are mooved by the Spirit, through the preaching of the Word, to feele their need of Chriſt, by reaſon of their ſinfull and damnable eſtate, to mourne for it; to be weary & heauy loden with the burthen of it, to beleeve the Goſpell, and to deſire to bee ſaved: but

all theſe doe evidently argue, that ſome ſpirituall life is begunne in them, in whom all theſe graces that prepare unto faith in Chriſt are wrought: becauſe the naturall man doth not conceive nor receive theſe things of the Spirit,
                           1. Cor. 2.14. 
                           neither doth fleſh and bloud reveale them:
                              Math. 16.17. and therefore being all wrought in men before they can beleeve in Chriſt (as hath beene ſhewed) and by the worke of the Spirit, through the preaching of the Word, (as muſt needs be granted:) therefore muſt they needs be effects of the Spirit, and conſequently argue ſome ſpirituall life in thoſe, in whom they are wrought: though as ſoon as they be wrought, faith in Chriſt be not wrought in them, and though they in whom they are wrought have not ſpirituall life ſufficient unto ſalvation, untill faith in Chriſt it ſelfe bee wrought within them.
                     
                     
                        OBIECTION 5.
                        
                           Repentance is not begunne before faith in Chriſt; becauſe repentance is the proper effect and fruit of the Goſpell.
                        
                        The reaſon is held good, becauſe it is preſuppoſed that every proper fruit and

effect of the Goſpell followes faith in Chriſt; and that the Goſpell can have no proper effect and fruit in men, before ſaving faith bee wrought in them thereby.
                        
                           Solution.
                           The reaſon is not good; becauſe the proofes thereof are unſound: for firſt, it is 
                                 〈◊〉
                               not trve, that every proper effect and fruit of the Goſpell followes faith: For the ſaving faith it ſelfe is a proper effect of the Goſpell, yea, the moſt proper fruit of it. Yet doth it not follow faith in Chriſt: for how can a thing follow it ſelfe? Secondly, it is not true, that the Goſpell hath no proper effect and fruit in men, till a ſaving faith bee wrought in them. For that is a proper effect and fruit of the Goſpel,
                                 Rom. 10.14. which the preaching of the Goſpell onely workes in men. The preaching of the Goſpell onely, workes in men a beliefe of the Goſpell; and a beliefe of the Goſpell is wrought in men, before a ſaving faith, or faith in Chriſt for ſalvation; becauſe no man will ever truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation, before he beleeve this for a truth, that if hee beleeve in Chriſt, he ſhall be ſaved by his faith.
                           I grant, the Goſpell can have no proper

effect or fruit at all in men, till by the preaching of it there bee wrought in men that ſaith, which is the beliefe of the Goſpell:1. Cor. 1.23. for as long as it is fooliſhneſſe to them (which it is, till the truth thereof be beleeved) what effect can it haue?
                           And I confeſſe, that the preaching of the Goſpell can have no proper effects or fruits in men unto ſalvation, untill a ſaving faith bee wrought in them; for if men dye before this bee wrought, it is not a beliefe of the Goſpell, nor the beginnings of repentance that can ſave them. But I deny, (and I have diſprooved it,) that a ſaving faith is ſo the proper effect of the Goſpell, that the preaching of it hath no effect at all in men, till a ſaving faith bee wrought, (for upon this lyes the whole ſtrength of the reaſon, becauſe hereby would they proove, that therefore the Goſpell could have no power to begin the worke of repentance, before a ſaving faith, becauſe it hath no power to produce in men any proper effect or fruit, till a ſaving faith bee wrought in them, by the preaching thereof.) Wherefore this Obiection being as weake as the former, I will no

longer inſiſt upon the diſproofe of it, but proceed to the laſt.
                        
                     
                     
                        OBIECTION 6.
                        
                           Repentance is not begunne before faith in Chriſt, becauſe it is not begun before Regeneration.
                        
                        The reaſon is taken for good, becauſe they thinke that regeneration is not begun before a ſaving faith be wrought in men. For (ſay they) if the beginning of regeneration followes faith in Chriſt, and the beginning of repentance follow regeneration, then cannot repentance be begun before faith, becauſe it is not begun before regeneration.
                        
                           Solution.
                           The reaſon were good, if the proofes were found, (that is) if the two Propoſitions were true, whereon it is grounded, viz. that repentance is not begun before regeneration; nor regeneration begunne before a ſaving faith.
                           The firſt Propoſition, viz. that repentance is not begun before regeneration, is falſe, beeing underſtood of repentance from dead workes, or at the firſt converſion: for of this is the queſtion, as hath beene ſhewed, in ſetting

downe the ſtate thereof; and being underſtood alſo of regeneration fully wrought in all the parts (though not degrees) thereof; for of ſuch a worke of regeneration muſt the Propoſition be underſtood, elſe it proves nothing in the queſtion.
                           I grant, repentance cannot be begun till regeneration be begun; for they are both begun together; and no ſooner doth a child of God begin to repent, but he preſently begins to bee regenerate: for though it be true, (which is not queſtioned) that repentance for ſins committed after the firſt converſion, doe follow regeneration in the children of God, becauſe they (after they are regenerate) doe ſinne often, and therefore repent often after they are regenerated: yet is it not true (which is queſtioned) that repentance from dead works (that is, for ſinnes committed before the firſt converſion, when men are dead in treſpaſſes and ſinnes) is not begun before regeneration be fully wrought. And my reaſon is plaine and good, becauſe then repentance ſhould be no part of regeneration.
                           For if repentance doe but begin to be wrought in men, when regeneration

is already wrought in them, then cannot repentance be a part of regeneration, becauſe all the parts of regeneration, (I doe not ſay the degrees) are already fully wrought in the perſon regenerated, before repentance doe begin to be wrought in him.
                           But it is not true, that repentance is no part of regeneration, ſeeing it is one of the chiefe graces of God, wherein the change that is wrought in men by regeneration doth conſiſt, and the fruits of repentance in amendment of life, are the chiefe ſignes and markes, whereby it is manifeſted and diſcerned. Secondly, where (for proofe of their reaſon) they further alledge, that regeneration is not begun before faith in Chriſt: I ſay, that this Propoſition is as falſe as the other, being underſtood of a ſaving faith fully wrought, (for ſo it is underſtood in the queſtion.) For though it be true, (which is not queſtioned) that when a ſaving faith is wrought in a man, he may be truly ſaid to be regenerate, yet is it not true, (which is alledged, but not proved) that till a ſaving faith bee wrought in a child of God, there is no regeneration ſo much as begun in him.
                           
                              Regeneration is not uſually wrought all at once, on a ſudden, and in an inſtant, but by degrees, and at ſeverall times, ſucceſsively, as experience teacheth, namely, by the fore-worke of ſome graces of the Spirit, that doe prepare them thereunto: as namely, knowledge of our ſinfull and damnable eſtate by naturall generation; a beliefe of this, and upon this beliefe, a laying of it to heart, whereby we are made to feare, tremble; bee humbled, and caſt downe in our ſelves, not knowing what to do. After this, upon the hearing, beleeving, and laying to heart of the Goſpell preached, which promiſeth to regenerate us, and to bring us into a better eſtate, then wee had by nature: this makes us deſire to be regenerated, and to ſeeke in the uſe of the meanes after it; which when they are wrought in men by the preaching of the Word, then cannot it be denied, but that regeneration is begun in them, ſeeing ſpirituall life is begun, as hath bin ſhewed. And ſeeing they be all the workes of the Spirit of God in them,
                                 Iohn. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 .
                                    •
                                 
                               tending to regeneration, and ſalvation, and are not wrought by the power of nature, or naturall meanes, but by the meanes which

God hath given to his Church, for the regenerating of the members thereof, viz. the preaching of Gods holy Word.
                           I grant, that God is able to worke regeneration in an inſtant, as hee doth in children that dye infants; and it may be he hath done it by the Miniſterie of the Apoſtles, and other worthy Preachers, for the magnifying of his exceeding gracious power in their labours; but that he hath, or uſually now doth work ſo, I cannot ſee, becauſe experience teacheth, men are effectually called by degrees, and by Sermon after Sermon ſucceſsively.
                           I confeſſe alſo, that the beginnings of regeneration, (wrought by certaine preparing graces thereunto, whereof I ſpake a little before) are not ſufficient to ſalvation, unleſſe it be perfited in all the parts thereof; and except a ſaving faith doe afterwards inſue, to perfect it, and to make it acceptable: and yet for all that, I am of opinion, that regeneration is begun, before a ſaving faith be fully wrought; and that repentance is begun, before regeneration bee perfected, and conſequently, that repentance is begun before a ſaving faith.
                           Now then, it being ſufficiently prooved,

that repentance is begun before a ſaving faith, that is, that men begin to reſolve not to live in their former ſins, but to ſerve God better, before they can truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation, it remaineth, that for a concluſion of this Rule, I make ſome uſe and particular application of the point, to the end the Reader may examine himſelfe by it accordingly.
                        
                        
                           The application and uſe of this point.
                           And firſt, the conſideration of that which I have ſaid touching the precedencie of repentance to faith in Chriſt, in that manner and meaſure, as I have ſaid,may ſufficiently confute their opinion, who thinke, that a ſaving faith is fully wrought in men, before any repentance begin to be wrought in them; to which opinion they have bin drawn, partly by colour of ſome places of Scripture which ſeeme to fauour it; whereunto I have already given a particular, and (as I hope) a ſufficient anſwere, to which I referre the Chriſtian Reader.
                           If there be any thing in our Divines that ſeemes to contradict that which I

have ſaid touching this point, namely, if by any of them it be affirmed indefinitely, that faith goes before repentance; I humbly pray the Reader not to ſtumble at it, becauſe it doth not croſſe that which I have ſaid; for I have often ſaid as much: but to know and remember, that thoſe Divines doe not ſpeake of ſuch a faith and repentance as I doe; as ſhall be ſhewed in foure particulars:
                           Firſt, where they ſay, Faith goes before repentance, their meaning is, a beliefe of the Goſpell goes before repentance, which I never denyed: and where I ſay, Repentance goes before faith, my meaning is, not before a beliefe of the Goſpell; but before faith in Chriſt.
                           Secondly, if it may be prooved, that any of them in that ſentence ſpeake of faith in Chriſt, then where they ſay, Faith goes before repentance, their meaning is, a ſpeciall faith in Chriſt goes before repentance bee fully wrought, perfected and accepted; which I have plainely affirmed: and where I ſay, Repentance goes before faith in Chriſt, my meaning is, onely that repentance is begun before faith in Chriſt; and that a true (though a weake) meaſure of repentance is begun in men, before they

can truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation.
                           Thirdly, where they ſay, Faith goes before repentance, they meane, that faith in Chriſt goes before the practice of repentance, or the bringing foorth of fruites worthy amendment of life; which is the putting off the Old man, and putting on the New man in the actions of our lives, and whereby the repentance of the heart is manifeſted: all which I acknowledge with them. And where I ſay, Repentance goes before faith, my meaning is, that repentance is begun in the heart; and that a true purpoſe and reſolution of heart to leave our former evill wayes, and to ſerve God in a new converſation for time to come, is begun in men before they can goe to Chriſt, to be eaſed of their ſins, or truſt in him to be ſaved, which I thinke none of them ever meant to deny.
                           Fourthly, where they ſay, Faith goes before repentance, they meane, faith in Chriſt muſt goe, before repentance can be acceptable to God, which I confeſſe. And where I ſay, Repentance goes before faith, I doe not meane, that this begun repentance can be acceptable unto God to our ſalvation, before we beleeve in

Chriſt; but that it is onely begun as a preparation to make as fit perſons to beleeve in Chriſt; and by beleeving, to crave pardon of our ſinnes for his ſake; which I never read, any of them did deny. So that how ever at firſt ſight there may ſeeme to be ſome difference in iudgement betwixt my ſelfe and ſome of our Divines, that ſpeake generally and indefinitely of faiths going before repentance; yet by applying the diſtinctions that I have made of faith and repentance, there will be no contradiction indeed in this point betwixt me and them, but an eaſie way of reconciliation, and conſequently of conſent herein.
                           Yet am I not ignorant, that there be ſome Lutherans that oppoſe this Doctrine that I have delivered; and I wonder ſo much the more at it, becauſe (as hath beene formerly proved) they hold faith in Chriſt to be an aſſured perſwaſion of ſalvation by Chriſt; which I know not how poſsibly they can iuſtifie by the Word, in as much as it is impoſsible, any Chriſtian ſhould be aſſuredly and fully perſwaded of his ſalvation, before he hath repented: which yet muſt be true, if to beleeve in Chriſt,

be to be fully aſſured of ſalvation by Chriſt; and this faith be wrought before any beginning of repentance.
                           2. The point I have delivered touching the beginning of repentance before faith in Chriſt, may teach us how to know, whether or no, we have a ſaving faith; namely, if before we truſted in Chriſt for ſalvation; our hearts began to turne to God, to reſolve to leave our former evill courſes, and to leade a better life.
                           3. It ſerves to reprove all thoſe ſuch carnall Goſpellers, which preſume they have a ſaving faith; and will ſay, they truſt they ſhall be ſaved, though they live in their former ſinnes, and have no reſolution begun in their hearts (upon the grounds I have formerly mentioned) to ſerve God better, then they have done.
                           4. In the fourth place it may be a ground of great comfort to thoſe, that have beene ſo prepared to beleeve in Chriſt, as I have ſaid, and that have the beginning of repentance wrought in them: for they may build upon it, that if the Lord after this manner have cauſed them to ſeeke to be ſaved, and to go to Chriſt for it; that is, to beleeve

in the merit of his death and righteouſneſſe for the ſame; and be ſure that their faith is ſound indeed, and that they are fit perſons to beleeve in Chriſt for pardon.
                           Laſtly, this that hath beene delivered, touching the precedency of repentance to faith in Chriſt, may be a ground of exhortation:
                           Firſt, to Miniſters, to be wary how they preach this doctrine, That faith goes before repentance; and that they expound it, viz. that a beliefe of the Goſpell doth goe before repentance; but that repentance is begun, before a ſaving faith can be wrought, (that is) before we can truſt in Chriſt for ſalvation, with any hope to receive it.
                           Secondly, to Chriſtians: 1. That if they have bin otherwiſe minded, then I have taught, that they would alter and rectifie their iudgement herein, and learne to diſtinguiſh betwixt a beliefe of the Goſpell in generall, and faith or affiance in Chriſt in ſpeciall; becauſe though that faith which is a beliefe of the Goſpell, goe before repentance, yet that faith which is a truſt, or reſting, or relying on Chriſt for ſalvation, followes the beginning of repentance, as I have

ſaid.Rule 6. 2. That they would try their faith by this Rule, that ſo they may bee the fitter to try it alſo by the fruits which follow faith, which is the next Rule of Tryall.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               THE SIXTH RULE.
               
                  CHAP. IX. Whether doeſt thou find in thy ſelfe, that thy faith is effectuall, and lively, to the amending both of thy heart and life, and to the bringing forth of the fruites of faith in new obedience.
                  IT is a good proofe that our faith is ſound, if we be able to ſhew, wee have beene rightly fitted to it, and kindly prepared to beleeve in Chriſt;

but this is not all, nor enough; for as there doe go before faith in Chriſt certaine workes of the Spirit that doe prepare us thereunto; ſo doe there follow many workes of the Spirit, as fruites and effects of faith, that doe declare, it is not a dead, but a lively faith indeed; and this ſhall be the ſixt Rule, by which we are to try our faith, to the end wee may diſcerne, whether wee have a ſaving faith or no; accordingly as we ſhal diſcerne wee have theſe fruites in us, or no.
                  In the handling of this point, I will obſerve this method: 1. I will prove, that a ſaving faith is lively and effectual to produce many holy actions in them that have it. 2. I will declare what thoſe fruits and effects be, wherein faith ſhewes her efficacie. 3. I wil ſet down the meanes by which it becomes ſo powerfull. 4. and laſtly, I will exhort the Reader to examine himſelfe by this Rule, to the end he may find, whether he have theſe effects and fruites in himſelfe or no, and may further doe according as he finds by tryall: and theſe foure points ſhall be comprehended in foure Sections.
                  To prove the firſt point, viz. that a

ſaving faith is lively and effectuall in 
                        §. 1 thoſe that have it, to bring foorth many holy fruites,A ſaving faith is lively to ſtir up to holines and good duties. 1. Theſſ. 1.3. I need no plainer proofe, then that of the Apoſtle to the Theſſalonians, where he ſpeakes of the worke of their faith: by worke, not meaning any one particular, and ſingle worke onely, as if it had no more but one; but a powerfull efficacie, or effectualneſſe of their faith, to bring foorth many excellent effects.
                  This appeares not onely by the very next words, where two of thoſe effects are named, viz. Hope and Love; but alſo by the Apoſtle Iames, where he ſaith, Shew me thy faith by thy works,
                     
                        Iames 2.18. ſpeaking in the plurall number as of many: which may yet further be declared by the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes; where in the 11. Chapter he reckens up very many effects and fruites thereof, through the whole Chapter. And no marvell, ſeeing that faith, which is but a beliefe of the Goſpell,
                        Marke 6.20. Act. 19.18. is able to produce ſome effects in them in whom it is: and alſo ſeeing a ſaving faith hath for the Author of it God himſelfe; for the immediate Obiect,
                        Eph. 2.8. Iohn 3.16. Ieſus Chriſt the Sonne of God; for the foundation and ground of it, the promiſe of the Goſpell, or the new

Covenant of God; for the inſtrumentall working cauſe of it,
                        Rom. 16.25. the preaching of the Goſpell, which is the arme and power of God unto ſalvation;
                        Rom. 1.16.10.14. 1. Pet. 1.9. and for the end of it, eternall life: all which are ſtrong workers, and powerful perſwaders unto holineſſe. But I ſhall not need to labour much in this generall, ſeeing it ſhall be further more clearely proved in the particulars, in the proſecuting of the next point.
                  Touching the ſecond point, which 
                        §. 2 is,What be the particular fruits of a ſaving faith. to declare what be thoſe ſpeciall and particular fruites of a ſaving faith, by which ſhee ſhewes her efficacie in true beleevers. I ſay they are of two kinds; the one, are duties; the other, comfo
                        •
                     ts: of the duties I meane to ſpeake in this Chapter, and of the comforts in the next; but of the duties before the comforts, becauſe by the well performance of the duties, there ariſe greater and ſounder comforts to our ſoules, by our ſaving faith.
                  The duties, to the practice whereof, a ſaving faith doth incite, and perſwade a true beleever (to the end he may walke worthy of the grace of God;
                        Eph. 2.14. 1. Pet. 2.9. and ſhew foorth the vertues of him, that hath called him out of darkneſſe to light,) are many, and manifold,

in regard of the diverſity of the perſons to whom, matters whereabout, and occaſions upon which they are to be done; ſo that a declaration of them in particular, would require a larger Volume, then I now intend: therefore wil I content my ſelfe with ſetting downe the moſt generall, to the end the Reader may helpe himſelfe, with applying of particulars under each generall, as occaſion is offered, of the practice of any one of them.
                  
                     The ſumme of all our duties is thankfulnes.The ſumme of all the duties to which we are perſwaded by our ſaving faith, is thankfulnes to God for our ſalvation by Chriſt; and to this thankefulneſſe, upon this ground, we are exhorted by Paul,
                     1. Cor. 15.57. where he ſaith, Thankes be to God, who hath giuen us victory through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, namely, over ſinne and hell, death and Satan our ſpirituall enemies: and where he ſaith,
                        Eph. 1.3.5. 
                     Bleſſed be the God, and Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who hath bleſſed us with ſpirituall bleſſings in heavenly things, (namely, election, adoption, redemption, to which he ſaith, They were predeſtinate according to the good pleaſure of his wil,
                     1. Pet. 1.3. Pſal. 103.3. 
                     to the prayſe of the glory of his grace.) And to this thankfulneſſe upon the ſame ground were Peter and David
                     
perſwaded, and no marvell.
                  For if the conſideration of a temporall bleſsing received from man, doth, or ought to ſtirre us vp to thankefulneſſe; how much more ſhould the bleſsing of all bleſsings, the gift of our ſalvation by faith in Chriſt, ſtir us vp to thankfulnes unto God, by how much the more we are vilde and unworthy perſons that receiue it; the perſon is ſo high and excellent that beſtowes it, and the gift ſo worthy and neceſſary that is given us, without which wee were accurſed, though we had all the world; and with it we are bleſſed for ever, though wee had nothing elſe.
                  Our thankefulneſſe to God for ſalvation muſt firſt be acted and performed; then ſhewed and declared.
                  Our thankefulneſſe to God is acted and performed by theſe fiue duties.How our thankefulnes is acted and performed. Luk. 1.46.45.50 Gal. 1.15.
                  
                  Firſt, by acknowledging the rich grace, and free favour of God, in the worke of ſalvation from the beginning to the end thereof, in all the parts, degrees, & manner of working the ſame.
                  Secondly, by admiring Gods grace,
                        Rom. 11.22. 1. Ioh. 3.1. and wondring what ſhould move God to beſtow ſo great a favour upon ſuch unworthy wretches.
                  
                     Thirdly, by prizing and eſteeming of it above all gifts and bleſsings whatſoever;
                        Mat. 13.44. 
                     
                        Phil. 3.8. and (in compariſon of it) by counting all things but as droſſe and dung (which we ſhall doe,
                        Luk. 10.20. if we delight more in the aſſurance of our ſalvation, then in all the pleaſures and treaſures of the world.1. Theſ. 16.17. If we comfort our ſelves with the meditation hereof, in the middeſt of all worldly croſſes and afflictions;
                        Phil. 2.12. 2. Pet. 1.10. and if wee labour in the uſe of meanes to make it more ſure to our ſelves every day then other.)
                  Fourthly, thankefulneſſe to God for our ſalvation, is performed by acknowledging in our ſoules unfainedly,
                        Luk. 1.48. & 15.11.19. & 18.13. our unworthineſſe of ſalvation by reaſon of our ſinne originall and actuall; and particularly for our ſinne of unthankfulneſſe, for his manifold mercies, ſpecially this.
                  Fiftly, and laſtly, we are thankefull to God for our ſalvation by faith, when we deſire and ſtudy, reſolve, and endeuour to ſerue him with,
                        Luk. 1.74. 1 Pet. 2.24. Tit. 2.14. & for ſo ineſtimable a benefit, in holines & righteouſneſſe all the dayes of our life afterward.
                  
                     How our thankefulneſſe to God is manifeſted and declared.Secondly, our thankefulnes to God for our ſalvation, is to bee manifeſted and declared.
                  
                     Firſt, by confeſsing with our mouthes Gods great mercy, in ſinging of Pſalmes of praiſe to him for it, as David,
                     
                        Pſal. 103. luk. 1.46.47. & 68. 
                     Zachariah, and Mary did.
                  Secondly, by refraining to doe thoſe things that we know are diſpleaſing to our gracious Father in Chriſt. For all that call on the Name of the Lord,
                     2. Tim 2.19. 
                     muſt depart from iniquitie, becauſe the grace of God that bringeth ſalvation,
                     
                        Tit. 2.11. 
                     teacheth men to deny all ungodlineſſe and worldly luſts. For it were a ſhame for the redeemed of the Lord to walke as Gentiles doe:
                        Epheſ. 4.17. for with them the night is paſt, and the day is come; and therefore it is good reaſon, that they ſhould caſt off the works of darkneſſe:
                        Rom. 13.12, 13. for hereby the purpoſe of their hearts to leave their former ſins, begunne before faith in Chriſt, is put in practiſe. In which worke of the refraining ſinne they are furthered: Firſt, by often remembring of former ſinnes,
                        Luk. 15.13.18. 2. Cor. 7.8. to beware by them of committing the like againe. Secondly,
                        Rom. 6.21. Iude ver. 23. Ezek. 20.43. 1. Pet. 5.9. Iam. 4 8. Epheſ. 6.12.13. Prou. 4.23. Mat. 5.29. Iob 31.1. by ſorrow for paſt ſinnes. Thirdly, by ſhame for them. Fourthly, by hatred of them, and of themſelves for their ſinnes ſake. Fiftly, by reſiſting Satan, and ſtriving againſt ſinne. Sixtly, by watchfulneſſe over our actions and affections, our

members and ſenſes. Laſtly, by avoiding the occaſions and opportunities of ſinne.
                  
                     
                        Prov. 5.8. 1. Theſ. 5.22. Prov. 23.1, 2, 30Thirdly, our thankefulneſſe to God for our ſalvation by faith in Chriſt, is teſtified and declared by doing thoſe good workes, that we know will pleaſe God; and that not onely in the actions of Religion, and of Gods worſhip generally, as we are Chriſtians; but in the ſpeciall workes of our particular Callings, as we are Magiſtrates, Miniſters, Husbands, Wives, Maſters, Servants, Parents, Children, Husbandmen, or Tradeſmen, according as God hath called us to any place in the Church, Commonwealth, or Family. For ſo ſaith Paul to Titus;
                     
                        Tit. 3.8. 
                     This is a trve ſaying, and worthy by all meanes to be received, that they which have beleeved, bee carefull to ſhew forth good workes: and the reaſon is, becauſe they who have faith in Chriſt,
                     
                        Epheſ. 2.9, 10. 
                     are Gods workmanſhip, created unto good works, which God hath ordained that they ſhould walke in: and they are taught to liue righteouſly,
                     
                        Tit. 2.14. 
                     ſoberly, and godly in this preſent world: namely, to teſtifie to God, their owne ſovles, and others, the foundneſſe of their faith and beliefe, by the holineſſe and unblameableneſſe of their life:

as alſo the truth of their repentance, and purpoſe of heart to ſerve God in a new life, which was begunne before their faith in Chriſt, whereof we ſpake before.
                  The duties that wee are to doe, to teſtifie our thankfulneſſe to God for our ſalvation, concerne either God, our neighbour, or our ſelves.
                  Thoſe which concerne God,Duties to God. are Either particular belonging to each perſon in the Trinitie; or generall, appertaining to the whole Deity.
                  The particular duties concerne either God the Father,Particular to each perſon. as a continuall calling upon him Abba our Father,
                        Rom. 8.15, 16. Mat. 6.9. with ſighes and grones of our hearts in ſecret prayer, Or they concern God the Sonne; as namely, a continuall truſting in his merits for the pardon of the ſinnes of every day,1. Theſ. 1.10. 2. Tim. 4.8. Tit 2.13. Epheſ. 4.30. 1. Theſ. 5.19. and an earneſt looking and longing for his ſecond comming, Or the Holy Ghoſt, as namely, a watchfull care that we grieue not the Spirit of God, nor quench his grace in us by relapſing into ſinne, but endevour to approve our ſpirits, to his Holy Spirit in the ſcope and aime of all our actions.Generall to the whole Deity.
                  
                  The duties that concerne the whole

Deity in generall, are either inward or outward.
                  
                     Inward duties. Gal. 5.6.The inward that are performed with the minde, are; firſt loue to GOD for his mercy with all our hearts.
                        Rom. 5.2. Tit. 2.14. Revel 3.19. Gal. 2.11, 12. Secondly, reioyſing in the Lord for his mercy in our ſoules in the midſt of all our worldly troubles. Thirdly, zeale of Gods glory, in not ſuffering with patience his name to be diſhonoured or taken in vaine.
                        Heb. 12.6, 7. Rom. 12.12. 1. Theſ. 1.4. Pſal. 34.10. Rom. 8.28.32. Fourthly, patience under Gods corrections, becauſe hee is now become to us a Father. Fiftly, dependance on his providence for temporall things, not fearing to want neceſſaries that may further us in the way to Heaven.
                        Phil. 2.12. Pſal. 130.1. Col. 3.22. Act. 23.1. & 24.16. 1. Theſ. 2 4. Sixtly, feare to offend God; care to pleaſe God, & approving our hearts to him in keeping a good conſcience. Seventhly, and laſtly, a dayly and continuall renuing of our repentance and Covenant with God of new obedience, reſolving and vowing more conſtantly and conſcionably to ſerue him, then heretofore we have done, in obeying all his commandements, in beleeving his promiſes, in fearing his threatnings, and profiting by all his workes of mercy and iudgement, unto humiliation, ſanctification and conſolation,

according to the ſeverall uſe and end thereof. And by the practice of theſe, we ſhew that we are regenerate, that our ſinfull nature is in ſome good meaſure mortified, and wee made partakers of the divine nature, by faith, in the power of the death and righteouſneſſe of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
                  There be outward workes alſo,Outward duties. that the faithfull performe to God, to teſtifie their thankefulneſſe to him for their ſalvation by faith in Chriſt, as namely: Firſt, labour by ſtudy and meditation more cleerely to underſtand the myſterie of the Goſpell, in which the way of ſalvation is taught us, and by which a ſaving faith is wrought in us, for the attaining of ſalvation according thereunto. Secondly, a 
                        Rom. 10.10. 2. Cor. 4.13. profeſsing of his truth more boldly; ſpecially that part of it that concernes our ſalvation. Thirdly, a 1. Tim. 6.12. Phil. 1.27. Gal. 2.11. defending and maintaining of it by word, writing, or purſe, or any other meanes we may. Fourthly, 
                        Col. 1.23. Act. 14.22. 1. Cor. 10.13. Phil. 1.27. 2. Tim. 4.7. Ioh. 8.31. 1. Tim. 2.15. Gal. 5.1. 2. Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. Rom. 6.2. Act. 20.44. & 21.13. 1. Theſ. 
                        
                           •
                        .26. continuing in the true faith and obedience of the Goſpell, without apoſtaſie either to the Law to ſeeke for iuſtification by it, together with faith in Chriſt, or to looſeneſſe and diſſoluteneſſe of life, and converſation. Fiftly, a readineſſe and

reſolution to ſuffer for the Goſpell, as loſſe of goods, good name, life, or libertie, if God ſhould be pleaſed to vouchſafe us the honour to be Martyrs and witneſſes of his truth. Sixtly, zeale and forwardneſſe in the worſhip of God ſecretly in our cloſets,
                        Ioh. 9.31, 38. Act. 24.14. Phil. 3.3. privately in our Families, or publikely in the congregation according to the Goſpell, and the ordinances of God, which in the Goſpell are appointed to that end. And thus much of our duty to God, inward and outward.
                  
                     Duties to our Neighbour.The workes that are the duties we are to performe to our neighbour, to teſtifie our thankefulneſſe to God for our ſalvation, they are generall and particular.
                  
                     
                        Gal. 5.6. 1. Theſ. 1.3. Epheſ. 1.15. 2. Pet. 1.7.The generall is Love, yea, brotherly love, that is, an entire loving affection to our Neighbour, becauſe he is a beleever in Chriſt, or a brother with us in the ſame profeſsion of our Chriſtian Faith.
                  The ſpeciall Duties which are alſo the fruits of this Love, are two. Firſt, a refraining to doe him any harme, in ſoule, body, goods, or good name, life or libertie, in his owne perſon, or in the perſons, or things that be his, either by

thought, word or deed. Secondly, an indevour to doe him, or his, any or all the good we poſsibly can any way, ſpecially in the pittying and relieving him in his miſeries and diſtreſſes; as alſo,2. Cor. 8.2.7. in furthering him in the way to Heaven, by milde reproofes,
                        Heb. 3.13. or admonitions, if we heare or ſee him doe ill; or by good exhortations, comforts and incouragements out of the Word,1. Theſ. 5.11. if we take notice he doth well: and all this is to be done in conſcience of our duty to God, and meerely in Chriſtian loue to our neighbour, without reſpect of profit or benefit to our ſelues, to the end it may be acceptable to God, profitable to our brother, and comfortable to our owne ſoules.
                  The laſt duty followes,Duties to our ſelves. in doing whereof wee may teſtifie our thankefulneſſe to God for our ſalvation, by faith in Chriſt, it concernes our ſelves, and conſiſts in two points, according to the two parts that are to bee ſaved by Chriſt: namely, our ſoules and our bodies: for as they are both to be glorified in Heauen; ſo it is reaſon wee ſhould heere on earth glorifie God with them both,1. Cor. 6 20. Rom. 12.1, 2. being bought with ſo deare a price as is the precious bloud of the Lord Ieſus.
                  
                     The Duties concerning our bodies are principally two.Duties concerning our bodies. Firſt, a denying to the members and ſenſes thereof unlawfull obiects of ſinne, whereby we may bee inſnared, ſpecially of thoſe ſinnes, whereunto we are moſt of all inclined, either by nature, or by cuſtome; for this is to mortifie our earthly members: this is to crucifie the fleſh,
                     
                        Col. 3.5. 
                     with the affections and luſts thereof:
                        Gal. 5.24. 1. Cor. 9.27. this is to beat downe the body: yea, this is to plucke out the right eye,
                     
                        Math. 5.29. 
                     and to cut off the right hand: to the end wee may not make them weapons of unrighteouſneſſe unto ſinne. Secondly, an uſing of the parts, members and ſenſes of the body,
                        Rom. 6.13.19. as weapons of righteouſneſſe unto holineſſe: as namely, an uſing of our tongues and mouthes to pray to God, and praiſe his name; our eares, to heare his Word; our feete, to to walke in his houſe, and place of his worſhip: and hereby we ſhall preſent our bodies a living ſacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God by Ieſus Chriſt,
                     
                        Rom. 12.1, 2. Cor. 6.19. Cor. 6.15. whereby wee ſhall make them fit Temples for the Holy Ghoſt, and members of Chriſt.
                  
                  
                     Duties concerning our Rules. Luk. 21.34.Laſt of all, the duties to our ſelves follow, in reſpect of our ſoules, which are: Firſt, a moderating of our deſires and affections to earthly things, to the

end our hearts may not be ſtolne away from the love of God, and care of our ſalvation; and this is called ſobrietie:1. Theſ. 5.8. Tit. 2.11. 1. Pet. 3.8. & 3.13. 1. Theſ. 5.16. 1. Pet. 1.8. Phil. 4.4. if thus we doe, wee ſhall be at more libertie to ſerue God, and haue the more leaſure to reioyce in the Lord alwayes, and in the hope of heaven: whereas if otherwiſe our hearts bee filled with worldly cares, pleaſures and treaſures, honours and fauours, there will bee no roome within us for ſpirituall ioyes, and heavenly comfort to lodge and harbour.
                  2. The ſecond Duty is a ſtriuing in the uſe of meanes to grow in grace,2. Pet. 3. vlt.
                      and in the knowledge of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
                        Iude 20. and to build our ſelves further in our moſt holy faith, to the end we may bee the better enabled to reſiſt Satans temptations unto hereſie in opinion, or to profaneneſſe, in practice of life, to practice holy duties more cheerefully, and to perſeuere unto the end conſtantly; that being faithfull to the death,
                     
                        Revel. 2, 10. 
                     wee may receive the crowne of life.
                  
                  The third is a making ſure to our ſelves our Calling and Election, Adoption and ſalvation,2. Pet. 1.10. to the end wee may reioyce with ioy unſpeakeable and glorious, euen in this life, by keeping faith

and a good conſcience. And thus much of the ſecond point of this Rule, namely, the declaring what bee the duties which the faithfull performe, as the fruits of their faith, to teſtifie their thankſgiuing to God, for their ſalvation by faith in Chriſt.
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 3 How faith becomes ſo effectuall.
                     Now the third point of this Rule followes, which is a declaration how faith becomes ſo effectuall to the producing of ſuch holy effects, and to the perſwading of them to doe ſuch excellent duties.
                     I ſay then, this comes to paſſe efficiently and inſtrumentally: Efficiently two wayes. Firſt, by the power of God, yea,
                           Epheſ. 1.17. by the exceeding greatneſſe of his power in them which beleeve according to the working of his mighty power which hee wrought in Chriſt, when hee raiſed him vp from the dead:
                        
                           Epheſ. 3.17. and ſecondly, by the power of Ieſus Chriſt the obiect of faith: for by faith he dwels in our hearts: and by faith we draw vertue from him, namely, from his death,
                           Rom 6.3. Cor. 
                           
                              •
                            12. Phil 3 9, 10. to dye to ſinne, and from his Reſurrection, to walke in newneſſe of life.
                     The ſecond way by which faith in

Chriſt becomes ſo effectuall, is inſtrumentall, that is, faith uſeth ſome meanes as inſtruments to worke her efficacie by. And theſe inſtruments are without us, or within us: they without us, are the Word preached, and the adminiſtration of the Sacraments, for theſe are the foode of our ſoules, whereby wee grow in the ſpirituall ſtrength of grace: and the inward are: Loue and the gift of Prayer,
                           Gal. 5.6. whereby we beg and obtaine increaſe of grace, whereby wee are made fruitfull in good works,
                           Epheſ. 6.18. to the glorious praiſe of God, the good example of others, the comfort of our owne ſoules. And ſo I come at length to the laſt branch of this Rule.
                  
                  
                     The uſe and application of it.
                           §. 4
                     
                     Seeing then ſuch ſweet Hearbs grow in the garden of a faithfull heart, & ſuch wholſome fruits on the tree of a ſaving faith: what remaines, but according to my promiſe I direct the Reader to try his faith, by that which I have ſaid of the efficacie of faith, to the end he may know whether hee have ſuch a faith or no.
                     For I demand of them, If they haue

the ſame faith, why ſhould they not have the ſame effects and fruits of faith in them? I doe not ſay in meaſure, but in kinde; why ſhouldeſt not thou by thy faith walke with God and pleaſe him, as Abel?
                           Heb. 11.5. Heb. 11.8. by thy faith obey God, as Abraham did?
                           Iob 1. & 19. by thy faith learn patience under the croſſe, as well as Iob did? by thy faith loue God,
                        
                           Luk. 7.47. 
                        
                           Pſal. 103.1. as well as Mary Magdalen? by thy faith bee ſtirred up to thankefulneſſe to God for thy ſalvation, as David was, and Zachariah?
                           Luk 1.68. Why ſhouldeſt not thou being a beleever in theſe dayes, ſhew thy faith by thy workes,
                        
                           Iam. 2.18. as well as Iames wils the beleevers in his dayes; and be carefull to ſhew forth good workes,
                        
                           Tit. 3.8. as well as Paul with the beleevers of his time? Let us ſee it, that wee may beleeve thee, that thou art a trve beleever indeed, and that thou haſt a lively, and not a dead faith.
                     
                        Simil.For wouldeſt thou perſwade thy ſelfe thou haſt an Apple Tree in thy orchard, if thou couldeſt never ſee fruit on it, but Leaues onely? or that it were a very good Apple tree, if it beare nothing but ſowre Wildings or Crabbes? no more oughteſt thou to perſwade thy ſelfe thou haſt a true liuely faith in Chriſt, if it ſtir thee not up to practice

duties to God, thy neighbour, and thy ſelfe; to ſhew thy thankefulneſſe for thy ſalvation by faith in Chriſt.
                     If then by thy tryall thou findeſt there bee none of theſe fruits in thy heart, or life, which I have reckoned up, nor conſcience to practice theſe duties that I haue named, to God, to thy neighbour, or to thy ſelfe, then maiſt thou iuſtly ſuſpect thy ſelfe, and feare thou haſt not as yet a ſaving faith; and therefore my counſell to thee is, not to delay, but labour in the uſe of the meanes to get it, leſt on a ſudden thou dye without the faith that ſhould ſave thee, and ſo be damned.
                     Whereas on the other ſide, if thou finde by tryall theſe effects and fruits in thy heart and life, that thou departeſt from iniquitie, and makeſt conſcience to leade a holy life, and to practice for conſcience ſake, duties to God, thy neighbour, and thy ſelfe, and all to teſtifie thy thankefulneſſe to God for thy ſalvation by Chriſt; then maiſt thou build upon it that thou haſt a ſaving faith indeed, and maiſt ſafely looke for ſalvation by Chriſt. For if thou overcome the world, it muſt be by faith:1. Ioh. 5.4. if thou eſcape the pollutions of the world,
                        2. Pet. 2.20. it muſt bee

by the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Ieſus Chriſt: If thou loue God and thy neighbour,
                        
                           Gal. 5.6. it muſt bee by faith: If thou reſiſt ſinne and Satan,
                        1. Pet. 5.8. it muſt be by being ſtrong in the faith:1. Theſ. 5.8. Epheſ. 6.17. if thou quench the fiery darts of the Divell, it muſt be by the breſt-plate and ſhield of Faith: and therefore comfort thy ſelfe; if thou haſt the fruit, thou haſt the roote; thou haſt a ſaving faith;
                           Tit. 2.2. 1. Tim. 5. thou art ſound in the faith; thou haſt an unfained faith; onely labour to ſtrengthen that faith, that thou maiſt in due time receive the end of thy faith,
                           Luk. 17.5. 1. Pet. 1.5. which is ſalvation.
                     I grant, that all belevers ſinne in many things; and though they haue a ſaving faith, yet have they their failings: but it is not true, that any ſuch ſettle themſelves in any evill courſes, or live long in knowne ſinnes; for they ſtriue againſt all ſinne; they reſolue to practiſe obedience to all Gods cōmandements, and if they faile, it is againſt their reſolutions; they doe not ouertake and runne after ſinne with greedineſſe, but are ouertaken with it;
                           Epheſ. 4.19. Gal. 6.1. they are humbled with great ſorrow for their ſlips, and by them they are made the more watchfull to doe no more ſo.
                     I know alſo that there is a difference

in the fruits of the faith of beleevers, and in their meaſure of grace, as well as in their faith: For ſome have a ſtronger faith then others, and therefore they have a greater meaſure of ſanctification, obedience, love, patience, thankfulneſſe, and other graces: but for all this, hee that hath a weake faith in Chriſt, hath ſome obedience, ſome loue to God, he hath ſome feare to offend him, and ſome care to pleaſe him: and therefore let no man deceiue himſelfe, to thinke that as yet hee hath faith in Chriſt, except hee have ſome of theſe fruits.
                     I doe not meane, that becauſe a man hath not theſe fruits now, nor this ſaving faith now, he ſhall never have it; for though hee have beene careleſſe heretofore; yet beeing better taught, by this and other meanes of inſtruction, he may labour to get it, and ſo have it, and the fruit of it: but this I meane, that if a man live and dye without repentance, and new obedience, without loue to God, or to his neighbour, he never had a true faith in Chriſt, nor can euer be ſaued.
                     I might heere make other uſes of this point, as namely, of confutation of the

Papiſt, who ſlanders us that we doe not vrge workes, nor preſſe our hearers to a holy life; they may here bee confuted: for wee teach men to try the truth of their faith, by the fruits of it, which are manifold.
                     Secondly, I might heere reproue all thoſe who would bee taken for good Chriſtians, and yet are they wicked in their liues and converſations, either openly by profaneneſſe, or ſecretly by hypocriſie.
                     Thirdly, I might here teach and inſtruct the Reader 1. a way how to try his faith, namely, by theſe fruits, & the efficacie of it: and 2. ſhew a reaſon of the wickednes & profaneneſſe, that is in the world, namely, becauſe they want a ſaving faith:2. Theſ. 3.2. 2. Tim. 3.8. but becauſe the chiefe intendment of this Rule is for the examination and tryall of our faith by theſe effects, to the end that finding we have them not, we may get the faith that wil produce them; or finding wee have it, we may labour in the vſe of the meanes to ſtrengthen it: therefore I will not enter into any larger diſcourſe of theſe uſes; but will content my ſelfe with that, which already hath been ſaid concerning examination, as beeing moſt

profitable for us: and therefore now for concluſion of this Rule, and for a further and finall ſtirring of us vp to holineſſe of life, and to the expreſsing of our faith thereby; I pray it may bee ſufficiently conſidered and remembred,
                           Iude ver. 20. Epheſ. 1.4. 1. Theſ. 4.7. Epheſ. 2.10. 1. Pet. 2.24. Luk. 1.74. that therefore faith in Chriſt is called holy faith and that therefore holineſſe of life is the end of our election, of our Vocation, of our Regeneration, or new creation, of our Redemption or Iuſtification, becauſe our faith in Chriſt whereby we truſt in him for theſe ends, ſhould ſtirre us vp to holineſſe, to the end wee may hereby glorifie God, ſtrengthen our brethren, and aſſure our owne ſoules, that we have a true ſaving faith indeed; becauſe the tree is knowne by the fruit. And ſo I deſcend to the ſeventh Rule.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  Rule 7.THE SEVENTH RULE.
               
                  CHAP. X. Whether doeſt thou labour in the uſe of the meanes, to feele in thy ſoule the comforts of a ſaving Faith?
                  IN this Chapter is contained the 7. Rule of Tryall, whereby wee may find whether or no we have a ſaving faith, namely, by examining our ſelves touching our endevour after the comforts of it; and here I would have it to be noted, that I do not make the tryall, whether wee feele them in us or no at all times; or at all times in like meaſure: for this would deceive many weake Chriſtians, who though ſometimes they want the feeling of theſe comforts of faith, yet may they have a ſaving faith for all that: but my quaere is, whether

we deſire and endeuour to find them. And in the handling hereof I purpoſe (God willing) to obſerve this order: Firſt, I will ſhew in generall, that a ſaving faith miniſtreth ſpirituall comforts to the ſoules of Chriſtians. Secondly, I will in particular ſhew what theſe comforts be. Thirdly, I will ſet downe the meanes by which a ſaving faith becomes thus comfortable. Fourthly, I wil declare why men ſhould labour for theſe comforts. Fifthly, I will teach, how men ſhall labour in the uſe of the meanes for theſe comforts. Sixtly and laſtly, I will make a briefe application of the Rule, to the end the Reader may examine himſelfe by it, and accordingly deale as hee finds by tryall: and of each of them a little.
                  
                     A ſaving faith is comfortable to the Soule.
                           §. 1
                     
                     That a ſaving faith brings comfort to the ſoule of him that hath it, is evident to him that conſidereth, Firſt, that the Apoſtle ſaith plainely, that they who have fled for a refuge to lay hold upon the hope that is ſet before them, (which all doe,
                           Heb. 6.18, 19. that by faith beleeve in Chriſt for ſalvation) may have ſtrong conſolation: and

that they have hope, as an anchour of the ſoule both ſure and ſtedfast. And ſecondly, how the Apoſtle ioyneth to faith a good conſcience▪
                        
                        1. Tim. 1.19. 
                        viz. as an effect and companion of it; becauſe a good conſcience is a continually feaſt; that is, it miniſters continually cauſe of ſpirituall ioy and mirth to the ſoules of Chriſtians: and no marvell, 1. Seeing that by grace we receive a ſtrong conſolation:2. Theſ. 2 16. Eph. 2.8. Philip. 2.1. Eph. 3.17. Ioh. 14.16, 17. Gal. 3.2.5. and by faith we are ſaved through grace. 2. Seeing by Chriſt we recive all conſolation, and by faith Chriſt dwels in our hearts to give it us. 3. Seeing the Spirit is the true comforter; and by faith wee receive the Spirit. And fourthly,
                           Rom. 15.4. ſeeing the Word and Goſpell miniſter conſolation; and by faith in Chriſt we receive the comforts of the Word.
                           Hebr. 4.3. rom. 1.16. But becauſe this generall point will be made more cleare in the particular comforts, therefore will I ſpend no more time in the proofe thereof.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 2 What be the particular comforts of a ſaving faith.
                     Touching the ſecond point, viz. what be the comforts which a ſaving faith miniſtreth to the ſoules of the faithfull, I ſay they are principally ſeven:
                     
                        The firſt is Peace, namely, in our owne ſoules and conſciences,1. Peace.
                         through the blood of Chriſts Croſſe. For Paul ſaith, that being iuſtified by faith,
                        
                           Rom. 5.1. 
                        wee have peace towards God through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: and he prayeth for the Romane Chriſtians, that the God of hope would fill them with peace by beleeving:
                           Rom. 15.13. yea Chriſt ſaith to Mary Magdalen, Goe in peace, after he had affirmed, her faith had ſaved her:
                           Luke 7.50. Mat. 11.28, 29. and to all that come unto him with broken And heavy-loaden ſoules, that is, which beleeve in him, that hee would give them reſt to their ſoules.
                     
                     This peace is not in a ſcanty meaſure to be enioyed by faith, but abundantly, if men ſeeke it as they ſhould; according to that of Peter, Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, through the knowledge of God, and of Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, that is,2. Pet. 1.3. through faith in Ieſus Chriſt.
                     The ſecond comfort is like the firſt,2. Ioy.
                         but yet diſtinct from it, and it is Ioy; which appeares not onely by the places alledged formerly out of the Epiſtle to the Romanes, namely, where Paul ſaith,
                           Rom. 5.2. that by faith we reioyce under the hope of the glory of God: and where he prayes,
                           Rom. 15.13. that they might bee filled with ioy, as wel as with peace by beleeving: but alſo it is evident

by the Epiſtle to the Philippians, where he ſpeakes of the ioy of their faith:
                        
                           Phil. 1.25. and by the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, where he exhorts them to hold faſt their confidence,
                        
                           Heb. 3.6. 
                        and the reioycing of their hope firm unto the end.
                     
                     This ioy ſhewes it ſelfe, not onely in reſpect of this, that wee are converted to the faith,
                           Act. 8.39. & 16.34. Luke 10.20. and made Gods children; nor in regard of this, that we ſhall be ſaved: but it is ſeene even in troubles and afflictions, in which no man naturally or reaſonably can reioyce: for the faithfull reioyce in troubles and perſecutions;
                        
                           Heb. 12.12. 
                        
                           Rom. 5.3. 
                        they take ioyfully the ſpoyling of their goods;
                           Hebr. 10.34. Act. 5.41. and they reioyce, that they are counted worthy to ſuffer for Chriſts ſake.
                     
                     The third comfort of faith is Hope, that is,3. Hope.
                         hope of heaven, or of eternall life: for by faith Paul ſaith, Wee reioyce under the hope of the glory of God;
                           Rom. 5.2, 5. and that with ſuch a hope, as wil not make us aſhamed. And Paul prayeth, that the Romane Chriſtians may by faith abound in hope by the power of the holy Ghoſt;
                           Rom. 15.13. H
                                 •
                              b. 11.7. John 3.16. Rom. 4.16. for faith is the ground of hope, and the ſubſtance of things hoped for, as the promiſe is the ground of faith; and God himſelfe in his truth, power, and mercy is the ground of the promiſe.
                     
                        The fourth comfort (which ariſeth alſo out of the three former comforts) is Aſſurance of ſalvation,
                           4. Aſſurance of ſalvation. and a good perſwaſion of Gods love to us, and that we are his children. For becauſe we are ſonnes, (which wee are by faith in Chriſt, Gal. 3.26. Ioh. 1.12.) God ſends foorth the Spirit of his Sonne into our hearts,
                        
                           Gal. 4.6. 
                        crying, Abba Father: and the Apoſtle wils us to draw neere to God in full aſſurance of faith, having our hearts ſprinkled from an evill conſcience.
                        
                           Hebr. 10.22. Yea Paul profeſſeth of himſelfe, (not as an Apoſtle,
                           Rom. 8.35. but as a beleever) that he was perſwaded nothing ſhould be able to ſeparate him from the love of God in Chriſt Ieſus.
                     
                     The fift comfort of a ſaving faith,
                           5. Boldneſſe in prayer. is Boldneſſe in prayer to God, as to our Father, with confidence to be heard in our prayers for forgivenes of ſinne, and all other ſpirituall and temporall comforts.
                           Eph. 3.12. For by faith in Chriſt we have boldneſſe and acceſſe with confidence:
                           Rom. 5.2. by faith we have acceſſe into this grace wherein wee ſtand: for he being now become our Father in Chriſt, wee may bee ſure,Iohn 16.23 & 14.13. Iames 1.6. 6. Ability to reſiſt temptations. that whatſoever we aske the Father in Chriſts Name, he will give it unto us.
                     The ſixt comfort, is an Ability wherby we may anſwere all Satans accuſations,

and reſiſt all his temptations, whereby he would perſwade us to deſpaire of mercie, in regard of our miſerie and great ſinnes, which have deſerved temporall, ſpirituall, and eternall curſes. For therefore Paul cals a ſaving faith,1. Theſ. 5.8. Eph. 6.17. a breſt-plate, and a ſhield, Epheſ. 6.17. not becauſe the faithfull ſhall bee freed from Satans temptations, and no way to be aſſaulted with them; but becauſe by it they ſhall be able to quench all his fiery darts, that is, to anſwer and refell them, that they ſhall doe us no harme, nor drive us to deſpaire.
                     For though Satan may bruize our heele, that is, ſting or pricke us with ſome feare and horror, yet ſhall hee never be able to breake our heads, or our hearts with deſpaire;
                           Gen. 3.15. becauſe in the end we ſhall be more then conquerors by faith in Chriſt,
                           Rom. 8.37. 1. Iohn 5.4. by which wee overcome the world.
                     
                        
                           7 Perſeverance in graceNow followes the laſt comfort of faith, which is, that if we be truly ingraffed into Chriſt, by a true and lively faith, we ſhall bee ſure to perſevere in grace unto the end: for he that drinkes of the water of life that Chriſt gives, (that is, whoſoever beleeves in him) it ſhall be in him a Well of water ſpringing up

to life eternall: and though they bee here on earth, and Chriſt in heaven,
                           Iohn 4.14. yet are they in the hands, (that is) in the keeping of the Father, and of Ieſus Chriſt;
                           Ioh. 10.28, 29. whence none ſhall be ever able to pluck them: and no marvell,1. Pet. 1.5. ſeeing they are kept by the power of God through faith unto ſalvation. From whence wee may collect three ſingular comforts: 1. Art thou afraid thou ſhalt never indure to the end? be of good cheare, thou ſhalt be kept unto ſalvation. 2. Doth it trouble thee that Satan is a ſtrong and ſubtil adverſary, able to overturne thee? bee of good comfort, thou art kept by the power of God, who is ſtronger then he. 3. Art thou diſmayed thy faith will faile thee? take heart of grace, thou art kept by the power of God through faith; therefore thou ſhalt keepe thy faith, and thy faith ſhall keepe thee, if thou have ſuch a true faith in Chriſt as I have ſaid.
                  
                  
                     The meanes by which faith in Chriſt becomes 
                           §. 3 ſo comfortable.
                     Now followes the third thing propounded in the handling of this Rule, which is a declaration of the meanes by which faith in Chriſt becomes ſo comfortable

to the ſoule: and I ſay that this comes to paſſe by the power of the holy Ghoſt,
                           Rom. 15.13. Iohn 14 26. & 15.26. who is the true comforter. Now the holy Ghoſt works theſe comforts in Chriſtians through faith, by reaſon, firſt, of the proper and immediate obiect thereof, which is Ieſus Chriſt, the meritorious cauſe and fountaine of all ſpirituall conſolation.2. Cor. 
                           
                              •
                           .3, 4, 7. Secondly, by reaſon of the goodneſſe, ſweetneſſe, and comfortableneſſe of the things themſelves, which faith beleeves, and which are promiſed in the Word, viz. iuſtification or forgiveneſſe of ſinnes, grace or ſanctification in this life, and glory in the life to come, freedome from the guilt of ſinne originall and actuall, and from the curſe of the Law thereby; and adoption to bee the ſonnes of God, and heires of the kingdome of heaven.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 4 Why we ſhould labour for the comforts of Faith.
                     The fourth thing in this Rule, is to conſider the Reaſons, why men ſhould labour for the comforts of faith; and they are chiefly theſe: 1. Becauſe theſe comforts are in the Word promiſed to

true beleevers: therefore may they be attained by ſeeking after them. 2.
                           Mat. 5.4. & 11.28, 29. 2. Cor. 1.4.7. Becauſe the faithfull in time paſt have inioyed them, as may be ſeene in Iob, Daniel, Peter, Paul, and the reſt; therefore may they be attained in this life by others alſo, namely, in ſome meaſure, though not in a like meaſure, in all. 3. Chriſtians muſt labour for the comforts of faith, in regard of the neceſsity of them; which appeares by this, in that, if they have theſe comforts in their ſoules, they are happy, if they had no comfort in the world beſides, but were every way elſe uncomfortable; and without theſe they are accurſed, and ſhall periſh, and be ſwallowed up of other diſcomforts. Laſtly,
                           Pſal. 119.92. 1. Cor. 15.19. they muſt labour for theſe comforts of faith, becauſe of the excellencie of them, in that they farre ſurpaſſe all other ioyes and comforts; for they are not ſenſuall, corporall and ſinfull, but holy, pure, and ſpirituall, not utterable and worldly, but unspeakeable and glorious; not fading,1. Pet. 1.7. but permanent and durable, ſuch as ſhal never be taken away,
                        
                           Ioh. 56.22. but ſhall doe them moſt good when they have moſt need.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           §. 6 The meanes of attaining ſpirituall comforts by faith in Chriſt.
                     In the fift place, I am to ſhew how Chriſtians ſhould labour in the uſe of meanes to attaine theſe comforts, and what meanes they ſhould uſe to that end. The meanes are, 1. An emptying of our hearts of all love of worldly, carnall, and ſenſuall ioyes, comforts, and pleaſures. 2. A feeling of the want of theſe ſpirituall comforts. 3. A knowledge of the neceſsitie and excellencie of them. 4. An hungring and thirſting, even an earneſt deſire of them. 5. A continuall reading, hearing, and meditating on the promiſes of the Word, and the comforts thereof. 6. A diligent and continuall uſe and meditation of the Sacraments of the Goſpel, which are the ſpirituall nouriſhment of our ſoules to eternall life. 7. And laſtly, a frequent, and fervent uſe of prayer to God for his bleſsing upon the meanes, that our hearts may bee raviſhed with theſe holy and heavenly ioyes and comforts, according to the neceſsitie, and excellencie of them.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 7 The application of this Rule.
                     Now come I to conclude this Rule,

and to make application thereof. That which I have ſaid touching theſe comforts of faith, may ſerve, Firſt, to confute the opinion of profane men, and carnall Goſpellers, who imagin in their hearts, and ſpeake with their mouths, that there is no ioy nor comfort in faith and Religion; that godly men and women are quite without any mirth; and that the profeſsion of the Goſpel is an utter enemy to all pleaſure and ioyes. Indeed to ſinfull and carnall pleaſure it is, but not to all pleaſure and ioy: for godly men have a liberty to partake in many lawfull pleaſures, and recreations; they are not debarred of them, though they belong to the ſenſes, and members of their bodies; and as for their inward ioyes, they are unſpeakeable and glorious; though wicked men cannot (as long as they continue wicked) be acquainted with them; becauſe they are not fit perſons to receive them.
                           Luke 4.18.
                     
                     Secondly, this that I have ſaid concerning the comforts of faith, may iuſtly reproove many profeſſors in the Church, and carnall Goſpellers, that do not labour for them, though they are to be had; and though being had, they bee ſo neceſſary and excellent. The reaſon

is, becauſe they are ſenſuall, and their hearts are ſo ſtuffed with carnall ioyes, and taken up with worldly pleaſures, that there is no roome for holy, ſpirituall, and heavenly ioyes to lodge and harbor. Let ſuch men take heed that go on in the eager purſuite of them, and careleſſe neglect of the other, that they be not in the number of them, that have already received their conſolation;
                           Luke 6.24. Pſal. 17.14. 1. Cer. 15.19. whoſe portion is in this world, and who have their hope in this life onely.
                     
                     Thirdly, this diſcourſe of the comforts of faith, may ſerve to teach and inſtruct us, what is the way to get holy and heavenly comfort, namely, to get a ſaving faith; as beeing the cauſe, root, and fountaine of them, as hath beene ſhewed in the ſecond Section of this Chapter.
                     Laſtly, it ſerves to exhort us all to labour for theſe comforts, and to examine our ſelves, whether we labour for them, and hunger after them.
                     If we doe not, then are wee ſenſuall and carnall either in whole or in part, according as we are negligent of them: let us therefore reprove our ſelves for this neglect, and feare that as yet wee have not the ſaving faith it ſelfe.
                     
                        Indeed, if either there were no comforts to bee had by a ſaving faith; or if theſe comforts were but meane; or if they were not durable, then might wee have ſome plea for our negligence in getting a ſaving faith, and the comforts of it: but ſeeing they are poſsible to bee attained; being attained, they are worthy to be enioyed; being enioyed, they are permanent and may be kept: therefore are we moſt worthy of ſharpe reproofe, if we labour not for them.
                     But if on the other ſide, wee find by tryall, that in ſome meaſure wee feele theſe comforts, whereby wee taſte how ſweet the Lord is to us, then have we reaſon to aſſure our ſelves wee have a ſaving faith indeed, as alſo we have good encouragement further to apply them to our ſoules; which if we doe, we ſhall not need to feare againe unto bondage,
                        
                           Rom. 8.15. or deſpaire, though happely ſometimes we may find ſome diſcomforts in our ſoules, by reaſon of former ſinnes not ſoundly enough repented of, or later ſinnes not carefully prevented.
                     For firſt, what though Satan tels thee thou art a ſinner? yet God tels thee in the Word, that by faith in Chriſts death and righteouſneſſe, thou art accounted

as righteous in Gods ſight: for Abraham truſted in Chriſt,
                        
                           Rom. 3.3. 
                        and it was imputed to him for righteouſneſſe:
                        
                           Philip. 3.9. and ſo was S. Paul accounted righteous, by the righteouſnes of God which is faith in Chriſt.
                     
                     Secondly, what though Satan tel thy conſcience, thou art a tranſgreſſour of Moſes Law, and therefore that thou art lyable to the curſe? yet God tels thee in the Word, that from all things from which thou canſt not be iuſtified by the Law of Moſes, every one that beleeves in Chriſt is iuſtified:
                           Act. 3.39. the reaſon is, becauſe Chriſt hath blotted out the hand-writing of ordinances, that was againſt us, and was contrary to us, that he hath taken it out of the way, and nayled it to his Croſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Coloſſ. 2.14.Thirdly, what though Satan ſuggeſt into thine heart, that thou art in Adam condemned to die the ſecond death? yet will the Lord tell thee in his Word, that in the meane time that execution is ſtayed; and that Chriſt hath procured a pardon for thee; for whoſoever beleeves in Ieſus Chriſt, ſhall receive remiſſion of ſinnes:
                           Act. 10 43. yea if thou beleeveſt in Chriſt,
                           Ioh. 3.33. 
                        thou haſt this pardon under ſeale: thou haſt everlaſting life, and ſhalt not come into condemnation, and art paſt from death to life.
                        
                           Iohn 5.24.
                     
                     
                        Laſtly, what though Satan obiect againſt thee, that thou muſt die, and after death come to iudgement? yet will the Lord tel thee out of the Word, that the ſting of death is taken away; ſo that it ſhall not be to thee a paſſage to hell,1. Cor. 15.56, 57. as it is to unbeleevers, but an entrance into life: for Chriſt by his death hath overcome him that had the power of death,
                        
                           Heb. 2.14. 1. Cor. 15.20. 
                        which is the Divell: and Chriſt is riſen from the dead, and hereby is become the firſt fruites of them that ſleepe. Onely labour for theſe comforts in the uſe of the meanes ordained to give them; and though thou want them for a time, yet as long as thou art troubled for the want of them, mourneſt after the Lord, and hungreſt for him, feare not, but bee of good cheare, thou ſhalt be eaſed and comforted in due time;1. Cor. 10.13. 
                        He will not try thee above thy ſtrength, but give a good iſſue; and though heavineſſe indure for a night,
                        
                           Pſal. 30.5. 
                        yet ioy and comfort will come in the morning. And ſo much for the ſeventh Rule, I now come to the 8. and laſt.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  Rule 8.THE EIGHTH RULE.
               
                  CHAP. XI. Whether doeſt thou uſe the meanes to grow in Faith, and to ſtrengthen it?
                  IN the handling of this Rule, I will obſerve this methode, and declare theſe points: 1. I will ſhew, that Chriſtians muſt ſtrive to ſtrengthen their faith. 2. I will propound ſome Reaſons to induce them to ſtrengthen their faith. 3. I wil direct them to the meanes, by which they may learne how to ſtrengthen it. 4. I will declare, that if they labour in the uſe of meanes, they may ſtrengthen it. 5. And laſtly, I will apply this Rule, and exhort the Reader to try himſelfe by it.
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 1 Chriſtians muſt labour to ſtrengthen their faith.
                     That Chriſtians muſt labour to ſtrengthen their faith, appeares by the

Word of God. Firſt, in Paul, where he exhorts the Coloſsians to be rooted and built vp in Chriſt, and ſtrengthened in the faith;
                           Col. 2.7. ſhewing that it was not enough for them to be planted in Chriſt, except they were rooted in him: for elſe how can they watch and ſtand faſt in the faith;1. Cor. 16.13. how can they quite themſelues like men, and be ſtrong? Secondly, in Peter, where he exhorts the Chriſtian and beleeving Iewes, to grow in grace,
                        2. Pet. 3. 
                        and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Ieſus Chriſt, ſignifying unto them, that when they are once begotten to the faith, and new borne in Chriſt, they muſt not be babes ſtill, but grow in ſpirituall ſtrength to a perfect man in Chriſt, euen to the meaſure of the fulneſſe of the age of Chriſt.
                           Epheſ. 4.13. Laſtly, this is taught us by the Word of God in Iudes Epiſtle, Verſe 5. where he exhorts the Chriſtian Iſraelites to edifie one another in their moſt holy faith:Iude ver. 20.
                         intimating that it is not enough to have the foundation of faith laid in us, except we bee further edified and built vp in the ſame, to be an holy temple to the Lord.
                        
                           Epheſ. 2.21.
                     
                  
                  
                     Why Chriſtians muſt ſtrengthen their 
                           §. 2 Faith.
                     Touching the ſecond point, although

theſe three plaine Texts are ſufficient to perſwade any reaſonable man to labour to ſtrengthen his faith; yet for a better inforcing of this point, I will adde ſome reaſons why they muſt ſo doe, whereof ſome are taken from the neceſsitie of this duty, and ſome from the fruit and benefit of it. The Reaſons that are taken from the neceſsity of labouring to ſtrengthen our faith, are three.
                     The firſt is borrowed from the nature and condition of our faith in this life, which is but weake and imperfect, and therefore hath need to be ſtrengthened; for wee know in part,1. Cor. 13.9. wee beleeue in part;Simil. ſo that as men doe therefore take foode and Phyſicke for the ſtrengthening of their bodies, becauſe they are fraile, weake and mortall; ſo therefore ſhould Chriſtians uſe the meanes of ſpirituall food and Phyſick, for the ſtrengthening of their ſoules unto eternall life; namely, becauſe their faith is weak for the moſt part.
                     My ſecond Reaſon that prooves it it neceſſary for Chriſtians to ſtrengthen their faith, is drawne from the conſideration of Satans malice, who uſeth all meanes to weaken it; yea, quite to ſubuert and ouerturne it (if it were poſsible)

as may be ſeene in the caſe of Peter, who was winnowed by Satan,
                        
                           Luk. 22.31. 
                        that his faith might faile. For I demand, if a houſe beginne to ſinke or reele of one ſide,Simil. will we not put vnder ſome ſhore to prop it vp? Or if any man queſtion the Title of Land we have purchaſed, will wee not ſearch Records, and uſe meanes to ſtrengthen our Title? Or if an enemy lay ſiege to a Citie to conquer it; or a thiefe ſeeke to breake into an houſe to rob it: will not the Inhabitants of that Citie, or that houſe, fortifie and defend it? if they doe not, they are worthy to be made Vaſſals, and be ſpoiled of their goods. Euen ſo, when Chriſtians doe know that Satan labours to weaken their faith; yea, wholly (if it were poſſible) to ſubuert it, they have reaſon to ſtrengthen the ſame, ſpecially, ſeeing by faith wee ſtand in the grace and favour of God: by being ſtedfaſt in the faith,
                           Gal. 5.22. 
                        wee reſist Satan: ſeeing faith is our victory,
                        1. Pet. 5.8. 1. Iob. 5.4. whereby we ouercome the world: ſeeing faith is a breſt-plate, or Corſlet,2. Theſ. 5.8. whereby we beare off all the ſtrokes of Satan, that they cannot hurt us to death; yea, it is the Shield and armour of proofe, whereby wee quench all the fiery darts of the Divell,
                        
                           Epheſ. 6.17. that they cannot

wound us vnto damnation.
                     The third reaſon enforcing a neceſsitie of ſtrengthening our faith, is taken from the conſideration of the nature and condition of the life of Chriſtians in this world, which is ſubiect by afflictions, to many tryals that require ſtrength of faith to undergoe them, and to make uſe of them, that wee faile not vnder them. For upon this ground Paul exhorts the Chriſtians at Antioch to continue in the faith;
                           Act. 14.22. becauſe we muſt through many tribulations, enter into the Kingdome of Heaven: and upon the ſame ground Paul ſends Timothy to the Theſſalonian Chriſtians, to ſtabliſh and comfort them in their faith, to the end they might not bee mooved by the afflictions of thoſe times, which hee told them beforehand they muſt ſuffer, 1. Theſ. 3.2, 3, 4. And no marvell: for when the ſtormy tempeſts of affliction and perſecution beat upon us, how ſhall we be able to ſtand, if wee be not deepely founded on a Rocke? Surely a ſilly Woman will make us deny our Maſter, as Peter did, if we be not ſtrong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; and if in feeling of the weakneſſe of our faith, wee labour not in the uſe of meanes to ſtrengthen it.
                     
                        The ſecond ground of Reaſons to perſwade us to ſtrengthen our faith, is taken from the benefit that comes by this labour, and by the ſtrengthening of our faith; and the benefits are likewiſe three.
                     The firſt is this, that if wee uſe meanes to ſtrengthen our faith, we ſhall increaſe our ſpirituall comfort; for the ſtronger our faith is, the ſtronger is the conſolation, the ſweeter are the comforts, and the more permanent are the ioyes of our ſoules, that proceede from our ſaving faith within us.
                     The ſecond benefit of ſtrengthening our faith is, that hereby we ſhall finde in us the more, and the more liuely fruits of our faith in holy obedience: for the ſtronger our faith is, the more conſtant and conſcionable ſhall be our ſerving of God, in caring to pleaſe him, and fearing to offend him; for hereby we ſhall draw downe from the death and Reſurrection of Chriſt, dwelling in our hearts by faith, Epheſ. 3.17. more ſtrength to dye to ſinne, and to walke in newneſſe of life.
                     The third and laſt benefit of ſtrengthening our faith, is, continuance and perſeverance in the faith, whereby wee

ſhall come to attaine to the end of our faith, which is the ſalvation of our ſoules. For we ſhall be preſented, holy and unblameable before God at Chriſts ſecond comming,
                        
                           Coloſ. 2.21. 
                        if wee continue in the faith, rooted and ſettled, and bee not mooved away from the hope of the Goſpell.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           §. 3 What be the meanes of ſtrengthning our Faith.
                     But though we know wee are commanded to uſe meanes to ſtrengthen our faith, and the reaſons why: yet if there be no means to ſtrengthen it, how ſhall we ſtrengthen it? It remaines therfore in the next place, that I ſhew what the meanes be which God hath ordained for that end. And of theſe, the firſt is, the continuall hearing of the Word, wch is the obiect of a ſaving faith, viz. the Goſpell. For to this end doth Paul cōmend the Epheſians to God,
                           Act. 20.31. and to the Word of his grace, to the end they might bee built up thereby. And for that end he deſires to ſee the Romanes, whom hee had by preaching at firſt converted to the Faith,
                           Rom. 1.11. 
                        that hee might beſtow vpon them a ſpirituall gift to ſtrengthen them, and to ſee the Theſſalonians,
                        1. Theſ 3.10. that he might perfect that which was lacking in their faith: and for

this end doth Peter command the Chriſtian Iewes, as new born babes,
                        1. Pet. 2.2. 
                        to deſire the ſincere milke of the Word, namely, that they might grow thereby:
                           Heb. 4 12. for the Word is liuely and mighty in operation,
                        
                           Act. 20.32. and able to ſtrengthen it; and beſides, it is a fit meanes to ſtrengthen our faith; becauſe it was the meanes whereby it was at firſt begotten in us.
                     The ſecond meanes to ſtrengthen our faith, is the frequent uſe of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
                     For if Circumciſion were a ſeale of the righteouſneſſe of faith,
                           Rom. 4.11. why not the Lords Supper alſo, being a Sacrament as well as it, and a Sacrament of the New Covenant or Teſtament? I do not meane, that the Sacraments confirm the promiſe of the Goſpell in it ſelfe, nor in reſpect of God, but in regard of us, who by reaſon of our weake faith, ſtand in need of the confirmation thereof, and who without it, ſhould not bee ſo ſure of obtaining ſalvation by faith in Chriſt, as otherwiſe with it wee are: And therfore (me thinks) hath the Lord Ieſus ordained ſpecially one of the Sacraments of the New Teſtament in a Supper, and in Bread and Wine; not onely to teach us, that now he hath put

an end to all the carnall & fleſhly ſacrifices & offrings of the Law, by this Bread and Wine repreſenting himſelfe: but alſo to teach thereby,
                           Pſal. 104.14.15. that as Bread and Wine doe naturally nouriſh our bodies: ſo the benefits of the body and bloud of Chriſt crucified comfort our ſoules; and not ſo onely, but that the ordinance of the Lords Supper doth alſo nouriſh, increaſe, and ſtrengthen our faith in the death of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, there repreſented for the further aſſurance of our ſalvation thereby; euen as thoſe creatures nouriſh our bodies.
                     The third meanes of ſtrengthening our faith is the frequent uſe, and feruent exerciſe of Prayer to God, in the name of Chriſt, the obiect of our faith. This the Apoſtles knew, and therefore doe they all pray to the Lord,
                        
                           Luke 17.5. 
                        to increaſe their faith: and this the poore man in the Goſpell knew alſo; and therefore having ſaid,
                           Mar. 9.24. 
                        Lord, I beleeue, he prayes in the next words, as in one breath, Lord, helpe my unbeliefe: & no marvell for if Prayer bee a meanes to obtaine a bleſsing of ſtrength, to the meanes that God is pleaſed to give us for the preſervation of our corporall ſtrength, and bodily life:1. Tim. 4 4. then well may it bee a meane

to obtaine ſtrength to our faith, wherein conſiſts our ſpirituall ſtrength. If Prayer bee a meane to ſtrengthen the faith of other Chriſtians,1. Theſ. 3.10. Phil. 1.9. and to confirme in them other graces, then why ſhould it not be a meanes to ſtrengthen our faith in Chriſt, and to increaſe it for the further comfort of our ſoules in Chriſt, in whom our faith is fixed?
                     The fourth and laſt meanes that I will mention for the ſtrengthening of our faith, is the meditation on the power, truth, goodneſſe, and mercy of God, in performing of his promiſes made unto us in Ieſus Chriſt, both of grace and glory; ſpecially for ſpirituall bleſsings in heavenly things: for hereby wee are the rather aſſured that he is able and willing to make them good.
                     For as the conſideration of the honeſty and ſufficiencie of a man that makes us a promiſe of any thing,Simil. giues us good incouragement to beleeue wee ſhall have it, and make us with patience to expect it: euen ſo the meditation of Gods power, truth and goodneſſe, doth ſtrengthen our faith to make us reſt in him, and truſt unto him for the good things promiſed: yea, with patience to expect the receiving of them.
                           Ro. 4.19, 20, 21
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     That Chriſtians may ſtrengthen their faith by theſe meanes.
                     
                        
                           §. 4 But though theſe bee meanes that in themſelves bee powerfull to ſtrengthen our faith: yet if it be doubtfull whether they will take effect accordingly, wee ſhall haue little heart to uſe them: therfore am I in the fourth place to ſhew, that if Chriſtians doe uſe theſe and the like meanes for the ſtrengthning of their faith, in manner and meaſure as they ſhould, they may confirme it hereby, and that they ſhall finde the ſame by Gods bleſsing effectuall to that end; for beeing Gods ordinances, why ſhould they not be effectuall to Gods ends, for the good of Gods people? And this ſhall appeare: 1. By the promiſes of God, 2. By the examples of the godly.
                     The promiſes are generall or ſpeciall. Generall,
                           Math. 7.7. that they that aske and ſeeke, ſhall find and haue. Speciall as namely, that of Saint Paul,
                        2. Cor. 9.8. where hee ſaith, The Lord ſhall cauſe all grace to abound to the faithfull; and that the righteouſneſſe of God is revealed from faith to faith,
                        
                           Rom. 1.17. that is, from one meaſure of faith to another; and that of Chriſts fulnes we all receiue grace for grace.
                        
                           Ioh. 1.16.
                     
                     This point likewiſe is made plaine by the examples of the godly in the Word,

whoſe faith hath been ſtrengthened by theſe meanes, as namely, the Chriſtian Iewes, who are ſaid to bee rich in faith.
                        
                           Iam. 2.5. The Theſſalonians, whoſe faith grew exceedingly: The Corinthians,
                        2. Theſs. 3. 2. Cor, 8.7. & 10.15. 
                        who abounded and increaſed in faith: and Abraham himſelfe the father of the faithfull,
                           Rom. 4.20. who was ſtrong in the faith.
                     
                     And yet for all this, I would not have men to iudge, as if I meant that al Chriſtians, by the uſe of the meanes, ſhall attain unto a like meaſure of the ſtrength of faith; for that is not to bee expected: but that they ſhall attaine unto ſuch a meaſure of ſpiritual ſtrength thereby, as ſhall be able to ſupport them from finall falling away frō God, or fainting under the afflictions of this life, with which God is pleaſed to try their faith in this world.
                  
                  
                     The application and uſe of this Rule.
                     Now then, to come to the laſt thing promiſed in handling this Rule: Examine thy ſelfe, good Reader, whether thou doſt with care & conſcience, with diligence & continuance, uſe the means preſcribed or no: if thou doe not, it is to bee feared, either thou haſt no faith at all; and then it is no wonder thou doe

not labour to ſtrengthen it, (for thou canſt not ſtrengthen that which is not) or that it is ſuch a one, that will proove weaker euery day then other, for want of ſpirituall meanes to ſtrengthen it. For I demand,
                           Job 8.11. Mat. 13.5. can a bulruſh grow without water; or ſeede without heart of earth? Can the body be ſtrong to labour, without food and reſt? no more can faith in Chriſt without the water of life, or the food of our ſoules. And therefore as men in the world,Simil. Merchants and Tradeſmen, doe not content themſelves with a little wealth or ſtocke, but ſtriue and labour to increaſe it, to hundreds or thouſands; ſo doe not thou content thy ſelfe with a ſmall portion of theſe heavenly treaſures, but labour to increaſe it; and the rather, becauſe of the worlds many allurements to weaken it, and Satans great malice, to ouerturne it.
                     But if on the other ſide, thou finde in thy ſelfe a deſire of thy heart, an endevour of thy minde, and an uſe of the means to ſtrengthen thy faith, then perſwade thy ſelfe thy faith is ſound. For it argues thou feeleſt need to ſtrengthen it;1. Cor. 10.12. 2. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 1.10. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 2.
                              •
                           2. for thou takeſt heed thou fall not, thou makeſt ſure to thy ſelfe thine own Calling and Election, and workeſt out thy ſalvation with

feare and trembling; thou takeſt heed to thy ſelfe,
                           Heb. 3.12. that there bee not in thee an evill heart of infidelitie to depart away from the living God, and therefore art thou like to abide and continue: for bleſſed is hee that feareth alwayes. Likewiſe it argues thou haſt an eye to the Lord for helpe, and to his ordinance for ſtrength, by meanes whereof, thou maiſt well in faith expect it, and find it, to the end that hereby being ſtrengthened in thy faith, thou maiſt be faithfull to the death,
                        
                           Revel. 2.10. 
                        and being faithfull to the death, thou maist receiue the crowne of life; only goe on ſtill in the uſe of meanes as thou haſt begun, goe on (I ſay) as long as thou liveſt in this world, and bee of Pauls mind, who never thought he had faith enough; and therefore ſtill laboured to know Chriſt,
                        
                           Phil. 3.9. 
                        and the power of his Reſurrection: ſtill pray for Gods bleſsing on the meanes, and depend on him for the ſame: and hee that hath commanded thee to uſe the meanes to ſhew thy obedience to his wil, & promiſed a bleſsing,
                           Gal. 6.9. to the end thou mighteſt truſt in him for the ſame, will in due time cauſe thee to reape of the fruit, if thou faint not,
                        1. Cor. 15. vlt.
                         knowing this aſſuredly that thy labour ſhall not be in vaine in the Lord. And ſo I come at length to the concluſion of my Treatiſe.
                     
                        At length, after many paces, and paſſages, I am drawing on to my iourneys end, (that is) toward a concluſion of my Diſcourſe of the tryall of faith: wherein, as largely as was needfull, as plainely as for me was poſsible, and as ſufficiently as God enabled me; I haue laboured to perſwade and incourage Chriſtians, to examine themſelves whether they haue a ſaving faith.
                     To perſwade them, I haue prooved the point, by alledging reaſons for it, and cleered it by anſwering obiections againſt it: by which it may appeare it is neceſſary to be done.
                     And to incourage men thereunto, I haue ſet down certaine rules to direct them how they may try their faith, and exhorted to the tryall of it by thoſe rules: by which it may be diſcerned that it is poſsible to be done.
                     It remaineth, that as a Traueller, after a hard iourney, I ſit me downe: (that is) that I finiſh the whole Worke, and having done, that I make an end.
                     And wherewithall ſhall I doe this better (having already commended it to the Chriſtian Reader in the Preface) then with a ſuppliant prayer to the Father of Lights, that he would be pleaſed

in Ieſus Chriſt to accept of theſe my poore labours in his Vineyard, and to bleſſe them to the good thereof: As alſo with an humble thankeſgiving to the ſame eternall Maieſty, (God bleſſed for euermore) for health & ſtrength of body, wherby I haue had opportunity, and for ſome meaſure of underſtanding in the myſterie of Chriſt, whereby I have had abilitie to write this Treatiſe.
                     
                        For this cauſe I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
                        Epheſ. 3.14. to the end of the Chapter. 
                        of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named; that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be ſtrengthned with might by his Spirit in the inner Man, that Chriſt may dwell in your hearts by faith: that yee being rooted & grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the loue of Chriſt, which paſſeth knowledge: that ye might be filled with all the fulneſſe of God. Now unto him, that is able to doe exceeding abundantly, aboue all that wee aske or thinke, according to the power that worketh in us: unto him bee glory in the Church, by Ieſus Chriſt, throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Table.
            
               A.
               WE are not iuſtified by being aſſured of ſalvation. 148.
               
               Aſſurance of ſalvation: ſee faith. 
            
            
               B.
               Beleeving. See faith. What bleſſednes is promiſed in the Goſpel. 110.
               
            
            
               C.
               Tender Conſciences not to bee wounded. 153.
               
            
            
               D.
               Many kindes of Deſpaire, 68. to 71.
               
               Why fewer deſpaire, then preſume of ſalvation in this life. 70
               
            
            
               E.
               Exhortations to Chriſtian duties are precepts. 8
               
            
            
               F.
               The true definition of a ſaving faith propounded, 96. and expounded, 98. to 113.
               
               The cauſes of faith. The efficient cauſe. 100.203.113. The materiall 101.113. The formall. 102.113. The ſmall. 110.113. The mouing 100.101. The imſtrumentall. 206. to 213.
               
               The ground or foundation of it. 111. to 114. The obiect of a ſaving faith. 109. The ſubiect or place in the ſoule where it is, 60.126.
               
               Faith in Chriſt doth ſave. 108. How it ſaues. 195. to 198. Why it ſaues. 198. How wee may be perſwaded it will ſave. 176
               
               Onely faith in Chriſt is the condition of the Goſpell. 32.147.150.
               
               The act of faith by which wee are iuſtified, is truſting in Chriſt. 102.130, 131.132.102. to 109. What is truſting in Chriſt. 102.103. Truſting in Chriſt is faith. 117. It is commanded 117. It is accepted of God to ſalvation. 108. It is more then beleeving the truth of Gods Word. 118. It goes before the aſſurance of ſalvatian. 145. to 148.
               
               Men are prepared to beleeue in Chriſt. 219. How they are prepared. 220. Legall preparations. 220. to 224. Evangelicall 224. All men are not prepared in like meaſure. 236. Begunne repentance is a preparation to faith in Chriſt. Proved by ſixe Reaſons. 233.264. Cleered by 6. obiections anſwered. 264. to 288. How farre repentance is begunne before faith in Chriſt. 230. to 233.289. to 292. The uſe of it. 288.
               
               A ſaving faith is liuely to bring forth many holy fruits. 296. What the fruits be. 297. to 310. How it becomes ſo effectuall. 310.311. The uſes of 
                     •
                  t. 311.
               
               A ſaving faith brings comforts to the ſoule. 319. What the particular comforts be. 320. The meanes by which it becomes ſo comfortable. 325. Why Chriſtians ſhould labour for the comforts of faith. 326. How they ſhould uſe the meanes to attain the comforts of faith. 328. It aſſures us of the efficacie of the Goſpel in us. 45. that Chriſt is in us. 47. Of our

ſalvation. 323.142, &c. It never failes. 12.16.22.23. It continues after this life. 37.
               
               Euery one hath not a ſauing faith, 14.16. few haue it. 15. Euery faith is not a ſaving faith, 11. to 14. onely truſt in Chriſt is. 102. to 109.130. to 132.
               
               No grace of God is ſo excellent for our uſe as a ſaving faith. 32. to 39. none ſo neceſſary as it. 39. to 42. No grace is acceptable without it. 275.
               
               It is the duty of Chriſtians to try their faith, prooved by 12. Reaſons. 6. to 52. cleared by anſwering 7. obiections. 52. to 89.
               
               The definition of a ſaving faith given by ſome Lutherans, confuted by fiue Arguments, and their chiefe reaſons anſwered. 138. to 172. Faith (as it iuſtifies us) is not aſſurance of ſalvation. ibid. The uſes of it. 172.
               
               Aſſurance of ſalvation is an effect of faith, 142. to 145. it doth not preſently follow faith in all Chriſtians. 149. we muſt truſt in Chriſt, before we can be aſſured of our ſalvation. 145. to 148.150.
               
               The Definition of a ſaving faith, according to the Church of Rome. 115. confuted by two reaſons, 117. to 125 and their chiefe Arguments anſwered▪ 
                  125. to 137.
               
               A ſaving faith is not onely an aſſent to the truth of the Word. ibid. 117.
               
               All the faith which the Church of Rome requires to ſalvation, is, that Catholikes aſſent to the truth of the Word. 116.
               
               We muſt ſtrengthen our faith. 334. We may. 344. Reaſons why. 335. Meanes whereby. 340.
               
            
            
               G.
               Chriſtians muſt try their graces. 30.
               
               The Goſpell is the ground or warrant of faith in Chriſt. 111.
               
            
            
               I.
               Iuſtification. See faith. 
            
            
               K.
               Knowing Chriſt, put for beleeving in Chriſt. 164.
               
            
            
               L.
               Loue is a fruit of faith. 304. Wee muſt try it. 31.
               
            
            
               M.
               Miracles were done to confirme our faith in Chriſt, as well as our beliefe of the Goſpell. 134.135.
               
            
            
               P.
               Carnall profeſſers muſt not be nouzled up in preſumption of their ſalvation. 156.157. It is not enough to ſaluation, to come of religious Parents. 56
               
            
            
               R.
               Repentance is begun, before faith in Chriſt. 106. We muſt try it. 31.
               
            
            
               S.
               Al men ſhal not be ſaved. 16. All true beleevers ſhall certainly be ſaued in the end and euent. 168. whereon the certainty of ſalvation depends 169
               
            
            
               T.
               God tryes our faith. 17. Satan tryes it 20. Heretiques try it. 26.
               
            
         
         
            
            Texts of Scripture alledged, and in part expounded by occaſion.
            
               Math. 21.32. Fol. 238
               Luk. 18.8. Fol. 15
               Ioh. 5.43. Fol. 44
               20.31. Fol. 133
               Act. 15.9. Fol. 267
               Rom. 4.30. Fol. 130
               8.38. Fol. 162
               14.23. Fol. 265
               1. Cor. 11.28. Fol. 10
               13.13. Fol. 35
               2. Cor. 5. pag. 7. and in the whole Preface. 
               Gal. 2.20. Fol. 277
               Epheſ. 6.16. Fol. 40
               Philip. 1.25. Fol. 166
               2. Tim. 1.12. Fol. 162
               2.25. Fol. 248
               Heb. 10.22. Fol. 165
               11.1, 3. Fol. 125
               11.6. Fol. 273
               1. Pet. 3.15. Fol. 24
               1. Ioh. 4.16. Fol. 163
            
         
         
            Faults eſcaped. p. for page: l. for line: r. for reade.
            PAge 8. lin. 18. after command, put them. p. 43. l. 5. for wheras, reade namely becauſe. p. 86. l. 18. for our r. their. p 106. l. 17. for ſeeking, r. ſeeing. p. 113. l. 17. for thereof, r of a ſaving faith. p. 139. l. 28. after former, put the former. p. 140. l. 2. put our as. p. 176. l. 16. for ſinners, r. ſinnes. & l. 17. for ſinnes, r. ſinners. p. 180. l. 21. for they, r. you, & l. 23. for their, r. your. p. 181. l. 14. put out & p. 219. l. ult. for 5. r. 6. p. 237. l. 22. for one, r. upon. p. 241. l. 3. for that, r. the. p. 251. l. 11. for where, r. whence p. 253. l. 20. for proffer, r. profeſſe. p. 255. l. ult. for only reade duely. p. 259. l. 13. after whereas, put in before. p. 262. l. 25. put out were. p. 266. l. 6. for then, r. there. p. 276. l 2. for to, r. of: & l. 3. for unacceptable, r. acceptable. p. 293. l. 21. put out that. p. 308. l. 21. for in, r. to. p. 327. l. 4. for Daniel, r. David. p. 332. l. 16. put out that.
            
            
         
      
   