
      
         
            
            
            A DISCOVRSE OF
The Queenes Maiesties entertainement
in Suffolk and Norffolk:
With a description of many things
then presently seene.
            Deuised by THOMAS CHVRCHYARDE, Gent.
with diuers shewes of his own inuention sette
out at Norwich: and some rehearsal of hir
Highnesse retourne from Progresse.
            Wherevnto is adioyned a commendation of
Sir Humfrey Gilberts ventrous iourney.
            
            
               
                  CERVA CHARISSIMA ET GRATISSIMVS HINNVLVS·
                  PRO: 5
               
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            AT LONDON,
Imprinted by Henrie Bynneman▪
seruante to the right Honourable Sir
CHRISTOPER HATTON
Vizchamberlayne.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the righte vvorshipfull
Maister Gilbert Gerrard, the Queenes
Maiesties Attourney Generall, Thomas
Churchyard Gent. sendeth this signe
of good will, and wisheth encrease
of worthy fame.
            
               HAVING a desire
(right Worshipfull)
to continue in
youre fauour and amitie,
I deuised sundry
ways to giue you
some cause of recreation,
amid the multitude
of youre graue studies, and weightie
affayres, and knowing that no one thing is
more welcome to a worthy witte, than the
vnderstanding of matter, wherein the dutie
of good subiectes is expressed, and the
greatnesse of good minds is made manifest,

I haue presented you with a little Booke,
that makes not only report of the noble receiuing
of the Queenes Maiestie into
Suffolke and Norffolke, but also of the
good order, great cheere, and charges that
hir highnesse subiectes were at, during hir
abode in those parties. And bycause I sawe
most of it, or heard it so credibly rehearsed,
as I know it to be true, I meane to make it a
mirror and shining glasse, that al the whole
land may loke into, or vse it for an example
in all places (where the Prince commeth)
to our posteritie heereafter for euer. For
in very deede, if the dutifull vsage of Suffolke
and Norffolke had not surmoūted
in greatnesse & goodnesse any fiue Sheeres
in England, for hospitalitie, brauerie, and
franke dealing, I had not made mention of
these causes, nor writtē so large a discourse
of their behauioures, and bountifull manner
of dutie: but finding these two Sheeres
so well furnished of Gentlemē, and so flourishing,

and ready to attend in time of triumph,
on hir that is oure triumph and
earthly felicitie, I can do no lesse, but with
immortall fame, sounde their prayses, and
vse my penne to their greate glorye and
thankes, as a guerdon due for their worthy
& honest dezerts, hoping that euery other
Sheere, where the Queenes highnesse hath
not bin, will rather striue to follow this lanterne
when occasion is offered, than any
way thinke me affectionate, or that I haue
partially proceeded in this exercise of pen.
And nowe righte Worshipfull, if you muse
why I do enterlard this discourse with some
suche wordes or sentences, as may seeme to
degresse frō my purposed cause, I pray you
conceyue, both for varietie, and the vertue
of the matter, that my iudgemēt is carried
by circumstances, to treate at large those
things, that shortnesse of speeche will not
suffer, and that my cunning can not aptly
place euery thing in his order: but yet as I

may (vnder your correction) I will boldly
hold on my matter which I haue penned, for
those people that dwell farre off the Court,
that they may see with what maiestie a
Prince raigneth, and with what obedience
and loue good Subiectes do receiue hir: not
that I thinke, but al the Sheeres of Englād
are most willing to do their duties to the vttermost
of their powers: but that in deede
the like of this entertaynemēt hath not bin
seene: I haue presumed to sette out these
things, and namely, bycause at Norwich
I was employed to sette forth some shewes,
which heere I haue imprinted, as well those
that hir Highnesse sawe not, by meanes of
euill weather, as those she sawe and heard,
and gaue gratious thankes for. And as I
mind to wrighte what truely happeneth in
my memorie, so meane I to touche a little,
the manner and inclination of the common
people, whose ciuill sorte and curtesie is
greatly to be commended. Withall, I haue

placed at the end of this discourse, a feawe
verses, in the honoring of good mindes, and
trauelling bodyes, meaning thereby Sir
Humfrey Gilbert, Maister Henry
Knolles, and others, right worthy and honest
Gentlemen, presently passed towards
a happy voyage as I hope. These paynes
and purposes of myne, proceede onely on
the good will I beare to al vertuous actions,
and so I trust you will take them, and giuing
my small Booke a little countenance
(if it so stande with youre pleasure) I shall
find my selfe greatly bound vnto you therefore,
and among the rest that speaketh well
(which are not a few) of your vprighte gouernemente
of life, I will not bee the last
shall yeeld you deserued laude, as knoweth
God, who encrease his grace and good
giftes in you, and make your end as
honorable, as your dayes
haue bin blessed.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               IF I shoulde not good
Reader as vvell shevve
thee some matter of delight,
as publishe to the
vvorld these penned discourses,
thy vvits vvould
vvaxe a vveery of my
friuolous vvordes, and
I should gaine but little
frute by my labour and
trauell: and greater delight can not be presented,
than heere to shevv thee the good disposition of
some people, bredde vp, and nourished out of
the bovvels of thine ovvne nation. And albeit it
seemeth strange, that people nurtured farre from
Courte, shoulde vse muche courtesie, yet vvill I
prooue by the humblenesse of the common
people, vvhere lately the Prince hath passed, that
if in a manner all ciuilitie vvere vtterly decayed, it
might haue bin found freshly florishing in many
of those parties and places specifyed before: for
so soone as the presence of the Prince vvas entred
in their boundes, by a meere motion of homage
and fealty, a generall consent of duetie and
obediēce vvas seene thorough the vvhole Countrey,
and vvell vvere they that might first find occasion
by any meanes to vvelcome a Courtier,

and not vvith feyned ceremonies, but vvith friēdlye
entertaynemente. And although it be a custome,
and most laudable manner for the poore
commons to runne in flockes to see their Soueraigne,
yet there, as me thought, their desire vvas
so greate, that they hadde neuer ynough of the
sight so long vvished and desired: and such reuerence
and humilitie they vsed tovvardes all the
trayne, vvheresoeuer they encountred anye of
them, that the invvarde affections of the people
vvas playnely expressed by their outvvard apparance,
and manifest curtesies: in so much, that the
meanest persons that follovved the Court, stood
maruellously contented vvith that they savv, and
vvondered at the rare & good maner of the people,
especially in Norvvich, vvhere the entertainemente
vvas so greate, that all degrees, from the
highest to the lovvest, vvere had in such admiration,
that it seemed another vvorlde to beholde:
vvhich nevve kinde of reuerence, and comely custome
of the Countrey (as it may be properly
applyed) makes the old haughtinesse, and stiffenecked
behauiour of some places, to blushe, and
become odious, yea in soyles, that the Prince generally
keepeth hir residence, & most abode in,
vvhere proude people vvill passe by many of the
Nobilitie, vvithoute mouing eyther cappe or
knee, a stubborne stoutenesse, and an vnmannerly

disordered boldnesse, bredde vp and fostered
on the long familiaritie had vvith the noble mens
seruants, and dayly vievv of their maisters, vvith
vvhiche sighte they are so cloyed and vveeryed,
that theyr duetie is forgotten, and vtterly reiected,
that ought to be ashamed of abuse, and
shoulde vse more reuerente manners. If they
vvould (to leaue off thys audacious fashion) but
looke on dyuers Sheeres in this lande, as Lancasheere,
Chesheere, Shropsheere, and other
Sheeres farre from the Court, they might soone
bee learned to clappe on more comelynesse,
and vse lesse obstinacie. And if they thynke
scorne to bee taughte at home of oure ovvne
people, it vvere good they vvere Shipped into
Fraunce or Flaunders, oure neere neyboures,
vvhere the meaner sorte are not onely knovven
by theyr garmentes and goyng, but perceyued
by theyr gestures, and humblenesse of countenaunce
and speeche. Novve gentle Reader,
thynke no other of thys my discourse in the
commendation of courtesie, but that I reioyce
to see suche auntiente humilitie as yet helde vp
and mainteyned in Englande, vvhen pride and
vayneglory vvoulde ouerthrovve the good
dispositions of the people, and breede both
to GOD and Man a common contempte.
And, as I haue rehearsed a peece of those

thinges I savve in Suffolke and Norffolke, to
further thy delight tovvards the reading of my
simple Booke, so looke for presentlye at my
handes the rest of that Progresse vvhiche I am
truely instructed of, or may come to my memorie.
Thus committing to thy handes and
head the boldnesse of my enterprise, and
vievv of those Verses and matter
I heere haue sette out.
I bid thee farevvell.
            
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The entertaynemente of
the Queenes Maiestie into Suffolke,
and Norffolke.
            
               TO wright of the receiuing
of hir highnesse into Suffolke
and Norffolke in euery poynte, as
matter may moue me, woulde conteyne
a great time, in making a iust
rehearsall thereof: wherefore I will
but briefely recite it, and committe
the circumstance and manner of the
same, to your discretion and iudgement.
The troth is, albeit they hadde but small warning certaynely
to build vpon, of the comming of the Quéenes Maiestie
into both those Shéeres, the Gentlemen had made suche
ready prouision, that all the veluets and silkes were taken vp
that might be layde hand on, and bought for any money, and
soone conuerted to such garments and sutes of roabes, that the
shew thereof might haue beautifyed the greatest triumph that
was in Englande these many yeares: for (as I hearde) there
were two hundred yong Gentlemen, cladde all in white veluet,
and thrée hundred of the grauer sorte apparelled in blacke
veluet coates, and faire chaynes, all ready at one instant and
place, with fiftéene hundred seruing men more on Horsebacke,
well and brauely mounted in good order, ready to receyue the
Quéenes highnesse into Suffolke, which surely was a comely
troupe, and a noble sight to beholde: and all these waited on
the Sheriffe Sir William Spring, during the Quéenes Maiesties
abode in those parties, and to the very con
                  •
               ynes of Suffolke.
But before hir highnesse passed to Norffolke, there was

in Suffolke such sumptuous feasting and bankets, as seldome
in any part of the world hath bin séene before. The maister of
the rolles, Sir William Cordall, was one of the firste that
beganne this great feasting, and did lighte suche a Candle to
the rest of the Shéere, that many were glad bountifully and
franckly to follow the same example, with such charges and
cost, as the whole trayne were in some sort pleased therewith.
And néere Bury, Sir William Drury for his part at his house,
made the Queenes highnesse a costly and delicat dinner, and
Sir Robert Iermyne of Roeshbroke feasted the French Embassadoures
two seuerall times, with whiche charges and
courtesie they stood maruellously contented. The Sheriffe Sir
William Spring, Sir Thomas Kidson, Sir Arthur Higham, &
diuers other of worship, kept great houses, and sundry eyther
at the Quéenes comming, or returne, solemnely feasted hir
highnesse, yea and deffrayed the whole charges for a day or
twayne, presented giftes, made suche triumphes and deuises,
as in déede was most noble to beholde, and very thankefully
accepted. The Norffolke Gentlemen hearing how dutifullie
their neybours had receyued the Prince, prepared in lyke
sort to shewe themselues dutifull, and so in most gallantest
maner, assembled and set forward with fiue and twenty hundred
Horsemen, whereof as some affirme, were sixe hundreth
Gentlem
                  •
               n, so brauely attired, and mounted, as in déede was
worthy the noting, which goodly company wayted on theyr
Sheriffe a long season: but in good sooth (as I haue heard credibly
spoken) the bankets and feastes began héere afresh, and
all kind of triumphes that might be deuised, were put in practise
and proofe. The earle of Surrey did shewe most sumptuous

                  •
               héere, in whose Parke were spéeches well sette out, & a
speciall Deuice much cōmended: and the rest, as a number of
Gentlemen, whose names I haue not, were no whit behinde
to the vttermost of their abilities, in all that mighte be done
and deuised. But when the Quéenes highnesse came to Norwich,
the substance of the whole Triumph and feasting, was
in a ma
                  •
               ner there new to beginne, for order was taken

there, that euery day, for sixe dayes togither, a Shew of some
strange Deuice should be séene, and the Maior and Aldermē,
appointed among themselues and their bré
                  •
               thren, that no one
person, reteyning to the Quéene, shoulde be vnfea
                  ••
               ed, or vnbidden
to dinner and supper, during the space of those sixe
dayes: which order was well and wisely obserued, and gayned
their Citie more same and credite, than they wot of: for that
courtesie of theirs shall remayne in perpetuall memorie,
whiles the walles of their Citie standeth. Besides the money
they bestowed on diuers of the trayne, and those that tooke
paynes for them (albeit my selfe but slenderly considered) will
be a witnesse of theyr well doyng and good will, whiles the report
of these things may be called to remembrance. I can not
nor ought not, considering theyr great charges (and discrete
gouernemente in these causes) but gyue them due la
                  •
               de and
reputation, as farre as my penne or reporte may doe them
good, and stretche out theyr credite. For most assuredly,
they haue taughte and learned all the Townes and Cities
in Englande a lesson, howe to behaue themselues in
such like seruices and actions.
            Nowe to returne to the Shewes and purposed matter penned
out by me (to shorten the season, and moue pastime to the
Prince) I thoughte it conueniente to printe them in order,
as they were inuented: for I was the fyrste that was
called, and came to Norwiche aboute that businesse, and
remayned there thrée long wéekes before the Courte came
thyther, deuising and studying the best I coulde for the
Citie, albeit other Gentlemen, as Maister Goldingham,
Maister Garter, and others, dyd seeppe in after, and broughte
to p
                  •
               sse that alreadye is sette in Print in a Booke, where the
Orations and spéeches of diuers are set out playnely and truly:
and for that my meaning was orderly to procéede, I haue
héere playnly drawē out my Deuice, not that I thinke it merits
anye greate memorie, nor claymeth credite, but onely
that myne honest intente may bée thereby expressed, and my
friendes maye sée how glad I am to honor God, my Prince,

and my Countrey, trusting to set sorth other workes as tyme
will permitte, and that right shortly, that shall hold you longer
tacke, and better please you. In the meane while I pray you
take in worth and good part my little paynes and greate good
will, and reade (as your fansie fauoures) the Uerses and Deuises
that followe.
            
               The Song on Saturday at hir Highnesse
entrie, soong on the great Stage
that was next the Market place, by the
VVaytes and best voyces in
the Citie.
               
                  THe deavv of heauen droppes this day
                  on dry and barren ground,
                  Wherefore let frutefull heartes I saye
                  at Drumme and Trumpet sound
                  Yeelde that is due, shevv that is meete,
                  to make our ioy the more,
                  In our good hope, and hir great prayse,
                  vve neuer savv before.
               
               
                  The Sunne doth shine vvhere shade hath bin,
                  long darknesse brought vs day,
                  The Starre of comfort novv coms in,
                  and heere a vvhile vvill stay.
                  Ring out the belles, plucke vp your sprightes,
                  and dresse your houses gay,
                  Runne in for floures to stravv the streetes,
                  and make vvhat ioy you may.
                  The deaw of Heauen. &c.
               
               
                  
                  Full many a Winter haue vve seene,
                  and many stormes vvithall,
                  Since heere vve savv a King or Queene
                  in pomp and Princely pall.
                  Wherefore make feast, and banket still,
                  and novv to triumph fall,
                  With dutie let vs shevv good vvill,
                  to gladde both great and small.
                  The deaw of Heauen. &c.
               
               
                  The Realme throughout vvill ring of this,
                  and sundry Regions moe
                  Will say, full great our fortune is,
                  vvhen our good hap they knoe.
                  O Norvvich, heere the vvell spring runnes,
                  vvhose vertue still doth floe,
                  And loe this day doth shine tvvo Sunnes
                  vvithin thy vvalles also.
                  The deaw of Heauen. &c.
               
               This Song ended, hir highnesse passed towardes hir lodging,
and by the way in a Church-yarde, ouer against Maister
Peckes dore (a worthy Alderman) was a Skaffold set vp
and brauely trimmed. On this Skaffolde, was placed an excellent
Boy, wel and gallantly decked, in a lōg white roabe of
Taffata, a Crimson Skarfe wrought with gold, folded on the
Turkishe fashion aboute his browes, and a gay Garlande of
fine 
                     •
                  loures on his head, which Boy was not séene, till the
Quéene had a good season marked the Musicke, whiche was
maruellous swéete and good, albeit the rudenesse of some ringer
of belles did somewhat hinder the noyse and harmonie:
and as soone as the Musike ended, the Boy stepped reuerently
before the Quéene, and spake these words that followe.
            
            
               
               The Boyes speech at Maister
Peckes dore.
               GReat things were meant to welcome thee (ô Queene,)
               If want of time had not cut off the same:
               Great was our wish, but small is that was seene,
               For vs to shew, before so great a Dame.
               Great hope we haue it pleasd our Princes eye,
               Great were the harmes that else our paynes should reape:
               Our grace or foyle, doth in your iudgement lie,
               If you mislike, our griefes do grow on heape:
               If for small things, we do great fauour find,
               Great is the ioy, that Norwich feeles this day:
               If well we waid the greatnesse of your mind,
               Few words would serue, we had but small to say.
               But knowing that your goodnesse takes things well
               That well are meant, we boldly did proceede:
               And so good Queene, both welcome and farewell,
               Thine owne we are, in heart, in word, and deede.
               The Boy therevpon flang vp his Garlande, and the Queenes
Highnesse sayd, This Deuice is fine.
               Then the noyse of Musicke beganne agayne, to heare the
which, the Quéene stayed a good while, and after departed to
the Cathedrall Churche, whiche was not farre from thence.
And the nexte day after, which was Sunday, when Princes
commonly come not abroade (and tyme is occupyed wyth
Sermons, and laudable exercises) I was to watch a conuenient
season, where and how might be vttered the things that
were prepared for pastime. And so vpon Monday before supper,
I made a Deuice, as though MERCVRIE had bin sente
from the Gods, to request the Quéene to come abroade, and
behold what: was deuised for hir welcome, the whole matter
whereof doth follow.
            
            
               
               Mondayes Deuice.
               The manner of Mercuries Coatche
and message to the Queene, requesting
hir Highnesse to come abroade, and
see what pastyme the Gods had
prouided for a noble
Prince.
               
                  THe Coatch that MERCVRIE came into 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Quéene, was closely kept in secret a long season,
and when the time came it must passe towards
the Court, it had a Trumpetter with
it, and the Coatchman was made to driue so
fast, as the Horses should séeme to flye, which
was so well obserued, as the people wondered at the swiftnesse
thereof, and fol
                     •
                  owed it in suche flockes and multitudes,
that scarce in a great gréene (where the Preaching place is)
mighte be founde roome for any more people. And when the
Coatch approched in the hearing of a Trumpet, the Trumpetter
sounded, and so came in to the gréene sounding, vntill
the Coatche was full placed before a window at the whyche
the Quéene stoode, and mighte be playnely séene, and openly
viewed. When MERCVRIE hadde espyed hir highnesse, he
skipped out of the Coatche, and being on the grounde, gaue a
n
                     ••
                  p or two, and aduanced himselfe in suche a sorte, that the
Queene smiled at ye boldnesse of the Boy. Thus MERCVRIE
beholding the Quéene with great courage and audacitie, at
the length bowed downe his head, and immediately stoode
bolt vpright, and shaked his rodde, and so beganne his spéeche
with a most assured countenance, and brauely pronounced it
in déede.
            
            
               
               Mercuries speech.
               MVse not good Queene at me that message brings
               From loue, or iust 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Lord of might,
               No earthly God, yet gouernes mortall things,
               And sprites diuine, and shining Angels bright.
               This Lord o
                     •
                   late to shew his mightie power,
               Hath wonders wrought, when world lookt least therefore:
               For at his becke, this day, and present houre,
               The Heauens shakt, the thunder boltes did rore.
               The earth did mooue, the dead therein did rise,
               And out of graue, the Ghostes of men are gone,
               The wandring Sprites that houered in the Skyes
               Dropt downe from ayre, for world to wonder on.
               The Sainctes thems
                     •
                  lues, that sate in glory great,
               VVere sent in hast, to worke Iehouas will,
               And I that oft my restlesse wings do beate,
               VVas cald, to vse my wings and office still.
               A common post is Mercury you know,
               VVhen he commaunds that made the world of nought,
               And flyes as fast, as arrow out of bowe,
               VVhen message may expresse Iehouas thought.
               VVhose power deuine full long ere this hath seene,
               That in this place should lodge a sacred Queene.
               And waying well, the Princ
                     •
                   whereof I speake,
               Might weerie waxe of common pastimes heere,
               (For that he knowes hir iudgement is not weake,)
               Deuisd aboue, below there should appeare
               (To welcome hir) some sights that rare should seeme,
               And carelesse stoode, what world thereof did deeme:
               So that good Queene, you take them well in worth.
               No sooner had Iehoua meant these things,
               But Cloudes clapt hands, and soules of men came foorth
               Of Heauen gates, yea goodly crowned Kings
               VVere flowen abroade, from blessed Abrams brest:
               Some in the ayre, and toppes of trees did rest,
               
                  
Some fell on 
                     〈…〉
                   houses high,
               Some suncke in Seas, 
                     〈…〉
                   were drouned now,
               And some did light on land where euery eye
               May them behold, and note their manners throw.
               And therewithall, the blacke infernall spreetes
               Ranne out of Hell, the earth so trembling than,
               And like yong laddes they hopt about the streetes.
               The Satyres wilde, in forme and shape of man
               Crept through the wooddes, and thickets full of breeres,
               The water Nymphes, and Feyries streight appeares
               In vncouth formes, and fashion strange to view:
               The hagges of Hell that hatefull are of kind,
               To please the time, had learnd a nature new,
               And all those things that man can call to mind,
               VVere gladde to come, and do their dutie throwe.
               I seeing this, cald for my Coatch in hast,
               Abide sir Boy, then sayd Iehou
                        •
                     
                   now,
               Thou goest not yet, vntill 
                     •
                   Prince be plast
               VVhere I appoynt, thou hast nothing to say.
               Then still I stoode, to know what should be done.
               VVith that, a swarme of people euery way
               Like little Antes, about the fields gan runne,
               Some to prouide for pomp and triumph great,
               Some for good fare, yea household cates and meate,
               And some they ranne to seeke where Poets dwell,
               To penne foorth shewes, and paint out tri
                     ••
                  es well,
               Some halde and puld, to bring the carredge in,
               Some ranne to gaze on triumph neere at hand,
               And some stoode mute, as they amazde had bin
               To see a Court, and Princely noble band
               Come marching on, and make heere their abode:
               But when I saw the carredge heere vnlode,
               And well had wayd the wonders I haue tolde,
               O mighty God (quoth I) now giue me leaue
               To goe from thee, some message to vnfold,
               That by my speech the hearers may conceiue
               Thy Godhead great, hath brought this Princesse here.
               
                  
It shall be so (quoth he) disp
                     •
                  tch and 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               And tell hir, that she is to me so 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               That I appoynt by mans deuice and arte,
               That euery day she shall see sundrie shoe
                     •
                  ,
               If that she please to walke and take the ayr
                     •
                  :
               And that so soone as out of dore she goes
               (If time do serue, and weather wareth fayre)
               Some odde deuice shall meete hir highnesse streight,
               To make hir smyle, and ease hir burthened brest,
               And take away the cares and things of weight
               That Princes feele, that findeth greatest rest.
               VVhen I had thus receyvd my charge at full,
               My golden rodde in liuely hand I tooke,
               And badde in hast my flying Horses pull.
               But eare I past, I gan about me looke
               To see that Coatch, and each thing gall
                     •
                  n
                     •
                   wer
                     •
                  :
               So downe I came, all winged as you see.
               And since I haue espyde that Princesse there,
               That greatest Kings do sue to by degree,
               And many mo that sues no whit, do feare,
               I kisse hir steppes, and shew my maisters will,
               And leaue with hir such graces from aboue,
               As alwayes shall commaund hir peoples loue,
               (Vphold hir raigne, maynteyne hir regall state,
               Find out false harts, and make of subiectes true,
               Plant perfite peace, and roote vp all debate)
               So with this grace, good Queene now heere 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               For I may now on earth no longer stey,
               Than Seruants must to Maisters will obey.
               
                  
                  MERCVRIE hauing thus spoken to the Quéen (whose
gratious inclination is suche, as will not haue anye
thing duetifully offred to passe vnregarded) was well heard,
hir Highnesse standing at a windowe, and (as I knowe,) the
Spéech very well taken and vnderstoode. MERCVRIE as he
came, passed away, at whose Coatch the people (that had seldome
séene such a Deuice) maruelled, and gazed very much:
for it had horsses to drawe it finely paynted as winged, to as
great shewe and order of that it presented, as witte mighte imagine:
the Coatchman sutable to the same: and a Trumpeter
in righte good garmentes, as decente for that purpose as
coulde be deuised. But the Coatche was made and framed on
such a fashion, as few men haue séene: the whole wherof was
couered with Birdes, and naked Sprites hanging by the héeles
in the aire and cloudes, cunningly painted out, as thoughe
by some thunder cracke they had bene shaken & tormented, yet
stayed by power deuine in their places, to make the more wō
                  der
and miraculous Shew. And on the middle of that Coatch
stoode a high compassed Tow
                     •
                  r, bedeckt with golden and gay
iewels, in the top whereof was placed a faire plume of whyte
feathers, all to bespangde and trimmed to the most brauerie:
MERCVRIE himself in blew Satin lined with cloth of gold,
his garmentes cutte and slasshed on the finest manner, a peaked
hatte of the same coloure, as though it should cutte and
seuer the winde asunder, and on the same a payre of wings,
and wings on his héeles lykewise. And on his golden rodde
were little wings also, aboute the whiche rodde, were two
wriggling or scrawling Serpentes, whiche séemed to haue
life when the rodde was moued or shaken. So in this sorte
and forme was MERCVRIE and his Coatch set forthe, and
in déede at such a season, as a great number looked not for any
shew, nor things were ready, as some thoughte, to performe
that was necessary and expected. Yet happe was so good, and
the gracious fauour of the Prince, that all was well taken,
and construed to the best meaning of the Deuisor. So ended
that dayes Deuice, which offered occasion to further matter.
            
            
               
               Tuesdayes Deuice.
               
                  AT this season, although I was not well prouided
of thinges necessary for a Shewe (by
meane of some crossing causes in the Citie)
yet hearing the Quéene roade abroade, determined
as I mighte (and yet by helpe of
friendes and happe) very well to venter the
hazzard of a Shewe, and to be full in the way where hir highnesse
should passe towards hir dinner, in whiche determination
many doubts were to be cast, and many men persuaded to
tarrie a better time, but considering how time rolled on, and
dayes and houres did wast (without doyng any thing promised,
and not perfourmed) I hastily prepared my Boyes and
Men, with al their furnitures, and so sette forward with two
Coatches, hansomely trimmed. The cōmon people beholding
the manner thereof, and gréedie to gaze on that shoulde bée
done, followed, as their fansies did leade them: so that when
we came into the open field, there was as great a trayne and
preace about the Shewe, as came with the Courte at that instant,
which graced much the matter, and gaue i
                     •
                   s
                     •
                  me expected
hope of good successe: and for that you shall (and please you)
imagine you sée the thing, I haue héere set downe the whole
manner of the Shew, and after that euery part as they were
played, shall be héere expressed.
               First, there is a fayned deuice, that VENVS and CVPID
were thrust out of Heauen, and walking on the earth, mette a
Philosopher, who demaunded from whence they came, they
told the Philosopher what they were, and he replyed, and beganne
with troth and ta
                     ••
                  tes to tickle thē so néere, that VENVS
fell in a great anger, and CVPID ranne away, and lefte
his mother and the Philosopher disputing togither, but CVPID
bycause he would be nourished some where, ranne to the
Courte, and there soughte for succoure, and encountring the
Queene, beganne to complayne hys state and his mothers,
and tolde howe the Philosopher had handled them both: but

finding neyther aunswere nor ayde, returned agayne, but not
to his mother, for she was fallen madde (vpon a conceyt that
she was not made of) and CVPID wandering in the worlde,
met with Dame Chastitie and hir maydes, called Modestie,
Temperance, Good exercise, and Shamefastnesse, and she
with hir foure maydes encountring CVPID in a goodly
Coatche, and without any honest gard wa
                     •
                  ting on him, sette
vpon him, threwe him out of his golden seate, trode on hys
pompe, spoyled him of his counterfeyte Godhead and cloke,
and tooke away his bowe and his qu
                     •
                  uer of arrowes, (the one
headed with leade, and the other with golde) and so sent him
like a fugitiue away, and mounted vp into the Coatche hir
selfe and hir maydes, and so came to the Quéene, and rehearsed
what had happened (although this was done in hir view)
and bycause (sayd Chastitie) that the Quéene had chosen the
best life, she gaue ye Quéene CVPIDS 
                  
                     •
                  ow, to learn to shoote
at whome she pleased, since none coulde wounde hir highnesse
hart, it was méete (said Chastitie) that she should do with CVPIDS
how and arrowes what she pleased: and so did Chastitie
depart as she said to the powers deuine. CVPID in ye meane
while wandering in the world, had found out Wantōnesse and
Ryot, who soone fell in beggerie & ruyne (a spectacle to be looked
into) and felt such dayly miserie with Wantōnesse & Ryot,
that CVPID was forced to 
                     ••
                  ing away once agayne, and hazarde
himselfe to fall into the handes of naughty people, or
where Fortune assigned, and comming abroade, happened
vpon the Philosopher, who talked with him agayne, and told
hym his erroures, and other poyntes of pryde and presumption,
declaring it was a greate blaspheme and abuse, to reporte
and beléeue that in Heauen were any other Gods but
one, and he had the only rule of all, that made all of naughte.
In whyche reasoning and discourses, CVPID waxt warme,
and yet in his greatest heate knewe not howe nor where to
coole himselfe, at whiche time came Wantonnesse and Ryot,
and persuaded CVPID to play 
                     〈◊〉
                   longer the foole (in striuing
with Philosophers) and goe away with them, so CVPID
                  
dep
                     •
                  rted, and wente away with Wantonnesse and Riotte, a
                     •
                  d
the Philosopher remayned, and declared that all abuses and
follyes shoulde come to no better end, than presently was expressed
by the miserie of Wantonnesse, Riotte, and CVPID.
Then Modestie and hir fellowes, leauing their Mistresse
Dame Chastity, with the powers Deuine, came 
                     •
                  oft and faire
in their Mistresse Coatch, singing a Song of chast life, & whē
the Song was ended, Modestie sent, as she said she was, from
hir Mistresse, spake to the Quéene a good season, and so the
matter ended, for the whiche Shew, I had gracious words of
the Quéene openly and often pronounced by hir Highnesse.
Now
                     •
                   before you reade the partes, you must throughly note
what my discourse thereof hathe bin, and carrying that care
and good will with you, the matter shall séeme to haue the better
life, and I shall thinke my labour & 
                     ••
                  udie well bestow
                     •
                  d.
               
                  Cupid comming, as he reportes, out of
Heauen (from vvhence his Mother and he is
banished) encountres the Queene, and speaketh
as followeth, he riding in a Coatch: and you must presuppose,
that before his comming to the Queene, he and hys
Mother had mette with the Philosopher.
                  
                     The Shew of Chastitie.
                     A
                           •
                        as poore boy, where shalt thou wander no
                           •
                        ,
                     I am thrust out of Heauen in despight,
                     My Mother too beginnes to bend the brow,
                     For both we walke, as we were banisht quite.
                     She mournes and weepes, and blubbers like a child,
                     By which great griefe, in rage now may she fall,
                     And I haue leaue to walke the wood so wild,
                     To houle, to crye, and 
                           •
                        ore complayne with
                           •
                        ll.
                     For loe of late, where she and I did goe,
                     A man we met, a father graue and wise,
                     
                        
VVho 
                           〈…〉
                         you the troth will know)
                     VVe were the dro
                           ••
                        e, 
                           〈…〉
                         of earth and 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     Fond 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     A leavvd delight, a flying f
                           •
                        nsie light,
                     A shadow fond, that 
                           〈◊〉
                         no shape, but name.
                     The whole abuse of each good witte or wight,
                     An ydle ground, whereon vayne Poets walke,
                     A cause of 
                           •
                        are, a spring where follie 
                           ••
                        oes
                     A wicked meane, to nourish wanton talke,
                     And to conclude, sharp 
                           •
                        ettles vnder Rose
                     VVe were: thus sayd the Father that we me
                           •
                        .
                     My Mother bl
                           •
                        sh
                           •
                        , these thundering words to heare,
                     And from them both, away in hast 
                           •
                         get,
                     To see if I in Court find better cheer
                           •
                        ,
                     But if no friend, no
                           •
                         fauo
                           •
                        re I may finde,
                     Nor aunswere haue of that which heere I speake,
                     Farewell, I seeke my fortune in the wind,
                     For Cupid hath in head 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     If Heauen
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     In earth below, I 
                           〈◊〉
                         to hide my face.
                  
               
               
                  Chastitie suddainely in the view of the
Queene, settes vpon Cupid, and spoyles hym
of his Coatch,Musicke the mean tyme. Bowe and all, and sets him afoo
                        •
                     e,
and so rides, in his Coatche to the Queene, and speakes as
followeth.
                  
                     Chastitie speaketh.
                     TO striue with boyes that standes on bragges and braue
                           •
                        
                     
                     I thought great scorne, till Cupid I espyde,
                     But that proude ladde, that makes so many 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
                     Must needes find one, to daunt his Peacocks pride.
                     Dame Chastit
                              •
                           e is she that winnes the field,
                     VVhose breast is armd with thoughtes of vertues 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
                     VVho to the fight doth bring no glittering shield,
                     But c
                           •
                        eane conceytes, which pure and bl
                           •
                        ssed are,
                     
                        
That strikes downe lust, and tames the wilfull mind,
                     Maynteynes the iust, and holds vp learning both;
                     And wisedome great, through me the Sages find,
                     Philosophers, the louers of the troth.
                     Yea Kings and Queenes by me worke wonders still,
                     Do conquere Realmes, and VVisedome do attayne.
                     The studious minds, whose knowledge, witte, and skill,
                     And all the world doth fame and glory gayne
                     That chastly liues, it talkes with God aboue,
                     It climbes the Cloudes from pomp and pleasures vayne.
                     It is a thing that shining Angels loue,
                     And in the world to come shall liue and raigne.
                     It triumph makes of fickle fond desire,
                     It breedes great force and courage still in men,
                     It quencheth sparkes and flames of fancies fire,
                     It quickes the wittes, and helpes the art of penne,
                     Yea all good giftes from Chastitie doth rise
                     That worthy are of honor vnder Skyes.
                     Then sith (ô Queene) chast life is thus thy choyce,
                     And that thy heart is free from bondage yoke,
                     Thou shalt (good Queene) by my consent and voyce,
                     Haue halfe the spoyle, take eyther bowe or cloke.
                     The bowe (I thinke) more fitte for such a one
                     In fleshly forme, that beares a heart of stone
                     That none can wound, nor pearce by any meane.
                     VVherefore take heere the bow, and learne to shoote
                     At whome thou wilt, thy heart it is so cleane,
                     Blind Cupids boltes therein can take no roote.
                     Now will I say in this poore Coatch of mine,
                     To mount the Skyes, and see the Gods deuine.
                     CVPID commes running afoote like a vagabond towards
the Queene, from Wantonnesse and Riot where he was
succoured, and méetes againe in open shew the Philosopher,
whose habitation was in a Rocke, and the Philosopher
demaundes of CVPID where he hathe bin, and what
is the cause he commes abroade in such disorder.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Philosopher speaketh.
                     HOw now my friend, where hast thou 
                           〈◊〉
                         other plight I trow
                     Thou wast, when lately I thee met, hath Cupid lost his bow?
                     His cloke? his Coatch
                           •
                         his witte and all? and fled from mothers face?
                     Or else hath Cupid gone to Schole, to learne some prettie Grace?
                     To play the God, fye foolish boy, leaue of these toyes in time,
                     Thy Mother (as the Poets fayne,) when beautie was in prim
                           •
                        
                     
                     A st
                           •
                        umpet was, it may be so, as well appeareth yet,
                     Thou art not of the race of Gods, thou art some Beggers chitte.
                     
                        Cupid.
                        Nay doting foole, that still dost pore on Bookes,
                        Though Coatch be gone, and golden cloke be lost,
                        Yet like a God, I tell thee Cupid lookes,
                        VVhen old grey beard shewes like a rotten post.
                        It yll becommes an aged man to rayle
                        On women thus, that are not now in place,
                        But sure thy words are spent to small auayle,
                        They can not blot my mother, nor my race.
                     
                     
                        Philosopher.
                        But dost thou thinke thou art 
                              •
                            God
                              •
                            then shew some proofe thereof.
                     
                     
                        Cupid.
                        That can I do, but you old men, with boyes will iest and scoffe,
                        And either laugh to scorne our words, or taunt vs past the nick.
                     
                     
                        Philosopher.
                        Beleeue not that, but when in deede we enter neere the quicke,
                        Ye wincke like Coltes, and fling away from witte and feeling seene,
                        VVel Cupid, prooue thou art a God, and shew some good defence,
                        To this thy talke, I will giue eare, and silence keepe a whyle,
                        Vntill thy w
                              ••
                           ds haue g
                              •
                           ne so farre, thy folly makes me smyle.
                     
                     
                        
                        Cupid.
                        The greatest Clarkes that earst haue bin, three thousand yeres agoe,
                        VVhen they on Venus talke or treate, takes Cupids part ye knowe.
                        T
                              •
                           eir bokes, their scrolles, their pāphlets large, makes mētiō of my name,
                        You nede no furt
                              •
                           er search for proof, to try out Cupids fame.
                     
                     
                        Philosopher.
                        Boast not of booke
                              •
                           , for bookes they be, that plainely witnes beares
                        How Cupids arte infects good minds, and canckers honest eares.
                        And though fond men in liables shew on you a flourish fine,
                        Such geegawes grees not with good rules, nor holds on gifts deuine.
                     
                     
                        Cupid.
                        VVhy Sir, you will beleeue, that Ioue and many more
                        Of other Gods in Heauen are, where I haue bin before?
                     
                     
                        Philosopher.
                        In Heauen? there you trippe, why boy how came you thence?
                        You went abroade to take the ayre, and haue bin walking senc
                              •
                           
                        
                        Like dawes along the coast, O boy, thy proofe is bare,
                        In Heauen is but one that rules, no other Gods there are.
                     
                     
                        Cupid.
                        And doth not Ioue and Mars beare sway? 
                              〈◊〉
                            that is tru
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        Philosopher.
                        Then put in Tom and Tibbe, and all beares sway as much as yo
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        Cupid.
                        I told you Sir before, your taunting tong would bite.
                     
                     
                        Philosopher.
                        I come too neere the sore, and please not your deligh
                              •
                           .
                        But since you 
                              〈◊〉
                            for naught, and can not heare the truth,
                        
                           
I will not shame my hoarie heares, to striue with wanton youth.
                        This Cupid, Venus sonne, as men suppose to bee,
                        Is neyther God nor Man in forme, nor monster as you see,
                        But such a kind of shade, as can no substance shoe,
                        Begot by braynelesse blind delight, and nurst with natures foe.
                        Fed vp with faithlesse foode, and traynd in trifling toyes,
                        Awakt with vice, and luld asleepe agayne with yrkesome ioyes.
                     
                     
                        Wantonnesse and Riotte commes in, and talkes with CVPID,
and so takes him away.
                     
                        Wantonnesse.
                        ARt thou so fond to talke with doting age,
                        This Man did bring thy mother in a rage,
                        And told hir playne, a Goddesse faynd she was,
                        Most leavvd of life, and brittle as the glasse,
                        I VVa
                                 •
                              tonnesse knowe well that tale is true,
                        To this my friend now R
                                 ••
                              tte what say you?
                     
                     
                        Riotte.
                        I could say much, but I will hold my peace,
                        Foule is that bird that his owne neast defiles.
                        If Riot should not speake, that Ven
                                 ••
                              
                            knowes so well,
                        (VVith whom since Cupid bare a name, did wantō 
                           Ven
                                 ••
                              
                            dwel)
                        Much pitie were it sure, that Riot life should beare,
                        For I am father of delight and pleasure euery where.
                        VVithout the help of whome, Dame Ven
                                 ••
                              
                            can not liue,
                        For vnto Lust and Riot both, doth Venus honor giue.
                        And Lust is Riots ioy, a spright that pleades for place
                        In euery soyle, since world began to boast of Adams race.
                        And now to tell you playne, from me, or from my stocke,
                        (An endlesse swarme of ydle of folke, a merrie carelesse flocke)
                        As prating Poets fayne, at first did Ven
                                 •
                              s spring,
                        But Venus was no strumpet sure; she was some finer thing
                        That alwayes furthers Loue, in French a 
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            
                           
                              •
                            playne,
                        A be
                              •
                           ter of good barg
                              •
                           ynes oft, and roote of fancyes vayne.
                        
                           
Though Goddesse were she not, yet faire and fine was she,
                        As I haue heard good Clarkes report, and you in Bookes shal 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                        Of hir great Storyes made, and great accompt thys day
                        VVe make of Venus darlings still, wherefore in briefe to say,
                        Both I and thousands more, with 
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            needes must hold.
                        Twas she, to whome King Pri
                                 ••
                              s sonn
                              •
                            did giue the apple of golde
                        That cost so many 
                              〈◊〉
                            but r
                              ••
                           de the seege of Tr
                                 •
                              y,
                        
                        And you shall see what prettie pranckes the mother and this boy
                        Hath playd in many partes, my knowledge is but small,
                        I tell by heeresay many things, but am not learnd at all
                        Good Wanto
                                 •
                              nesse thou knowst, but p
                              •
                           sse ore that awhile
                        I could tell tales of Ven
                                 ••
                              
                            yet, would make the hearers smile.
                     
                     
                        Wantonnesse.
                        O speake no more, come comfort Cupid now▪
                        
                        Let Venus go, that 
                              •
                           ate and saw with eye
                        The order great, and all the manner how
                        Dame C
                                 •
                              astitie did mount to Starrie Skye
                        VVith such a Coatch, and such a noble spoyle,
                        As seldome h
                              •
                           th in Heauen oft bin seene.
                        She sayd, when she had Cupid put to foyle,
                        She gaue his bowe and shaftes vnto a Queene.
                        And Cupid streight came running vnto me.
                        I saw him bare, a
                              •
                           d sent him bare away,
                        And as we are in deede but bare all three,
                        So must we part as poorely as we may.
                        No reasoning heere with him that learned is,
                        Philosophers knowes more than wanton fooles,
                        If we had once bin beaten well eare this
                        And lovd our Bookes, and truely plyde our Scholes,
                        VVe had bin learnd, yea livd, and felt no lacke,
                        VVhere now our wealth is all vpon our backe.
                     
                     
                        Ri
                              •
                           tte.
                        By sweete Sainct Iohn we are in goodly weede
                              •
                           ,
                        To daunce with belles a Morric
                              •
                            throu
                              •
                           h the Streets.
                        
                           
If any heere, three ydle people need
                              •
                           s,
                        Call vs in time, for we are finefor sheetes:
                        Yea, for a shift, to steale them from the hedge,
                        And lay both sheetes, and linnen all to gage.
                        VVe are best be gone, least some do heare alledge
                        VVe are but Roages, and clappe vs in the Cage.
                        Come Cupid come, if thou wilt heare a song,
                        Dame Chast
                                 •
                              ti
                                 •
                              
                            hath sent hir Coatch along,
                        To comfort those, that dayly liues in wo.
                     
                     
                        Cupid.
                        NAy Cupid will, go hang himselfe I tro
                              •
                           .
                        Much better were, to fall on p
                              •
                           ynt of knife,
                        Than from rich state, to leade a beggers life.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Cupid, VVantonnesse, and Riot, departs,
and the Coatch softly commes on, vvith
such Musicke as is deuised, and sings not, vntill
the Coatch be before the Queeue, in the meane while the
Philosopher speaketh.
                  
                     Philosopher.
                     NOw world may iudge what fables are, & what vain gods ther b
                           •
                        ,
                     VVhat names and titles fondlings giue, to thē, likewise you see,
                     And that one God alone doth rule, the rest no vertue showe,
                     Vayne Venus and blind C
                              •
                           pid both, and all the ragment rowe
                     And rabble of Gods, are fayned things, to make the season short,
                     As wisedome knowes that wel cā wey, the worth & weight of sport.
                     Through trifles light, sad things are sene, through vice is vertue foūd,
                     By hollow wayes, and crooked pathes, app
                           ••
                        res the playnest ground.
                     Thus leauing vnto wisedomes reach, the things that heere are done,
                     And fearing foyle, if heere vve should, in further folly runne,
                     VVe stay, saue that, some Musicke commes, to knitte in order due,
                     The substance of thys 
                           〈◊〉
                         Shew, that we present to you.
                  
                  
                     
                     Modestie speaketh.
                     DAme Chastitie we serue, and wayte vpon hir still,
                     Saue now, that she is cald to Cloudes, to know 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         will.
                     She bad vs walke abroade, and searche, where might be seene
                     In stately troupe, and royall Court, a worthy noble Queene.
                     Salute hir in my name, and l
                           •
                        oke in secret sort
                     (Quoth she) you do with al your force, maynteyne hir princely port.
                     Good exercise as chiefe, thy humble dutie doo,
                     Let Shamefastnesse, and Modestie, and sober Temprance too,
                     Attend as handmaydes still, vpon that sacred dame.
                     VVe hearing what our mistresse sayd, & marking wel the same,
                     Did hast vs hither streight, but ere we went at large,
                     
                        Ieb
                              •
                           us sent vs Graces great, and gaue vs powre and charge,
                     (VVhen pomp is most in place) to creepe in princely hart,
                     And gide the mind, & throughly serch, the soule & euery part.
                     That still the feare of God, be burning in hir brest,
                     Ther is the only house O Quene, wher we four maids wil rest,
                     There we will seruice shew, there shall our 
                           〈◊〉
                         budde,
                     Ther is the plot, the seate, the soyle, and place to do most good.
                     Yea vnder richest roabes, we haue a powre to goe,
                     In fair
                           •
                        st weedes are cleanest thoughts, & purest minds I know.
                     The earlish Countrey cloyne, yea clad in smeared cloke,
                     VVith cāckred hart, & currish lokes, sits grinning in the smoke.
                     The comely cleane attire, doth carrie mind aloft,
                     Makes mā think Seo
                           ••
                        e to stoupe to vice, & loke to Vertue oft.
                     The Sunne that s
                           ••
                        neth bright, hath vertues manifold,
                     A gallant floure hath pleasant smell, great goodnesse is in gold.
                     So gay and glittring Dame, thy graces are not small,
                     Thy heauenly gifts in greatest prease, in deede surmoūts thē all.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Wensday.
               
                  THE Wensday hir highnesse 
                     〈◊〉
                   at my Lord
of Surreys, where were the Frenche Embassadours
also, and a moste rare and delicate Dinner
and Banquette. At whiche season I dyd
watch with a Shewe (called MANHODE and
DEZARTE,) at my Lorde of Surreys backe dore, going to
the Quéenes Barge: but the row
                     •
                  e was so little, that neyther
the Shotte, the Armed men, nor the Players, could haue
place conueniente: Wherevpon we toke Boats, and conueyed
our people downe the water, towards a landing place that
we hoped the Quéene woulde come vnto. And there hauing
all things in a readinesse, hoouered on the water thrée long
houres, by which meane the nighte came on, and so we were
faine to withdraw
                     •
                   oure selues and goe homewarde, trusting
for a better time and occasion, which in déede was offred the
nexte day after by the Quéenes Maiesties owne good motion,
who tolde me she woulde sée what pastimes were prepared, as
hereafter you shall perceyue by the discourse of these matters
that I meane to make, and by this Shewe of MANHODE,
and the Shewe of the NYMPHES, which I minde fully and
truely to treate of.
            
            
               
               Thurseday.
               
                  THe Thurseday in the morning, my Lorde
Chamberlaine gaue me warning ye Quéenes
highnesse woulde ride abroade in the after
noone, and he commaunded me to be ready,
dutifully to presente hir with some Shewe.
Then knowing whiche way the Quéene
woulde ride (by coniecture and instructions giuen) I caused a
place to be made and digged for the Nymphes of the water,
the manner and proportion whereof, was in this forme and
fashion. Firste, there was measure taken for thréescore foote
of grounde euery way, the hole to be made déepe and foure
square, whiche ground was couered with a Canuas paynted
gréene like the grasse, and at euery side on the Canuas, ranne
a string through Curtayne rings, whiche string might easily
be drawen any kinde of way, by reason of two great poales
that lay along in the grounde, and aunswered the Curtayne
or Canuas on eache side so, that drawing a small corde in the
middle of the Canuas, the earth woulde seeme to open, and so
shut againe, as ye other end of the cord was drawē backward.
And in the same caue was a noble noyse of Musicke of al kind
of instruments, seuerally to be sounded and played vpon, and
at one time they shoulde be sounded all togither, that mighte
serue for a consorte of broken Musicke. And in the same caue
likewise was placed twelue water Nimphes, desguised or
dress
                     •
                  d most strangely, eache of them had eyther vpon white
Silke, or fine linnen, gréene segges, stitched cunningly on a
long garment, so well wrought, and set on, as scarce 
                     〈◊〉
                   whit
might be perceiued. And euery Nimph had in hir hand a great
bundell o
                     •
                   bulrushes, and had on hir head a Garland of Iuievnder
the whiche Iuie was a Coyfe of Mosse, and vnder the
Mosse was there long goodly heare like golden tresses that
couered hir shoulders, and in a manner, raughte downe vnto
hir middle. And touching the beautie of the Nimphes, they

                     •
                  rmed to be the chosen children of a world, and became theyr

attire so wel, that their beauty might haue abused a right good
iudgement, for diuers of those that knew them before, (albeit
they were bare faced) coulde scarce knowe them in their garments,
and sundry tooke them to be yong girles and wenches,
prepared for the nonce, to procure a laughter. These Nimphs
thus apparelled, and all things in very good plight and readynesse,
there was deuised, that at the Quéenes comming néere
the water side (as this caue stoode at the brimme of the Riuer)
one Nimph shoulde poppe vp out of the caue first, and salute
the Quéene with a spéech, and then another, and so till four of
them had finished their spéeches, there they shoulde remayne,
and when they retired into their caue, the Musicke should beginne,
which sure had bin a noble hearing, and the more melodious,
for the varietie thereof, and bycause it should come secretely
and strangely out of the earth. And when the Musicke
was done, then should all the twelue Nymphes haue issued togither,
and daunced a daunce with Timbrels that were tr
                     •
                  mmed
with belles, and other 
                     •
                  angling things, which Timbrels
were as brode as a Séeue, hauing bottoms of fine parchment,
and being sounded, made suche a confused noyse, and pastime,
that it was to be wondered at, besides the strangenesse of the
Timbrels (yet knowen to oure forefathers) was a matter of
admiration to such as were ignorante of that new founde toy,
gathered and borowed from our elders. So in order and readinesse
stoode that Shew for the time. And to kéep that Shewe
cōpany (but yet far off) stood the Shew of Manhode & Dezart,
as first to be presented, and that Shew was as well furnished
as the other, Men all, sauing one Boy, called Beautie, for the
which Manhode, Fauour, and Dezarte, did striue (or shoulde
haue contended) but good Fortune (as victor of all conquestes)
was to come in, and ouerthrowe Manhode, Fauour, Dezarte,
and all their powers, and onely by fine force (vppon a watchword
spoken) should lay hande on Beautie, and carrie or leade
hir away. The other suters troubled with this kinde of dealing,
should talke togither, and sweare to be in one minde, for
an open reuēge, & vpon that Fortune should crye arme, arme.

The other side called for their friendes, at which 
                     〈◊〉
                   should
appeare both their strengthes: but good Fortune should faire
in pow
                     •
                  r excéede his enimies: And yet to shew that Destenie,
(and who best can co
                     •
                  quer) shal gouerne all, Fortune should
make an offer, that sir to six with sworde and targette shoulde
ende the brawle and businesse: then sixe Gentlamen on either
side with rebated swords and targets (only in dublet and hose,
and Morion on head) approched, and woulde clayme the combat,
and deale togither twelue blowes a peece, and in the ende
Fortune should be victor: and then the Shot, and Armed men
shoulde fall at variaunce so sharpely (vppon mystaking of the
matter) that Fortunes side should triumph and march ouer the
bellies of their enimies: in which time was legges and armes
of men (well and liuely wrought) to be let fall in numbers on
the grounde, as bloudy as mighte be. Fortune regarding nothing
but victorie, marcheth so away in greate triumph, and
then shoulde haue come into the place a dolefull song for the
death of Manhood, Fauour, and Dezartes, and so the Shewe
should haue ended. But now note what befell after this great
businesse and preparation, for as the Quéenes highnesse was
appoynted to come to hir Coatch, and the Lords and Courtiers
were readie to mount on Horsebacke, there fell suche a
shoure of rayne (and in the necke thereof came such a terrible
thunder) that euery one of vs were driuen to seeke for couerte
and most comfort, in so muche, that although some of vs in
Boate stoode vnder a Bridge, we were all so dashed and washed,
yt it was a greater pastime to sée vs looke like drowned

                     •
                  attes, than to haue beheld the vttermost of the Shewes rehearsed.
Thus you sée, a Shew in the open fielde is alwayes
subiect to the suddayne change of weather, and a number of
more incoueniences than Ierpresse. But what shoulde I say
of that whiche the Citie lost by this cause, Ueluets, Silkes,
Tinsels, and some cloth of golde, being cutte out for these purposes,
and could not serue to any great effect after. Well, there
was no more to say, but an old Adage, yt 
                  Man doth purpose,
and God dothe dispose, to whose disposition and pleasure I

                  
                     ••
                  mmitte the guide of greater matters. So this 
                     〈◊〉
                  
tooke his leaue from vs, and left vs looking one vpon another,
and he that thought he had receyued moste iniurie, kept greatest
silence, and lapping vp, among a 
                     •
                  undle of other mysfortunes
this euil chaunce, euery person quietly passed to his lodging.
The nexte day was the Quéene to departe the towne,
and I fearing that all my labour shoulde be loste, deuised to
conuert the Nimphes of the water, to the Fairies on the land,
as hereafter shall appeare: In the meanewhile I haue sette
downe the foure spéeches that foure Nimphes shoulde haue
spoken at the Waterside, where the Quéene was looked for:
And withal, I haue written the order and parts of the Shew
of MANHODE and DEZARTES, that no one thing that
was well meante, should sléepe in silence. And first and form
                     •
                  st
you must conceiue, that the Shew of MANHODE was
inuented to be playde in a Garden, or wheresoeuer had bene

                     •
                  ound a conueniente place, the Prince then being in presence.
And vnto hir Highnesse shoulde there haue come a Lady called
Beautie, humbly on knées, requiring ayde and succoure,
or else iudgemente, in a matter disputable, and in greate controuersie,
vpon whose sute and humble intercession, the disputation
was to beginne in order as followeth, in manner of a
Dialoge, the parts whereof are héere for you to reade at your
leysure, and after the same, as the Shewe of the Nymphes
shoulde haue bin, shall their parts followe in lyke sort.
               
                  
                  Firste, Lady Beauty speaketh, and she
attyred in very goodly garmentes as becommeth
such a Dame.
                  MOst royall Prince, speede on thy comely pace,
                  Make hast in time, to do thy subiects good,
                  Go r
                        •
                     nne with me, to stay this heauie cace,
                  Take p
                        •
                     ynes good Queene, to gayne the giltlesse bloud.
                  In one mans life, saue liues of many moe,
                  Saue him in whome, the state of others stayes,
                  For I poore wretch, God knowes am minded so,
                  VVith him to liue, with him to end my dayes.
                  VVho now in force, of Tyrants hands doth lye,
                  And vaynely striues, to scape his helplesse fate,
                  VVho seeth his death, and dolefull date so nigh,
                  Go hast to help, and yet perhaps too late.
                  
                     Manhode.
                     YEt were I best, to kill this peeuish Boy,
                     VVhome now she makes, hir chiefe and sole delight,
                     In whome she finds, such pleasure and such ioy,
                     That causelesse I, am cleane defaced quite.
                     Such gaudyes gay, are in his Peacocks face,
                     And skinne smooth
                           •
                         vp, with shew of ydle hue,
                     That I do lodge, and languish in disgrace,
                     Though she of me, hath proofe of promise true.
                     VVell, make thy choyce▪ and see what likes thee best,
                     View he ere the death, of this thy darling now,
                     Or yeeld thy loue, to fancie my request,
                     VVhose manly force, shall winne the conquest throw.
                  
                  
                     Beautie.
                     NAught shalt thou winne, by that which I shall lose,
                     Thou ge
                           •
                        st no gaynes, though I be thus bereft,
                     And though that I, betweene two mischiefes goes,
                     VVhere naught but bale, and wretched woe is les
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     
                        
Yet thy reward, which doest assault my friend,
                     (In whose delight, my heart was fedde long whyl
                           •
                        )
                     Shall be disdeyne, and hatered in the ende,
                     A guerdo
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        itte, for such a Tyrant vile.
                  
                  
                     Manhode.
                     THis wretch is he, by whome I am annoyde,
                     He hath thy heart, though I deserue the same,
                     If wisely then, I do my harmes auoyde,
                     VVhy stey I sword, I can not purchase blame,
                     By cutting off, the cause of my distresse,
                     VVhen he is gone, my lette shall be the lesse.
                  
                  
                     Beautie.
                     HOw canst thou say, thou doest dezerue my heart,
                     VVhich kilst my heart, and causest all my woe,
                  
                  
                     Manhode.
                     SInce that thou takest, my dealing in such part,
                     I will delight, to wreake my wrath on 
                           •
                        oe.
                     In greeuing thee, most glad to heare me grone,
                     And art most pleasd, when Manhode makes his moan
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Beautie.
                     O Gracious Prince, to thee my mone I make,
                     And prostrate fall, O Prince before thy foote,
                     VVith wonted grace, on me some pitie take,
                     O salue my sore, let sorrow find some boote.
                     I swelt in sighes, and sure shall dye to see
                     My friend dispatcht, and murthred in this wise,
                     O bid the wretch, come thrust his sword in me,
                     For from my loue, the cause of griefe doth rise.
                     I made the fault, then punish me therefore,
                     Shall silly Lamb, be ledde to slaughter thus?
                     Do eyther help, with death my endlesse sore,
                     Or with remorse, and ruth the case discusse,
                     If he do dye, by Mightie Iou
                              •
                           
                         I sweare
                     I will not liue, if sword or knife be found,
                     
                        
VVith scratched face, 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     I know at first, my 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     And then ad
                           ••
                        , my 
                           〈…〉
                        , steale away
                     O Queene, in hast, 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Manhoode.
                     SInce 
                           〈◊〉
                         O Prince, forbidst reuenge to take,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         wilst that men▪ should lose their time in loue,
                     Then marke my case, and giue me leaue to make
                     Myn
                           •
                         owne defence, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         allea
                           •
                        ge and proue,
                     And I will shewe 
                           〈◊〉
                         right and title good,
                     And that I do, des
                           •
                        rue the 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     Though this fond wretch, always my sute withstoode,
                     As one who long, 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     VVhome leavvd delight, hath ledde out of the way,
                     (VVhich good Aduise, and ord
                           •
                        ed Iudgement keepe)
                     VVhome Beauties blast hath 
                           •
                        ounst against the 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
                     VVhere eraggy tockes, and sands lye 
                           •
                        idde in deepe,
                     A fond deuice to trust to pay
                           •
                        ted face,
                     And fasten fayth vpon so fickle 
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        y,
                     To whome D
                           •
                        me H
                              •
                           be, lends often gui
                           •
                        efull grace,
                     VVhich euery yeare and day doth plucke away,
                     VVhome sicknesse spoyles, and 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     VVhome time doth eate and age 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     VVhome 
                           •
                        ares of mind do shake and alter so,
                     As VVinter winds defaceth 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     A snare for witte, a b
                           •
                        yte for wanton youth,
                     A false conceyte, an error of the mind,
                     A fond delight, wherein there is no truth,
                     A poysoned dish, th
                           ••
                         doth the reason bli
                           •
                        d▪
                     
                     A colour cast on things that are but 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
                     A glorious shew, to shrowde a homely part,
                     A rule to runne, a leavvd and retchlesse 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
                     A deepe deceyte, which daunteth oft the heart.
                     In rage of youth, these pricking thi
                           •
                        tles growes,
                     VVhiles Riot 
                           •
                        aynes, and Folly bear
                           •
                        s the sway
                     
                        
In hoarie age, 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     VVhere 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     The weaker 
                           •
                        exe, in 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     The infant hath, the, 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     The hurtfull weede, which 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     To view of eye, doth 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     In outward shower, in deed
                           •
                         the trust in small,
                     They are but clokes, and 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     The vertuous mind, and 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     VVhich gaynes 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     Dame Ven
                              ••
                           
                         loues, the 
                           〈◊〉
                         and warlike Knight,
                     Though once alas, she loud 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     And Ladyes which, do loue 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     Loue such as can, their 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     VVhat could thys 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     VVhome could this 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Iudge thou O Queene, which of vs two could make
                     The better shift, and force the worst to yeeld.
                  
                  
                     Good fauoure.
                     YEt let me pleade, my cause before my Queene
                     As thou hast done, and sentence after craue,
                     Then shall the truth, of our two 
                           〈◊〉
                         be seene,
                     I craue no spoyle, but wish the thing I haue.
                     VVhy should my beautie, purchase my 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     VVhy should my prayse, become 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     VVhy should Dame Natures giftes be thought so bass,
                     VVhich heeretofore haue bin in greater name?
                     VVho euer could, enforce the Gods with might,
                     To yeeld themselues, as conqured with his strength?
                     Yet Beautie hath, subdude them with his sight,
                     And made them 
                           •
                        end, and bow to him at length.
                     VVhome force subdues, with sadde vnwilling heart,
                     Submittes themselues, and greeue at euery strok
                           •
                        :
                     VVho beautie winnes, and gaynes vnto his part,
                     They gladly graunt, to take the pleasant yoke.
                     
                        
Thy strength thou mayst, full many a VVinter 
                           ••
                        ide,
                     Till time doth serue, to shew the same in place,
                     Sweete Beautie can, no moment be vnspide,
                     But doth delight, each one with gladsome grace.
                     Dame Natures shew, and Ritches Beautie is,
                     A Heauenly gift, to rauish euery eye,
                     A perfite Pear
                           •
                        e, wherein is naught but blisse,
                     Delight of men, delight of Gods on high.
                     
                        Apollo pleasd, himselfe with Golden heare,
                     
                        H
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           e delightes, the Gods with comely 
                           ••
                        ue,
                     God Venus oft, hir tender brest did teare,
                     VVhen she Ado
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           
                         death was fayne to 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     P
                           •••
                        bus did mourne, when his delight was slayne,
                     VVith great mishappe, and error of his hand,
                     But Gannimed, aboue with Ioue doth raigne.
                     And wayting on, his Nectars cuppe doth stand.
                     VVhat should I speake, of him who at the brooke,
                     The wanton Nimphes, in loue supprisd away,
                     Or him whome Ph
                              •
                           eb, in to hir Charriot tooke,
                     Or him, whose beautie di
                           •
                        d the morning grey,
                     The Gods in beautie, passe each mortall wight,
                     And men surmount, in forme the fayrest beast,
                     And yet of them, some are more braue in sight,
                     VVhose natures are, more fined than the rest.
                     The vgly Tode, swel
                           •
                         out his poyson cold,
                     A crabbed corpse, commes of a churlish kind,
                     No ragged mold, the vertue rare can hold,
                     A seemely face, declares a modest mind.
                     The fayrest Horse will swiftest runne his race,
                     The gallantst Hound, will soonest wind his game,
                     VVhat neede I more, to treate vpon this cace,
                     The hearers shall, be iudgers of the same,
                     If Beauties giftes, and fauoure you exile,
                     Then Manhode must, be heere preferd the while.
                  
                  
                     
                     Dezart.
                     STay iudgement Prince, and let my cace be know
                     VVhose friendly toyle, deserues to rea
                           •
                        e his gayn
                     Mine earnest 
                           •
                        ute, may not be thus orethrowen,
                     So long employd, in hope and endlesse payne.
                     I see these men, prease boldly heere in place,
                     Vnfolds great words, and long deb
                           •
                        tes the cace:
                     And braues it out, with goodly gallant Shewes,
                     VVhich I will not, eclips nor blot at all,
                     My clayme is good, and that iust God he knowes,
                     VVhat neede I then, my right in question call.
                     I haue no force, nor skill in marshiall field,
                     I boast not of my fresh and flouring hue,
                     Nor yet neede not, in any poynt to yeeld,
                     That can alleadge, Dezarts and seruice true.
                     My trauell then, and truth may not be l
                           •
                        st,
                     Nor my good will, be recompenst with wrong▪
                     
                     Nor he that hath, with tempestes sore bin tost▪
                     
                     And tasted griefes, and bitter torments long,
                     May not so soone, be shaken off for nought,
                     I take fine tearmes▪ to shew my secret thought:
                     The Gods accepts, our dutie in good part,
                     The Prince rewards, the billes of our request,
                     The greatest men, consider but the heart,
                     The friendly meanes, can 
                           •
                        ame the wildest beast.
                     And VVomen who, in softest mouldes be cast,
                     VVhose tender heartes, rues on our carefull cryes,
                     Must needes be wonne, with louing meanes at last,
                     To ease our playntes, and wipe our watered eyes.
                     True loue of right, must recompenced be,
                     Dezart must needes, flye farre beyond the rest,
                     Then graunt O Prince, this pretious prise to me,
                     VVhose loyall loue, claymes place aboue the b
                           •
                        st.
                  
                  
                     
                     Good fortune.
                     
                        MVch words are spent, where speech shall not preuayle,
                        Long time is lost, in threats and fond dispute,
                        Though I good Happe, haue borne but simple 
                              •
                           ayle,
                        And went aloofe, tis I must end thys sute,
                        And reason bring, as victor of the field,
                        Vnto whose troth, your weak
                              •
                            discourse shall yeeld.
                     
                     
                        Faire Beautie heere, for whome you fondlings striue,
                        May moue, I graunt, a God to like hir well,
                        But though she wer
                              •
                           , the fayrest thing aliue,
                        (As sure indeede, hir beautie doth excell)
                        Is that a proofe, that you in loue must fall,
                        VVith that which nought pertaynes to you at all?
                     
                     
                        Admitte hir mind, by meane of some consayte,
                        VVith sweete delight, of fancie may be ledde,
                        Your eagre eyes, most greedie of such bayte,
                        In forward hope, a season hath bin fedde.
                        Shall she be spoyld, for fauoure she bestowe
                              •
                           
                        
                        In friendly sort, and not in faithfull wise?
                        Nay sure, she shall, ne fame nor freedome lose,
                        For fraylties faultes, or vse of gracious eyes.
                        But to the poynt, and purpose of your stri
                              •
                           e,
                        One pleades good will, by shape and fauoure got,
                        (A gallant Boy, to please a pleasant wife)
                        Another tels a penned 
                              •
                           ale by rote,
                        Bedeckt and fylde with ynck
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           ne tearmes ynow.
                        The third commes in, and calles himselfe Dezart,
                        And each of them are seene in Storyes throw,
                        And finely seekes to conquere Loue by arte.
                        Great sleight is vsd, and Clarkly cunning both,
                        To force a right, and iudgement in this cace,
                        Dezart, 
                              •
                           e telles a trimme discourse of troth,
                        The 
                              〈◊〉
                            wigge makes boast of shining face.
                        
                           
And Courage he, by Manhood claymeth all.
                        Great poynts they are, that pleaded are this day,
                        And vnto whome, the Lady now should fall,
                        Some doubts may rise, if reason bore the sway.
                        But to be briefe, fayre Shape and comely port,
                        The wise men hold, but outward blossoms vayne,
                        And Manhoods force, may heere be knitte vp short,
                        Stoute hearts may not, alone the glorie gayne:
                        Nor yet Deza
                              •
                           t, that neerest goes the gole,
                        May winne the prise, and thrust his better backe,
                        For he it is, that hath the greatest dole,
                        That doth in deede, no peece of Fortune lacke.
                        Good Fortune still, a Lord of worldly chance
                        Is only iudge, himselfe, of all is done,
                        Bid Strength stand backe, good Fortune leades the Dance,
                        Fine shape likewise, with Fortune dare not runne.
                        Dezart is dead, where Fortune men aduance.
                        So heere I prooue, since I good Fortune haue,
                        This Dame is mine, hir destnie willes it so,
                        In Mothers wombe, the Gods this gift me gaue,
                        She ordeynd was, with me away to goe.
                        Each worldly grace, and rule with Fortune flyes,
                        A wife must needes, then sto
                              •
                           pe to destnyes lot.
                        VVherefore I heere, possesse thys noble prize,
                        As Iewell rich, by happe and Fortune got.
                        VVho striues to take, hir now from me by force,
                        Shall haue withall, my breath and vitall corse.
                     
                  
                  Then talke the other thrée priuilie togither, and Manhoode
speakes to Good Fortune as followes.
                  
                     Manhode.
                     ME thinkes most fond, and weakely commes bee heere
                     Alone to three, if we togither stoode:
                     And though in deede, we buy the quarrell deere,
                     And pay therefore, the sweetest of our bloud,
                     
                        
Yet let vs shew, the noble hearts of men,
                     For since he sayth, we all our labour lose,
                     Not one of vs, shall neede to sorow then,
                     Nor care a figge, how ere the matter goes.
                  
                  
                     Dezart.
                     A Gree
                           •
                        , though I Dezart haue double wrong,
                     I will reuenge the same by dint of sword,
                     And you shall see, I will not dallie long
                     To do my best, sith I haue spoke the word.
                     Despayred men, dare fight with Fortune still,
                     And scratch for life, as long as breath will last,
                     VVhen hope is gone, I know no better skill,
                     But bide the brunt, till all the broyle be past.
                     Let loue and life, togither make an ende,
                     The heart shall feele, and hand shall head defend.
                  
                  
                     Good fauoure.
                     THough I speake last, that first found speciall grace,
                     In formost 
                           •
                        ight, looke you for tender yeares,
                     And iudge him not, a Milkesoppe by his face,
                     That stoutely like a Man at neede appeares.
                     Great skorne I thinke, good Fortune should haue all,
                     And reape the right, that laboure long hath sowen,
                     Yea, Fauoure hath perhappes more friends at call,
                     Than you would thinke, or to the world is knowen.
                  
               
               
                  Heere follow the Speeches of the
vvater Nymphes, vvhich should haue
bin shewed vpon the Thurseday,
had not euill weather hindered
the same.
                  
                     
                     The first Nymphes Speech.
                     WE VVater Nimphs haue time to sport, & skip in euery place,
                     VVhē days are lōg, & nights be short, & Phoebus hides his face▪
                     
                     And hearing that there came a Queene, along this water side,
                     So long as we poore silly Nimphes, on land dare well abide,
                     VVe daunce, we hop, and bounse it vp, in honor of hir name,
                     To whome Diana and hir trayne, doth giue immortall fame.
                  
                  
                     The seconde.
                     VVE shun the Sunne, yet loue the Mone, & hate the open light,
                     VVe hide our heads amid the Reedes, in blustring stormy night.
                     In calmest weather do we play, yet seldome seene we are,
                     VVe watch our times, and flee from those, that stil doe on vs stare.
                     VVe harme no wight, yet fearefull be, to those that haue no spreete,
                     VVe are some hold of VVomēs sexe, and gladde with mē to meete.
                  
                  
                     The thirde.
                     THe Phayri
                              •
                           s are another kind, of el
                           •
                        es that daunce in darke,
                     Yet can light Candles in the night, and vanish like a sparke,
                     And make a noyse and rumbling great, among the dishes oft,
                     And wake the sleepie sluggish Maydes, that lyes in Kitchen loft.
                     And when in field, they treade the grasse, from water we repayre,
                     And hoppe and skippe, with thē sometime, as weather waxeth fayre▪
                     
                  
                  
                     The fourth and last that called them
into their caue.
                     VVHat rule is this, what tales tel you, what bable do you make▪
                     
                     VVill you tel secrets out of Schole? beware, if bugges awake
                     You will be shent, come hye you hence, can yee abide the viewe,
                     The gaze, and staring such a whyle, of all this noble crue?
                     Though that we came to honor hir, that Gods on high haue blest,
                     It is a shame for water Nimphes, on earth so long to rest.
                  
                  Then suddaynely shou
                        •
                     de they all haue departed into the
ground, where was an heauenly noyse of all kinde of Musicke
prepared, and nothing séene at all, when the paynted
Canuas had bin drawen ouer their heads, as the descripti
                        •
                     n
thereof doth declare.
               
            
            
               
               Fridayes Deuice.
               
                  ON the Friday, the Court vpon remoue, the
Citie troubled with many causes, and some
séeking to do seruice like my selfe, moued me
to doe somewhat of my selfe, bycause myne
aydes (as many tunes they were before) were
drawne frō me, each one about his owne businesse,
and I lefte to mine owne inuentions and policie, at
whiche erigente, or casuall things of Fortune, I drewe my
Boyes vnto me, that were the Nymphes on the water, and
so departed the Citie, with such garments and stuffe necessarie
as fitted my purpose and the matter I went about. Then
chose I a ground, by the which the Quéene must passe, enclosing
my company in the corner of a field, being defenced with
high and thicke bushes, and there some parts I made, whych
the Boyes mighte misse, bycause the time was short for the
learning of those parts. But I being resolued to do some what
might make the Quéene laugh, appointed that seauen Boyes
of twelue, should passe through a hedge from the place of oure
abode (which was gallantly trimmed) and deliuer seauen spéeches,
whiche followe in the next leafe. And these Boyes (you
must vnderstand) were dressed like Nimphes of the water,
and were to play by a deuice and degrées the Phayries, and
to daunce (as néere as could be ymagined) like the Phayries.
Their attire, and comming so strangely out, I know made
the Quéenes highnesse smyle and laugh withall. And I hearing
this good hope, being apparelled like a water Sprite,
beganne to sounde a Timbrell, and the rest with me, all the
twelue Nymphes togither (when the seauen had repayred in)
sounded Timbrels likewise. And although I had no greate
harting, yet as I durst, I ledde the yong foolishe Phayries a
daunce, which boldnesse of mine bredde no disgrace, and as I
heard said, was well taken. The Quéene vpō our retiring in,

hasted to hir Highnesse lodging, whiche was seauen Myles
off, and at that present, when the Shewe ended, it was past
fiu
                     •
                   of the cl
                     •
                  cke.
               Thus haue you truly hearde the reporte of mine owne
workes and inuentions, with the which did no any o
                     •
                  e deale
but my selfe. And as I haue made a recitall of matters done
in Norwich, so meane I a little to treate of the Quéenes returne
from thence, in as short and briefe order as I may, and
the briefer, bycause I haue not all the Gentlemens names,
in whose houses the Quéene lay, and who bestowed some entertaynemente
on the trayne, but those, in whose houses I
was (and where I saw or heard any thing worthy memorie)
I mind to speake of, and touch, praying you that shall reade
the same, to pardon me, where I omitte any matter or men
that merits commendation, for it is not wante of good will
that shall make me forget any good entertaynementes bestowed
on the Courte, but it is wante of knowledge that shall
cause me so sleightly runne ouer the causes, and make a briefe
report ther
                     •
                  of, as knoweth God, who graunt and sende oure
Quéene often to suche pleasant Progresses, and increase good
people and louing subiects to shew the like dutie and order, as
hathe bene orderly séene in thys season, and tyme of triumph.
               
                  
                  The Queene of Phayries
Speech.
                  
                     THough cleane against the Phayries kind, we come in open view
                           •
                        ,
                     (And that the Queene of Phayries heere, presents hirselfe to you)
                     Some secret cause procures the same: the Gods at first, ye know,
                     In field to honour thee good Queene, did make a gallant shew:
                     Should we that are but sprites of thaire, refuse to do the same?
                     No sure, for Gods and mortall men, shall serue thee noble Dame.
                  
                  
                     The seconde.
                     VVHen Mercury came first in Coatch, a message to vnfolde,
                     (And Maske of Gods amid the night, in chāber secrets told)
                     VVe warned were to shape our selues, to do what Ioue assignd,
                     But water Nymphes stept in the while, and so exprest their mynd,
                     And thrust poore Phayries out of place, yet we: 
                           •
                        or feare of soyle,
                     VVatcht here our time, & for our sports, did chose this certain soyle.
                  
                  
                     The thirde.
                     YEa out of hedge we crept in deede, where close in caues we lay,
                     And knowing by the brute of fame, a Quene must passe this way,
                     To make hir laugh, we clapt on cotes, of Segges and Bulrush both,
                     That she shuld know, & world should say, lo there the Phayries goth,
                     Like Furies madde, and Satyres wild yet loe, we haue in store
                     Fine Timbrels, that the Auntients vse, to make the shew the more.
                  
                  
                     The fourth.
                     WHē saints & soules, & sprites of mē, frō Heauē downe did fling▪
                     
                     (And Ieboua spake, and Cloudes did shake, & many a crowned King.
                     Crept out of graue, to honor thee, we ready were to wait,
                     But Hagges of Hell, & damned Feends, that feedes on false desayt
                     Did blush to see thy presence Queene, but we that harmelesse were,
                     Kept loue in store, to shew at length our dutie voyde of feare.
                  
                  
                     
                     The fifth.
                     BVt when that Cupid was condemnd, and Venus fell in rage,
                     And VVantonnesse & Riot rude, for knackes were clapt in cage,
                     And all the ragment rowe of Gods, to one great God gaue place,
                     VVe sillie Phayries were afeard, therewith to shew our face.
                     Yet when we saw a Maske well likt, and Gods condemnd appeere,
                     VVe did consult, at last farewell, the Phayries should be heere.
                  
                  
                     The sixth.
                     BVt with Orations good and great, to wall the weake was thrust,
                     Yet whē the strongest did their best, of force yet speake we must.
                     For Ioue that all commands, and doth, bade vs to watch the howre,
                     And shew no more at this adue, than was in Phayries powre.
                     So keeping course of Ioues commaund, we speake that is in brest,
                     And leaue the Queene and all the trayne, with wit to iudge the rest.
                  
                  
                     The seauenth.
                     WIth Gods, yea kings & Quenes, begās your entrie to this place,
                     VVith gētle Gosts & merrie sprites, we mind to end the cace.
                     So in good signe of happie chance, to thee O sacred Queene,
                     To knit vp all, we meane to daunce with Timbrels on this greene.
                     And then farewell, we can no more, salute thee in oure gise,
                     All that is done, by great good will, is offered to the wise.
                  
                  Then came the Phayries out with Timbrels, and daunced
a whyle, and so departed, and there withall the Quéene
went on hir way to hir highnesse lodging.
               
            
         
         
            
            Hir Highnesse returne from
Norvvich.
            
               NOwe to come to the returne of the Quéenes
Maiestie from Norwich, I thinke it as necessarie
to be tolde, as the rest of matter penned before,
n
                  •
               t chiefely for the chéere and entertaynemente

                  •
               ounde returning, but for other ca
                  •
               ses
méete to be rehearsed. But to be tedious in that behalfe, and
dwell longer on the discourses of the entertaynement than is
requisite, I should but wéerie you with the reading therof. So
to auoyde the doubts of mi
                  •••
               king, and daunger of thys fyne
world, and sifting senses, I will playnely fall to the troth of
thinges that I meane to haue vnderstood. And so as I haue
héeretofore sayd, the Quéene passing from Norwich, came to
Maister Woodhouses that night, where she was well re
                  •
               eyned,
and nobly entertayned. From thence to Wodde rising,
the chéere and entertaymente there I sawe not, wherefore I
giue it no greate commendation. From thence to The
                     •
                  forde
at Sir Edward Cleeres. The trayne haue tolde me (that was
there) how they were worthily feasted. From thence to Sir
Thomas Kidsons, where in very déede, the fare and banquets
did so excéede a number of other places, that it is worthy the
mētion. A Shew representing the Phayries (as well as might
be) was there séene, in the whiche Shew, a rich Iewell was
presented to the Quéenes Highnesse. From thence to Maister
Reeuets, where all things were well, and in very good order,
and meate liberally spent.
            But nowe to speake a little by the way of Gods mightie
hande and power, that framed mens harts so well in manye
partes, before the Quéenes Highnesse came to Cambridge
Shéere, and to tell how blessedly our great and good God did
deale with our déere Soueraigne Lady, in causing euery person
to shew their dutie, is a matter of great discourse, and of
no little weight and comfort to all good minds that shall con
               
                  ••
               esse

of the same, suche a Lorde is oure greate God, that can
frame all things to the best, and suche a Soueraigne Ladye
we haue, that can make the crooked pathes streighte where
she conu
                  •
               eth, and drawe the hearts of the people after hyr
wheresoeuer she trauels. I had almost passed the bound
                  •
               s of
my discourse, by a desire of doing wel, but remembring where
I lefte, I beginne agayne, and followe my first intention, to
shew the returne of the Quéene from Norffolke and Suffolke.
So from Mayster Reuets, hir Highnesse came to my Lorde
Northes, who was no whit behind any of the best for a franke
house, a noble heart, and well ordered entertaynement, and
there was an Oration made by a Gentleman of Cambridge,
and a stately and fayre cuppe presented from the Uniuersitie,

                  〈…〉
                Embassadors of France beholding the same, and the
Gentlemen of the Shire (as in many other places) did 
                  •
               eare
the Qu
                  •
               enes meate to the table, whiche was a great lik
                  •
               ng,
and gladnèsse to the Gentlemen, and a solemne sighte for
Strangers and Subiectes to looke vppon. From my Lorde
Northes, to Sir Gyles Allingtons, and there thinges were
well, and well liked. From thence, to Sir Iohn Cuttes, but
what chéere there was founde, I knowe not, for I was not
there. From thence to Mayster Kapels, where was excellente
good chéere, and entertaynement. From thence to Hide Hall,
where I hearde of no greate chéere nor banketting. From
thence to Rockwood Hall, but howe the trayne was there entertayned,
I am ignorant of. From thence to Mayster Stonars,
and from thence to my L. of Leycesters house, where the
Progras ended, and to knit vp all, the good there was reui
                  •
               ed,
not only with making a great feast to ye Quéene, & the Frēch
Embassador, but also in feasting solemnely (at seueral times) ye
whole Gard, on Sunday & Munday before ye Quéene came, at
his owne table, vsing such courtesse vnto thē for the space of
two dayes, as was & is worthy of perpetuall memorie. Thus

                  •
               old I haue bin a little, to speake of ye Quéenes Highnesse retu
                  •
               ne,
who God hath so well preserued, that she like a worthy
Prince to our great comfort, prospers in peace, to ye great disgrace
of the enimies of God, and aduersaries of our common
Weale and Countrey.
            FINIS
            
               ꝙ Tho. Churchyard.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            
               GOod Reader, I had almost forgotten the names
of the Gentlemenne that the Quéene made
Knyghtes in Suffolke and Norffolke, whiche
ouersight had bin a blotte and blemishe to my
Booke, bycause hir Highnesse aduanced thē to
the more Worship, for that they should all their life time after,
haue the greater regard to God, and to their Prince.
            
               Their names follow.
               Mayster Colt.
               Mayster Parkar.
               Mayster Iermine.
               Mayster Spring.
               Mayster Kydson.
               Mayster Heygham.
               Mayster Kneuet.
               Mayster Bacon.
               Mayster Pastons.
               Mayster Grear.
               Mayster Shelton.
               Mayster Henry Woodhouse.
               Mayster Gaudye.
               Mayster Woodde Maior of Norwich.
               Mayster Roger Woodhouse.
            
         
         
            
            ¶A matter touching the
Iourney of Sir Humfrey
Gilbarte Knight.
            
               THe man that trauels much,
            vvith mind and body both,
            (Whose restlesse lims, & labring thoughtes,
            through heaps of hazards goth,)
            A vvhile vvould gladly rest,
            and so some sollace taste,
            To sharp the sense, and ease the heart,
            that toyle doth vveare and vvaste.
            But though vvith charged brest,
            I seeke to steale a nappe,
            In hope sounde sleepes vvould soone forget,
            the griefe of thankelesse happe:
            Some cause calls vp my Muse,
            and bids my vvitts avvake,
            That dovvne is layde on quiet Coutch,
            a little ease to take:
            As lately loe you heard,
            by Verses penned vvell,
            Which soundes so shrilly through my eares,
            and tings so like a Bell,
            That though in sadde dead sleepe,
            my vvery body vvere,
            
               
I must rise vp and whet my wittes,
            and lend a louing eare
            To that new tale I heere,
            of friends that hence do go
            Vnto a soyle they neuer saw,
            another world I trow
            That few or none haue found,
            well, what should more be sayd,
            The Iourney that my friends do take,
            full long in head I wayd,
            Yet thought to pause awhile,
            (eare pen to paper past)
            To see how course of world wold go,
            and things fell out at last.
            And thus in my delay
            I caught a slumber sweete,
            And sure me thought in fearful dreme,
            or sweauon did I meete
            The Golden Heart, and other Ships,
            that to this voyage goes,
            Which Barks vver brauely vnder saile,
            vvhere vvater ebbes and floes.
            And where the view of Coūtrey soile,
            was farre from Saylers sight,
            And men were forst to trie the Seas
            in storme or darkest night,
            But eare my dreame could ende,
            a voyce gan call alowde,
            
               
               
                  〈…〉
               
            
            or is he crept in Clowde,
            To shunne the vse of penne
            and matter worthy note?
            VVhereat I started out of bedde,
            and streight wey vp I gote,
            And to my Studie dore
            in hast therewith I went,
            As one that fain wold write some thing
            that might the VVorld content.
            Then brought I vnto mind,
            the heauie Dreame I had,
            Yet eare I wrote one Englishe verse,
            I cald my little ladde,
            And bad him runne with speede
            abroade, and bring some newes,
            And learne the troth of euery thing,
            that I might shape my Muse
            To please the peoples eares
            with frute of Poets penne.
            My Lackey had not vvalkt in Pawles
            not twentie pasis then,
            But heard that sundrie friends
            of mine, had taken leaue
            At Courte, and were all Shipte away.
            this brute may thee deceyue
            Thou foolish Boy (quoth I)
            nay Sir by sweete Sainct Iohn
            
               
(Quoth he) 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            and all his troupe is gone.
            But whether, no man 
                  •
               nowes,
            saue they that are in Barke,
            Who vvith one mind, and one consent,
            do hope to hitte one marke.
            A ha Sir boy (quoth I)
            I knew this long agoe,
            Shut study dore, packe hence a vvhile,
            and musing euen so,
            I marueld howe this Knight,
            could leaue his Lady hee
                  •
               e,
            His friends, and prettie-tender babes,
            that he did hold so deere,
            And take him to the Seas,
            where dayly dangers are.
            Then wayd I how, immortall Fame,
            was more than vvorldly care,
            And where great mind remaynes,
            the bodyes rest is small,
            For Countreys wealth, for priuate gayne,
            or glory seeke we all.
            And such as markes this world,
            and notes the course of things,
            The weake and tickle stay of states,
            and great affayres of Kings,
            Desires to be abroade,
            for causes more than one,
            
               
Content to liue as God appoyntes,
            and let the world alone.
            Yea such as deepely looke,
            into these worldly toyes,
            And freedome of the body still,
            and noble mind enioyes,
            Are glad to-trudge and toyle,
            and driue off time awhile,
            And at our ydle pleasures laughs,
            or at our follies smyle:
            That will not take some paynes,
            and trye both land and Seas,
            For Knowledge seeke, and heape of happe,
            to do our Countrey ease.
            O Gilbart noble Knight,
            God send thee thy desire,
            O manly Knolles, and worthy Wight,
            whose heart doth still aspire,
            I wish thee great renowme,
            and noble Carie too,
            And noble North, with Wigmore wise,
            I vvish you well to do.
            O Ravvley ripe of sprite,
            and rare right many wayes,
            And liuely N
                  ••
               well, God you guide,
            to purchase endlesse prayse.
            Goe comely Cotten too,
            and march amidde the rancke,
            
               
And honest Dennie with the best,
            must needes deserue some thanke.
            George Carie forth I call,
            and sure Iohn Roberts heere,
            A speciall sparke with present witte,
            in person shall appeare.
            Miles Morgan gaynes good Fame,
            and VVhe
                  •
               stone steps in place,
            And seekes by trauell, and by toyle,
            to wine him double gr
                  ••
               ce.
            Iohn Vdall is not hidde,
            nor Rowles I do forgette,
            The rest I vow to publish out,
            and so dwell in their dette.
            But though that Frances Knolles
            commes last vnto my mind,
            Among the first that shall do well,
            he vvill not be behind.
            O faithfull friends farewell,
            I named you all aroe,
            For VVorld to view, whiles world doth last,
            what courage you do shoe.
            VVhat charges you are at,
            what venter you haue made,
            And how you seeke to traffike there,
            where neuer yet was trade.
            And most of you such men,
            as liuings haue at home,
            
               
So great and good, that sure abrode
            yee neede not for to rome:
            Faire houses, lands, and wiues,
            great friends, and of the best,
            Good stayes and pillers, vvherevpon
            the strongest heere may rest:
            Well knowne, and honord both,
            in credite euery way,
            In perfite plighte and state to liue,
            and laugh, though world say nay.
            This strange adiew of youres,
            doth argue noble harts,
            And in your brestes are noble giftes
            and many noble parts.
            For hauing wealth at will,
            and world at becke and call,
            Propt vp with Princes fauoure still,
            so sure ye could not fall:
            And yet to leaue that hope,
            to seeke vncertayne happe,
            And so committe your goods & liues,
            to euery stormy clappe
            That suddayne tempest brings:
            me thinke the venture great,
            The value of your valiant minds,
            surmountes the fire in heate.
            Whereof such hote desires
            of doing good, doth rise,
            
               
The kind 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            do sparckle thro
                  •••
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
            
            Some people ha 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            a greedie hope 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            And heap 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            doth ma
                  •
               e you 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            Oh sure that 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            conceyue the case who 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            For hauing that 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            alreadie in 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            You meane to 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            as high as eye may look
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
            
            And search 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            and euery secret nooke, 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            As farre as Shippe may 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            I trust for Count 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            And for the 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            you offer life and bloud 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            Let vvorld now speake 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            and babble vvhat they please 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            What thing 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            
               
                  •
               and so forsake your 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            It God moud not 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            to things he liek
                  ••
                vvell
            And that your good and deepe 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            vvherein you long 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            Did leade and hall you 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            as men prepard and 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            
               
To she
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
            
            and serue the makers thought
            That all thing cleerely 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            tis God and your good mind,
            That driues you 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            for any thing I find.
            And as he sent you out,
            so can he bring you'in,
            Yea safely home 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            at large vvhere you 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            And novv to tell it plaine,
            not one of all 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            (Of gentle race) 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            did hold dovvne head 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            But brauely bore 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            which shewes no need 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            That did pro
                  〈…〉
               
            
            from hence in hast to passe.
            Thus sure some other thing
            than gayne, did cause you goe,
            Some noble fire that 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            vvhose flames of force 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            Good meaning and good 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            good frute and grayne 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            When season serues, and 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            and hoep for hire doth call.
            You might haue walkt the streetes,
            as other gallants do,
            
               
Yea kept the Court and Countrey both,
            in Pavvles haue ietted too.
            If mind had not bin drawne,
            to things of greater weight,
            And had not harts held vp your heads
            another kind of heigth,
            Perhaps in ydle dayes,
            you would set men a vvorke,
            And call them to accompt in hast,
            that close in corners lurke:
            And aske in open place,
            how they would spend their time,
            And if they say they had no mind
            the loftie Cloudes to clime,
            Yet would you vvish they should
            see what on earth is found,
            And search the proofe, and sayle by arte,
            about the world so round.
            At home to tarrie still,
            but breedes grosse bloud and witte,
            Then better with the Favvcon flie,
            than heere on dunghill 
                  •
               itte,
            And see hovv Crowes do feede,
            on tainted carren bate,
            Or liue a lea
                  •
               d and 
                  •
               retched life,
            vpon a hungry share.
            At home much time is lost,
            and neuer found againe,
            
               
Much household cares, and common griefes,
            do breake both sleepe and brayne.
            Abroade men winne great wealth,
            or knovvledge gayne at least,
            At home vve runne to wanton sportes,
            and smell out euery feast.
            Abroade small bankets are,
            it vvill not quit the cost,
            At home is naught but making loue
            to euery paynted post.
            Abroade the flesh is tamde,
            and brought in feare and frame,
            At home oft times pride goes before,
            and after commeth shame.
            Abroade vve▪ Wisedome learne,
            and do from follie flee,
            At home some daunce so in a nette,
            their selues they can not see.
            Abroade where seruice is,
            much honor may be wonne,
            At home our gay vayneglory goes,
            like shadow in the Sunne.
            Abroade bare robes are best,
            and Manhoode makes the showe,
            At home yong Maister must be fine,
            or all is lost you know.
            Abroade fevv quarrels are,
            a brawle is bought so sre,
            
               
At home they cogge, they 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            and 
                  〈◊〉
                all 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Abroade is 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            and ciuill order still,
            At home where rudenesse keepes no rule,
            vvilde vvantons take their vvill.
            Abroade may health be got,
            for laboure lengthens life,
            At home the Goute, the 
                  〈◊〉
               , the cold,
            and each disease is ri
                  •
               e.
            Abroade the sightes are strange,
            and vvonders may be seene,
            At home a stale and balde deuice,
            but duls the spreetes I weene.
            Abroade we learne to spare,
            to serue our turne in thend,
            At home men set the cocke on hoope,
            and vaynely spoyle and spend.
            Abroade few theeues you haue,
            they find so little grace,
            At home foule, shiftes and robbries both,
            abounde in euery place.
            Thus prooue I trauels best,
            for body, soule, and se
                  •
               s
                  •
               ,
            And ease a nurse to pamper vice,
            and buckler of defense.
            Where vertue can not strike,
            nor enter any way,
            
               
The 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            dame Vertues force to stay.
            With rest leawd lust doth rise,
            and soone subdues the 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            And toyle 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            and strikes vaine fancie blind.
            Much rest runnes Riot still,
            and breedeth treasons oft,
            And toyle plucks downe those 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            that lokes to mount alofte.
            Rest maketh mischiefe ripe,
            and settes bad things abroch,
            Toyle teach
                  •••
                men to conquer Fame,
            and flee from foule reproch.
            Rest loues to 
                  〈◊〉
                much,
            like vvhelp that waues the tayle,
            Toyle is for Ve
                  ••
               ue quicke as Bee,
            for Vice as slo
                  •
                as 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Rest sowes no blessed feede,
            yet reapes a curssed grayne,
            Toyle weedes the g
                  •
               ound, and planteth floures
            where nettles did remayne▪
            
            Rest vvill no dutie know,
            but shakes off shackels still,
            Toyle makes 
                  •
               he body apte to stoupe,
            to bend and shew good 
                  •
               ill.
            Rest is a retchlesse ioy,
            that 
                  •
               ees not his 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            
               
Toyle castes out many a vayne consayte,
            that rest brings in by svvarmes.
            If toyle bring these good things
            that I haue told before,
            And rest but want and beggrie breedes,
            with sundrie mischiefes more:
            They ought haue endlesse lavvd,
            that in these loytring dayes
            Set ydle hands and heads a worke,
            to winne immortall prayse.
            And they that first found out
            the strange and forrayne soyle,
            Are gone themselues to win the prise,
            or take the open foyle,
            Which shevves them more than men,
            halfe Gods if I say troth,
            VVhole kingdomes scarcely cā suffic
                  •
               
            
            their minds and manhoode both.
            Now haue they taken leaue
            of worldly pleasures all,
            That yong and lusty were to liue,
            and now to toyle they fall
            That finely were brought vp,
            yea now they bidde adiew,
            The glittring Court, the gallāt towne,
            the gorgious garments new,
            The brauerie of this world,
            the pride and pomp of earth,
            
               
And looke not backward any vvay,
            to ritches, race, or birth.
            To worthy wife no
                  •
                friend,
            to babes nor neerest kinne,
            But only to the Lord aboue,
            and iourney they are in.
            And all for Cou
                  ••
               reys cause,
            and to enrich the same,
            Now do they hazard all they haue:
            and so for wealth and fame,
            They fare along the Seas,
            they sayle and tide it out,
            They hale and stretch the sheates aloft,
            they toyle and dread no doubt.
            They feede on Bisket hard,
            and drincke but simple beere,
            Salt beefe, and Stockfish drie as kecke,
            is now their greatest cheere.
            And still a fulsome smell
            of pitch and tarre they feele,
            And vvhen Seasicke (God wot) they are,
            about the Shippe they reele.
            And stomacke belcheth vp,
            a dish that Hadocks seeke,
            A bitter messe of sundry meates,
            a Sirrope greene as leeke.
            Then head and heart doth heaue,
            and body waxeth cold:
            
               
Yet face 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            the same is to behold
                  •
               
            
            But they must need
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            a greater brunt than this,
            And hope that 
                  〈…〉
                paynes,
            there commes a time of 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Yet note the torments strange,
            that toyling saylers haue,
            Who liues 
                  〈…〉
                the Seas:
            yea surge and 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            Would swallow vp the 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            if Pylots were not good,
            And some 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            vnto their 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            Sometime a flaw 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            blowes 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            And 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            and at a cord doth 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            To saue his sillie life,
            aloofe then 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            No 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            and on the 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            And plying for abo
                  •••
               ,
            about the Vessell 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            And through 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            a gale of winde there bloes,
            That seemes to shake the Barke,
            in sunder euery rib
                  ••
               ,
            
               
Then is no time to 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            to crie carous and bibb
                  ••
               
            
            But each man to 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            they fall and flie 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪
            
            In necke of this 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            that seekes to giue the 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪
            
            They spie in halfe a 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            vp Sould youres 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            The Captayne calls, 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            a sort of them are plast,
            To bea
                  •
               e the 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            that should the Shipp
                  •
                assayle,
            At length the Cannon bullet flyes,
            and shotte as thicke as 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Goes off to murther m
                  •
               n,
            and such a smoke doth rise,
            As few may well regard the seas,
            or scarce behold the Skyes.
            Some grone and 
                  〈◊〉
                goodnight,
            their day watch vvaxeth dimme,
            Some cā not speake their heads are off,
            and some haue lost a limme.
            Some lyes on 
                  〈◊〉
                lame,
            they haue no legges to stand,
            And some haue lost the vse of arme,
            or maymed of a hand▪
            
            
               
And some are fighting still,
            and gets no harme at all,
            But he that speedeth best the while,
            makes boast thereof but small.
            These brawles and bloudy broyles
            to end or quiet brought,
            A new beginnes, as yll a storme,
            that troubles more their thought▪
            
            The Rockes and wretched streights,
            that they must safely passe,
            The narrow Creekes & doubts they find
            in compasse of their glasse,
            Is daunger wonders great,
            so that these Saylers toyle,
            Rests all on hazards, eare they come
            to any certayne soyle.
            I could rehearse a heape
            of sorrowes that they haue,
            But you that liue in peace at home,
            and mince the matter braue,
            Will scarce beleeue a troth,
            and toyle that trauelers take.
            Well noble Pilgrims, as in Verse
            I write this for your sake,
            In Prose at your returne,
            looke for a greater prayse,
            
               
A Booke that to the loftie Skyes,
            your rare renovvne shall rayse.
            This write I for your friends
            that you haue left behinde,
            Your vvorthy wiues, whose patient hearts
            beare many things in mind,
            And sitte and shakes their heads
            at that they can not mend,
            And many a sigh and sadde con
                  •
               aite,
            along the Seas they send,
            To follow those that flie
            from them God wot to fast,
            And carried are in rotten Barkes
            about vvith euery blast,
            And tossed vp and downe
            the Seas, our Lord knowes where.
            O Husbāds whē you saw your wiues,
            shedde many a bitter teare,
            How could you part from them?
            the cace is aunswerd thus,
            You are not ruld by loue of babes,
            nor womens vvilles yewus.
            But guided by such grace,
            as God himselfe hath sent,
            And that you do, is done indeede
            vnto a good intent.
            
               
God graunt you good successe,
            the whole harts ease you craue,
            As much of wealth and honor both
            as euer men may haue.
            A safe and short returne,
            not long from home to dwell,
            A quiet happy iourney still,
            and so deere friends farewell.
            FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            
            A welcome home to Master
Martin Frobusher, and all those Gentlemen
and Souldiers, that haue bene with
him this last iourney, in the Countrey called
(Met
                  •
                incogni
                  •
               a) whiche welcome was written since
this Booke was put to the Printing, and ioyned to the
same Booke, for a true testim
                  •
               ny of Churchyardes
good w
                  •
               ll, for the further
                  •
               nce of
Mayster Frobushers f
                  •
               me.
            FIue hundreth times, moste welcome home
            my friendes that farre haue bin,
            When thousands thought, that all was loste
            your fleete came safely in:
            To glad their harts, that long bewailde
            your toyle and hazard great:
            O giue me leaue, in English verse
            a whyle on this to treat,
            That doth dezerue, such worldes renowme
            and come to such good end,
            As forceth friends to fauour much
            and foes may well commend.
            You slouth full snayles, that creepe not far,
            and loue your shelles sowell,
            
               
And you cold crousts, that haue smal crums
            in cottage poore that dwell,
            Now will you blush, or bende the browe,
            to see how trauelers thryue,
            Nay, now you ought goe helpe your selues
            and rather seeke to striue
            Against ill happe, that holdes you here,
            when others worke for wealth,
            And trudge abrode, to lengthed life,
            and nourish wished health.
            But adle heades, and idle braynes,
            and babling tongues, I trowe,
            Had rather sitte in smokie house
            (or on the dunghill crowe
            Like crauen Cockes) than go abrode
            where Fortune may be founde,
            And serch where Gold, and Treasure lies
            in bowels of the grounde.
            A pecke of drosse, doth more content
            the base and beggars minde,
            Than heaped bushels, of good happe,
            that paynefull toyle doth finde,
            
               
The thriftlesse will, not let to say,
            ô giue me ease and rest,
            A groate in purse, a coate on backe,
            a homely house and nest,
            And fie on Fame, and profite both,
            that cōmes by breake of sleepe,
            And but vaine pleasures of this world,
            both harde to winne and keepe.
            O mizers mindes, and wretches hartes,
            if all men sought their ease,
            And none should search out golden mines,
            nor seeke their gaine by seas,
            The worlde would sone be at an end,
            or meate and clothe would fayle,
            And those that now doe laugh and smyle,
            at length would weepe and wayle.
            And all a like, should Lorde and ladde
            be sette by ery where,
            The foole and wise man, would 
                  •
               e one:
            and voyde of loue or feare
            The world should sta
                  •
               d; for wealth & wit
            is that which gouern
                  •
               s all,
            
               
And makes vs know the mighty sorte
            and shoes the great from small.
            If each man were a like in wealth,
            as rogues and beggars are,
            And none had skill, nor great foresight
            for countreys cause to care,
            Adeu good rule, and ritches too
            and farewell vertues prayse:
            But God be thankt, that we are borne
            to liue in happier dayes,
            When wittes will worke for wealths auayle
            and sundry ryde and runne,
            Yea hoyse vp sayle, and go themselues
            as far as shines the sunne
            Through thick and thin, & feare no foile,
            as though to their good mindes
            The Gods had made the la
                  •
               de and Seas,
            the skies, the ayre and windes,
            To follow that they haue deuisd
            that take these toyles in hand.
            And of late dayes, 
                  〈◊〉
                great a flocke
            of these are in this land,
            
               
That I haue scarce good leysure left,
            to wryte their names a right,
            And yeelde the prayse, and liuely lawd
            is due to eury wight.
            In deede our age for many things
            exceedes the season past,
            And yet some say, all things be old
            and shall whyles world doth last.
            But if no new deuise, did helpe
            the age of that is gone,
            Full weake and lame would be old toyes
            these dayes to looke vpon.
            I graunt the graue, olde sages wise,
            began to breake the yee,
            Made smoeth rough ways, set vertue vp,
            and flatly threw downe vice,
            Built goodly towres, reard walles aloft,
            and to be briefe and short,
            Saylde throwe a world, saw eury creeke
            and knew each common port,
            But all they did, hath time reformd
            or made more perfite still,
            
               
               
                  〈…〉
               
            
            tooke place from auntient skill.
            So though our elders trauaylde farre,
            yea, went the worlde about:
            Yet many things, our fathers witts,
            as yet could nere finde out:
            Whiche they did leaue, to yonger heads,
            and men of later birth,
            To search, & see, what hidden wealth,
            lay lurking deepe in earth:
            As loe, in (Meta cognita)
            
            is knowne, & founde of laet,
            By those, that through their venture great
            both golde and glory gaet.
            O Frobusher, thy brute and name
            shalbe enrold in bookes,
            That whosoeuer after cōms,
            and on thy labour lookes
            Shall muse and maruell at thyne actes,
            and greatnesse of thy minde.
            I say no more, least some affirme
            I fanne thy face with winde,
            
               
I flatter for affections sake:
            well, God shall witnesse be,
            In this thy prayse (and other Bookes)
            I speake but right of thee.
            A Boke I made, at thy Farewell,
            in prose (where ere it is)
            Another for thy Welcome home,
            thou shalte haue after this,
            If this mislike thee any whitte.
            So here mine owne good friend
            I bid thee welcome once againe,
            and therewith make an ende.
            THus haue I playnely expressed with pen, what portion of
good will I beare to all those that valiantly and worthily
are workers to the enriching & honour of our common wealth:
And surely I thinke, I am as well bounde to wryte in the
praise of those that accompanied Mayster Frobusher this voyage,
as all together gyue one alone the commendations of a
generall labour and manly enterprise: But I wante their
names, that gladly I wishe great fame vnto, and willingly I
would put in a Register of good reporte, which in time to come
may be touched, not in the respect only of the paynes they haue
taken, which merites much, but to the encouragyng of others
to the like aduenture, I woulde bestowe some Verses on this
rare bande, where in is a knot of right honest Gentlemen, and
a crewe of good companions, whose for wardnesse may not be
forgotten, and whose faithfull seruice claymes a great consideration
and a good regarde. For, although that commonly a

Captayne carries away the credite of battayles and victories
where the Souldiers haue done their dueties, & haue bene an
occasion of triumph and conquest: yet by the iudgement of a
sounde sense and vncorrupted witte, the branches of the 
                  〈◊〉
               
that bring forth leaues, blossoms and fruite, oughte as mu
                  •
               h
to be spoken of, as the 
                  •
               are bod
                  •
               e of the same, 
                  〈◊〉
                witho
                  •
               t
branches, (though it haue neuer so greate sappe) is but barrayne
or little estéemed. I remember of late 
                  •
               ayes a victory
wonne agaynst the Turkes on the Sea, and one man went away
with the glo
                  •
                of the same, whiche b
                  •
               edde such disdayne
among the rest in whome the force dydlie, that from that tim
                  •
               
in this present houre, the greate man that wente away with
this glory was neuer called or desired to take the same charge
in 
                  •
               ande agayne. Neuerthelesse some one Generall and Captayne,
is more happier and more necessarie than a number of
the Merrenary people: For I reade, that a great conquerour
after he had receyued his deaths wounde, with causing himselfe
to be carried aboute the 
                  ••
               elde in a chayre, gaue suche a
terrour and feare to the enimies, that they ranne away, and
had not the courage to defende their liues and liberties, the
dignity, and name, and presence of the person before rehearsed,
had so daunted them and taken away the vse of th
                  •
               ir 
                  〈◊〉
               .
And many matters and noble Histories make mention, that
one mans happe, courage and conduite, is farre better (at some
instant and season) than the inconstant opinions of a multitude.
But yet for al that, it is good to haue wise and stoute Soldiours,
whole obedience and manhoode deserues as much commendation,
as their Captaines can wish to themselues. When
in another worke this may come in question, I will
more largely deale therwith among the discourses
of warre. And so for this presents I trouble
you no further.
            
               Thomas Churchyarde.
            
            
         
      
   