
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A MVSICALL CONSORT OF HEAuenly harmonie (compounded out of manie parts of Musicke) called CHVRCHYARDS CHARITIE.
                  Imprinted at London, by Ar. Hatfield, for William Holn. 5.
                  1595.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT HONORAble ROBERT DEVEREVX Earle of Essex and E
                        •
                     e, V
                        •
                     count of Hereford, Lord Ferrer of Chartley, Bor
                        •
                     her and Lou
                        •
                     ine, Master of the Queenes Maiesties horse, Knight of the noble order of the garter, and one of hir Maiesties honorable priuie Counsell: Thomas Churchyard wisheth increase of all wished honor, happines of life, worlds good will, and euerlasting fame.
                  
                     A Greater boldnes cannot be committed (Right Honorable) than to present Pamphlets and Poetrie to noble Counsellors that gouernes a publike state, though in all ages reasonable writers, that kept an orderly compasse, were suffered in verse or prose (so their inuentions were not farced ful of vanitie) to shew good will in the dedication of some honest labors, to such honorable personages, as was woorthie of any good volumes, or in the woorth of vertue, excelled the waight and value of numbers, that neither merits laudation, nor shew no sufficiency to be saluted with a booke. But what I see and the world reports

of your Lordship, makes me somwhat hardie to offer a present, yet simplenes of spirit and want of profound learning, hath so muffled my muses, that they dare not speake, nor I presume to write, neuertheles thinking on your twenty fold honorable father (my great good Lord) matchlesse in our world, that caried in his breast the feare of God, and wan with his life the loue of men (so noble was his minde) I stood nothing discouraged, bicause a soldier like noble sonne of his is left aliue, to follow the steps of so stately a father, and to shine aboue and beyond the course of thousands in this time, or is likely to come after this age. To treate of particulars in that behalfe, I should presume too far, and vnaduisedly come too short of matter fit for this cause. Wherefore I am to leaue those deepe considerations, and drop into the shallownes of mine owne studies, that brings foorth a booke of the coldnes of charitie, bicause a great noble man, told me this last wet sommer, The weather was too colde for Poets. On which fauorable words, I bethought me

that charitie in court and all the world ouer, was become so cold, that neither hot sommer, feruent fire, nor heate of sunne could make warme againe, in that comfortable sort as our forefathers haue felt it: so my good L. following that onely theame of cold weather (being apt to take any theam) to write on, in as sweete a phrase and termes as I may deuise (putting in the praise of Poets withall) I smoothly passe ouer (without bitter speeches) the corruption of this world, and disguised maners of men, riding by the new fanglenes of a multitude, and not dashing any ones infirmitie, with blot of disgrace, or blemish of credit, hoping the best sort shall stand pleased with, howsoeuer the woorst (happily may be touched) do of meere malice, wrest awry the honest meaning of a plaine writer. For the dutifull regard, towards the purchasing of your L. fauor hath so sifted euery word and sentence, that no one verse or line shall bee offensiue to a sounde iudgement and good construction. And for that now (by reason of great age) my wits and inuentions are almost wearied with writing

of bookes (this being one of the last) I tooke this taske in hand, at large to dilate somewhat of Charitie, which would to God I had as great power to reuiue, as the world hath occasion to remember. Thus ouer-bold to trouble your L. so long with the reading of so simple an Epistle, I proceed vnder your honorable supportation, to my purposed matter, wishing your L. euerlasting fame, credit, and honor, most humbly at commandement,
                  THOMAS CHVRCHYARD.
               
               
                  
                  AN EVERLASTING MEMORIE OF CHRISTIAN comfort to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie.
                  O Grashous dame, in whose graue iudgment great
                  The heauens hie, lies open plaine to sight
                  The earth belowe, takes from thy regall seat
                  (In darkest daies) his hope and cleerest light.
                  For at thy feet, a world of woorthies fall▪
                  
                  ELIZABETH, a monarke to them all.
                  An Empresse heere, three kingdoms showes vs plaine
                  On which three realms, our Queen may rightly raine.
                  O treble Queen, the sweete and highest part
                  That we like best, and shrillest voice doth sound
                  The onely meane, to shew deepe musicks art
                  Where all the skill; of well set song is found.
                  Grant silly man, a grace that meanes to sing
                  Of heaunly loue, and of none other thing.
                  He sings of peace, a song should lull asleepe
                  The fellest feends, and fearfull bugs below
                  Peace charms with words, the wolfe that wearies sheep
                  That neither lambe, nor kid astraie shall goe.
                  For as the hen, hir chickens keepes from kite
                  So charitie, doth saue hir children all
                  From common plagues, and wicked worlds despite
                  
                     And all the wrath, that from the clouds can fall.
                  She spreds hir wings, to keepe hir birds from cold
                  And learns poore chicks, to picke vp graines of gold.
                  This charitie, so checkles ore hir broode
                  She scrapes the earth, to make hir yoong ones feed
                  And freely from, hir selfe doth spare them foode
                  She takes in hart, such care for those that neede.
                  If charitie, were not the onely nurse
                  To nourish vp, each thing that life doth beare
                  This backward world, would grow from ill to woorse
                  And brutish 
                        •
                     olke, would banish loue and feare.
                  Warme Christian loue, as long as life doth last
                  Doth bide the shocke, and brunt of eurie blast.
                  And kindled once, in any princely hart
                  It burnes and flames, as hot as Aethna hill
                  Creepes throw the vains, and nerues in euerie par
                        •
                     
                  
                  Cannot be quencht, with water, wit nor skill.
                  A heaunly grace, maintains a heaunly loue
                  Each thing diuine, diuinely is set foorth
                  Planted like rocke, that nothing may remoue
                  Garnisht like gold, or perle of greatest woorth.
                  The charitie, I meane is garded so
                  And for hir saith, through fire and aire may goe.
                  But what is that, to him that sings a song
                  
                     
                        •
                     f twenty parts, when he one voice must sound
                  Presumes to tell, a tale perchance too long
                  
                     To sacred eares, whose iudgement is profound
                  Sing hie or lowe, how ere the tune he takes
                  For one small iar, the song begins againe
                  No shift may serue, for concord musicke makes
                  Most harmonie, consists in pricksong plaine.
                  Diuision doth, but teare in peeces small
                  The minnems long, and little crotchets all.
                  Full softly blowes, a quiet calmie winde
                  A still milde voice, doth please the hearers well
                  No note nor ring, so much contents the mind
                  As solemne sound, of cleere sweet siluer bell.
                  O that my muse, might get so great a grace
                  As credit win, throw any sound it shoes
                  I die to see, one fearfull frowne of face
                  VVhere these meeke words, and humble verses goes.
                  Now mirthles song, begin thy new found note
                  As strange a straine, as any eare hath hard
                  If world would learne, to sing the same by rote
                  Good charitie, should grow in more regard.
                  Play well thy part, so shall the greatest smile
                  And meanest sort, of force be pleasd the while.
                  
                     
                        Your Maiesties most humble seruant, Thomas Churchyard.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     WHat song should please, a sacred princes eares
                     Which likes no tunes, but musick sweet & sound
                     Weake were my muse, to offer sighes and teares
                     Where ioyfull mirth, and gladnes doth abound
                     But troubled mind, that rowles on restles ground
                     In sorrow sings, the secrets of the hart
                     Because sad man, can sing no sweeter part.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     Of charitie, that makes a solemne noies
                     A strange consort, I hope well 
                           •
                        unde I bring
                     Of heauenlie loue, that passeth earthlie Ioies
                     In formall wise, a true set song I sing
                     Would God the sound, through al the world might ring
                     That charitie, which ech one ought to keepe
                     Might waken now, that long hath laine a sleepe.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     Shee hath bin brought, in slumber sundrie waies
                     With lullabie, as nurse doth rocke hir childe
                     The cradle gaie, of pleasant nights and daies
                     With too much ease, hath charitie beguilde
                     And now God wot, the world is waxt so wilde
                     That charitie, must needs make ech thing tame
                     That wilde discord, hath brought cleane out of frame.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     Pity and ruth, are fled or banisht quite
                     And in their place, comes rigor rudelie cled
                     Godlie remorse, is drownd in worlds delite
                     Good cons
                           •
                        ence feares, that charitie is dead
                     Loue looketh downe, and hate holds vp the head
                     Troth barelie liues, and tretchrie thriues apace
                     Deserts doth starue, and meanewell hides his face.
                     O charitie help
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Franknes is blinde, affection dims his sight
                     Larges is lost, hardnes supplies his place
                     Wrong runs so swift, it ouer-gallops right
                     Goodnes limps downe, and halts in many a case
                     Do well doth droupe, or walks with mu
                           •
                        fled face
                     Vertue and vice, now wrastles for a fall
                     And so the strong, will thrust the weake to wall.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     Stoutnes with strength, strikes flat the feeble force
                     Downe is kept downe, and neuer like to rise
                     Malice and might, rides both vpon one horse
                     (Sir Packolets nagge, that gallops through the skies)
                     Iudgement growes grosse, ore weening wanteth eies
                     Will is a wagge, waste hath the wager woon
                     For all the date, of our redresse is done.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     Loyaltie weeps, and flattrie laughes and smiles
                     Goodwill is scornd, and puts vp many a taunt
                     Pouertie is plagude, or ouermatcht with wiles
                     Plainnes complaines, but pride bids him auaunt
                     Crueltie the curre, with crie of hounds will chaunt
                     But bandog bites, full sore before he barke
                     And craft the carle, still iuggles in the darke.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     Friendship lookes pale, it hath an ague fit
                     Fauour is faint, and lame it cannot go
                     Finenes is false, and full of subtill wit
                     Faith giues faire words, and breaketh promis so
                     Constancie reeles, and staggers to and fro
                     Charitie must needs, reforme these follies strange
                     That by abuse, doth noble nature change.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Dutie doth die, to driue on diuelish drifts
                     Stubbornes striues, to wrangle for a strawe
                     Cunning long liues, by cusnage and by shifts
                     Disorder thriues, with neither rule nor laue
                     People growes proud, without true feare or awe
                     If suffrance see, these prancks and hold his peace
                     Goodnes decaies, and badnes shall encrease.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     If charitie be, the foode or fruite of faith
                     Where bloomes that tree, where doth those branches bud
                     True charitie sure, as wisest people saith
                     Is working still, and euer dooing good
                     Loue helpes our health, as life maintaines the blood
                     But where no helpe, nor succour we may finde
                     There charitie, is almost out of minde.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     If through my faith, great mountaines I may moue
                     And can raise vp, to life the dead from graue
                     That withred faith, brings foorth no fruite of loue
                     It gaines no grace, what euer hope I haue
                     If charitie be, the thing which good men craue
                     God graunt that I, and all that heares the same
                     May sing that song, like Sidrack in the flame.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     My humble hart, hopes now but for dispatch
                     Of life that wastes, away like candle blase
                     The clocke will stricke, in haste I heare the watch
                     That sounds the bell, whereon the people gase
                     My forces faile, my wits are in a mase
                     My corps consumes, my skin and bones doth shew
                     The soule is glad, the bodie hence shall go.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Truth waited long, on your sweete sacred raigne
                     To catch some crums, that from your table fals
                     I sowe in teares, and reaps but bitter paine
                     That makes sicke soule, lie groning by the wals
                     Where hands a crosse, for helpe to heauen cals
                     So sucks vp sighes, and sorrow of the minde
                     As boyling brest, blowes fast for aire and winde.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     My muse doth muse, how labour lost his time
                     And seruice great, doth get so small regarde
                     I neuer thriude, by prose nor pleasant 
                           •
                        ime
                     Nor could in world, be any way prefard
                     An open signe, my thankles hap is hard
                     Yet numbers of, my verie name and race
                     By prince in court, were cald to woorthie place.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     I am the Drone, that bees beats from the hiue
                     The vglie Oule, that kites and crowes do hate
                     The drawing oxe, that clounes do daily driue
                     The haples hinde, that hath the hatefull fate
                     (That weares a
                           •
                        l sutes, and seasons out of date)
                     If destny so, alots men such hard chance
                     They passe the pikes, that fortune will aduance.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     My passage is, like one that rides in post
                     Through water, fire, and all the hazards heere
                     And so draws home, a weary grisly ghost
                     Whose losse of youth, bu
                           •
                        es loathsome age too deere
                     Now coms acco
                           •
                        nt, of daies, of houres and yeere
                     My debts are stald, as oft bare bankrouts be
                     The graue paies all, and sets my bondage free.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     
                     The wo of wars, and pride and pompe of peace
                     The toile of world, and troubles here and there
                     And churlish checks, of fortune I release
                     Their heauie crosse, I can no longer beare
                     In peeces small, my scribbled scrowles I teare
                     So flinging verse, and bookes before your feet
                     I craue some crownes, to bie my shrouding sheet.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     All hope is gone, of any earthly hap
                     The axe is come, to giue the falling blow
                     Downe flies the bowes, the tree hath lost his sap
                     Vp to the clouds, like smoke the breath shall go
                     A sillie puffe, of winde ends all this wo
                     O grashous Queene, then some compassion take
                     Before my soule, this combrous caue forsake.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     If nothing come, of seruice, sute and troth
                     True man must trudge, and leaue his natiue soile
                     Abroad the world, to see how fortune goth
                     In any place, where faith is free from foyle
                     Heere with vaine hope, my selfe and life I spoile
                     First lost my youth, so time and all is gone
                     Age sindes no friends, nor helpe of any one.
                     O charitie helpe.
                  
                  
                     Of charitie, a great discourse is made
                     Vnto an Earle, I honor in this land
                     It is not hid, nor sits in silent shade
                     Would God it were, in your faire blessed hand
                     There lies the notes, as thicke as is the sand
                     And there I sing, three parts in one at lest
                     And in sweete sound, true musicke is exprest.
                     O charitie helpe, or else adue the pen
                     For I must march, againe with marshall men.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  To the generall Readers.
                  IF ought amisse, you finde good Reader heere,
                  His fault it is, that sings ne sweete nor loud:
                  When he caught cold, and voice could not be cleere,
                  Because ech note, is cloked vnder cloud,
                  He cra
                        •
                     d no helpe, nor stole from no mans song,
                  One peece nor part, of musicke any waie:
                  Ne sembreeffe, breefe, nor yet ne larke nor long,
                  For he hath skill, in deskant some men saie,
                  And on the base, can make three parts in one,
                  And set new songs, when all the old are gone.
                  Though some beleeue, but hardly that he makes,
                  These things or that, which seemes far past his reach,
                  Tush though old head, and hand with paulsie shakes,
                  Let no ill will, plaine writers pen appeach:
                  If you do loue, no wrong giue ech man right:
                  Rob not the iust, of any praise well won,
                  Way not mens worth, with waights in ballance light,
                  For truth is truth, when all is saide and don:
                  You may as well, say white and red is blacke,
                  And Sun and Moone, are steele and marble stone:
                  As say or thinke, behinde a writers backe▪
                  
                  He borrowed that, which he claimes as his owne:
                  O giue men leaue, to father their owne childe:
                  Let it be foule, or faire as babies are,
                  A stubborne boye, a cracke-rope tame or wilde,
                  Begot in haste, and brought vp poore and bare:
                  How ere they be, blinde, lame, or shapt awrie,
                  Vglie to sight, bigge, boulcho
                        •
                     s, lowe or 
                        •
                     ie,
                  Those yoonglings all, the Dad
                        •
                     an not denie,
                  Are his that sent, those babes abroad to nurse,
                  (Like orphants weake, that knowes not what to do)
                  With blessings great, and not with parents curse,
                  That shortens life, and gets Gods anger to:
                  Children were woont, to beare their fathers name,
                  Not one durst say, in earnest iest or skorne,
                  
                     (To hinder childe, of spotlesse birth and fame)
                  A lawfull sonne, was but a bastard borne.
                  Both beast and bird, their yoong ones do defend,
                  So shall my Muse, maintaine that I haue pend,
                  Then bring Shores wife, in question now no more,
                  I set hir foorth, in colours as she goes,
                  
                     Sir Rafe Bowser a worshipfull knight witnesseth where and when I penned that.
                  
                  And as she went, like gallant lasse before,
                  So other gyrls, as gaie and fresh as rose,
                  With verse haue I, set foorth in sundrie sorts,
                  As braue as she, what ere disdaine reports,
                  That humor now, declines for age drawes on,
                  The full tide is, of fine inuention gon:
                  Ebbe followes floud, when vitall vaines waxe dead,
                  Wit weares and wastes, as torch consumes with winde,
                  When water turnes, drie growes a flowing head:
                  In age ech thing, decaies by course of kinde:
                  Yet whiles the oyle, in lampe may make a blaze,
                  Or candell in, the socket shewes a light,
                  On sparkling flame, the cleerest eies will gaze,
                  And comfort finde, thereby in darkest night:
                  I yeeld to time, that like a sithe cuts cleane,
                  All that doth gr
                        •
                     w, in spring or fall of leafe,
                  And wish in world, my treble were a meane,
                  That I might sin
                        •
                     , to eares that are not deafe,
                  A note should sinke, as deepe in iugging brest,
                  As euer yet, 
                        •
                     n sea did ancker rest:
                  Songs are but likt, as fancies giues them leaue,
                  Both well and 
                        〈◊〉
                     , as sounds of trumpets are,
                  Though Syrens voice, the hearers doth deceaue,
                  Mine hath no charme, but open plaine and bare,
                  As I was borne, so speake I English still,
                  To lose my paines, and win the worlds good will,
                  No losse so much, as credit crackt with pen,
                  Nor gaine so great, as loue of honest men.
                  Fare you well.
               
               
                  
                  The Author to his booke.
                  GO now plaine booke, where thou maist welcom find,
                  Walke throw the world, till frinds do thee embrace:
                  Let foes alone, obay thy masters mind,
                  For fear nor threat, hide not a fautlesse face.
                  Win courts goodwill, the countries loue is gaind,
                  With wise men stay, from froward wits beware:
                  At plow and cart, plaine speech is not disdaind:
                  Sit downe with those, that feeds on hungrie fare,
                  For they haue time, to note what thou dost saie,
                  Let gallants go, they will but giue a gibe:
                  Or take thee vp, and fling thee straight awaie,
                  Touch not smooth hands, that vse to take a bribe,
                  They better like, full bags than busie bookes,
                  Shun from the sight, of glorious peacocks proud:
                  Their onlie pomp, stands all on statelie lookes,
                  They glowm and skoull, as tweare a raynie cloud.
                  Giue babling toongs, good leaue to taunt and talke,
                  Their taste is gone, they oft take chese for chalke.
                  Bid scornfull heads, let true-plain
                        •
                      lines alone,
                  That harmles are, and came from lowlie hart:
                  Passe not in haste, to people strange vnknowne,
                  Least iudgment swift, do take on thee the start.
                  And run beyond, thy reach full many a skore,
                  Go slowlie foorth, with thanks come quickly 
                        〈◊〉
                     :
                  Bring no rebuke, for that nips near and sore,
                  Twere better far, abroad thou shouldst not ro
                        ••
                     .
                  Though thou be blind, yet those that well can see,
                  If thou offend, will find great fault with mee.
                  Behaue thy selfe, as mildly as thou maist,
                  L
                        •
                     ke messenger, that doth his arnd aright:
                  Thy master must, affirme each thing thou saist.
                  The darkest word, at length must come to light,
                  Like pilgrim go, and passe throw perils all,
                  Take well in worth, what hap doth thee befall.
                  
                     Returne no more, to me till newes thou bring,
                  Of praise or thankes, or of some better thing:
                  If none of these, this waiward world will yeeld,
                  Trudge from fine towne, fli
                        •
                      to the open feild,
                  Where thou must passe, through thickets full of thorns,
                  Where pricking briers, and croked brambles grose:
                  And neuer none, s
                        •
                     apt free from sc
                        ••
                     th or scornes,
                  Or scratted hands, or tearing of his close.
                  Where eluish ap
                        •
                     s, and marmsets mockes and mose,
                  And thistles are, seen sooner than a rose.
                  Yea thou shalt come, where nettles are good store,
                  Whose angrie sting, will blisters raise apace,
                  Slip from those weedes, and come near them no more:
                  For fear vnwares, good words do get disgrace.
                  The goodlie floures, of court thou needs not feare,
                  For they are sweete, and meeke of nature throw,
                  There wisedome will, with writers humor beare:
                  If humbly stil, thou canst behaue thee now,
                  Thy masters pen, hath purchast fauour there,
                  Among the Dames, of faire Dianas traine,
                  Where beautie shines, like siluer drops of raine.
                  In sunnie day: O booke thou happy art
                  If with those Nimphes, thou maist be entertaind,
                  If any one, of them take in good part,
                  A verse or word, thou hast a garland gaind,
                  Of glorie great, for fame hir selfe must sound,
                  Out of their voice, looke what they do pronounce:
                  Like tennis ball, aloft it doth rebound,
                  And yeelds great weight, but not by dram nor ounce,
                  But heauie as, a massie pound of lead,
                  They wey mens worth, with praises quicke or dead.
                  Yea what they say, of Poets fond or wise,
                  Of prose or verse, that ripe inuensho
                        •
                      shoes:
                  As tw
                        •
                     re a lawe, the fame thereof shall rise,
                  And through the world, like coin it currant goes.
                  
                     From hand to hand, and so doth passage take,
                  Preasse thou to them, for they may mend my hap:
                  If that of thee, some good account they make,
                  And that in sport, they laie thee in their lap,
                  Vntill they list, to read thee eurie line,
                  Then at welhead, some water drawe I may:
                  For fountaine springs, may run cleere claret win
                        •
                     ,
                  Whose pleasant sap, giues moisture eurie way.
                  The nimble Nimphs, that with Diana dwell,
                  Can quicklie turne, the cock and flowing spout:
                  That thousands shall, bring buckets to the well
                  And watch their times, till comfort commeth out.
                  Now booke trudge hence, bestow thy labour right
                  Set spurs to horse, that flies in aeir with wings
                  Mount ore the hils, and rest ne day nor night
                  Till thou do come, before great Queens and Kings
                  Then flat on face, fall prostrate at their feet
                  That may from graue, call vp thy masters spreet
                  Keepe thou these rules, this course and compasse hold
                  So may thy grace, conuert my lead to gold.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  CHVRCHYARDES CHARITIE.
                  
                     WHen labring minde, and weary body both
                     Is cloid with world, & hart wold shake off toile
                     Before the ghost, to highest heauens goeth
                     And death of life, shall make a wretched spoile
                     (And man must needs,A well disposed minde, cals many good things to memorie. forsake this soathsome soile)
                     He takes some care, to make his conshence cleere
                     Of all he thinks, or may imagine heere.
                  
                  
                     First lookes he vp,Good men haue many sweet imaginations. where soule desires to be
                     Of life to come, to know what hope we haue
                     And where we rest, in ioie from bondage free
                     So soone as cold, dead bodie lies in graue
                     Than ere man leaues, this cruell cumbrous caue
                     In charitie, he waies this world aright
                     As far as wades, wise iudgement, skill and sight.
                  
                  
                     But finding world,Blinde world is fraught with fond desires. full fraught with fond desires
                     (A mightie masse, of matter therein lies)
                     That burns out time, and kindleth many fires
                     Whereon foule flames, and smothring smoke doth rise,
                     He lookes thereon, with heauie rufull eies,
                     As though some zeale, might mooue a musing minde
                     To pity plagues, that man must leaue behinde.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        The poore estate of people is to be pitied.Who doth not sigh, to see the poore opprest
                     By rich mens reach, that wrests awry the right
                     Who will not waile, the woe of troubled brest
                     Or sore lament, the state of wronged wight
                     When broad day brings, darke dealings vnto light
                     Who will not rue, our wretched race on earth
                     That keepes till death, no rule from day of birth.
                  
                  
                     
                        The wealth hardly won is easilie left.The goods we win, are woorse to keepe than get
                     The wealth we lose, robs some of rest and sleepe
                     Our daily gaine, will answere scarce our det
                     We couet more, than wit can warely keepe
                     We slip from hence, as rich as new shorne sheepe
                     And that we leaue, in world that well was won
                     Is soone consumde, and spent with riotous son.
                  
                  
                     Who parts from world, would wish that were not so
                     
                        Graceles time runs on rowling wheeles.His charitie, commands him so to thinke
                     But graceles time, on rowling wheeles doth go
                     At whose abuse, our flyring world can winke
                     Vice cares no whit, if vertue swim or sinke
                     Ambishous mind, and malice meetes in one
                     So that true loue, and charitie is gone.
                  
                  
                     
                        Christian loue lookes to euerie thing.Loue bids men looke, to all things vnder Sun
                     Beast fish, and foule, and all we see with eie
                     But charitie, a greater course doth run
                     Because it doth, in quiet conscience lie
                     She lookes ech where, as she had wings to flie
                     And houer ore, our doings on this mould
                     That bridle takes, and will not be contrould.
                  
                  
                     
                     O then to loue, and charitie I pas
                     Whose zeale is great,Zeale is the glas that shewes the spots of face. and charge is nothing small
                     That cleerely sees, (as in a christall glas)
                     The spots of face, and inward cankers all
                     And can in haste, vnto remembrance call
                     Old farn yeers past, and present things of late,
                     Whereof a world, of wits may well debate.
                  
                  
                     Who can hold toong,Abuse runs ouer the brim. to see bad worlds abuce
                     Run ore the brim, where vertue neuer floes
                     As hauocke had, hald vp the water sluce
                     Where out at large, great skuls of fishes goes
                     Poore pashence must, be pleasd with painted shoes
                     Alms deeds are dead, no pitty now is last
                     For all the world, is set on sleight and craft.
                  
                  
                     If pouertie, be pincht with plague or sore
                     He starues for food, adue the man is dead
                     The sound we seeke, the sicke we do abore
                     Full paunch eats all,Full paunch eats vp all.the hungrie is not fed
                     For greedy guts, keeps needy mouth from bred
                     True charitie, and good deuoshon old
                     By frost and snow, are almost kild with cold.
                  
                  
                     Would God good works, with faithfull honest deeds
                     Reformd this vice, that spreds too far I feare
                     And faire sweete flowrs,Faire word
                              •
                            make fooles faine. were planted for those weeds
                     That doth with fraud, infect sweet soyles ech where
                     Fine words doth but, betraie the simple eare
                     As fowlers pipe; the harmles bird disseaues
                     That lights on lyme, amid greene birchen leaues.
                  
                  
                     
                     If meere deceit, were banisht from our viewe
                     
                        Deceit deceaues militous of men.False dealing then, would blush to shew his face
                     If wisdome did, disdaine vaine follies newe
                     Old troth in world, would claime his woonted place
                     But cunning wits, doth finenes so embrace
                     That plainnes walkes, like pilgrim to and fro
                     In wandring wise, and knowes not where to go.
                  
                  
                     
                        Wealths thirst drinks riuers dry.Wealth hath desire, to drinke great riuers drie
                     His scalding thirst, cannot be quenched well
                     Want pines awaie, and comfortles doth lie
                     And water tasts, like Tantalus in hell
                     The needy sort, in dolour daily dwell
                     The hautie head, thinks skorne to turne his face
                     And rue the state, of naked wretches case.
                  
                  
                     The fields and lanes, are full of sicke and lame,
                     Who beg and craue, as loud as voice can crie
                     
                        A sauing world spares nothing to the poore.But sauing world, is grown so far from frame
                     No great remorse, remains in passers by
                     Hardnes holds backe, both bag and bounties eie
                     So that no ruth, regard nor pittie comes
                     From sparing hands, and graceles griping thombs.
                  
                  
                     Our prisons all, are pestred with poore soules
                     Whose yelling noise, a tyrants hart may mooue
                     At grates they stand, and looke through peeping holes
                     
                        Prisoners perish for want of comfort.To purchase alms, and trie good peoples loue
                     But penurie, doth so their pashence prooue,
                     With emptie wombe, and hungrie meatles mawe
                     They lay them downe, on boords or wads of strawe.
                  
                  
                     
                     The silly folke,Many silly soules goes a hungrie to bed. in towne or cottage rude
                     With belly full, do seldome go to bed
                     And lookes as leane, as haukes that ill are mude
                     Which often be, with crowes or carraine fed
                     How should men giue, when charitie is dead
                     For money, meat, and clothing now is bard
                     From those that need, the world is waxt so hard.
                  
                  
                     How can full purse,Full purse follows many pleasures. supplie the poore mans went
                     When trull at home, from sheepe lookes for a fleece
                     And master must, be sometimes all a flant
                     And prettie pus, my deere must haue a peece
                     Whose beautie staines, the faire Helen of Greece
                     These things are large, and lo
                           •
                        g to looke vpon
                     By which cold cause, warme charitie is gon.
                  
                  
                     More reasons rise, to make men hold and keepe
                     The crums they catch, from Fortunes table still
                     For purchesars,The purchesars plucks all from the poore. do walke when plow men sleepe
                     Their sacks of corne, is seldome from the mill
                     They take no rest, till thrift bare budget fill
                     Then locke they vp, in chest their golden bags
                     When beggers trudge, and iet about in rags.
                  
                  
                     Cold parts men plaie,Craftie 
                              〈◊〉
                            can play bopeep. much like old plain bopeepe
                     Or counterfait, in dock out-nettle still
                     And for their game, there is such hold and keepe
                     That nothing can, escape their reaching skill
                     Much haue yee won, when got is their good will
                     Tis lost againe, for one small graine of gold
                     Their charitie, is growne so extreme cold.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Cunning raiseth the price of euery thing.They raise the price, of euery thing is bought
                     On tenter hookes, their ware is stretched out
                     Seekes all the waies, for wealth that may be sought
                     As for the winde, a ship is swaid about
                     And at a trice, they turne the water spout
                     So from our purse, both pence and pounds they draw
                     By hooke or crooke, by wrest or reach of law.
                  
                  
                     
                        Vittles made deere seldome comes downe againe.The rate of things, rackt vp doth fall no more
                     Colde conshence takes, all-fish that coms to net
                     To make corne deere, they hoord much graine in store
                     So they may win, some care not how they get
                     For eu'ry bird, they do such lime-twigs set
                     That no bird scapes, if it be slidge to flie
                     Except foresight, the suddaine danger spie.
                  
                  
                     No rain nor curb, nor bridle holds them in
                     No lawe nor rule, nor order will they keepe
                     Sets all abroch, to feede and nourish sin
                     
                        Wicked wolues deuoures the lambs.And plaies the wolues, with lambs when yonglings sleep
                     Makes old folks whine, and babes in cradle weepe
                     And makes the rate, of eu'ry thing so scant
                     That some cries out, that neuer thought of want.
                  
                  
                     
                        A diuelish dearth destroies thousands.A diuelish dearth, is come from darke hell gate
                     To kill cold harts, as hands can crush a crab
                     That blow fals not, vpon the proud mans pate
                     But giues the meeke, and mildest minde the stab
                     Now tell I all, the secrets like a blab
                     As good to shew, a sore whiles wound is greene
                     As let men starue, before the greefe be seene.
                  
                  
                     
                     The loue of wealth,The loue of wealth forgets all goodnes. forgets both God and man
                     And who growes rich, sets little by renowne
                     To catch and hold, the world doth what it can
                     With endles care, in court, in field and towne
                     Craft keepeth vp, plaine honestie fals downe
                     Charitie is dead, and goodnes growes full sicke
                     Wisedome doth drowp, and follie is too quicke.
                  
                  
                     Wealth like a worme, eats vp sweete kernels all
                     As cankers rust, runs into iron and steele
                     Hard closed hands, that will let nothing fall
                     Wants eares to heare,Hard hands will part from nothing. yet fingers hath to feele
                     Well all is right, when world runs like a wheele
                     Round as a top, that scourging can abide
                     Swims vp and downe, and followes time and tide.
                  
                  
                     On present time and muck mans mind is bentFoolish world thinks but our present time.
                     
                     On world to come, no care nor eie they cast
                     What coms with ease, is often rashlie spent
                     And what doth hap, in hands we hold full fast
                     As though our pomp, and pride should alwaies last
                     Yea thinking all, is ours that we can scrape
                     And still for more, do greedie gluttons gape.
                  
                  
                     The many yeers,Many yeers and maners alters the kinde of man. and winters past and gone
                     Hath changde the kind, of grace and goodnes quite
                     Our bodies beares, in flesh a hart of stone
                     That ioined is, with faintie liuer white
                     Which neuer breeds, in breast one good delite
                     Our noughtie minds, may be the cause of this
                     That hath transformd, all Adams babes amisse.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        A golden age is turnd to copper and brasse.The golden age, of our forefathers wise,
                     Is copper now, or worse than any brasse,
                     We quickly can, clap on a new found gife
                     And weare a maske, seeme shadow in a glasse
                     But bring no worke, nor great good thing to passe
                     Make shew of much, as art sets tristes forth
                     That proues a puffe, in substance little worth.
                  
                  
                     
                        Words is the worst ware that euer was sold.Words are the ware, that each man sets to sale
                     With phrases fine, bedeckt to blinde poore sight
                     Faire promise first, steps forth and tels a tale
                     Of bad deuice, that weies in ballance light
                     For at your need, performance taketh flight
                     And leaues in lake, the foole that words hath won
                     Who paies great paines, for shadowes in the sun.
                  
                  
                     
                        Wealth weighs downe euery thing.Wit did prefer, good people well of yore
                     Welth now with weights, doth wey the ballance down
                     Words and fine talke, leads world the dance before
                     But neither wealth, nor words wins true renown
                     For when the trumpe, doth giue vncertaine sown
                     Men will not then, prepare them for the fight
                     But rather seeke, to saue themselues by flight.
                  
                  
                     
                        Words are waues tossed with wind.Words are the waues, that welters on the seas
                     And works a froth, in colour white as snoe
                     Makes thousands sicke, and breedes a cold disease
                     To those that with, such swelling surges goe
                     Inconstant words, with tide will ebbe and floe
                     But fruitfull deeds, stands firme and fast as rocke
                     That bides the brunt, of eurie blast and shocke
                  
                  
                     
                     Fine Macheuill,Marcheuill is now made an English man. is now from Florence flown
                     To England where, his welcome is too great,
                     His busie books,Want of charitie hath made me loose my pattent. are heere so red and known
                     That charitie, thereby hath lost her heat
                     Poore prisners doe, in Ludgate die for meat
                     Who doth for det, in danger long remaine
                     Must fall down flat, and seldom rise againe.
                  
                  
                     Wit takes his toll,The milner will be sure of his toule. as milner at the mill
                     Powlseakes the bags, of meale as he doth please
                     Thrusts thousands backe, till tricksie tanker fill
                     Like prentise fine, that faine would take some ease
                     In deed there is, no fishing to the seas
                     But what is caught, in conshence should be sold
                     In market place, that men might credit hold.
                  
                  
                     No charitie,A fine fisher would catch all himselfe. is found when fisher feeds
                     On all himselfe, and giues his fellowes none
                     Alas poore soules, we angle in the reeds
                     And catch a frog, when all the fish is gone
                     Bullhead and loch, lies vnder little stone
                     But stones and sticks, will breake our nets I dout
                     Before we bring, a dish of gudgins out.
                  
                  
                     The great good turnes,Good turnes are turnd to faire holy water. in court that thousands felt
                     Is turnd to cleer, faire holie water there
                     The scraps are small, that hungrie hands haue delt
                     Spoile cannot spare, the paring of a pea
                           •
                        e
                     For snatch crust robs, almes baskets eury where
                     The poore so starues, or knowes not what to do
                     And so I feare, shall sillie suters to.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        The father will scarse speake for his sonne.The father scarse, will speake for his owne son
                     World waxeth mute, when men should do some good
                     The streame is stopt, where water ought to run
                     We cast our nets, where fish creepes in the mud
                     And clime those trees, where bowes will neuer bud
                     We take great paine, yet no good fruit enioies
                     For words are wind, and fils our eares with noies.
                  
                  
                     
                        The soldier consumes himselfe with griefe.The soldier sits, and sighes to shake off greefe
                     Whose wounds in war, of right claimes great reward
                     Waits hard at heele, but findeth small releefe
                     Who least deserues, is alwaies most prefard
                     Who brags and boasts, blind world doth best regard
                     But some that lost, their blood in countries right
                     May kisse the post, and bid vs all good night.
                  
                  
                     What charitie, is that iudge you that can
                     Who sees these things, so far past all redresse
                     
                        A lip wise world cares little for a man.When lip-wise world, sets little by a man
                     What may fall out, of that a foole may gesse
                     Each one shall haue, his lot yea more or lesse
                     But charitie, and fortune differ far
                     Between them two, we find a mortall war.
                  
                  
                     The one helps all, and loues a number still
                     
                        Charitie and fortune differ far.The other hurts, or else prefers a few
                     And wise men find, no hold in hir good will
                     For she is cald, a most inconstant shrew
                     That with the sun, will waste away like dew
                     A sommer flowre, that withers in the frost
                     Coms softly on, and rides away in post.
                  
                  
                     
                     As blind of sight, as euer Cupid was
                     For she lookes not, on vertue any way
                     Nor wisdoms worth,Fortune fauors many an asse. but fauors many an asse
                     For his smooth face, and peacocks feathers gay
                     But charitie is, the only staffe and stay
                     To all estates, for where she stoutly stands
                     She sets all free, and breaketh bondage bands.
                  
                  
                     Forgiues great faults, and suffers many a wrong
                     She giues a badge,Charitie forgiues and forgets iniuries. that eury christian weares
                     And in all worlds, hir liurey lasteth long
                     It garded is, all round about with teares
                     And she hir selfe, a branch of oliue beares
                     In signe of peace, and mercie mixt with grace
                     That pitie takes, of eurie rufull case.
                  
                  
                     This charitie giues, as much as men may craue
                     And soone forgets,Charitie hath no end of hir bountie. the bountie she bestowes
                     Takes great delight, the life of man to saue
                     By vertue of, good turnes that from hir floes
                     Whose is sent like, the white and sweet red rose
                     For all hir gifts, and graces beares such flowres
                     That makes poore men, to laugh when fortune lowres.
                  
                  
                     On charitie,Charitie giues few words but doth many good deeds. the hungrie dailie feeds
                     As lambs and sheepe, in fruitfull pasture liue
                     Shee giues few words, where shee bestoes good deeds
                     The more we neede, the sooner will shee giue
                     As corne from chaffe, is si
                           •
                        ted through the siue
                     So shee tries out, from dust and drosse the gold
                     As wisdome doth, the worth of men vnfold.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Charitie is the 
                              〈◊〉
                            and 
                              〈◊〉
                            shall be
                              ••
                           sled.This charitie, is first that fauour findes
                     And shall be last, that wins our worlds good will
                     Begot by grace, and nu
                           •
                        st in noble mindes
                     That staies and stands, vpon their honor still
                     Tis seen far off, as torch is on an hill
                     Felt near at hand, and found out by the light
                     Which in darke daies, doth glad ech good mans sight.
                  
                  
                     When fortunes wrath, hath wounded many a wight
                     She brings a boxe, of balm to heale ech sore
                     That makes sad mind, and heauie hart so light
                     It neuer thinks, on wretched chance no more
                     
                        Charitie conquers euery where like a victor.If charitie, like victor goes before
                     Come after hir, proud world with all thy braues
                     Like conqueror, she triumphs on hir slaues.
                  
                  
                     But well awaie, and woe God wo
                           •
                         the while
                     True charitie, is faintly felt or found
                     Shee is of late, halfe-driuen in exile
                     
                        Bad life would driue charitie in exile.Because bad life, lets crueltie abound
                     The world is full, of hollow harts vnsound
                     And mercie meets, with ruth scarce once a yeere
                     For rigors rage, doth show such churlish cheere.
                  
                  
                     
                        Men go transformed now a da
                              •
                           s.Men walke abroad, transformd in sundry shapes
                     More monster like, than babes of Adams brood
                     Fearfull to sight, like vglie owls and apes
                     That hath of kind, no ciuill humane mood
                     Tigers in proofe, nurst vp with woluish food
                     For sillie lambs, that doth no butcher fear
                     They do deuour, and in small peeces tear.
                  
                  
                     
                     Greedy as guls,Some people are as greedy as guls. and gapes for garbedge still,
                     Rauening like woolues, that murthers sheepe in folde
                     Suttle as foxe, that neuer hath his fill
                     Hedstrong and proud, and will not be controld
                     Currish as kite, ne gentle yoong nor old
                     Such cruell tricks, doth alter so mans minde
                     That long they liue, by craft and dies vnkind.
                  
                  
                     Quarrels encrease,Quarrels breeds mischiefe and bloudshed. and combats haue no end
                     Till bloud be shed, and life and land be lost
                     Some thinks the bow, were better breake than bend
                     On that consait, stands mightie manhood most
                     But charitie, rides then away in post
                     And leaues in lash, behinde hir in some part
                     A heape of harmes, and many a heauie hart.
                  
                  
                     Lust liues by spoyle,Lust is a theefe and robs vs of life. like theefe that robs true men
                     Desires to eate, the hen and chickens all
                     Rauine and rage, prouls fast for profite then
                     So gets some cheate, though it be near so small
                     But lust is like, an image on a wall
                     Strike out the cole, that is but blacke of hue
                     Faire white and cleane, appeers blurd wall to you.
                  
                  
                     Ore weening runs, beyond the course of wit
                     Presumpshon then, doth set best foote before
                     And boldnes knowes, not where to stand nor sit
                     His loftie lookes,Pride and presumption is bold as bl
                              •
                           nde baya
                              •
                           d. prouokes his pride so sore
                     But when threed-bare, his bad spun cloth is wore
                     The world but laughs, to see bald bayard blinde
                     With painted robes, patch vp a stately minde.
                  
                  
                     
                     In cloud vnseene, new fanglenes would walke
                     
                        New fanglenes is easily found out.But he is spide, by old deepe serching sight
                     Fine filed toongs, like parrets prate and talke
                     And wonder makes, of trifling matters light
                     This glorious crew, triumphes in moone shine night
                     But when cleere day, such idols doth disclose
                     World will point out, where eurie shadow goes.
                  
                  
                     
                        Wilful heads hates good counsell.Wilde wilfull heads, that all sound counsell hates
                     A careles course, of borrowed life doth lead
                     Whose retchles race, still argues and debates
                     They soone forget, good lessons that they read
                     But when the foot, awrie the shue doth tread
                     Downe goes the heele, yea seam the sole and all
                     And so vnwares, a man in mire may fall.
                  
                  
                     
                        Ill custome Breedes abuse.And stumbling oft, makes some to snapper still
                     Vse mastrie breedes, and custome pleads a law
                     Let bridle goe, the horse will haue his will
                     Much water scarse, will quench hot fire in straw
                     A stubborne childe, that still doth backward draw
                     Must needes be whipt, to make him feare the rod
                     So we are plagud, when we forget our God.
                  
                  
                     
                        Two plagues past th
                              •
                           eatens a third.Three sundrie plagues, the wrath of God doth show
                     The first is past, the second you may see
                     The third ye wot, the world too well doth know
                     For that cuts downe, corne, grasse, and highest tree
                     The angrie cloudes will neuer calmie bee
                     Till better life, seaise all our showres of raine
                     And Gods great grace, brings sommer home againe
                  
                  
                     
                     Shame followes pride,Shame followes pride, and deart
                              •
                            nipped sore. and death comes after sin
                     Then famine k
                           •
                        ls, vp thousands where it flies
                     They will take heed, that hath well scourged bin
                     And fall to mend, their liues if they be wise
                     But in our world, such new found fashons rise
                     All frames not well, looke into ech mans waies
                     Small charitie, is seen in these bad daies.
                  
                  
                     When charitie,Proud painted posts are rotte
                              •
                            in the middle. proud painted posts plucks downe
                     To God and prince, great honor shall arise
                     When plainnes thriues, in court and ciuill towne
                     Old troth will bid, farewell our newfound gise
                     Goodnes will come, and so aduance the wise
                     Dunses and dolts, shall stand beneath the bar
                     And pride shall blush, that doth presume too far.
                  
                  
                     The least of most, makes most of his bad stuffe
                     So leers and looks, as frighted were his wits
                     Is neuer well,Pride alubberly lout, lookes like a monarke. till pride be in his ruffe
                     Than monarke like, on loftie seat he sits
                     (Whose scornfull hart, is full of froward fits)
                     But speaks no word, for feare that bayard blinde
                     Should plunge before, and yearke at him behinde.
                  
                  
                     The woorst with best,The woorst with h
                              •
                           e hart, compares with the best. compares and striues for place
                     As gold and glas, in woorth weare all alike
                     Beares out his brags, with scowling brazen face
                     That cannot blush, no more than can blacke tike
                     He frowns so sore, he lookes as he would strike
                     The crabbish 
                           •
                        arle, so curst and cumbrous is
                     Then when he speakes, in schoole the schollers hisse.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        A surly sire swels like a a toad.The surly sire, sits swelling like a toad
                     That venom casts, on goodly herbs and floures
                     Not pleased well, in house nor yet abroad
                     Nor seemes to haue, ne quiet daies nor houres
                     When cheerefull folke, doth smile this churle he loures
                     A swarme of such, checkmates a man may see
                     If stagers come, where fresh fine fellowes bee.
                  
                  
                     
                        A stately stalke thinks none like himselfe.The stately stalks, that will ne stoup nor bend
                     Will speake no word, till first yee them salute
                     Holds head aloft, but downe no looke will lend
                     Faire blossomd trees, that brings foorth no good fruit
                     Nay sickles sharpe, that reaps vp many a sute
                     Their haruest hath, cut downe the corne so cleane
                     They leaue in field, the poore no graine to gleane.
                  
                  
                     
                        A craftie crue are wilier than the foxe.The craftie crue, more wily than old Foxe
                     Runs flocking on, as sheepe to fold doth flie
                     Takes what they may, and giues but scornes & mocks
                     They want no wiles, within the winde to lie
                     Drains riuers vp, and drinks great fountaines drie
                     At first rebound, strikes backe the tennis ball
                     (From those that plaies) as though they would haue al.
                  
                  
                     
                        Cun
                              •
                           ing lads are 
                              •
                           s quicke a
                              •
                            a 
                              •
                           ee.The cunning lads, that creepes through auger holes
                     As quicke as Bee, seekes honie eury where
                     Feeds body fat, but cares not for their soles
                     Their snatching shewes, what greedy minds they beare
                     Who lends the poore, ne louing looke nor eare
                     Brings emptie paunch, to mouth vp all alone
                     Skornes and disdaine, to fling a dog a bone.
                  
                  
                     
                     Preferments were,Preferments are not got with shooting toe short. the marks whereat we shot
                     But past our aime; and reach those marks do stand
                     For ere we draw, the bow the game is got
                     Or else the string, doth breake within our hand
                     Our plaine prick-shafts, were wont to cleaue a wand
                     But now so blunt, and flat the heads are worne
                     When archer shoots, leud world laughs him to scorne.
                  
                  
                     They hit the white,They hit the white that haue good hap. that neuer shot before
                     No marke men sure, nay bunglars in their kind
                     A sort of swads, that scarce can shoot twelue score
                     Nor hath no skill, to know where blowes the winde
                     Lo thus you see, that fortune is but blinde
                     To giue them hap, whose knowledge is so bace
                     They scarce deserue, a simple pedlars place.
                  
                  
                     Ech man prefers,Ech man prefers his serua
                              •
                           ts and friends. his friends and seruants both
                     The Queenes poore men, findes few to help their hap
                     I praie you who, doth speake for plaine Tom-troth
                     Which plies them all, with curchie, knee and cap
                     His old crab tree, is burnd with thunder clap
                     Blacke are the bowes, that once grew greene and gai
                           •
                        
                     
                     The rune of time, doth threaten his decaie.
                  
                  
                     How should men liue, that haue no chinks to spend
                     Steele now lacks strength, to strike out fire from flint
                     Hold fast the gnoff, will neither giue nor lend
                     Hope-well can get,Hope well can get no money from the mint. no money from the mint
                     All things we haue, are set now at a stint
                     Nip-crust the carle, hath crept so neere the crums
                     That nothing scapes, from hungrie hucksters thumbs.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Serue long spends much and gets little.Serue long waite well, spend much and little get
                     May be compard, to walking horse for nought
                     Brings many men, in danger and in det
                     For wit and time, thereby is deerlie bought
                     As when a drudge, all daie hath trulie wrought
                     And goes to bed, vnpleasd or paid aright
                     He thinks daies toile, brings beggrie home at night.
                  
                  
                     
                        Who makes haste to amend any misse.I pray you who, makes haste to mend this misse
                     The man in the moone, as soone as any one
                     By which cold signe, true loue and charities
                     Growne now more cold, than ice or marble stone
                     As dogs do striue, and snarre about a bone
                     So for good turnes, the people throng and thrust
                     So thicke God wot, we know not who to trust.
                  
                  
                     
                        New natures alters good old conditions.These natures new, doth argue plagues most strange
                     To come if now, No famine heere were had
                     For as we do, our old good maners change
                     So world I feare, hencefoorth will be too bad
                     When sober men, growes sauage wilde and mad
                     Looke for small rule, and order heere belowe
                     Our Iudgement daie, thereby drawes neere I trowe.
                  
                  
                     
                        Not one doth right, search and you shall see.Not one doth right, with weights when we are waid
                     All are as light, in ballance as a flie
                     For out of frame. are all when all is said
                     Both they below, and those that would sit hie
                     But chieflie such, as vse to sell and bie
                     All sciences, yea all of eury art
                     Are stept on stage, and coms to play their part.
                  
                  
                     
                     Search eury art,Artificers and all are light in the ballance. artificers and all
                     In charitie, behold them as they are
                     And you shall see, their conshence is so small
                     That nere a one, for charitie doth care
                     Do neither church, queer, court, nor country spare
                     And tell me plaine, what charitie is there
                     God grant these daies, true loue be any where.
                  
                  
                     Can plagues cease then,Plagues will not cease till bad life be reformed whan eury liuing wight
                     His neighbour plagues, as far as powre may stretch
                     In ballance iust, not one man waies aright
                     All vse desait, and ly on gard and watch
                     He liues not now, that can not scrat and snatch
                     Men are no saints, world is a world to thend
                     So folly doth, his wilfull faults defend.
                  
                  
                     The man of Ind, can neuer change his skin
                     Nor yet the cat, of mountaine change hir hue
                     So those wilde buds,Wild buds brings foorth no good fruit. that euer bad haue bin
                     Can neuer beare, good fruit nor blossome nue
                     A bitter taste, will neuer go from rue
                     A wicked life, can shew no vertous deed
                     No more than may, a floure spring from a weed.
                  
                  
                     What keepes good course,Neither world not weather keeps good course. the weather alters oft
                     The heauens seeme, to shew some sodaine change
                     The winds waxe shrill, and loud they blow aloft
                     Familiar friends, for trifles gro full strange
                     Wit waxeth wilde, whose wont was not to range
                     So out of tune, ech thing is wrested now
                     Because abuse, corrupts good nature throw.
                  
                  
                     
                     If sommer once, in twentie yeers growes hot
                     (Whose warmth reuiues, both fruit & floures ech where)
                     Cold winters blast, bites near the bones ye wot
                     Cold pleaseth few, for cold ech one doth feare
                     Why world growes cold, and cold is hard to beare
                     
                        Neither world nor weather keeps good course.Cold weather makes, warme conshence cold I troe
                     So charitie, and goodnes cold doth growe.
                  
                  
                     
                        Cold weather or world pleaseth none.Cold is the aire, the open field and towne
                     Then court must needs, wax colder than it was
                     It seems wise world, cares not for vaine renowne
                     As world doth come, a Gods name let it passe
                     Though charitie, growe thrise as cold as glasse
                     A warmer time, in better tune may bring
                     This hard cold age, when comes a sommer spring.
                  
                  
                     
                        Cold aire kils sometime sound and sicke.Cold snow is not, so good as luke warme milke
                     Hot sun doth melt, cold frost and cakes of ice
                     Thicke frise surmounts, a thin cloke linde with silke
                     Furde gowne exceeds, cold cloth of preshous price
                     Warme loue lasts long, cold fauour growes full nice
                     With warme good will, we win great wordlie good
                     The fire burns best, where most ye clap on wood.
                  
                  
                     
                        Cold loue quicklie takes leaue.Both flame and fire, goes out in weather cold
                     Where neither coles, nor wood mantaines the heat
                     And heat is that, contents both yoong and old
                     For in the same, our sweete delight is great
                     Most men feeds best, with good warme drinke or meat
                     Cold breeds worst blod, and hardlie doth digest
                     Bicause cold things, lies belching long in brest.
                  
                  
                     
                     Cold fortune kils,Cold fortune kils any man liuing. the strongest man that liues
                     Cold countnance cuts, the throte ere we be ware
                     Cold poison 
                           •
                        onke, a quicke dispatch it giues
                     Cold cra
                           ••
                        s dries vp, the sences where they are
                     Cold lims waxe lame, and breeds diseases rare
                     Thus cold mars all, then warmth God send vs now
                     That eurie part, of man feele comfort throw.
                  
                  
                     Cold food is faint,Cold foode is comfortles and hard to digest. vnto weake stomacks still
                     Warme broths keeps health, in perfect sound estate
                     Warme daies we wish, cold bitter aire is ill
                     Cold blasts be nought, sharpe blustring storms we hate
                     Sweetly sun shines, in world earlie or late
                     Cold quicklie caught, goes seldome soone away
                     And long cold nights, kils some before the day.
                  
                  
                     Cold drie hard fro
                           ••
                        , makes thousands seeke for fire
                     Warme meate giues spreet, to either sicke or sound
                     Cold hungrie baites,Cold hungrie baites may kill a horse. makes many a horse to tire
                     Warme clouts and clothes, doth comfort eurie wound
                     No fruit thriues well, where cold doth much abound
                     The warmth doth ioy, both spring and fall of leafe
                     Makes dead things quicke, delights both dum & deafe
                  
                  
                     Yea blind and lame, and all that life doth beare
                     Are glad of heate, then cold is out of grace
                     Cold words God wot,Cold words makes a man desperate. when meaning scarce is there
                     Kils many a man, in court or any place
                     O wold to God, warme deeds did show his face
                     That charitie, hir whole effect may show
                     On those that needs, which knows not where to goe
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        A colder season in all sorts was neuer seene.A colder time, in world was neuer seene
                     The skies do lowre, the sun and moone waxe dim
                     Sommer scarce knowne, but that the leaues are greene
                     The winters waste, driues water ore the brim
                     Vpon the land, great flotes of wood may swim
                     Nature thinks scorne, to do hir dutie right
                     Because we haue, displeasde the Lord of light.
                  
                  
                     
                        Cold words and workes makes many a heauy hart.Cold works, cold words, cold world and al things cold
                     Showes death drawes neer, and then a deep cold graue
                     Such hard cold hap, may make a yoong man old
                     Or old gray beard, become a gall
                           •
                        e slaue
                     Well let them loose, that can ne
                           •
                         in nor saue
                     The state of man, on strange hap hazard lies
                     As one fals downe, so doth another rise.
                  
                  
                     If charitie, would once bespread hirraies
                     As Phoebus showes, abroad his shining beames
                     
                        Cold winter may bring some sommer daies.Or winter cold, would bring some sommer daies
                     And rid vs soone, from all these great extreames
                     Then shee dies not, but haplie sleeps and dreames
                     Now waken hir, that haue most powre to speake
                     I haue tane cold, and so my voice growes weake.
                  
                  
                     You whose cleer speech, doth loud as trumpet sound
                     And may command, the world, the skies and stars
                     And rules at beck, the massie earth so round
                     Sets orders downe, and can make peace and wars
                     And hath the force, to breake big iron bars
                     
                        Warme loue 
                              〈◊〉
                            awaken charitie againe.Call charitie, fot loue once home againe
                     That shee may heare, hir people poore complaine.
                  
                  
                     
                     My breath but bores,The author
                              •
                            breath is to cold 
                              〈◊〉
                            do any good. a hole within the aire
                     My date neer don, cals for a shrouding sheet
                     My darke dim daies, lookes for no weather faire
                     Mine eies can scarce, look to my stumbling feet
                     My wounted muse, forsakes my drowping spreet
                     My books and scroules, and all that I haue wrot
                     Hides now their heads, as I were cleane forgot.
                  
                  
                     When aged yeers,Aged yeers showes death 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           t hand. showes death amid my face
                     My words are of, small credit in this plite
                     My hap and hope, is in a better place
                     Wherefore of world, I plainly speake and write
                     And ere I goe, discharge my conshence quite
                     To win the wise, and loose the fonder sort
                     That vnto quicke, nor dead yeelds good report.
                  
                  
                     The wise well won,Labor is well 
                              ••
                            stowed when wise men are 
                              〈◊〉
                           . waies ech thing as it ought
                     Mistakes no terme, nor sentence wrests awrie
                     The fond will read, awhile but cares for nought
                     Yet casts on ech, mans works a frowning eie
                     This neither treats, of matters lowe not hie
                     But finds a meane, that ech good meaning might
                     In all true meanes, take charitie aright.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A PRAISE OF POETRIE.
                  Imprinted at London, by Ar. Hatfield, for William Holme.
                  
                  1595.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A praise of Poetrie, some notes therof drawen out of the Apologie, the noble minded Knight, sir Phillip Sidney wrate.
                  
                     WHen world was at the very woorst
                     And vice did much abound
                     And for offence the earth was curst
                     Yet charitie was found.
                  
                  
                     Among the wise and woorthie sort
                     Who euer had good chance
                     with treble fame, by their report
                     True vertue did aduance.
                  
                  
                     The Poets and Philosophers
                     Stept first on stately stage
                     And plaid their parts with hazards great
                     In euery world and age.
                  
                  
                     In eury age while wits of men
                     Could iudge the good from bad
                     Who gat the gift of toong or pen
                     Of world great honor had.
                  
                  
                     Good Poets were in hie esteeme,
                     When lea
                           •
                        ning grew in price
                     Their vertue and their verse did seeme
                     A great rebuke to vice.
                  
                  
                     With blunt base people of small sence
                     They fall now in disdaine
                     But Sydneyes booke in their defence
                     Doth raise them vp againe.
                  
                  
                     
                     And sets them next Diuines in ranke
                     As members meete and fit
                     To strike the worlds blinde boldnes blanke
                     And whet the bluntest wit.
                  
                  
                     Heere followes Histories good store
                     That much thereof shall tell
                     If paines may purchase thanks therefore
                     My hope is answerd well.
                  
                  
                     
                        Amphyon and Orpheus Poets and excellent musitions.AMphyons gift and grace was great
                     In Thebes old stories saie
                     And beasts and birds would leaue their meat
                           •
                        
                     
                     To heare Orpheus plaie.
                  
                  
                     
                        Liuius, Andronicus, and Ennius.In Rome were three of peereles fame
                     That florisht in their daies
                     Which three did beare the onely name
                     Of knowledge, skill and praise.
                  
                  
                     
                        Dant, Bocace, and Petrarke.In Italy of yore did dwell
                     Three men of spechall spreete
                     Whose gallant stiles did sure excell
                     Their verses were so sweete.
                  
                  
                     
                        Mar
                              •
                           ot, Ronsa
                              •
                           t, and d
                              •
                            Ba
                              •
                           tas.In France three more of fame we finde
                     Whose bookes do well declare
                     They beautifide their starely minde
                     With inward vertues rare.
                  
                  
                     
                        Go
                              •
                           re, Chaufer, 
                              〈◊〉
                            the noble earle of S
                              ••••
                           e.In England liued three great men
                     Did Poetrie aduance
                     And all they with the gift of pen
                     Gaue glorius world a glance.
                  
                  
                     
                     In Scotland finde we other twaineDauy Lindzey and Buckananus.
                     
                     Were writers of good woorth
                     Whose studies through their Poets vaine
                     Brought many verses foorth.
                  
                  
                     In Ireland to this present timeThey honor and make much of their 
                              •
                           imers.
                     
                     Where learning is not mich
                     With Poetrie in verse or rime
                     Their language they inrich.
                  
                  
                     In Wales the very remnant yetIn Wales they call their rimers Bardes.
                     
                     Of Brittaine bloud and race
                     They honor men of speshall wit
                     And giues a Poet grace.
                  
                  
                     Albinus long that rained heereAlbinus loued poetrie much.
                     
                     Made verses in his youth
                     And in his age as doth appeere
                     With verse auancst the truth.
                  
                  
                     Among the sauage Indians stillThe rude Indians make much of their rimers.
                     
                     (Who knowes no ciuill thing)
                     They honor writers of some skill
                     Their parents liues to sing.
                  
                  
                     Among the anshent noble DanesThe Danes and Saxons had many poets among them.
                     
                     And Saxsons long ago
                     We read of many Poets names
                     Whose woorthy wits did flo.
                  
                  
                     The graue wise learned men of GreeceIn Greece their best philosophers at the first became poets.
                     
                     Durst neuer shew their art
                     Till those Philosophers presumd
                     To plaie the Poets part.
                  
                  
                     
                     Some sang in verse, their naturall
                     
                        Thales, Empedocles, and Parmenides.Philosophie we finde
                     And in sweete songs heroicall
                     Exprest their secret minde.
                  
                  
                     
                        Pithagoras and Phosillides.So morall counsels vttred were
                     In that same selfe sweete sort
                     Thus Poets flourisht eury where
                     As stories makes report.
                  
                  
                     
                        Torteus.And marshall matters in those daies
                     Were song and set aloft
                     So some the art of warre did raise
                     Vnto the skies full oft.
                  
                  
                     Sibillas prophesies in verse
                     Were alwaies vttred well
                     The oracels of Delphos to
                     In verse would woonders tell.
                  
                  
                     
                        Solon that wrate the fable of the Atlantick Iland.In pollicies wise Solon plaid
                     The Poet sundrie waies
                     Good things were better soong than said
                     Which gaind immortall praise.
                  
                  
                     
                        Plato a diuine philosopher did stoup to poetrie.Plato tooke Solons works in hand
                     And plaid the Poet right
                     And set that Atlantike Iland
                     Full plaine before our sight.
                  
                  
                     
                        Herodotus.The Booke of Herodotus bore
                     A famous title fine
                     (Yea such as none did giue before)
                     Of all the muses nine.
                  
                  
                     
                     Dominician was a Poet rareDominician Vaspasians sonne, as Plinie saith was an excellent poet.
                     
                     And did therein excell
                     So many princes now there are
                     That loueth Poetrie well.
                  
                  
                     Three conquerours of mightie powreAlexander, Caesar and Scipio.
                     
                     Gaue Poets such a grace
                     That they would neuer frowne not lowre
                     On them in any case.
                  
                  
                     As Plutarke saith,Alexander Phoreus wept at a tragedy. a tyrant wept
                     A tragedie to heare
                     Who sawe his murthring minde thereby
                     As in a glas full cleere.
                  
                  
                     Amid a great reuolt in RomeMenenus Agrippa a philosopher made peace among the people in an vprore.
                     
                     A woorthie Poet stood
                     And told of bodie and the minde
                     A tale that did much good.
                  
                  
                     Two Poets turnd a tyrants hartSimonides and Pyndarius made Hiero a iust king.
                     
                     From rigour vnto ruth
                     And wrought him with their wits and art
                     To fauour right and truth.
                  
                  
                     Nathan did faine a tale indeedNathan spake of a lambe vngraciously taken from his bosome.
                     
                     To Dauid when he fell
                     Whereon the king tooke such great heed
                     He saw his follie well.
                  
                  
                     In Dauids Psalms true miter floesDauid and Salomon deuine poets.
                     
                     (And songs of Sallomon)
                     Where great delite and pleasure groes
                     Are woorthie looking on.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Platoes dialog called Ion.A dialogue that Plato made
                     Giues Poets great renowne
                     Brings ech rare wit to sun from shade
                     To weare the laurell crowne.
                  
                  
                     
                        Lelius a Romane & Socrates both were poets.True stories old with new delite
                     Shall fill your harts and 
                           •
                        ares
                     For they of Poets praises write
                     Their books good witnes beares.
                  
                  
                     
                        Iames the first that was king of Scotland, and K. Iames the sixt now raigning, great poets.If aunshent authors and great kings
                     No credit gets herein
                     Darke-sight sees not no stately things
                     That doth great glory win.
                  
                  
                     
                        The Greeke Socrates put Aesops fables into verse, and Aristotle wrate the art of poetrie.Plucke vp cleere iudgement from the pit
                     Of poore espreet and sence
                     And wipe the slime from slubbred wit
                     And looke on this defence.
                  
                  
                     
                        Emperors, kings, captains, and Senators were poets, and favoured the art.That Sydney makes, a matchles worke
                     A matter fresh and new
                     That did long while in silence lurke
                     And seldome came to view.
                  
                  
                     
                        Adrian and Sophocles great poets.He cals them Poets that embrace
                     True vertue in hir kinde
                     And do not run with rimes at bace
                     With wanton blotted minde.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           f our 
                              〈◊〉
                            me, the pa
                              ••
                            
                           
                              •
                            poetry, Robert 
                              •
                           ng of Cic
                              •
                           ll and 
                              〈◊〉
                            great Frances 
                              •
                           ng of France.All idle verse he counts but vaine
                     Like cracks of thorns in fire
                     Or summer showrs of sleete or raine
                     That turns drie dust to mire.
                  
                  
                     
                     These rurall rymes are but the scum
                     And froth that flies from seasCardinall Berabus and Bibiena.
                     
                     Or doth from some sharpe humor come
                     That breeds a new disease.
                  
                  
                     In braine that beats about the skullFamous teachers and preachers, Beza and Melancton.
                     
                     And so brings foorth a toye
                     (When musse or moone is at the full)
                     Of paines or pleasing ioye.
                  
                  
                     Like long wingd hauke,Learned philosophers Fracastorius and Scaliger. doth Poet fore
                     Ore mountaine or hie trees
                     And loud as cannon can he rore
                     At ech vice that he sees.
                  
                  
                     His scope as hie as reasons reachGreat and good orators Pontanus and Muretus.
                     
                     May clime in order due
                     Not to giue counsell nor to teach
                     But to write fancies new.
                  
                  
                     Of this or that as matter moonesAnd beyond all these, the hospitall of France being builded on vertue, gaue poets a singular commendation.
                     
                     A well disposed minde
                     That vice doth hate and vertue loues
                     And he good cause doth finde.
                  
                  
                     So ruling pen as duties bounds
                     Be kept in eury part
                     For when the Poet trumpet sounds
                     It must be done by art.
                  
                  
                     As though a sweete consort should plaieAlexander kept the bookes of Homer in 
                              〈◊〉
                            his Iewel casket.
                     
                     On instruments most fine
                     And shew their musicke eury waie
                     With daintie notes diuine.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Menander the comicke poet being sent for by embassadors of Macedonia and Aegipt preferred the conscience of learning before kinglie fortunes.Ech string in tune as concord were
                     The guide of all the glee
                     Whose harmonie must please the eare
                     With musicke franke and free.
                  
                  
                     The Poets Lyra must be strung
                     With wire of siluer sound
                     That all his verses may be sung
                     With maidens in a round.
                  
                  
                     
                        Augustus Caesar wrate familiar epistles vnto Horace, which Horace in his life was aduanced to the tribuneship of soldiers, and when he died he left Augustus Caesar his heire.So chaste and harmles should they be
                     As words from preachers voice
                     With spiced speech in ech degree
                     Wherein good men reioice.
                  
                  
                     Not farsed full of sollies light
                     That beares ne poies nor weight
                     But flying cleere in aire like flight
                     Whose force mounts vp an height.
                  
                  
                     And seems to pearce the cloudie skies
                     Such poets Sidney likes
                     Whose gentle wind makes dust arise
                     As hie as morice pikes.
                  
                  
                     
                        Virgill entring the colledge of poets in Rome, the rest of the poets there did more reuerence to him than to the emperor, and when he came into the senate the senators likewise did so.That lifts aloft the soldiers hart
                     Who doth aduance the same
                     And bends his bodie in ech part
                     Thereby to purchase fame.
                  
                  
                     The sword and lance of marshall men
                     Their Lions courage showes
                     The poets with their wit and pen
                     Tels where their furie flowes.
                  
                  
                     
                     They both are knowne as soone as seene
                     As things of great import
                     The one may verie far ore weene
                     The other in some sort.
                  
                  
                     Stands on his honor sundrie waies
                     And offreth life therefore
                     The poet seekes no more but praise
                     As poets did of yore.
                  
                  
                     Whose words strooke dead the stoutest groomesDauid sung the Liricke verses to his harp and those ebrue songs consisted of divers feet and vnequall numbers, somtime in Iambikes running other while.
                     
                     That euer were in place
                     And sweeped cleane like new made broomes.
                     The foulest cause or case.
                  
                  
                     As water washeth ech thing white
                     And sope might scoure with all
                     The canker of foule worlds delite
                     (More sharpe than bitter gall.)
                  
                  
                     So poets with plaine terms makes cleane
                     The soulest conshence liues
                     And by good words from vice doth weane
                     (Through councell that it giues.)
                  
                  
                     The childest wit and churlisht mindInsaphicks swelling again in halfe a foote amiably halting.
                     
                     Lo then how poets may
                     Both alter maners and bad kind
                     To frame a better way.
                  
                  
                     Of heauens and the highest throneSalomon in the gardens of Engadda framed songs to his harpe which then was a heauenly musicke.
                     
                     Where God himselfe doth sit
                     Good poets still should treat alone
                     To showe 
                           •
                        heir flowing wit.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Ieremie wrate his funerall lamentations in saphycks long before Simonides the Greeke poet.As by their muse they caried were
                     Beyond our sight or vew
                     Into a fine and purer aire
                     Or speshall climat new.
                  
                  
                     Where all things are as cleane as gold
                     From furnace to the stamp
                     So poets should this world behold
                     And shine as cleer as lamp.
                  
                  
                     
                        Isaias wrate sacred Odes & holie verses, and for remembring the mysteries of god therein, a tyrant king caused him to be sawed a sunder.That light doth giue to eury eie
                     Which doth in darknes dwell
                     And glorie show of heauens hie
                     To damned spreets of hell.
                  
                  
                     Which darknes in a dungeon keeps
                     From sight of vertues lore
                     Where ignorance in slumber sleeps
                     Like dunse for euermore.
                  
                  
                     
                        The song of Sydrack and his fellowes in the hot flame was in verse.Sir Philip Sydney praiseth those
                     Whose waking wits doth see
                     The depth and ground of verse or prose
                     And speakes with iudgement free.
                  
                  
                     
                        Moises by some men is thought the first deuiser of verse, and his sister Marie deuised the exa
                              •
                           eter, and by it to haue glorified Iehoua.Of all the matters vnder sun
                     Both secrets hie and lowe
                     And ouer them with pen can run
                     As far as skill can goe.
                  
                  
                     Sift eurie word and sentence well
                     And cast away the bran
                     To show the kernell, crack the shell
                     In peeces now and than.
                  
                  
                     
                     That eurie one shall taste the nut
                     Or see where worme hath fed
                     And shoot an arrowe at the but
                     And drawe it to the head.
                  
                  
                     Like archer that can hit the whiteAusonius a french man and poet, schoolemaster to Gracianus the Emperor was a
                              •
                            orator and consul of Rome therfore.
                     
                     And win the wager straight
                     With cunning knowledge and delite
                     And suttle sence and slaight.
                  
                  
                     Which looks into the world so round
                     And searcheth eury place
                     To see what may be easlie found
                     Or spoke of ech mans case.
                  
                  
                     To rime and roue in retchles sort
                     He counted reuell rash
                     As whip doth make a horse to snort
                     When carter giues a lash.
                  
                  
                     So ballet makers doth with windHomer writes that Achilles sonne of Peleus was a singular liricke poet, singing and plaing the noble deeds of cheeftaines.
                     
                     Stir vp a hiue of bees
                     And of the abundance of vaine mind
                     With words in aire he flees.
                  
                  
                     As though it were a thunder crack
                     That neuer brings foorth raine
                     But dailie threatens rune and wrack
                     With ratling rumors vaine.
                  
                  
                     Vaine commedies that stirs vp vice
                     He did condemne and hate
                     He holds that babble of no price
                     That doth infect a state.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Linus of Thebes a most ancient poet, he was the sonne of Mercury and wrate the course of the sun, moone, and spheres in excellent verse.Corrupts with words good maners still
                     Offends both eie and eare
                     Brings in loose life by customs ill
                     And takes away true feare
                  
                  
                     Of God and man, such Poets leud
                     Were banisht and exilde
                     Because with foule condishons shreud
                     Their country they defilde.
                  
                  
                     
                        Tiberius Nero the Emperor a poet, and Lucan his tresorer a poet on a publike theater they shewed 
                              •
                           he tragedie Orpheus.Good Poets were in eury age
                     Made of and nourish
                           •
                         well
                     They were the floures of gardens gaie
                     That gaue the goodly smell.
                  
                  
                     The true forewarners of great things
                     That after did befall
                     The ioy of godly vertuous kings
                     And honest subiects all.
                  
                  
                     Our age and former fathers daies
                     (Leaue Goore and Chauser out)
                     Hath brought foorth heere but few to praise
                     Search all our soyle about.
                  
                  
                     
                        Adrianus, Augustus Emperor a poet and preferrer of poetrie.Yet of all those that newly wrate
                     In prose or verse of late
                     Let Sydney weare (for stile of state)
                     The garland lawreate.
                  
                  
                     
                        Iulianus Empeperor and Caius Iulius Caesar.His bookes makes many bookes to blush
                     They shew such sence and wit
                     Our dribbers shoots not woorth a rush
                     When he the marke doth hit.
                  
                  
                     
                     His phrase is sifted like fine floureOppianus of great nobilitie.
                     
                     That maketh manchet bread
                     Sweet eury where and nothing soure
                     That flowes from Sydneyes head.
                  
                  
                     Sweete dewe dropt out of Sydneyes quillSextus Aurelius Propertius one of the Dedicie.
                     
                     As raine great moysture shoes
                     And from his muse there did distill
                     A liquor sweete as rose.
                  
                  
                     Aquintesence,Scenica a spani
                              •
                            knight Neros schoolemaster. a spirit of wine
                     Naie Nectar better namde
                     A breuage for the Gods deuine
                     Of compounds made and framde.
                  
                  
                     That whosoeuer drinks thereonSophocles and Pericles.
                     
                     Immortall shall be made
                     His books he left to looke vpon
                     When we in worldly shade
                  
                  
                     Sits mumping eury houre of daie
                           
                              •
                           milius 
                              〈◊〉
                           , a man of noble parentage.
                     
                     And scarce knows where we are
                     Our braines like bucke doth stande at baie
                     Beset about with care.
                  
                  
                     Of this or that when Sydneyes booksAnacreon of Theios with Pollucrates king of the Samiana.
                     
                     Cals vp a drowping ghost
                     For whosoeuer thereon looks
                     (With worldly troubles tost)
                  
                  
                     He shall finde quietnes thereby
                     And Christian comfort great
                     Woorth all the treasure vnder skie
                     It climes to Ioues hie seat.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        A
                              •
                           atus all his life time liued with An
                              •
                           ig
                              •
                           nus.And sits among the Angels sweet
                     Where psalmes and himnes are sung
                     And all base humors vnder fee
                           •
                        
                     
                     Are out of fauor flung.
                  
                  
                     
                        Lucius Cecilli
                           
                              ••
                           , C
                              •
                           sar, play 
                              ••
                           lo
                              •
                           e.The poets that can clime the cloudes
                     Like ship boy to the top
                     When sharpest stormes do shake the shroudes
                     Sets ware to sale in shop.
                  
                  
                     
                        Cirus the poet treasorer of the Emperor Theodocius, and Apatrician.Of heauenly things that earthly men
                     Can scarcely vnderstand
                     Did not our Chausers golden pen
                     (That beautifide this land.)
                  
                  
                     
                        Publius and 
                              •
                           aberius companions with Iulius Caesar.Reach to the sunne and highest star
                     And toucht the heauens all
                     A poets knowledge goes so far
                     That it to mind can call.
                  
                  
                     
                        Arian the poet of Periander king of Corinth.Each wonder since this world began
                     And what was seene in skies
                     A poet is no common man
                     He lookes with Argoes eies.
                  
                  
                     
                        Ra
                              •
                           ullides with Iulianus the Emperor.Like Linx throw steele or stonie wals
                     No secret scapes his sight
                     Of future time and what befals
                     In world by day or night.
                  
                  
                     
                        Claudian
                              •
                           s his tomb
                              •
                            
                           
                              •••
                           ored b
                              •
                            
                           
                              ••
                           nor
                              ••
                           s and A
                              •
                           cadius Emperors.He sees and somtimes writes thereof
                     When scornfull people scowle
                     And makes of earnest words a scoffe
                     Or cals 
                           •
                        aire speeches fowle.
                  
                  
                     
                     Our countrie breeds vp Poets still
                     As grasse springs from good ground
                     For there doth flourish learned skill
                     Where knowledge doth abound.
                  
                  
                     Looke what our elders wits did sowe
                     Or left behinde in heapes
                     Our age and haruest people mowe
                     Or with sharpe sickle reapes.
                  
                  
                     The seede of sence, faire fruit brings foorth
                     In feeld a thousand fold
                     And is in value price and woorth
                     More preshous than the gold.
                  
                  
                     What can be counted foule or cleane
                     But Poets thereon talke
                     Yet thousands knowes not what they meane
                     When they in cloud will walke.
                  
                  
                     As from the fountaine water floes
                     (Conuaid by gushing pipe)
                     So from the pen of Poet goes
                     Fine words and sentence ripe.
                  
                  
                     That ech good minde may well digest
                     As sweete as honie sure
                     His termes are taken with the best
                     If verse be neate and pure.
                  
                  
                     As riders whisking wand doth feareAeschiron in hi
                              •
                            whole militarie expedition, 
                              •
                           amiliar with Alexander.
                     
                     The horse whereon he sits
                     So wrangling people eurie where
                     At verses vex their wits.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Masonides honored of Adrian the Emperor.If any writer touch the gall
                     In pastime be it sed
                     Then downe coms tressels house and all
                     Vpon the poore mans head.
                  
                  
                     Yet wise men will good words embrace
                     And take each thing in worth
                     And giue each word and line a grace
                     That poets do set forth.
                  
                  
                     
                        Ariosto liked of all good wits.Diuine du Bartas merits 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     Most excellent verse he wrate
                     So sundrie writers in our daies
                     Haue done full well of late.
                  
                  
                     In Spensers morall fairie Queene
                     And Daniels rosie mound
                     If they be throwly waid and seen
                     Much matter may be found.
                  
                  
                     
                        Torquator Tasso an Italian knight and poet laurea
                              •
                            who departed from obliuion to immortalitie this last Aprill 1595. whose memorie shall neuer vanish.One Barnes that Petrarks scholler is
                     May march with them in ranke
                     A learned Templers name I mis
                     Whose pen deserues great thanke.
                  
                  
                     A number more writs well indeed
                     They spring vp newly now
                     As gazing world their works shall reed
                     So shall world praise them throw.
                  
                  
                     But sure my noble Sidneies skill
                     I neuer can forget
                     To him my seruice and good will
                     Shall euer dwell in de
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     
                     Of learned lore the onely lightMounsiour D
                              •
                           
                           uereux a yoong Bishop at this day liuing in France, accounted now the singular man in Europ for verse and po
                              •
                           
                           ticall deuises.
                     
                     Which blazde like lampe most cleere
                     And as a star in moone shine night
                     Could vnder cloud appeer.
                  
                  
                     Seemd dim and darke to dazled eies
                     But faire and bright to those
                     That vnderstood the stately gise
                     Of learned verse or prose.
                  
                  
                     Could crack the nut of 
                           •
                        a
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        hell
                     And shew the kernell plaine
                     For by his works who notes them well
                     In world he liues againe.
                  
                  
                     The booke that doth of poets treatSir Phillip Sidney to appology.
                     
                     In golden robes so shines
                     It triumphes still with honor great
                     Among the best diuines.
                  
                  
                     Which booke deckt vp in trim attire
                     Of authors wise and graue
                     In matters of mine owne desire
                     Great light to poetrie gaue.
                  
                  
                     And made me write of poets praise
                     Thus so to starrie skie
                     My Sidneies honor heere I raise
                     As far as fame can flie.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  My next Booke comes out shortlie: dedicated to my Honorable woorthy friende, Master HENRIE BROOKE, sonne and heire to the noble Lord COBHAM.
                  
               
            
         
      
   