
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A PLAINE OR moste true report of a daungerous seruice, stoutely attempted, and manfully brought to passe by English men, Scottes men, Wallons & other worthy soldiours, for the takyng of Macklin on the sodaine, a strong Citee in Flaunders: sette forthe at large with speciall pointes to bee noted: by Thomas Churchyard gentleman. 1580.
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Ihon Perin, dwellyng in Paules Churchyarde, at the Signe of the Angell.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ TO THE RIGHT honorable my singuler good Lorde, the Lorde Norrice: Thomas Church-yard wisheth blessednesse of life, muche honor in the worlde and the beste happe can bee desired.
            
               
                  MY good lorde the fauor and Noble dealynges towards me in the dayes you were lorde embassadour in Fraunce, when your aide and pollicie (by meane of a passeport) conuayed me from danger to the Prince of Orrange, made me often remember that sutche courtesies with good will or seruice should bee requieted.
               
               But hauyng small power for the publishyng of duetie, and little abilitie to requite a good tourne (watchyng occasion to bee gratefull) I take suche matter as tyme doeth minister for a furtherer of my expectation, and a meane to encrease my credite with your lordship. And consideryng whē dolefull newes was brought of one of your cheefest sonnes dedde in Irelande, I wrote a heauie Epitaphe, I thought now hearyng greate and goodnewes of another (both in nature and valliancie brother to the eldest who GOD hath called) to make a pece of amēds, for the saluyng of my first presumption, & the throughly expressyng of my present desire of duetifull doyng. So my good Lorde leauyng
               
               circumstance of wordes and filed phrases of florishyng ceremonies, I fall to my purposed matter. It hath been an olde maner, and a newe finenesse in this cunnyng worlde, that sutche as could purchace praise or commendation by their owne practises (either by pen or tong) would reape the glorie thei could get to themselues, and leaue out the fame of others, if trothe by tract of tyme reueled not rightfull causes, and gaue eche well doer the reward of their workes, then if those maners of menne, finenesse of the worlde, & greedinesse of glorie runnes awaie with hast to their owne commoditie, and no benefite to others: Blame not any nation (properly giuen to their priuate praise) to tread doun the laude
               
               and honor of any strange people, neither borne in their Countrey, nor commyng to their soile, but to serue for money & sutche report of fame, as the Countrey maie spare from them selues to the Soldiours, that serue for these twoo causes before rehearsed. Not withstanding because the eager myndes of menne (that bites at euery blaste of fame) shall not breed by their boldnesse, neither abuse nor ill custome, whereby the estimation of forwardmen should be hindered, nor the quicke forwardnesse of vainglorie should not finde too mutche occasion to triūph on the aduantage of tyme, I haue now tyme as I thinke with trothe and good laisure, written sutche intelligēce to the worlde of the taking of Macklin,
               
               as I hope shal serue for a testimonie that my penne is euer honestly occupied, and that no writer maie willingly (if licēce permit) suffer further report of newes to be published, then the wise of the world alloweth, & the generall opinions of men maie embrace. Thus wishing truthe alwaies (as a torche to burne on the topp of a hill) to bee looked on, and affections of men to bee tried and wrested to the beste constructions of that whiche beste becomes a good worlde to heare, I present to your Lordship the true reportes I haue heard for the winnyng of Macklin, and sutche thynges as there happened at Macklins mischance: written not for that sutche matter (or a greate deale greater) can bee hid from a noble
               
               man of your callyng. But presented to keepe my acquaintaunce with my good freendes, and cause the worlde to imagine I was borne vnder a Marcial planet and signe: and neither spareth pen, studie, nor paines to prefarre Marciall people, and honour the worthiest sorte of men. So hopyng your Lordship lookes on my willyng mynde to dooe well, and turnes your face frō the defectes of my base phrase and writyng: I wishe your honor daiely to encrease, with the blessyng of God vpon your house and children. From VVestminster the laste of Aprill: your Lordshippes at commaundement.
            
            
               Thomas Churchyard.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Macklins mischance.
            
               AS eche Countrey and Nations seekes their owne credite and aduauncement, so hardly any forrain soldier rea peth fame in a strange sovle he serueth in: I meane an Englishe man seruyng out of his owne Countrey (ioyned with straungers in action) standes at reward of common report, or is subiecte to the affection of the people where he serueth, who regardes more their owne estimation, then the fame of a forraine Soldier, which soldier rather for fame then rewarde, goes from the natiue soile he was borne in, and serueth a straunge people for a small peece of money, but yet a great portion of praise and good

renowne. This not spokē nor applied to the discredite, and hindrance of any straungers well doyng, but in the defence and seruice of the Englishe Nation, whose labour, charge, courage, readinesse, and warlike mindes, is not inferiour to the greatest neighbours, (or furthest of you can name) nere vs, in any Marciall order, maner, discipline of warre, or hazard of life.
            And for a profe of these special pointes herein rehersed, the moste warres of christendome beares suche testimoniall and witnesse of their forewardnesse (though here at home God bee praised is peace) that few or none hath been so forward in the feeld, nor more daungerously serued. Then iniurie it were, and cleane against good nature of men, and order of armes, that any nation for their owne glory (vaine as a shadowe) should eclips the dezartes and valiauncie, of the Englishe now seruyng in Flanders, drawne thether

for fame (and their owne desires to do well) and liue from debt of the worlde and daunger of the Lawe. In whose commendation, and for the trothe of matter now penned, vnder good will of the wise, and sounde iudgemente of the world, I enter into a discourse and plaine order of the takyng of Macklin, dispraisyng no Nation at the seruice, nor leauyng out no matter is true, because trothe is to bee embraced, and matter depending of flatterie or affection, is vtterly to be disalowed.
            It happened I beyng at the Court (where the trothe of many thynges is moste certain) I sawe a letter written out of Flaunders, from the handes of a gentilman, whose eyes beheld the very seruice and enterprise, and the winnyng of the great toune of Macklin, and the letter was so well penned, & went so directly to the matter (in euery point and order) touchyng the particulars and generall takyng of the same citie,

that I was forced by the credite of the gentilman that wrote (and by probable confirmation of sonderie other reportes) to beleue the letter to be moste true, and worthie the rehearsall to the open world. But amased at the strangenesse of the hazard, and wonderyng not a little at the attempt (which was maruelous) I bethought me how the Spanyardes vpō a resolution emong themselues sodainly set vpon Antwarp, and in a smal season had the people at their mercie, and toune at their pleasure: and yet me thought this enterprise for the winnyng of Macklin, surpassed all the exploites that euer before I heard of, or in deede throughly vnderstode. Thā waiyng how sleightly I had gone ouer the Seruices of Flaunders, in a booke called my Choice knowyng that I had forgotten bothe maister Norris, maister Cādish, maister worke, and a nomber of others verie valiaunte gentilmen, that merites

more praise then my pen can giue thē. I thought to make amendes with the nexte woorke I should set out, and so peisyng in the ballance of an vpright iudgemente, the weight and value of the valiauncie of men, and the inuinsible courages that resolute soldiours dooeth shewe. I tooke an accasion to publishe the letter I haue spoken of, and to stretche out the fame and honour of my countreymen, that otherwise might be darkned by disdaine, or drouned in forgetfulnesse, for want of true recorde that proceadeth from the penne of an honest writer, who iustlie maie be bold without blushyng, to report that he heareth, and maie be proued to be true. In the warrs betwene the Prince of Orrange and the Malle contants, for causes I nede not to touch Mounsire de Fammai, and Mounsire de Temple, beyng as some saie, the drawers of a drift, & to be at some execution of the practice, as appeareth by many mens

opiniōs, the ix. of Aprill earely at a determined howre, by the consentes and deuises of suche as gouerned in Marciall affaires. Maister Ihon Norrice with seuen Enseantes, beeyng but eight hundreth Englishmen (or somewhat more) he Collonell of those companies, with the aide of the Scottes and Wallons fower hundreth, approched in orderly marche and manner (without sound of Dromme) nere the walles of Macklin, Monsire de Famai promisyng before that the Soldiours (on his honor) should haue fiue monethes paie for their further encouragemente to that and all other the like seruices.
            And these whole companies approched, and deuidyng them selues some for the skalle in one place, and some in an other, the one parte with Boates well manned, and the other wadyng verie depely to enter vpon the skalyng Ladders, some negligence or haste by some not spoken of, had almoste discouraged

the whole attempte: And in the ende failed their footyng, and forced Maister Norrice and the power with hym, to aduaunce theim selues towardes the enemie, and dwell vppon their gard (with the losse of sometyme) before the face of the Toune, whiche by meanes of noyes and Alarum the daie beyng come, was in a readinesse for defence, and shotte of their peeces to their moste aduauntage, and the assailantes discourage, defendyng a Courtaine verie stoutly, against the whiche Courtain maisier Ihon Norrice was faine to drawe fiue hundreth shotte, not meanyng thereby to enter. For the Boates by mischaunce of vnladyng of them were drouned, and the fiue hūdred shot was drawne to this one place, to procure the people in the toune to repaire thether, whiles some apointed for purpose, at an other place should enter with more ease and lesse daunger. But those that were putt to

the plonge for to wade, found the water so deepe, that it came aboue their shulders: a matter to bee marueled at, a harde aduenture, and a sore escape: But by that meanes thei found awaie to enter by Ladder at a Gate, where thei passed fiue seuerall tymes with some small power, but could enter no more but one persone at once. Yet hap serued so well, no resistaunce in that corner was made, till three hundreth of the Englishe soldiours had possessed a peece of the toune: And then the Albanoies horse menne, thinkyng to breake through the force of footemen, charged them. So suche as foolishely aduentured to farre of the footemen, fell into the daunger of the Albanoies, whereon the horsemen gaue an other charge, and tastyng with their boldenesse the pushe of the Pike, and seeyng the Englishe stande stoutly at defence, the Albanoies wheeled about, and forsooke that maner of fighte, with the

losse of diuers of their horsemen.
            After which repulce the Albanoies had no mynde any more to come so nere daunger, whereby the Burgoes of the toune beganne to quaile, and stoode in a little mase and doubt of the matter. Then the whole tounes men and soldiours forsooke the rampiers and manned bothe brigges and streates as well as thei might: in this season and hard fight bothe doubtful and dangerous. The Englishe, Scottish, and all the other Soldiours for that attempt presente, hauyng passed ouer the gates, walles, and places of readiest entrie, marched forewardes (criyng a noble woorde) and founde great resistaunce at the ende of euery streate by whiche sharpe encounter thei were faine by little and little (as Fortune serued their hopes) to winne their ground with some losse of Soldiours who mynded more victorie, then cowardlie to retire, and at the laste with

mutche a doe and long bickeryng (the tounes menne for their libertie and liues, and the assailantes for fame and conqueste) thei came in vewe of the Market place, where the tounes men and their stoutest companies stood in order of battaile, euery waie flancked with ordinaunce: But as the French man faieth, Il falloit aualler cela, the Soldiours meanyng to trie what Fortune durste dooe, gaue a lustie charge, and by Gods helpe, and the greate courage of sonderie stoute gentilmen, and officers of credite and value, thei had the vpper hande of their enemies, with whom thei made as short worke as thei might: But in deede before apparaunte victorie could any waie bee knowne, greate struggling and stoute sturre on bothe sides was seen▪ and maister Ihon Norrice was matched with a lustie Limlifter, a breachlesse Freer called Brother Peter, the onely manne that made and maintained

all the broile and businesse, who had put on a resolute mynde, either to kille Maister Norrice, or els to bee slaine hym self, and dealt blowes so brauelie in this his determination, that he hitt maister Norrice with a Halbert two full thwackes on the Curate, whiche blowes wer sone reuenged by maister Norrice, who dispatched ye Freer, and gaue hym a dedde paie in recompence of his paines. This gallaunte Freer thus slain, ended all the strief and biodie braule: for then euery one cried Misericorde, and fell pitifully at the feete of the Soldiours, who findyng victorie vsed not mutche extremitie. For the nomber of all those that were slaine were not aboue twoo hundreth persones: one letter declareth that the gouernoure with the Albanoizes, dispairyng a little before the ouerthrowe fledde (out at a backe Porte or Posterne) to Louaiu and so saued their liues: another letter saith the gouernor

was taken prisoner. Oure Englishe Nation loste in their companie a fifteene Commoners, but as I beleeue thei were all gentilmen Soldiours. For to the nomber of thirtie Englishe men were slaine, and fower score sore hurte: whiche argues of eight hundreth, one hundreth and more were likelie to haue paied their liues for their enterprise. And further the losse or hurtyng of so many oure Nation, manifestly declares that thei did most of the seruice, and deserues therefore the moste honor: how so euer the printyng of the firste newes bee taken and vnderstoode, one Maister Smithe, twoo valiaunte Lieutenantes, Maister Humfrey Turner an Enscante, Maister Iones a gallant yong Soldiour, were worthely seen serue, and slaine in the action. By a misfortune after the fight Maister Whitchurche, and Maister Heddleis brother of the Garde was slaine: and of all the other

Nations that came with the English, as yet can be knowne was but twoo persones slaine in the enterprise.
            Nowe yet I praie you, heare what an other man of good credite wrote of this matter, who stoode and plainely behelde the seruice from the beginning to thende. The power of twelue hundreth in all, whereof eight hundreth were Englishemen, set forward from Filforde and came to Macklin, as eager as Haukes that seeketh their praie, wadyng to the chinne, and climyng ouer Iron gates, as men that cared not for life, so fame might be gotten. Yea surely saieth he, the strengthe of the toune considered, there was neuer vnder the cope of heauen, suche an enterprise taken in hand, and brought to so glorious a victorie. For saieth he though very good captaines might after long fight & hurtes forsake the assault, these soldiers wer so desirous of seruice, that thei would not in any cace

at no tyme retire, and beeyng entered the toune but a very fewe, thei fought it out so manfullie, that maister Roulande Yorke s
                  •
               ept into the water, wadyng after them to their succour: And at the present displaiyng of his Enseant, he loste his Lieutenant, his Sergeante, and Maister Iones his Enseante bearer, and he hym self shotte through his Dublette, and Maister Norrice not as a Collonell, but as a common Soldiour, ledde his Soldiors the waie through thicke and thin, where moste daunger appeared. And encountered Frier Peter, who was cheef leader of all the Priestes in the toune, he was in daunger to be slaine, for the Frier firste shotte of his peece, then he tooke him to his Pike or Halberte, and laste fell to his sworde, and so like a couragious Confessour valliauntly lost his life. And when all the broyle was in a maner ended, he saith that looked vpon all these dooynges,

               Mounsire de Temple, & Mounsire de Fammai came to the toune, or were peraduenture about the toune nere the seruice, for the aunsweryng their hope, and furthering of the matter expected. Yet haue thei no sutche cause to bee written of, as those that wer the onely executioners of the seruice in deede: wher fore the firste printed booke of this newes must be wayed, accordyng to the trothe and vmore of the matter.
            After the toune was wonne, Maister Norrice did what he might too keepe his people from pillage, but in the meane while Temples men ioynyng with the Scottes gotte the best booties: wherevpon the Englishmen fell to take that easely might bee had, either of Churchmen or Cloister houses, but especially thei searched the Cloisters and Religious places, saiyng thei were Inquisitors for to seeke out Copes, Surpleses and Uestinentes, and to take so good an order by

their Commission, that no Masse should bee songe nor saied in Macklin many a long yere after, for wante of gilted Challices, and golden Copes.
            And the Shrine of Sainct Tomball was so terriblie handeled, that it was bothe remoued out of his place, and left not worthe a pennie. And the Soldiours were so wealthie, that the olde custome of the Spaniardes was taken vp againe, for Dice plaie began so merrilie on the toppe of Drommes heddes, that money could not tarrie in the bothome of mens purses. Men that haue by their forwardnes found sutche good Fortune, are to bee excused though thei merrilie passe a little money a waie at Dice: Declaryng by that pastime whiche standeth on good happe to winne, or euill lucke to lose. The whole 
                  〈◊〉
                of manne standeth but on hazarde and chance: a matter that soldiours doe mutche marke, and the worlde can not denie. But for all their

plaiyng at Dice (whiche Soldiours will not bee varred from) their Capitaines and Leaders, as it is reported, had more regard to that whiche was so hardly gotten, and yet to redeeme a Capitaine out of prison, maister Norrice hath paied a greate somme of money, whiche money was moste noblie employed: my freende good Capitaine Morgane that now is in Macklin, will I warrant you confesse the same whē he is asked. An other poincte of honor is to bee spoken of. For when a Nonrie in the toune was readie to be spoiled, Maister Norrice hearyng that some Englishe women were emong the Noonnes, defended theim from harme, and sette them free, and vsed other courtesies more, that is worthie the noting. When I heard of this noble parte of a Soldiour, I remembred how a greate conquerour, in a maner of the moste parte of the worlde, hauing Darius wife and a nomber of gallaunte

Ladies vnder his mercie: vsed hymself so honourably towardes his captiues, that for feare to bee tempted with their beauties, he would not scarce come where thei were, and yet were the prisoners so reuerentlie and honestly vsed (beyng women of greate callyng and birth) that Darius thought hym self happie (though vnfortunate Prince he was) to bee conquered of sutche a noble kyng as Alexander, who could not onely conquer his owne affections, but winne his enemies hartes by his fauourable and Princelie dealynges: And surely greater honor is gottē by vsyng victorie wiselie, then by ouerthrowyng a multitude with manhoode, without shewyng mercie and gentilnesse. A conquerour by repressyng crueltie by courtesie, is hadd in admiration of his verie enemies, and a victor without vertue and pitifull consideration, is hated emong his freendes, and despised generally emōg

all kinde of people. Nowe you muste note that the Englishemen, and suche as entered the toune by hazard, furie of shotte, danger of sworde, and pushe of the Pike, are not a little to bee honoured and praised, and more to bee commended then thousandes of those that stood a farre of, and gaue but the lookyng on. And you maie see by the same some menne are happie, not onely to passe through many perilles, but likewise to liue long, and make theim selues and their soldiours ritche: and cause the fame of their Countrie to be spred as farre as the winde can blow, or the Sunne maie shine. And the more happie be our Englishemen and Scottes men, with all the reste of this attempte, that thei dwell as yet in the place thei haue taken, and mynde not to parte there fro, till the poore Soldiours bee pleased. And the keepyng the saied Toune in their handes all this while, argues thei haue deserued

too haue the charge thereof, though Mounsire Fammai beare the name to bee the Gouernour of Macklin.
            
            Thus haue you heard the effecte & rehersall of two letters, sent into Englande from those in Flaunders, that sawe Macklin bothe wonne and loste, which commyng to light and to the open eye of the worlde, showes that all tounes, fortresses, and holdes (bee thei neuer so strōg) are subiect to sodain ouerthrowes, and in the deuine disposition of the Almightie, who visiteth a nomber of our neighbours, with many kindes of callamities, to make vs beare in mynde his Omnipotente power, and our owne dueties to GOD and our Prince. This peece of seruice I haue touched, because euery Nation prefarres their owne Countriemen, and the Englishe doe thei neuer so well, and be the first at a breach (or at the saulte of a Toune) thei are the last shalbe spoken of, and the worst

rewarded) especially where beste thei deserue, and moste should be made of. I feare it is some mennes Deastenie, neither at home nor abroade to reape no benefite of their labours. So for this season I bid you farewell, myndyng hereafter to shewe other seruises that are forgotten in my booke of Choice, that was ouer hastely Printed, and must be runne ouer againe, bothe for the fame of some therein lefte out, and the troth of some matters I was wrong instructed of. And to keepe the people in some good likyng of me and my woorkes. I am presently settyng out a discourse of the late yeartquake, not touched of any writer in Englishe here tofore: Though some haue touched many good pointes to bee noted, bothe learnedlie and louynglie with duetifull order, declared to God and the worlde. Thus once againe crauyng your pacience and iudgemente. to read before you condempne, I

bid you adue, and goe aboute the Printyng of my booke presently promised.
            Finis.
            
         
      
   