
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Lamentable, and pitifull Description, of the wofull warres in Flaunders, since the foure last yeares of the Emperor Charles the fifth his raigne.
            With a briefe rehearsall of many things done since that season, vntill this present yeare, and death of Don Iohn.
            
               Written by Thomas Churchyarde Gentleman.
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Ralph Nevvberie. Anno. 1578.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honorable, Sir Frauncis Walsingham Knight, Principall Secretarie to the Queenes Maiestie, and one of hir Highnesse most Honorable priuie Couns
                  •…
               ile, THO. CHVRCHYARD wisheth continuance of noble giftes, and increase of vertues.
            
               SOme men (righte Honorable) searche many soyles, and trauell very farre, to finde out a pretious Iewell or rare deuise, to presente vnto their friende when they come home. And gayning by their gift and honest intent a thankefull benefite and special good turne, makes of their labours a pleasure and cōmoditie. But I, that often haue bin abroade for the like purpose, and heere at home haue soughte the bottome of my studie, and sifted out the best frute, that eyther deuise of head,

or paynes with my penne could yeeld, can not finde any thing worthy acceptation, where I made promise, and purposed long ago, to offer a presente. And the longer I haue tarried (and looked about me) the worse I am furnished for the answering of my hope, and the lesse able I feele my iudgemente, to performe that I purpose: like a mā that would fayne trauell a great iourney, hauing a weake body, and a lusty mind. And before he commes halfe way to the ende of his pilgrimage: his legges waxe lame, and he calleth for his crutche, and yet when there is no remedy, must either of force hoppe homewarde againe, or hale forward as fast as he may, to come to the knitting vp of his attempted labour. But though with like weakenes my body is discouraged (when the mind glories too muche in his owne strength,) yet another thing comforts me, which may be a great help to my smal ability, & a special cause

to find thereby some singular fauour. Sir, the troth is, I heare that others haue sped wel, & were well liked, for presenting to your honourable discretiō, the iudgement of their Bookes: and creeping vnder the buckler & sheld of such courtesie, though not with such matter as is meete for your wisedome, I humbly presente you with a breefe discourse that I haue drawne out, touching the troubles & afflictiō of Flā
                  ders, not gathered out of other mēs gardens (the more my ouersight) as the Bee sucketh forth honey from seuerall sweete floures, but collected and takē frō the cō
               passe of mine owne knowledge & experience of our time, in the view of mine eye, & reach of my reason. Yet had I beautified my Boke, with the depe iudgemēts of my betters, & filled the empty places & sētēces voyd of learning, with some borowed tearmes & fine trāslatiōs, as wisely & lernedlie some haue done, my ignorāce

and boldnesse heerein so soone had not bin espyed, and I might haue found more pill
                  •…
               rs and proppes to haue susteyned vp from falling a long season, my weake and f
                  •…
               eble workemanship, and tottering building: but wanting that prouision and foresight, and bringing frō the Printer my Booke, I make my selfe and my credite subiecte to the worldes reporte, and must desire your honorable countenance, to the furthering of my good name, and liking of my worke. And for that of late you were Embassadour in Flaunders, and haue bin long acquainted with the causes of that Countrey, I haue dedicated my paynes heerein to your hands and protection, minding, if this be well accepted (as I doubt not but it shall be) to set forth another worke, called, the calamitie of Fraunce, the bloudy broyles of Germany, the persecution of Spayne,
               
the misfortune of Portingall, the troubles of Scotlande, the miserie of Irelande, and the blessed state of England, as knoweth the Lord of all Kingdomes, who accomplish and fulfil the good course your noble mind hath held, and make your desired hope to be as happy as your well wonne fame doth deserue honoure.
            
               At your honorable commaundement,
Thomas Churchyard.
            
         
         
            
            
            ¶ Flaunders bewayles with bitter sorovv, the soare affliction of hir state and Countrey.
            
            
               
                  THe vvife, that hath hir husband lost, alone may sit and vvaile,
               Whose teares faste trickle dovvne hir cheekes as thicke as shovvres of hayle.
               The friend that farre is from his feere, and vvants a faithfull mate,
               By vievve of foe, and fraude of vvorld, lamentes his losse to late.
               The labring man, that sees his land lye vvaste for vvant of plovve,
               And can not vvell supply his lack, is fraught vvith sorovv throvv.
               The sadde and heauie minded vvight, (of ioy that takes no holde,)
               As mirth forsakes the striken breast, hath hart full deade and colde.
               The Merchaunt vvhom the Pyrate spoyles, and in vvide vvorld is laft,
               May blame the vviles of vvicked heades, and cursse their cunning crafte.
               The Captaine vvhich no souldiers hath, vvho lost his force by fight,
               
                  Doth folde his armes, and vvrings his handes, and sorrovves day and night.
               But none of those compares vvith me, that left am as you knovv,
               In friendlesse sort, vvith many babes, like vvidovve full of vvoe:
               That each man vvrongs and fevve do help, and in myne aged dayes,
               Am made a pray to people straunge, that plagues me many vvayes.
               I flourisht once in pompe and pride, beyonde my neyghbours all,
               But vvhere apace came in the tide, novv floud beginnes to fall:
               And at lovve vvater marke I stand, that earst haue floated stil,
               My hauen mouth is chokt vvith sande, my loades men lacke the skil,
               To passe the strayghtes, and safely bring, my barcke to quiet port.
               Novv vvaste and empty lye the tovvnes vvherein vvas greatre sort.
               And vvhere my Merchaunts trafficke kept, novv men of vvarre do flocke,
               And vvhere the gates vvide open stoode, vvith barres and double locke
               
                  Novv are they shutte and rammed fast, and bulvvarkes still vve make,
               And ore the vvalles the Cannon rores, vvhereat our houses shake.
               Our hartes in breast do tremble too, vvhen vve beholde this change,
               O ruinous lande, oh soyle forlorne, oh dolefull destnie strange,
               That throvves a vvelthie countrey dovvne, and maketh straungers raigne
               On harmelesse folke, and silly soules, and simple people plaine.
               My fall (alas) I see at hande, and vvhere vvas most my ioy,
               The tovvne vvhere al my triumph vvas, shall be a seconde Troy.
               Oh Antvverp, vvepe thy fatall chaunge, thy filth hath vvrought thy foyle,
               Thou vvast the pirate of the vvorld, that didst all nations spoyle.
               And novv I feare for thy foule factes, the vvorld shall ring on thee,
               For by my scourge and common plague, thy drearie date I see.
               Yea manie stately tovvnes beside, vvel vvallde and peopled both,
               
                  Through vvrath of God, and rage of vvarre, to vvracke and mischiefe goth.
               I vvas puft vp vvith Princely povvre, and vvorthie vvariours stoute,
               Who stoode like friends, vvith push of pike, to keepe proude enmies out.
               And vvhiles in deede vve drevve one yoake, great things poore Flaunders did,
               Whose former fame, and bright renovvme, in darkenesse novv lyes hid.
               Bycause my pillers shrinke in hoales, my nobles sevred are,
               And for to please a forraine foe, casts off their countrey care.
               We neuer fearde our fall, til novv, the Faggots bande is broke,
               And stickes flee out, yea all the house is full of flame and smoke.
               And in this heate and smother foule, the enmy spies his time,
               And 
                     •…
                  inely layes to catch the birdes, the suttle snares and lime.
               O vvilfull vvaste and blindenesse great, that vvill not see the sore,
               Where bile begins to beale and burst, and breedes a canckred core.
               
                  O running vvittes, that roues and shootes, at markes past reasons reatch,
               O frovvard flocke, and schollers rude, that no scholeman may teach.
               O vvretched members of my state, that teares in sunder all,
               And seekes to giue a cunning trippe, to soote that vvould not fall.
               O carreine Crovves, that follovv fleshe, and flee the fruite of spreete,
               O tipsie brains, and senselesse heads, that knovves not sovvre from svveete.
               My glorie had not so declinde, had you your duetie done,
               You haue no stay, your steppes do slyde, your feete a gadding runne.
               Ful many yeares, as cause you had, to Englands aide you stoode,
               And alvvaies leaned to that lande, that most might do you good:
               And novv to strangers, frame your selues. your flytting may proue vvell,
               But vvith the colde conceite of this, in care doth Flaunders dvvell.
               My care is lesse, though shame be much, for your offence and foyle,
               
                  I beare the blame, and yours the fault, and I the only soyle,
               That some shootes at, and playes vpon, vvhat play, oh Lord, he knovves.
               Some come as they vvere lookers on, but some haue longer vvoes,
               That reacheth to the highest cloudes, your quaffing sees not that,
               You svvallovv vp a Cammel great, and snatche a little gnatte.
               I liste no further speake of faults, nor teache you to agree,
               But hovv so ere the matter goes, I vvarne you looke to mee.
               O staggring state that reeleth still, yet looke vnto thy strength,
               Or else my povvre aud name shall slyde, and thou shalt fall at length,
               And make a crack, as though in deede, ten thousand trees fell dovvne,
               O members mine, that me forgets, yet loke to Antvverpe tovvne,
               That long hath lasted to my fame, and stoode vvith greatest peeres,
               With svvorde and shotte in open plaine, this many hundreth yeeres.
               
                  But all in vaine that tale is tolde. What shoulde I further speake,
               When might decayes, and force of man, by finesse vvaxeth vveake.
               My members must giue place to time, and I therevvith decay,
               As frost and Snovv, and cakes of Ise, do melt on Sommers daye.
               The heat of my good hap is gon, the prime of pompe is past,
               And as the vvarmth forsakes the vvorld, the colde comes on as fast.
               The Spring but threatens fal of leafe, all bravrie beggrie brings,
               He vvepes in vvant, that first in vvelth, and toppe of triumph sings.
               Yet vvellavvay, and stil vvo vvorrh, the causers of my crie,
               Who rockes my people fast asleepe, vvith many a farced lye.
               And fables forced for the nonce, oh pause I go too farre,
               My slouth, or sinne, or foule carovvse, is cause of all this vvarre:
               That bybbing vp deep bovvles of vvine, vvent drousie home to bedde.
               
                  And savv not vvhat shrevvde matters lu
                     •…
                  kt, in sober suttel hed.
               Well, since my faulte, as people say, is partly cause of this,
               I must require the vvondring vvorld, to take it as it is:
               And by the same, a mirror make, that they in one agree,
               And seeke throvv loue and good accorde, to shunne the plagues of me,
               Who novv laments, and cryes alas, too late as vvisedome shoes,
               And am compeld in hard extreames, to yeelde to mortall foes.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the Warres and troubles in Flaunders, during the raigne of the Emperoure Charles the fifth, and since those dayes a rehearsall of sundrie things, till the late death of Don Iohn de Austria.
            
            
               IN the raigne of y• mightie Emperour Charles y• fi
                  •…
               th, whose victories & conquests are registred in Chronicle, Flaunders did flourishe with Souldioures, abounde in wealth, prospered in w
                  •…
               r, and wanted neyther wise men to make peace at their aduantage, nor good Gouernoures, to maynteyne their publike stare & common cōmoditie: and yet their Countrey stoode neuer frée frō troubles, nor their Townes, Fortes, and fo
                  •…
               tifications coulde any long whyle in quietnesse remayne, the occasion whereof may procéede, eyther of the ambition of this gréedie worlde, or the plagues prepared of God and poured on the people, whose wealth and pride was so great, that they were wart so wanton with abundaunce of treasure, that sometymes they fell to open rebellion, treason, and insolencie, and sometime to such disorder of life, as was not to be suffered. For the which cause, the Emperour made in Gaunt a great Castel, and kept such a garrison in the same, as might feare the offenders, and animate good subiectes in well doing. So the whole Country of Flaunders, Braban
                     •…
                  , Seland, Holland, Artoys, Henalt, Namure (and other members

thereof whatsoeuer) were gouerned by a Regente, called the Quéene of Hungary, sister to the Emperoure, in whyche season fell out many matters, but especially suche warres as I meane to make mention of, and ought not to be forgotten in this shorte rehearsall of the affayres of Flaunders.
            
            Nowe to touche briefelie the broyles and businesse of those dayes, it is to be presupposed, that Fraunce hadde a clayme to some partes of the Countrey of Flaunders, for whyche clayme or gréedie desire of dominion, a most cruell and pitifull warre burst out betweene the Emperoure, and the French King. And continuing long in diuers exploytes and exercises of armes, the King of Na
                     •…
                  arre with an armie entred the lowe Countrey (néere vnto Saint Homers) burning and spoyling what hée thought conuenient, or had by sworde conquered.
            
               Monsieur Grand Maeter, called Count Dernes, dyd leauie another power of Burgonyons, Flemmings, and Englishmen, and so marched, to withstande the furie of the Frenche, and encamped himselfe néere vnto the King of Nauarre, called Duke de Vandoem, where was oftentimes hote skirmishes, and good leaping of dikes, the seruice was so well plyed on both the parties. At whyche seruice, were sundrie English bands, and many Gentlemen of Englande, as Sir Anthonie Storley, Captayne Matson, Francis Hor
                  
                     •…
                  ey, Sir William Drurie, Captayne Mitchell, Captayne Plonket, Captayne Hinde, my selfe, and a great number of others, whose names I haue forgotten.
            This businesse béeyng done, and the Frenchmen retyred, Monsieure Grand Maeter beséeged Hedding, and battered the Castell, where Duke Orace was slayne, and manye other noble men of Fraunce, and at length, the Castell and Towne was assaulted, and Captayne Matsons Auntiente was the fyrste that entred the Towne (William
               
               Hinde bearing it) and gaue the fyrste signe of victorie: after whyche Conquest, with the pause of thrée dayes aduisemente, the Castell of Hedding was yéelded to Monsieur Dernes, and the Frenche Souldyoures marched away with bagge and baggage, to the greate glorie of the Burgonyons, and discontentmente of the French.
            The Emperoure not long after, wyth a puissante power, and a mightie armye, beséeged Meatz in Lorraine, in whyche Towne was a greate number of the floure of Fraunce placed, as Duke D'Aumail, Duke De Namures, and the Vidaem de Chartoys, a lustie and noble Gentleman, wyth whyche Vidaem was the Lorde Charles Howarde of Effingham that nowe is. And the Frenche so worthilie behaued themselues in that Towne, (by sallies, and issuing out vppon the Emperoures Campe) that the Emperoure was fayne to rayse hys séege, wyth the losse of twentye thousande menne by Sworde and Pestilence, and so departed, and missed the thyng hée looked for▪
            
            From Artoys the meane whyle, Monsieur Grande Maeter, with a greate power, wente along the water of Some, and spoyled two Townes of good strength, the one called Noyon, and the other Roye, wyth a number of other Uillages. And in the same iourney, before Pyroen, was Sir William Drurie shotte through the bridle hande by a Frenchmā, y• offered to breake a Lance vpō him, who threwe downe his staffe when hée shoulde haue putte it in the rest, and so discharged hys Dagge at Sir William Drurie, whyche was accompted the parte of a Cowarde.
            At the same instant, or very soone after, the Frenchmen beséeged Hedding agayne, where Monsieur Byron was, as Generall. His Father Mon. Grand Maeter came to raise y•
               
séege with a sufficiente power, but came too late, for the French hadde wonne it the same nyghte that we laye in Campe, within two leagues of Hedding, and Monsieur Byron commyng away wyth bagge and baggage, sente vs worde of hys misfortune, whyche newes so tooke away the courages of oure people (I meane Burgonyons, and suche as were in oure Campe) that we marched without sounde of Drumme or Trumpet that nyght, to Saint Poule, a neutre Towne on the frontiers, and the season was then so terrible cold, that all the way we had but Snowe and sléete in oure faces, with suche a winde and blustering storme, as many dyed by the way, and many fell sicke of their suddayne and sore trauell.
            Héere I must a little tell you of the strange manner of both oure Camps at all times and extremities, whyche in déede was of the worlde to be wondered at: for the French woulde sometimes make hast to followe vs, but when they came néere, then woulde they retyre, wyth as greate expedition, as they made hast before: and in lyke sorte, we followed them vppon the lyke aduantage. But when our Campe came in the smell of theyr Poulder, away wée trudged as fast (God knowes,) without any greate occasion. And in this trade and manner the whole forces of both the sydes continued a maruellous tyme, and yet assuredlye on both partes were manye stoute and valiante Captaynes, and menne of suche fame, as to these dayes there are but a fewe lefte alyue of theyr worthynesse.
            About this time Rentie was besieged, where manye noble things were done, so valiantly, and with suche courage and conduct, as merits great praise: but in fine, the French were faine to withdraw themselues, and the Burgonians succoured the Fort with no little losse or hazarde.
            
               The greate Citie and Towne of Arras had like to haue bin betrayed, but the treason was espied, and the practise preuented, to some losse of the French side.
            
               Monsieur Dernes dyed, and in his place came Monsieur Benningcourt, who, being Graund Maister, prepared to besiege Dorlean, and laye neare it with a huge power, the French by a great pollicie, laide an ambushe of horsemen and footmen in a place conuenient, and the Burgonions casting no doubt, went about some enterprise, and fell in the lapse of the French, where was a maruellous great fighte and sharpe encounter, horsemen to horsemen, at the leaste fiue thousand on a side, and the Burgonians at the first wan a gyddon or two from the French, and tooke manye prisoners. But in the end, the broile began to be so hote, that the Prince of P
                     •…
                  anoys was smored to deathe in hys armoure, and the Duke of Ascot was takē prisoner, and the Burgonions were forced to make the best shift for thēselues that they coulde, at whiche seruice and other exploites before, was Sir William Drurie, and moste of the Gentlemen and souldioures of Englande before named.
            
               Hedding was againe besieged by the Burgonions, and wonne from the French, and rased to the verye grounde, to the vtter disgrace of the Frenche, and great glorie of the other side.
            The Emperoure his owne person, and his sister the Regent, came with a wonderfull great armie to Cambris, and abode the French Kings cōming, for a battell. The French King came, and presented the battel, with such a multitude of braue Souldyers, horsemen and footemen, as seldome I euer sawe before, and in déede they marched full in the face and viewe of the Emperours campe, which was so entrenched, that the French coulde not haue any aduauntage, and so, after the great ordinance had gone off a long season, the Frenche in a moste noble and braue order retired.
            A strong and goodly Towne called Turwaine, was besieged

by the Burgonions, battered and assaulted, at which assaulte we lost many men. But the Spaniardes were euen with the towne after: For at a parlée, the Spaniarde, sodainely entred the towne, and so a greate murther of all sortes of people was made, in somuche, that I sawe sundrye wounded and sicke Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, leape downe from the toppe of the walles, but that preuailed not, for the murther continued, and the towne was cleane spoyled, throwne down, and rased in moste cruell dispite.
            There was many other seruices in Flaunders, the whiche I saw not at that seasō, wherfore I do commit the reporte thereof to those that are better experimented with the causes, and haue a minde to set them out at large. For my onlye meaning was, but briefly to make a rehearsall of suche things as I knewe to be true, and may not wearye a willing Reader.
            Nowe after a number of broyles and warlike affaires were ended, the Emperour and the Quéene of Hungarie tooke shypping, and went into Spaine, and ended their liues in a Monasterie, and in Flaunders was placed, King Phillip, in whose time was many great actes done, and sundry battels worthily gotten.
            The greatest of those victories was at Saint Quintines, whiche towne King Philip besieged. To the rescue of the same towne, the French King sent the chiefest of al his nobilitie with a puissaunt power, but the King of Spaine hys hap was to encounter them, and ouerthrowe them: and making a greate slaughter, tooke the highe Conestable of France, and many other honorable and mightie personages prisoners. The town of Saint Quintines notwithstanding, stoode to the mercye of the sworde, and woulde not yéelde in any respect. Wherevpon a Generall assaulte was roundly

giuen, in going to the whiche assaulte, the Lorde Henry Dudley was slaine, a lustie and towarde Gentleman, but in 
                  •…
               ine, with much adoe, and very great seruice and slaughter, Saint Quintines was won and spoiled, and an English Gentleman (nowe sir Nicholas Malby) of good valor and courage, wanne Saint Quintines heade, whiche was held as a greate and holy Relique among the Frenchmen.
            At this siege was the Erle of Penbrooke sent from Quéen Mary, as Generall ouer fiue thousande Englishemen, and in that company, the Lorde Grey of VVilton, the Earle of Leycester, called then Lorde Robert Dudley, and the Lord Henry his brother, Lorde Bray, Lorde Delawaer, Sir William Courtney, Sir Iohn Pollard, and a greate number of nobilitie, and worthy Gentlemen, which being mustred and putte in order of battell on Saint Peters gréene by Callice, made as gallant a shewe as was séene in those partes a long season before.
            King Phillippe béeyng happye in warres, and hauyng alwayes, or the most parte, victorie (and aduauntage ouer the Frenche) made what stirre or businesse hée pleased, during the time of his abode in Flaunders, and departing to Spaine, lefte the Dutchesse of Parma as Regent. But about that season, or anone after, the French Kyng sente Monsieur de Termes, who was Generall of Callice (when England had loste it) with tenne thousand Souldioures, to destroy a greate péece of the lowe countrie, and they prospered a while, and burnte Donkirke, and Berges, and sundrie other Townes and Uillages. But the Counte De Egmond, with a noble bande of Burgonions, gaue a charge vppon Monsieur de Termes before Grauelin, and ouerthrewe hys whole armye, leauing but a fewe horsemenne to runne awaye and make reporte of the conflicte. Oure shippes on the Sea (as some saye) dyd further muche this victorie.
            
               Thus all this while did Flaunders moste manfullye an
                  •…
                stoutlye striue with the Frenchmen, and gote commonly
                  •…
                twice so muche as they loste, either by martiall feates in field, or pollicie at home in peace. And surely Flaunders had the name to haue as greate souldiors, and as wise Counselloures, as any one parte of Christendome. Lette their actes in our daies be a testimonie to trie their valor and worthinesse, and for my parte I goe no further in their fame and glorie, than al their neighboures can beare witnesse of, and hath bin séene in the compasse of thirtie yeares, of whiche time I haue had some triall among them of their wars and experiences in martiall causes. But what can mans force or pollicie doe, when God withdrawes his goodnesse from the people
                  •…
                Did not Rome florish many yeares, and conquered in a maner the greater parte of the world? Did not Carthage, Thebes, Athens, Florence, Genewa, Venice, Naples, and a number of other Kingdomes and Seigniories, abounde in wealth and glorie? and nowe at these daies are but a few of them left able to compare with this little Iland. And to speake of Flaunders, though I knew the day when it might haue compared with the greatest state that I haue named, the greater is the fall thereof at this presente, and the more it is to be lamented, not onely bicause it was our antient neighbour and friende, but for that it was a famous and riche countrey, whiche I leaue to Gods ordinance and appointmente, purpos
                  •…
               ng to follow the matter I haue taken in hand.
            The Dutchesse of Parma remaining Regent, had much adoe to quiet things in hir time, for the state beganne to be deuided, and a quarrel betwéene the Cardinall Granduiell, and Monsieur Degmond (who gaue the Cardinall a blow) encreased such dissention, as coulde not be a long w
                  •…
               ile bée pacified: and then the Prince of Orange, Counte de Horne, Counte de He
                     •…
                  traed, and others of the greatest calling, aduaunced Religion, and brought suche matters in question,

as bredde great businesse and bloudshed.
            The first of this ruffling and sturre began at Antwerpe, where they threwe down Images, and made a greate vproare among the common people, so that they fell to sides and factions, and thereby a grudge of ranckor tooke roote in their heartes, in suche sorte, that the one side sought the others ouerthrow and vtter subuersion.
            At thys tyme, a greate Citie called Valentian, taking holde and sauoure of Religion, reuolted from the Regent, whiche towne was besieged a long season by the Regents power, and by practise and policie surprised, taken, and cruelly handled.
            But in the mean season, there was one called Monsieur Tolouse, that assembled a company of souldioures, to the number of two thousand, and fortified a place neare Antwerpe, called Auste
                     •…
                  uiel, in minde to exercise Religion there, and to draw as many vnto them, as were fauorers of that enterprise.
            The Regent hearing thereof, with all expedition sente Monsieur Beauoys, with a sufficient hand, both of horsmen & footemen, which set vpon Monsieur Tolouse his companye (when they were not well prouided to withstande such a chardge) and ouerthrewe the whole assembly, putting to the sworde as many as they coulde lay hand vpon, with as great terror and crueltie, as coulde anye waye be imagined.
            The common people of Antwerpe standyng on their walles, and beholding this murther and massacre, began to murmure at the matter, and so burst out in open words of malice, and swore to reuenge the bloudshed they behelde of their brethren and countrimen. Whervpon a common crie was sodain
                  •…
               ly raised throughout the stréetes, of Viue le geuxe, & all the people arming themselues in euerye parte of the Citie, came running to the Mear Broeg, a wide and large stréete, adioyning to the Borse, & when they

hadde assembled togither to the number of tenne thousand shotte, and armed menne, they determined to march out of the towne, and méete Monsieur Beauoys, as hée returned from Austreuiel. But in the market place was assembled twelue Auntients of the Regents side, who had the keyes of the gates, and so kepte the people from their purpose a little season.
            But the multitude was so greate, and the people swarmed so thicke in euery place, that the Regentes power in the Market place were 
                  •…
               aine to drawe the Cannons from the walles, and gather theyr friendes togither from all partes of the Citye, and hauyng a greate power, all in one place, they chardged all theyr Cannons and greate péeces with haile shotte, and dydde fortifye themselues in the Market place verye stronglye.
            The nighte before, one Capitayne Bright, and Capitaine Marya an Italian, hadde broken all the bridges and passages, that the people of the Citie shoulde haue gone ouer, or haue hadde anye passage at, whiche was done vppon some suspition they had conceiued of a reuolte.
            The people being with this and other occasions made angrie, and brought in a rage, beganne furiouslye to goe aboute the walles, and kepte togither by thousandes and multitudes, the number whereof coulde not easilye be knowen: but they were iudged in all to be fiue and twentye thousande able men, and yet among them hadde they no speciall Captaine, no
                  •…
                any that woulde take vppon him to sh
                  •…
               w what was necessarie to be done, in this their extreame hazard and danger.
            The Prince of Orange, the Count de Horne, the Count de Host
                     •…
                   Monsieur Decaerdes, & al the nobilitie being

afraide to offende the King with an open reuolte, did perswade the Regents power, to make peace with the people, and aboute that perswasion they spente thrée long houres. But the Regents power being experimented Souldiours, woulde lose no occasion to conquere their enimies. And on that pointe they stoode so sti
                  •…
               elye, that they determined presentlye to gyue the commoners a battell, and trie oute the matter by sworde, and not by sweete persuas
                  •…
               
               ons. And to performe the same, they sette all in order, and were readye to marche into the Citie, and méete with the people, as by fortune they mighte any waye encounter them.
            The Prince, and the Nobilitie muche grieued with this bloudye resolution, repaired towardes the people, and tolde them all the matter, and willed them to goe to their owne houses, and he would sée, that all thinges should be wel ended.
            The people liked no whit that councell, and gaue the Prince euil wordes, and a greate number of them burst into my lodging. And bycause the Prince hadde made of mée before, (and that they knew I hadde serued in the Emperoures dayes,) they called me forth, and saide I shoulde be theyr leader, whiche thing I refused as far as I durst, alleadging, I was ignoraunt of suche affayres: wherevpon, they bent theyr pikes on me in a greate furie. I beholding the extreamitie I was in, gaue them my faith, and so came into the stréete among the reste of their companye, where I was so receiued, as fewe woulde haue beléeued the manner thereof, but suche as had séene it. Witnesse Sir Thomas Gressam.
            
            Then knowing the daunger we were in, and finding no way so good for our expectation, as spéedily to preuent the harmes the ennimies mighte doe vs, I drewe the whole

power into a strong péece of grounde, called Noua Vielle, digged and defenced of it selfe, and tooke out of the companye an eyght thousande souldioures well appointed, and marched to one of the Gates. And beatyng downe a little posterne with barres of yron, we sallied out into the fieldes, to encounter Monsieur Beauoys, giuing cha
                  •…
               ge to a thousande shotte, to kéepe the posterne, till we retourned in againe, which duly did their endeuour, as well for their owne liues, as oure safetie. But wanting horsemen to discouer the enimy, and hauing no fitte grounde to auoide the charge of the enimies horsemen, whiche came lustily on a great gallop to holde vs in play till their footemen hadde ouertaken them, we softely and orderly retyred, leauing in the face of the enimie a sufficient company of shotte, that galled their horses, & held thē at a stay, til we had recouered the towne againe, whiche done, we shutte vp the posterne, and lefte men to guarde it, and so came to our power, that hadde in this season furnished themselues wyth weapon, pouder, shotte, armour, and all things necessarie for a battel.
            At our cōming in, the prince of Orange came to me, & gaue me thankes, for sauing the liues of so many men that had bin abroade, which Monsieur Beauoys was like ynoughe to ouerthrowe, bycause he had a great band of horsemen in his campe.
            The Regentes power in the market place hearing, that oure men woulde fight, and hadde prepared thinges for that purpose, and séeyng oure companye encrease continuallye, stoode in a doubt and durste not issue oute of the market place, whiche was well fortified and guarded rounde aboute with greate chaines and greate péeces rammed full of haile shotte, and other mischiefe méete for a murther.
            
               Now I asked of my companie, if they woulde fight, and desired such as would be in their houses to depart, whereat they flang vp a thousande Cappes, and cryed, arme, arme, Battallia, Battallia, viue le geuxe. I hearing this crie, and noting their courage, as well as I could, set them in order, and tooke with all possible spéede the high way towards the Market place, willing all those that woulde saue their houses from spoyling, to ayde vs with Munition, and suche things as we wanted. And as soone as we came to C
                     •…
                  pper str
                     •…
                  et, we sent foure thousand shotte to enter (on a warning giuen) on the backes of our enimies, which they were readie to do when we ioyned in battell.
            The day was faire, and the people left in their houses, reioyced so at our comming by them, and made such a shoute and crye, that we had good hope of victorie: and to atteyne the same, we marched a great pace, cr
                  •…
               ing all the way Viue le geuxe, in so muche, that the very noyse of thys crye came to the hearing of the enimie, and neyther Drumme nor Trumpet could be heard of any side, the crye that wée made was so greate, (the like of whiche noyse since I was borne I neuer hearde.) And as we approched almost to the mouth of the Cannon, and view of the enimie, the Prince of Orange, and all the Nobilitie (to saue bloud, and the liues of thousands) came betwéene both the armies, and desired vs to retire, declaring, the enimie was stronger (by meane of their good Souldioures and artillerie) than we: and as he sayde, it was impossible for vs to enter vpon them. At which words, our people fell in so greate a rage, that they cryed, kill the Prince, and surely, had not some saued him (I name them not) he had bin slayne. But both the Prince, and a number of the noble men, being frighted with the furious follie of the people, retired so hastilie forwarde, that their Horses fell downe: and the Prince beyng conuayde safelie into another Stréete, we tooke the aduantage of time. And making a shew, as though we had ouerthrowne

these noble men, we marched immediately vpon the enimie, crying s
                  •…
               ill Viu
                     •…
                   le geuxe, and they beholding oure boldnesse, and perceiuing the sho
                  •…
               te that should haue entred on the backe side of them, withoute gyuing fire to anye péece, cryed in lyke sorte Viue le geuxe, and yéelded themselues, withoute any stroke stricken, vnto vs, in most humblest sorte and manner, simply and playnely. A thyng to be wondered at, and coulde not be broughte to passe but onely by Gods ordinance.
            Nowe hauing this peaceable victorie, we soughte all possible meanes to reste in suretie, and come by that wée desired, whiche was (as the people confessed) the libertie of the Gospell. And for oure most aduantage, we tooke wyth vs diuers of the enimies chiefetaynes, and foure and twentie Cannons and greate péeces, whiche they hadde all readie charged, and marching from the enimie, we came to the Mear Br
                     •…
                  eg, and there encamped, chayning and choking the corners of euerie stréete with Cartes, bigge timber, Barrels, and other necessaries, to holde out the enimie, and to debate the matter at the push of the Pyke, if néede required. And finishing these fortifications, we thrust euerie windowe full of shotte that might serue for the 
                  •…
               lancking of the stréetes, (and commande the rest of y• houses in the compasse of our shotte) that nothing might be a lette or hind
                  •…
               rance to our desired hope.
            By this time, the Prince had the keyes of the Towne, and no man coulde eyther enter, or go out, without the licēce of the people encamped in the Mear Broeg, for we kept the watch and ward, and had the only rule of all Antwerp, without any empeachment or contradiction.
            And aboute midnighte after this victorie, diuers of the Souldioures in greate companyes came vnto me, and desired to go and spoyle the Catholikes houses. I tolde them, that it was more méete to watche and be in readinesse for the enimie, for the Prince hadde tolde me, how they prepared

to assaulte oure Campe the same presente nyghte, whyche policie kepte oure people in quiet: and further, I knewe, if wée hadde spoyled one house, wée shoulde haue ransackt the whole Towne, and when I hadde gotten anye treasure, I béeyng a straunger, shoulde haue had my throte cutte for my goodes. But in very earnest, I made the Prince priuie to all those thyngs I dyd, or intended to doe, whyche kepte the best of the company in feare to offende, and made the worst reforme themselues, before they committed any violente acte, or fell into open disorder and follie.
            The seconde daye, the enimies beganne newe practises, and the Margraue and Burgo maisters went busilie about some mischiefe towards vs, and deuised many wayes how they mighte weaken our power, and augment their owne strength, and had secret communication with many of our camp (who were rich men of the Towne) to bring to passe the effect of their deuises.
            Aboute dinner time, I being with the Prince at the Table, the people had broken into the Friers, and spoyled their house, which was a beginning of a bloudie businesse, had it gone forward. The Prince hearing thereof, sent me to pacifie the hurly burly, and I came, when sixe Friers were going to hanging, and the people were determined to kill all the Papistes in the Towne, especially the Priests, Monckes, and Friers: but I persuaded the people to be in quiet, and preserued the liues of the Friers, and thousands of their betters, both honest Gentlemē, and wealthie Burgeses. The same nighte, the rudest, and most disordred of al our company, came in a great heate, and told me, that in one Battes his house, an Englishman, was a great flocke of Friers and Religions persons, and all the treasure that they could gather and bring: but by this time had a practise of the Burgo Maisters takē such place, that I was fayne to kéepe watch all the night, with all the armed men, & chiefe

shotte in our Camp, and yet cleane againste oure hope; dyuers of our people were fledde from vs to a contrarie side.
            Then I was sent to the Prince from our people, to demaund what was the meaning of these matters, for he had daylie conference with the Borgo Maisters, and others, about a common quietnesse (which our rude and basest sorte of Souldioures vnderstoode not.) And the Prince to my demaunde aunswered some what sharplie, and declared, that the Calui
                     •…
                  stes had sworne to kill the Martinistes, whyche he would not suffer, and by the threatning of himselfe to his owne face the firste daye, he smelled some suche smoke as woulde breede a furious flaine of fire. Wherefore he willed the people to vse more temperance, and shew more fidelitie and seruice to God and his person.
            This message so vered the vayne heads of numbers in our Camp, that they determined to the last droppe of their blouds to maynteyne their purpose for their liues and libertie. And the grauest and wisest sort, who were of great wealth and experience, confessed openly, that the brute raised, for the killing of the Martinistes, was a deuice of some diuelishe inuention, to set bréethren at variance. But in a little while after, our company grewe so weake, that wée were but fiftéene thousand left, of fiue and twentie, whych fiftéene thousand were become so resolute, that they purposed the nexte morning to giue all their enimies a battell, and s
                  •…
               are, neither to spare one nor other. And in this heate and furie, they badde me looke to my promise, and kéepe my faith, for they doubted not, but God would giue them victorie, for their quarrell was onely for the aduancemente of Gods glorie and hys word.
            The next day, the enimies grew very strong, what with Spanyards Easterlings, Burgonions, Almaynes, and Martinistes, the stréetes were all couered with their assemblyes. And we hearing they were sparckled abroad, and without

order, suddaynely we thought to charge them: and so putting our selues in battell, began to march: the brute whereof so amazed the enimies, that they caused the Prince to send and stay vs, and that they were glad to talke of peace, and would not any way offend vs, the Prince sent. Whervpon we stayed, and I was agayne sent from the people to the Prince, to will all our aduersaries immediately to lay downe weapon, and goe home to their houses, for otherwise there was no hope of peace. The Prince willed me to persuade them to goe home first, and promised that all the Citie should be in quiet, so soone as they were in their houses: to the which I replyed, and sayd, that our people were now able and strong ynough to debate the matter in any maner of sort, and being in their houses, and the enimie in armour, the suretie of our people mighte be doubtfull. And I knew I shoulde but offend the people, to bring them newes, that they must giue place to their enimies, when they were maisters of the Towne, and the enimie scattered abroade, and not like to be in order, if we tooke the aduantage that God had put into our hands. Wherfore in hast there was no more to be saide, but eyther the enimie must defend & fight, or without delay withdraw themselues home ward, and let them vse victorie that gat it.
            The Prince gaue no aunswere to this, and our men halled me away, that were sente to the Prince with me. And when I came to the people, there was a new crye, Viue le geuxe, Battailia, Battailia, and suche a shoute and noyse was suddaynely raysed, as made y• enimie afrayde and trem
                  •…
               le, and the whole Towne to draw to some accorde and pacification. And in greate post hast came a messenger from the enimies, that they woulde lay downe weapon, and agrée, that there shoulde be a frée libertie of Preaching, and no person shoulde (of this our assemblie) be troubled, for anye matter or cause cōmitted. And to performe this that the enimies offered, they promised to sweare on a Bible, and

so they did, at which othe and offer our people reioysed, and clapped handes, but still they manfullie stoode in order of battell. The enimies duly obserued the appoyntmēt made, and went euery man to his lodging, accordingly as the order was taken, and when we sawe and found all things in quiet, we marched along the stréetes with Anciente displayed, and as euery man came by his owne house, he entred. But before we wer all placed in our lodgings, it grew very late. Thus ended this greate reuolte, without bloudshed or hurte to any one person liuing. And for our paynes, and true performance in things that we promised, we reaped trouble and persecution: and in a little season after, both Prince and people were driuen through a thousande hazards, to saue life and libertie. The Prince was fayne to depart to a Towne of his owne called Breda, and hauing hast away (or for some great cause) left his sonne and heyre called Monsieur Debuer in Louaine at Schole: and dyuers Gentlemen shifted away as they might: among the rest I seambled hardly into Englande, being layde for, and yet so desguised, that I escaped the handes of my enimies, who hadde a commaundement from the Regente, to put mée to death with Martiali law (a badde recompence for so great good and diligence bestowed on hir people, and a naughtie reward for the frute of a good meaning mind.)
            
               Flaunders, and all the lowe Countreys belonging to the King of Spayne, after this time, fell in a maruellous mislike of King Philips friendes, and so to bridle that Countrey, and kéepe the people in awe and feare, were appoynted streighte lawes, and seuere Gouernoures. And among the rest of cruelties, the inquisition was thought a necessarie curb or plague, to persecute y• heads that were thrust out too farre. And with this inquisition was sente from Kyng Philip the Duke of Alua, a graue Prince, but a sterne and stoute Souldyoure, at whose comming, the Dutches of Parma was to departe, and to yéelde the gouernemente

to the aforesayde Duke of Alua. And to fetche him into the Countrey, went the Count Degmond, and al the Nobilitie of Fla
                     •…
                  ders, whereof some were eyther in Religion, or other causes, to King Philip, offendors before. But neyther their offering of seruice, nor diligent attendance, coulde plucke him from his purpose, that came for a pretenced persecution and s
                  •…
               ourge, prepared for people that God appointed to be plagued. And the Duke of Al
                     •…
                  a minding the matter he came for, and forgetting no aduantage that mighte be taken in time, beganne roughly, and wyth some rigor, to shew the power and commission he had, sparing neyther purse, c
                  •…
               ming, nor practise, to accomplish hys desire, and bring to full effect by sword and policie the substance of a plotte and grounde, settled in his iudgemente. And going on a determined course (neyther reuocable, nor to be controlled) like a Hercules, that woulde sette Pillers where neuer none had bin, procéeded so farre in his owne opinion and resolute mind, that he feared the offenders so much, that gladde was the man (of what degrée soeuer hée was) that by submission myghte purchace hys fauoure. And he fyndyng hymselfe thus feared and soughte vnto, vsed hys forces and extremities, to subdue by violence that whyche some Gouernoures by swéete persuasions woulde haue reformed: wherevppon, hée layde handes on the Count Degmonde, Count De Horne, and many others, that he thoughte woulde bée a lette to that he went about, and hadde at his commaundemente for the execution of these causes▪ a greate number of Spanyardes and Straungers, that gaped for nothing else, but the liues and goodes of those, that eyther rigour of law, or seueare iustice hadde condemned: so withoute delayes, or deferring of punishmentes, vppon an open Skaffolde, to the greate terror of y• beholders, Count Degmonde, and Count De Horne were beheaded, after theyr araynemente & condemnation made: and many others were not only dayly troubled, but

likewise were put to death, and a generall persecution was ministred and felt through the whole Countrey of Flanders.
            
            The Spanyards, as maysters and rulers of all Fortes, Townes, and strong holdes, prospered in wealth, brauerie, and benefite, and became so hauty and stoute, that neyther Burgonion nor Flemming durst struggle with them, in ame sort or manner: by whiche meanes, the people murmured, and thought all amisse, but knew not how to amend anye péece thereof. Wherfore they put their neckes willinglie in the yoke, and drew that way that the Spanyardes would wrest them, offering no resistance to any insolence or disordered behauioure that the Spanyarde might vse towards thē. And in that kinde of seruitude the poore Countrey continued a long season.
            Upon the mislike of some 
                  •…
               ractions, and other streyghte handlings, there grewe a grudge and a common hatred among the people agaynst the Spanyards, but they were so hardly held & looked vnto, y• both their power fayled to answere their mindes, and their courage was daunted, and could do nothing in recouering their former liberties and priuiledges belonging to their state. Then diuers fleddé from their patrimonies and liuing, and came to the Count Lodwike, who hadde gathered a good power, and lay in Freeseland to anoy the Spanyards, and wi
                  •…
               e a Towne called Groening. And this valiát Earle had many followers and fauourers, and many times wanne of the Spanyards, and put thē to the foyle. But in conclusion, his people béeing not all sound (nor so desirous to sight as they were willing to haue warres) in a maner at a great extremitie and pushe of seruice, for sooke their noble Captaine, & cowardly behaued themselues, when valiancie should most haue bin séene, and force of manhode & sword might by fortune haue gotté great victory. In which ouer sight & féeble spréete of y• 
               Almaynes, the Counte Lodwike was put to flight, all his pow
                  •…
               r eyther ouerthrowne or dispersed, and he himselfe

forced to make shift in the best manner he coulde (hauing loste at this encounter seauen thousande men, and all his campe spoyled, and no one thing left at his power and commaundement, that before his enimies had no power of. Master Crewes, an auntient Souldioure, was at this ouerthrowe with the Counte Lodwicke.
            
            The Spaniardes, as occasion fell out, on this victorie (besides the other greate hopes they had) waxed some what more stoute than they were wont to be, and hauing the brydle caste on their neckes, (and holding the bitte in their téeth) ranne what course they thought conuenient, not fearing the myre that a headstrong horse mighte happen in, nor suspecting any danger that ouermuch libertie myghte bring them to, fell after in a mischeuous Labyrinth, and could not get out of the same, since that present time, to this day, as héereafter in playne discourse shall appéere.
            Nowe the Countrey of Flaunders, perceyuing that the Spaniardes soughte not to preserue the people thereof, nor vse anye meane to encrease credite, and continue in good liking, and finding (as they thought) those that should haue proued guides and shepeheards, became Wolues and spoilers of their common wealth, the willing obediēce of thousands grew to a common contempt and wilfull stubbornnesse, and fewe was the number were lefte willinglye to obey the Duke of Aluaes direction, and new deuised orders that the straungers had offered them.
            So some ran to y• Prince of Orange, some sled to England, (and that in greate numbers) some slypped into Fraunce, and some were readye to tourne any way, and goe where Fortune assygned them. And great was the griefe that some did féele, that tarryed at home, who gladly kept silence, and watched a season to vtter their malice, or auoyde their present mischiefe.
            
               Flaunders and all the lowe coūtrie being in this perplexitie, began to decline and waxe féeble, both of force and courage:

the souldioures little set by: their marchaunts despised: and their noble men so daunted (by meanes of the pride of the Spaniarde, and plague of the 
                  •…
               nquisition) that they thoughte themselues rather in a slauishe bon
                  •…
               age, than handled like subiectes: and woulde haue faine shaken 
                  •…
               st the yoke of this seruitude, but their power was so small, and their miserie so greate, that little or nothing at all coulde they doe, and were forced to beare and su
                  •…
               er with patience, a burthen most heauie, and a loade that ouercharged both bodye and conscience.
            The Prince of Orange hauing hope, that sundrie of the towns and stréets of the Countrey, in this extremitie would haue ioyned with him (for the recouering of their libertie and priuiledges) drewe himselfe among his friendes in Germanie, and practised for money and men to be ready with an army to encounter the Duke of Alua, and either by battaile to ende tho miseries of Flaunders, or by strong hande to driue oute the perturbers of their publske state and quietnesse.
            And so resolued to trie, what good fortune, and fast friends woulde doe in those affaires. He remained at his house (ten Dutche leagues beyonde Collen) called Dille
                     •…
                  burgh, a goodlye seate, and a faire strong Castell, to which place repaired many noble personages of Germany and Capitaines of greate conduct and charge, to deuise and talke of matter conuenient for the purpose rehearsed. In whiche communication was concluded, that as soone as an army mighte be leuied, they woulde méete and assemble at an Abbey neare vnto Andernake, which Monasterie was beyond the riuer of Rhein, and stoode wel for the suretie of the people that there should be mustred.
            It came well to passe after a long prouision, and that a braue regiment of Frenchmen were readye (that Monsieur Maulberg brought out of Fraunce) that the Prince & his people met & assembled at this Abbey, in such warlike sorte and order, as gaue a great hope of some high attempt and enterprise.

For in verie troth, the Counte de Hostraet, a noble worthye manne, the Counte Lodwike a moste valiaunte souldiour, were come to the Prince, and brought with them a great bande of Burgonions of great and good houses, and suche as hadde bin well experimented in wars. And a maruellous companye of Swarfe Rutters, high Almaines, and Sweessers were come from Germany, and at one instant and time they met all togither, and muster was taken of aleauen thousand horsemen, and two and twenty thousande footmen, whiche made so noble a shewe when they were assembled, as (me thoughte) was worthy the noting, and mighte encourage anie souldiour to march among, and kéepe companye withall.
            The Prince hadde prepared so great a treasure, that immediatly after the army was mustred, there was a generall pay for two moneths, and out of hande order was taken for to passe ouer the great riuer of Rhein, not far from Andernak, the towne being gladde to stand as our friendes, and aide vs with all that they might. And so marching forwarde as direct a way towards Flaunders, as was thought necessarie, we encamped betwéen Boen and Collen, where the Flemings and highe Almaines hadde of the Frenchmen in our Campe receiued some words of reproche, touching the ouerthrow that the Counte Lodwike hadde at Groening in Freeslande: on which words, the Almaines being ful of wine, made a mutinie, and put themselues in battel, and shotte off their small péeces, and began a foule businesse. To appease the same broyle, all the whole army were in armes, and the Swarfe Rutters were mounted, and were come into the fielde, the French and Burgonions tooke one side, and the Almaines and Rutters another, and so there was a greate murther: but it dured not long, for the Prince of Orange & his brother Count Lodwike, by muche entreatie stayed the strife.
            The Duke of Aluaes Campe hearde of this mutinie, and hadde not a greate riuer bin betwéene oure Campe and

his power, we had smarted for the folly the Almaines committed. But as by wisedome and hap of good heads, sel out better things than was looked for, and all matters were quieted, and she beginners of this vproare and madnesse, were by martiall lawe punished.
            After this, we encamped before Ayex Ocorken, where commonlye the Emperoure is crowned, a greate Cittie not very farre from Mastricke, the people wherof did feare to be besieged, and so with a great summe of money redéemed their towne. The Spaniardes the neare vnto our camp shewed themselues, and were repulsed to their losse, and so the camp marched a little further in a most braue and gallant order.
            The Prince of Orange vsed here a noble policie: firste hée sente to the Bishop of Leeg, willyng hym to let his armye passe through the Citie of Leeg, promising to passe quietly▪ the Bishop being wylie, sente the Prince worde, that he would make a bridge by the Citie, for the army to passe ouer at, and made the Duke of Alua pr
                  •…
               uy to hys practise, who should haue bin on the other side of y• water with his armye, to haue receiued our people. Whiche Stratageme the Prince suspected, but yet with fayre words he helde the Bishoppe in beléefe, he woulde passe ouer the bridge, and tooke the offer thankfullye, and a daye was appoynted, that al things should be in a readinesse. But in the mean time, the Prince by good espiall, tryed out the fine fetch and cunning of the Byshoppe, and sodainely, when no one man in our army knew which way we shoulde marche, the Drum was soūded, and our carriages going towards Leeg, and al oure faces tourned that way, and marched a good while as thoughe the Prince meant to passe ouer the bridge spoken of. And when oure people beganne moste to doubte some danger, & talked of the hazard, the Prince caused our army to turne their faces, (& by that time night approched) and hauing good guydes, we marched swiftly without making

any noise. ij. Dutch leagues down y• riuers side called Moesse, y• wether being foule, & the night very dark. And surely a sore iorney it was, & a lōg march. But in the morning at the dawning of the daye, we came to a shallowe place of the water, where was a foord to passe ouer, and so much expedition was made, that eleauen thousand horse and two and twenty thousand footemen were passed ouer the water in one daies labour: but the legs of the horses kepte vp the water so long a season, that the riuer rose a yard in height, by which means, many horsmen & footmen wer drowned, & all our victuall had taken great wet, and was in a maner marred and spoyled quite. Notwithstanding, to oure great hope and comforte, our campe was nowe in Flaunders, and our enimies were deceyued vtterly of their expectation and deuice.
            Nowe after this labour, we tarryed ouer long to refresh the army, for thrée dayes were spent in ydlenesse, in which time, the enimies heade and body was occupied, lyttle to oure aduantage: yet the thirde daye we marched full vpon the enimyes campe, whiche daye was so cleare, and the countrey so plaine to marche in, that all the order of oure campe mighte be throughlye discerned. And who that had séene the glistering battels of footmen, and the awful shew and troupes of the horsemen (which w
                  •…
               re not a few) would neuer in his life dayes forgette that noble assemblie: for it was a wonder of the worlde, to sée so many braue and lusty souldiers togither (and as it séemed) euery man was bent to battell, and prepared with weapon and courage to conquere a Kingdom. And vndoubtedly, the most of our camp looked that night for a combate and sharpe encounter, for the enimyes were thrée and thirtie thousande footemen, and fiue thousande and eight hundreth horsemen, and gallant laddes both well furnished and well disposed, whiche was argument ynough, that they woulde looke vs in the faces: their leader in like sorte, a graue Prince, and an auntient &

wise souldiour, alwayes stoute and honorable. But neither we feared his force, nor doubted his pollicie, but marchyng towards him, came in viewe of his camp, and so néer
                  •…
               
               ▪ 
               
                  〈◊〉
               , that his great Cannons went off at our 
                  •…
               ple, and cure péeces played lustily on his power againe, and a hote skirmishe beganne with eg
                  •…
               e desire on both sides to gette glorie, bloude and victorie. But the Duke hadde entrenched his Campe so stronglye rounde aboute, that oure horsmen could not gyue a charge. And peraduenture all our Swarfe Rutters were not of one minde, as the sequele hereafter maye shew. Thus in s
                  •…
               irmishe all the daye was spente, in somuch, that at night we were faine to encampe our selues on a toppe of a hill, full in the enimies eye, the seruice dured so long and late, we could not be better prouided.
            The Duke of Alua at thrée of the clocke after midnight dislodged hys Campe, went from Mastricke, where he la
                  •…
               , and marched along the riuer side towardes Leeg very closely, and without brute or sounde of Trumpet: and at the peepe of daye, oure vancurrers hadde a viewe of the enimyes, and we might at the length perceiue them fully, and beholde the whole order of their battels and marche. Oure people beyng moued with that 
                  •…
               ighte (albeit it was somewhat feareful to fainte courages) offered the skirmishe, & cōtinued in the same a long time: butiour meaning was, to marche into Flaunders, and get some Townes for oure succoure, and money for the reléefe of the souldioures. So wée came to a Towne called Tonger, and tooke in the same a number of Waggoris loaden with victuall, that was going to the Dukes campe: and frō thence to Sentr
                     •…
                  e an other great Town we marched, which Town was strong, and stood against vs, til they saw the battery placed, thē was it yéelded, & somewhat spoiled, where religious persons were found: and it redéemed itselfe for a summe of mony, and remained in peace, whē we marched further into y• country.
            The Duke followed oure Campe dayly, and wayted so

vppon vs, that the stragglers were soone sente home, and y• whole armye tooke greate héede and care of all things they did. The wether was moste parte foule, and the wayes seldome fayre, and victualles euer harde to come by, by mean of a commaundement and charge giuen by the Duke to y• Boores and Countrymen, who continually did annoy vs as they might, breaking bridges, Mils, & all other thinges that shoulde doe vs good, for the whiche, their houses and stackes of corne were burnt, and their wiues and familie, when we tooke them, were very yll entreated.
            This scarc
                  •…
               tie of victuall, and crueltie of the Countrimen encreased dayly, and as it was reported, diuers of good calling brake promisse with the Prince, & drewe an other way, which in very déede pintched and wroong the heart in the breast of those that wisely wayed the inconstanc
                  •…
               e of the world, and suche as had not made before good prouision, were put to their plunge, and felte penurie and indigence ynough: and as victuall wared scant, so garmentes, horseshoes, and other necessaries could not be gotten for mony, that was a miserye remedile
                  •…
               e, and a mischiefe, that neither man nor beast mighte easily abide. Yet as for victualles, some shift with sword was made, that people perished not in ertreame lacke and want of sustentation.
            Many daies and seasons we pingled and struggled with the Spaniardes for breade and other cates, and often wée mette with them in the Townes, Uillages; & open fields, and skirmished at y• very skirts of their cāpe, procuring thē to fight. But y• Duke wold haue no battel, and our Rutters were so wise, y• they would make y• war long, to bring good bags, & ful purses, & Waggons home to their houses, when the Prince should retyre. But whatsoeuer might be iudged of the matter, the souldiors on both sides were sometimes loath to encounter, except vpon a great aduantage, & much procurement to the same, they were pricked forwarde, to 
                  •…
               eeke aduentures, and féele the force of Fortune.
            
               The Prince being once neare Louaine, & thought to haue besieged y• town (by the watche & wayting on him that the Duke vsed) was driuen to séeke many wayes to compasse that he sought: one while to bid the bace to the Dukes cō
               panye, & another while to practize (for the preuēting of mischiefe) al the meanes that possible could be deuised: & retyring sometimes to make the Duke folow: & folowing somtimes to putte the enimies to flight, if fortune so fauored, & occasion could be taken, & houering vp & down a great time in the maner rehersed before, he had to passe by Tillemont, a bridge betwéen two woods, which bridge his enimie thoughte to guard, or at the least, to shew some exploite at: & encamping themselues neare the Prince, the Princes vangard & maine battel, marched towards the passage. The Duke (to occupy y• tune til his purposed deuice tooke place) made as though he would haue biddē battel, & came ful before ye reregarde of the Prince, to a waters side, hauing on both his wings a mightie wood, and guarded behinde with waggons & cariages, & hasted apace towardes the Prince with al his power. The Prince very glad to sée the enimie so desirous of battel, approched with his reregard néere the enimy, & sent with spéede for the vangard & maine battel, to come backe agayn for causes conuenient, which came, & in open field presented themselues in order of battell to the enimie: but the Duke kept him and his power beyonde the water, and yet put out dyuers bands to holde the Prince in play, & drawe our people neare the great and small shotte. The Burgonions, Rutters, Almaines, & most of the lustiest souldiours about the Prince, ranne so couragiously to thys encounter and péece of seruice, that sundrye were galled & hurte at the first charge, and fewe or none that aduentured anye thing at al, but escaped hardlye the daunger of body, & losse of life, the ground which the enimies had chosē was so ful of aduātage, & the Spaniards so valiantly maintained the skirmish. Notwithstanding, the Princes power

augmented continuallie, and plyed the seruice, in such sort, that the enimies perforce were driuen into their mayne battel. But this bickering endured so long, that the day was farre spent, and numbers of oure men were hurte. Among the chiefe a noble man (and a speciall sparke of life) called the Count De Hostraet, was shotte through the legge, of whych wounde, after he dyed. And as many stoute Souldioures that season serued well and worthylie, so was none more to be commended, than the Count De Lume, a Leagoyse, otherwise called Count De la Marsh, who onely came to the Prince with a braue bande of Horsemen, for the reuengemente of his Cousins deathe the Count Degmond, which lost his head, as before you haue heard.
            Now what should more be sayd of this matter, but that the Duke in this mean season had conuayed fiue thousand shotte (the leading whereof hadde Iulian Romero) to the bridge and strayte passage, not farre from Tillemont. And this Iulian, as he was a maruellous valiant and good souldiour, of greate experience, fame, forwardnesse, and antiquitie, so did he so cunningly in a woodde at this presente lay an ambushe, that it was to be wondred at: the manner whereof followeth.
            First, when he came to this strayte, he caused the Spanyardes (which in good sooth were noble Souldioures, and resolute men) to lye flatte on their faces, and as closely as could be deuised, withoute making brute or businesse: and commaunded, that no one man shoulde be so hardie as to stirre, til he gaue a warning and watchworde. Which the Spanyards obeyed in euery poynt, for they are men of great obedience & vigilancie, where they ought to be readie, & at commaundement.
            The Prince hauing a minde and good occasion to passe this straite before the night came on, marched towardes the brigge, and all the way the Duke wayted on him, making many offers to haue giuen battell: and still greate

seruice was to be séene, and the enimie was euer occupyed, to bleare our eyes the better. And yet the Prince to preuent mischiefe, sente a number of Almayne shotte (named the Forlorne hope) to the selfesame woodde, where Iulian Romero lay, to be as it were a succoure to his armie, if the Duke had charged on the reregard, as was presupposed he woulde, the aduantage was so great. And this Almayne shotte were so carelesse, that as soone as they came into the woodde, they lay loking ouer a high dyke, how the Princes cariages, stragglers, vangarde, mayne battell, and wings thereof should passe ouer the bridge, and had no further consideration, but gazed before them, when behind their backs the enimie was priuilie placed. Well, in fine, the Princes power came on, and the artillerie, the stragglers, the cariages, the vangarde, the mayne battell, and all, sauing the reregard, passed ouer the bridge, but the reregarde, bycause it was nexte the Duke, and in danger to be sette vpon (by the Dukes power) was double garded with horsemen, besides the ordinarie bandes it was wonte to haue. And further, the vancurrers, and gallantest Gentlemen of person and manhoode, attended on the reregard, to sée the ende of the matter. And so soone as the reregarde came betwéene the two wooddes, the Spanyardes did shewe themselues suddaynely, with suche a terrible shotte and thunder, of Muskette, and Calyuer, that the Almaynes by terror of the same, flang downe theyr péeces, and woulde haue fledde, but most of them were immediately spoyled and flayne.
            The Horsemen of the reregarde were so amazed at thys aduenture, that they scarce knewe what was best to bée done: yet in conclusion, a noble Captayne, called Rides, and diuers other bands of Swarfe Rutters whéeled about, made head to the enimie, and were readie to giue a charge on Captayne Iulian. And albeit a greate dyke was a lette for the charge, yet the Rutters scambled ouer the same, and as

they myght, in the woodde, slewe diuers of the Spanyardes. But the Duke plyed the matter so sharply vpō the backes of the reregarde, that Monsieur Maulberg (a Baron, with a regiment) and most of his band of braue French Souldioures, were put to the sword, or drowned, and many Burgonyon Gentlemen and Souldioures of all sortes were likewise slayne or ouerthrowne in the water: in whyche conflict, we lost foure or fyue thousand men. But the Prince beholding this murther, and in danger of the shotte continually, was dismayed no whitte: for being on a high ground, ful before the Dukes Camp, he sente downe succoures to hys people, and bent all his great Ordinance vppon the Duke, and stayed his whole straggling armie in the very view and shotte of the enimie, a thing most rare and strange to be séene.
            The Dukes power, as they mighte notwithstanding, followed victorie, and till the darke night did separate the armies, the shotte on both sides neuer ceassed. And looke what prisoners the Duke did take, before the day went out of the Skye, he caused them to be burnt all togither in one house, the smoke and smell whereof came with the winde full into oure noses. Thus we encamped in that presente place, hoping for a reuenge the next morning, at whyche season was Monsieur Ianlees to come oute of France to the Prince, and with him two thousande Horse, and four thousand footemen.
            The Duke hearing of Monsieur Ianlees commyng, wente to méete hym, but woulde not encounter hym that tyme, bycause the Princes Campe was so néere. And Monsieur Ianlees came ouer the water at Namure, where the garrison resisted him to theyr po
                  •…
               er, and lost a hundreth or fourescore Souldioures at that tyme. Ianlees entring with bloud, marched forwarde brauely with hys little Campe, in the whyche hée hadde fyue good péeces of artillerie. And at length he came in the view of the

Duke of Aluaes Camp, and being resolued to fight, rather than retire, he put his power in battell, and tooke the nexte way to the Prince, in most manly manner, as indéede hée was a stoute Gentleman. The Duke séeing his boldnesse and courage, gaue him the looking on, and let him passe, and so our Camp and his ioyned togither.
            Upon Ianlees comming, who broughte a maruellous gallant companye (of Gentlemen, & experimented Souldioures) it was thought, that without delay we should haue soughte out the Duke, and haue giuen him battell: and in that minde was oure whole power many a long day, but what was the occasion to the contrarie, I knowe not, and what did kéepe vs asunder so long, dothe passe the reache of my reason. A wéerysome time in this sort poore Souldiours turmoyled, who were visited with so many wants & extremities, that it would haue pitied any Christians heart and minde to consider of: yet the willingnesse of people to doe some worthy acte or enterprise, tooke away a péece of the heauie burthen, and made the fardell of affliction the lighter to beare, and the lesse repined at: and it was a miraculous matter, for men (as some may alleadge) to liue without bread, béere, ale, or wyne, so great a time as we did: for most certaine, the scarcitie was such of the same, that some in the Campe (and right good men) for the space of twentie or thirtie dayes, neuer tasted of bread, nor dranke better than water: yet what with Apples, and frute, and other moyst things we found, the Camp was satisfyed, and men (in hope of better sustenance) shifted out a sorowful season, and nothing gréeued their heartes more, than that they cou
                  •…
               d not end or ease that miserie with y• hazard of battell.
            Nowe when necessitie compelled the Prince to wythdraw his power, or desperate
                  •…
               ie to set on the enimies camp in a fixed determination, he sought daylie after the Duke of Alua, who still auoyded the fight. Yet to trayne the enimie néere vs, and bring thē from the wooddes to the plaine

(that the Horsemen myghte charge them.) The Prince marched towards Leeg, and beséeged that great and goodly City, although the Rutters stiffely refused that seruice, saying, it was imperiall, and a Towne they ought not meddle withall. But frō whēce that reason was racked, or wherof that answere did smel, I report me to those that knowes the handling and scanning of such cunning mysteries.
            The Cannons were planted, for all this contradiction, and the greate péeces did play vpon the Citie two or thrée dayes, and the Duke hearing thereof, came (as it was reported) to set on some of the Princes people and forces. The Prince hauing examined a prisoner that was taken at that present, & vnderstanding where and which way the Duke might be found, sent for his chiefe Captaines, & commaunded anone after midnight, to dislodge quietly without soūd of Drumme or Trūpet, & march (as they might) towards the Duke: albeit the night was darke, and the weather inconstant, which was a great trouble to the Camp, yet the Prince was resolued to trie out by aduersitie, whether the Duke or he had the more hard destiny and aduerse fortune. Nowe the Souldioures beganne to reioyce, and although the way was combersome, and the nighte darke and vncomfortable, yet euery man bore a portion of the trauell, in hope to come quickly to an end of the trouble. And by my troth, the maner of our march was so difficult and strange, (and y• Camp went so scattered abroade at all aduentures) that we were like ynough before day to be some of vs t
                  •…
               nne mile asunder, or to happen in the hands of the Duke of Aluaes watch vnawares, and so we did: for some taking the Rutters (that the Duke had) to be our men, and mistaking the way they should haue kept, fell in the middle of y• Duke of Aluaes centinell, but they were but a few that so foolish
                  •…
               y wandred. Yet by this blind occasion, the Duke gat lightof the Princes purpose, and thereon entrenched himselfe and his Camp in a strong ground, to his greate suretie and aduantage.

And at the breake of day, our Camp begā chéerefully to sounde a marche, full in the hearing of the Dukes power. I doubt, if I made mention of the mirth that oure people had, some fyne fellowes woulde scarcely beléeue it: wherefore I procéede to my matter.
            The Campes thus being néere togither, were both in order of battell, the Dukes entrenched, and the Princes in open playne: and the Princes power presented the battell in a braue and goodly order, but it was refused. Notwithstanding, y• enimie issued out of their trench by multitudes, and offered y• skyrmish: but that was thought but a meane, to gall & hurt our best Souldioures (as in déede a skirmish
                  •…
                in some cases is no better) wherfore the Prince marched about more néedefull affaires, and yet helde the enimie play ynough, with a sufficiente company, for that purpose they came out for. In a little while after, knowing y• the Duke would not fight (though he were able, and durst if he pleased) the Prince meante to depart from Flaunders, and comming by trifling Townes, yet some of them well walled, he did what he thought conuenient to those Townes, and at length came before Chaiteu Caembersey, which would not yéelde, and so the Prince beséeged it: but the batterie was so farre off, that it did no greate hurt. And the Duke minding to shew some rescue to the Towne, came in the sighte of our Camp, and lodged betwéene two great wooddes. Yet nothing worthy noting was attempted. And the Prince, séeing time was consumed, without anye profit or lykelyhode of battell, he marched unto France, entring betwéene Gwyse, and Saint Quintains, two speciall Townes of the French Kyngs: and comming nowe into a goodly Countrey full of holesome Wyues, and healthfull thyngs (that oure si
                  •…
               ke and sore weatherbeaten Campe néeded, and were gladde of) wée rested awhile, and fylled our emptie bellies wyth benefyte of the earthe, and blessings of God: and so in small processe of time returned into Straesbr
                     •…
                  eg,
               
and other partes of Germanie, where after this long voyage, and hard fare, many dyed of suche diseases as followes the miserable estate of man, and cuttes off the dayes and lyues of Millions. The Prince went in a while after to hys house at Dillenbrough, and euery other person to suche places and Countreys as best they liked, and mighte most contente theyr mindes and calling, and the Duke drewe hymselfe towardes Antwerpe, and both their great armyes were dispersed and seuered asunder in a shorte season. But Flaunders, béeyng ordeyned to troubles, coulde no season rest, withoute some persecution and practise
                  •…
               s to vexe and disquiet the state, so that thousandes were alwayes busilie occupyed, not only to molest the Spanyards, but also to gette and winne suche plottes, and péeces of the Countrey of Flaunders, Zelande, and Hollande, as myght bée an occasion to bring the Priuiledges of all the Countrey in question, and debate their causes at large. And hauyng hadde some talke one with another of these matters (that were againste the Dukes gouernemente) the Count De Lume, otherwise named Count De la March, a lustye Gentleman, came with a sufficiente power, and tooke the Breell, an Iland that fronts vpon Flushing.
            
            The Prince and his brother was or had bin before with the Duke de Dupont, and the Prince of Condey, in greate seruices, for the whiche they wanne worthy fame for theyr aduēture with the said Prince of Condey. And the Prince of Orange, woulde take no charge, but as it séemed, came to sée how the affayres of the world would burst out or finish. Yet in the ende, the Prince of Orange and his brother came home, and the Count Lodwike, to exercise his greate heart in great things, went against y• Duke of Alua, & was receiued into Mounts in Henalt, a strōg towne. The Duke not asléepe, but had so waking a wit, y• he would rise earely to bid his enimies good morow, came & beséeged Mounts in Henals (Sir Williā Morgā
                being then wt Coūt Lodwike) &

with much businesse and great adoe, vpon hard conditions, agréed, that the Count Lodwike, and all his noble Souldiers, shoulde departe with bagge and baggage, whersoeuer they pleased. The Duke most honorably saw the capitulation obserued and kept, and the Count Lodwike and hys friends marched from Mounts with honor ynough, though not so muche as they loked for. And thus was that broyle taken vp and ended, and a new to be practised and beginne.
            If I haue placed ye winning of ye 
               Breell, taken by y• Count de Lume, before other things that hapned somewhat before y• exployte, or rehearsed any thing out of his due order in ye rest of my work, I trust y• report of mine shall hurt no whit y• troth of euery matter seuerally by me penned: for in mistaking one season for another, and not borowing out of any booke (that flatters the time) any péece of matter, at their great Torch to light my little Candle, I might wāder out of my way, and so goe aboute, but can not misse the comming home to the troth of my purposed enterprise. For I haue written nothing, but eyther mine owne eyes behelde it, or at some one time or other I was in the Countrey whyle it was a doing. And so, the losse of the Breell, to conclude, caused Flushing, and other places to reuolt, and argued, that in the necke of those changes, would happen an infinite number of vnwelcome chances, to suche as thoughte themselues of fortune most assured.
            The whole Countrey through, was so farre out of quiet, that y• Duke not only fylled the new Citadell in Antwerpe with Souldiers, but lykewise, put great garrisons in all places & Townes of strength, whych garrisons peraduenture behaued themselues not so well towardes the people, as they looked for. And as they mighte méete to reason of those matters, and other thyngs of weyghte, they muttered, in muche mislike at many occasions, but more for feare than fauoure, they followed the Dukes deuice, and both with money and men ayded the Duke, agaynste

those that were disturbers of his state. Yet suche broyles were abroach, as coulde not be remedyed without muche bloudshed, and hardly that way, as experience in processe of tyme did declare.
            Now in the heate of this murmuring, an infinite sort of scattered people drewe to the Counte Lodwike, and many made sute to the Prince, to steppe in and thruste out strangers, especially Spaniardes, that then were generally despised. The Prince hauing many iniuries offered him, and remembring olde wrongs and newe displeasures, beganne to giue eare to such persuasions, as touched the priuiledges and liberties of those Countries the Duke hadde gouernement of, and by déepe foresight and iudgement, auoyded the daunger of his enimyes, and so stoode on hys guarde in all thinges he went about. At which resolution, his friends a folowers reioiced, and euery one according to his ability, put to a helping hand, & sent him such succoures, as he was able in person and power in a shorte time to méete hys enimye on land or on Sea, such was his foresight, his force, & good fortune.
            Nowe the towns in Holland and Zealand began to bende apace, to be at y• Princes deuotion, and the Prince hadset oute a number of Shyppes, whyche often encountred their enimyes, and wanne greate and riche prizes, and seldome loste anye thing, but still foughte it oute so valiauntlye, that victorye séemed to be theirs by inheritaunce.
            A fléete of Shippes came from Spaine to the Dukes aide, and some of the beste of them happen into the Flushingers handes, commyng into the Hauen, whiche shippes were fraught with treasure, that serued the Princes turne a long time after The Counte Lodwike had done verye greate things in sundry enterprises, and seruice of no little charge and hazarde, and was like to proue the oddest Souldier of a noble man in his dayes: but the Duke did alwayes so

pursue him with a great power, and great practises, that he could not, nor was not able, to preuent the Dukes pollici
                  •…
               s and Stratagemes. And so at an ouerthrowe, whiche fell on the Counte Lodwikes syde, hée was forced to flye, and as some affyrme, was eyther drowned, or slaine after. Mayster Clap. and Maister Font, Englishe Gentlemenne, were at this seruice, and Font was slaine there.
            Diuers other Gentlemen pri
                  •…
               ly, without the knowlege of oure Prince, and hir highnesse honorable Councell, stole by secreate meanes, out of England to Flushing, for the whiche at their returne home againe, they were a long while frowned vppon, and could not come in Courte. Sir Humfrey Gylb
                     •…
                  rt was their Generall, Capitaine Cotten, Captaine Morgan, Captaine Chester: and many other Capitaines and Gentlemen, for knowlege sake, fame and entertainement, wente at that time ouer, and fell thereby in displeasure héere at home.
            The Spaniards many times came néere to Flushing, & the English bāds met them often, betwéen whom was diuers hote skirmishes, & couragious encountre: & albeit that the English deserued muche praise for their forwardnesse, the Spaniards were not behind in any forward seruice, or striuing for fame & place: for at euerye méeting, the Spaniarde both in nimblenesse & stoute behauior séemed often to want neither agilitie, courage, nor conduct: & the Gentlemen and old soldiors of them, durst
                  •…
               tug and wrastle for the maistery with any one that they encountred, as our wise & stout soldiors gladly do confesse, & thinke it a greate iniury, to haue a stoute enimy any way euil spoken of.
            As very many towns fel dayly to the Prince (whiche he fortified strongly,) so a towne among the reste called Harlam, was so well m
                  •…
               nned and defended, that the fame therof muste néedes be sounded with a Trumpet of euerlasting renoume, of whiche I mind a little to speake, as muche to shew what y• manlinesse of man can do, as to declare what

honour belongs to stoute souldiers.
            
               Harlam being a place of strength, somewhat by nature thorow the mean of water (& other causes a fortresse requireth) was manned & furnished with most assured souldiers. And as the Duke had greate adoe in many other places, & made great armies to besiege them, so at the siege of this, y• Duke loste such a nūber of mē, as is incredible to be spokē, & would hardly be beléeued: for women there were of suche courage, as was wonderful to beholde: & one woman tooke a miraculous charge vpon hir, which was, to haue the leading of men (a matter to be simled at, but yet of troth, and to be credited. Then if women wer so stoute, what mighte men of noble hart & mind proue? forsooth their actes & déedes did shew thē to be in courage more than Lions, & in worth & valor more than a. C. M. of the ordinarie sorte of people. For some haue bin in many seruices, that neuer saw y• like of Harlam souldiers: & men may trauel to the very confines of Christendome, & not find such people, as were at Harlam (besieged by the Spaniardes) a nation in these dayes, that can both besiege a town, & can do much in the field) whiche people had such resolute minds & willing bedies, to defend & suffer whatsoeuer might happen, y• they séemed to be made & formed, not out of our common mould, but wrought and created of some speciall substance & workmanship, wherein y• glorie of manhood & valiancie was cūningly cōprehēded. O that my st
                  •…
               le were so stately (& could carry such life) that I might worthily expresse the noblenes of their courages. But I may not praise the alone for their corage, but exalt thē also for their policies, & sufferāce of al misery & aduersities a long seasō, & in a maner past y• power of mans weak nature & conditiō. But alas, y• while they were ouertakē wt too much truste in their enimies words, & led at length like shéepe to y• slaughter: but how I liste not tell you, referring y• iudgement of such like actions, to those that haue y• managing of mighty matters, & knows how to cōquere & gouerne.
            
               Well, to finish and knitte vppe the scanning and seruices of the famous souldioures of Harlam; to the furthest of my abilitie, I will honour the bones of all suche warlike people, wheresoeuer I shal find them, and with perpetuall same aduaunce theyr bodyes to the lofty skies.
            Uery many practises the Duke both by force and finesse wrought against the Prince, and was assisted and aided with many of the states of the low Countrie, to entrap the Prince, or take the Townes he had in his hands from him, but nothing could preuaile, although great & huge armyes of men went aboute the ouerthrowe of the Prince and his fortresses. And such Towns were at his commaundment in Hollande & Zelande, that the greatest armies of the world coulde not winne, without maruelous charges and losse of people to the assaylantes, whiche was well tryed and proued, by the successe that the Duke and his friendes continu allye founde, who neuer ceased to worke al possible means to attaine that he soughte, and that whiche his power and people were thought might commaunde (which was not a little) bycause their forces were double and treble in nū
               ber againste the Princes power, and helde the whole countries in awe and subiection.
            The Princes good fortune so much amended, & he grewe so mightie both by sea and lande, that neyther the Duke sometimes would méete hym, nor many others (of abilitie full greate) had minde to encounter his power, whiche alwayes were resolued to fight, and seldome tooke foyle or disgrace, but once before Harlam, in offering to victuall the Towne, and at some other seasons, that are not of so great moment, as merites much memorie. And the Prince taking holde of thankfull fortune, and folowing to the furthest, the good hap was offered him, besieged some places that the Spaniards were in, and wan those fortes or towns, and disposed of them what he thoughte most necessarie. Among the whiche townes, Midlebr
                     •…
                  eg was one, where the

seruice was greate, and muche time was spent, before the Spaniardes were cleane thruste out thereof.
            Many attempts were made to Ansterdam, a goodly seate, and a strong, but that was manye times, or for the moste part, addicted to the Spaniardes, and so were other towns, that the Prince made but little accompte of.
            But now (to make shorte) the Prince hauing in a manner all Zeland and Holland, and all the strong places therof, had so wearyed the Duke, and the states of Flaunders, that he possessed them in peace: or if they were assaulted, they were so well defended, that the Duke not onely loste hys laboure, but lykewise greate numbers of menne, so that the Kyng of Spaine gaining but little by the Dukes gouernement, as manye supposed, sente for him away, or he made sute to goe home, and the Duke Medina Cely was sente to remaine in his place. But the Duke Medina Cely séeing that the state of Flaunders (and all the lowe Countries) was so rent and torme in péeces, that he coulde not knitte them togither againe, therefore (as it séemed, and manye wise men did déeme,) he ha
                  •…
               ed himselfe thence, and minded not to take charge and gouernement of a Country so much disquieted, and so 
                  •…
               arre out of order. And in his place came the Duke de Terra Noua.
            
            This Duke de Terra Noua, when he came into Flaundors, and hadde séene and founde, that seuere Iustice, and straighte and harde handling, broughte the people in mislike (and made many a great mischiefelye l
                  •…
               rking in a bollowe hearte) beganne his gouernement more mildelye, and vsed a more gentle manner towardes the inhabitantes of Flaunders, and yet was sterne and 
                  •…
               oute ynoughe (as farre as his power stretched) towardes the Prince of Orange, and manye times anoyed him, and held
                  •…
                him very hardly.
            But in effect, neither the Duke of Aluaes greate labour,

seruice, nor securitie, nor the Duke de Terra Nouaes courtesie and gentlenesse coulde reclaime those people that tooke a toy in their heads, like some kinde of Hawkes that will not come to the Fawkners fiste, nor giue eare to any straungers lewring. And surely, if some hawke haue once taken the checke, she will royle abroad at hir pl
                  •…
               asure, and pray where she l
                  •…
               steth. But to the matter, the common people of Flaunders were so vexed wyth the Spaniardes, and troubled with straungers in their Countrey, that they cared not to what seruitude they offered themselues, so they myghte be ridde of them, that so long hadde ouer laboured them, and tyred bothe theyr mindes and bodies.
            In thys wandring sorte of disliking, and vncertaine manner of suretie, the poore and common people were caryed aboute with suche a multitude of miserable conceites, that they knewe not to whome to complaine, nor vnto what piller they shoulde leane, and in a manner were readye to sincke and drop downe, vnder the masse of mischief, that lay as heauy as lead on their shoulders.
            The Duke de Terra Noua no lesse troubled in iudgement (for the dischardge of his care and aucthoritie) was often times not well in health, and so consuming some yeares in dooyng what he determined, at length he gaue ouer hys lyfe, and Flaunders remained a season withoute anye strange Gouernoure, albeit molested, (as the people thoughte, not a little) with the Spaniardes, whiche of all griefes, did moste gripe them, and gladdest they were to be cased of.
            And to bryng to passe some greate matter, and to be dischar
                  •…
               ged of thys their daylye sorrowe and continuall clogge, the States in companies as their mindes were bent and sauoured that faction whyche wroughte agaynst the Spaniardes) dydde deuise and talke of the recoueryng of their liberties. And for the attayning of the same, they

pollitiquelye layde a playne plotte, and swore among themselues▪ to performe euery point and péece of theyr purpose.
            The Spaniardes both by outwarde countenaunce and bending of browes, perceiued there was some priuie practise a working, and prepared to withstande it by all the meanes possible mighte be deuised: and kéeping close their owne councell, concluded, that when occasion came, they woulde putte in execution the matter they hadde treated of, and all the meane whyle they furnished themselues wyth euerye thing fitte for their purposed deuice.
            The contrarye parte casting no perill, and standyng too muche to the opinion and bayne hope of a multitude, wente openly about their businesse, and assembled of their friendes a greate companye togither, able with good gouernement to haue gyuen a battell: whiche band and carelesse company lay in Antwerpe, solacing themselues, and making good chéere, as al things should haue gone with thē according to their wish.
            But euen as those people that Samson destroyed amidde their banquets and feasting (smarting himselfe with committing the murther) or rather like wilfull weaklings & wanton children that neuer tasted the strength of a man, beléeues, that blunt wasters wil byte like sharpe weapōs, and so 
                  •…
               unne on heade to their owne harmes, and behaue themselues so carelesly for the combate, that one man well aduised, shall beate a hundreth of those harebraines. Euen so, & in no better plight, or in a worse case, y• multitude were taken and putte to open foyle and reproche, to the greate shame and ouersight of themselues, that hadde charge, and disgrace of euerye good souldior that they loft.
            The Spaniards wisely and warily (but sure about a bloudy and cruel act) came as closely as they could, togither into

the Castell of A
                     •…
                  twerpe (whiche the Duke of Alua caused to be builte) and there consulted quickly on the thing they hastily went aboute: and making no more adde, but ei
                  •…
               er to kill or be killed, aboute dinner time when some haue more mind of their belly, than their safetie (and fall to quaffing and bibbing, when greedie hunger and thirste shoulde be moderated with sober diet) the Spaniardes issued furiouslye into the Citie, into whiche the greate Cannon shotte came roaring before them, and with them came suche a thunder of harquebuzers, and trampling of horses, that the Towne thoughte, that Hel hadde béene burste open, or that the skies hadde fallen vppon them by some sodaine rattle aud thunder-cracke from the Heauens. But well away, manye a sily soule by this bloudye bargaine were sente vnto Heauen or Hell, and the simple people that trusted to the wisedome of their leaders, fell all by their owne follie to the mercie of the Spaniardes, whyche are not ignorant in the vsage of victorie, nor ouer-mercifull till they finde themselues Maisters of the fielde, and in secure and peaceable estate.
            Thus Antwerpe was throughlye spoyled, and in manye places burnte and defaced, where the Spaniardes founde suche a deale of golde and treasure, as hath not bin possessed by one spoile in anye two Townes these manye hundreth yeares: and there was taken prisoner, the young Counte Degmond, with some others of good reputation: a warniug to all wanton Cities, hereafter to giue and kéepe better watche of their libertie and wealth, and to cause the inhabitants of euerye Towne and Corporation, to haue suche regarde of God, and the leading of their liues, that they come not into the indignation of the highest, who often doth visite the base conditions of the people, with sword, fire and pestilence, and manye other punishementes and plagues, that oure present daies doeth present vs, and the worldes wickednesse cannot shunne.
            
               It is to be thought, while these things were a doyng, y• 
               Don Iohn de Austria was drawing hymselfe towards Flaunders: but as it fell out by matter that followeth, a verie fewe of good calling in the state were willing to receiue him, especially willing to be gouerned with a straunger, or stande any way pleased with the Spanyardes in the lowe Countrey. For long before the murther and bloudshed in Antwerpe, there was so hotte a fyre kyndled in the fornace of the breast, and fancies of men, that all the water in Antwerpe Towne coulde not quenche. And after this furious facte was committed, neyther gentle wordes, nor mylde Gouernoures (if they were straungers, that should speake or gouerne) coulde salue the swelling sore and bléedyng woundes of the tormented myndes, that dayly were perplered with thoughte and care of theyr poore Countrey of Flaunders. Howe the Spanyardes hadde vsed the people at anye tyme, or howe this vnquen
                  •…
               hable fire of malice dyd firste take flame, or how the heartes of the commons conceyued suche offence, as was past forgiuenesse, I neyther knowe nor meddle withall: but I knowe, and experience teacheth, it is a harde and a dangerous hazarde, to happen in the hatered of a multitude, and be condemned of the common people, albeit theyr iudgementes are not alwayes sounde, yet their displeasure is durable, and so sore to susteyne, that the wisest of al times and ages, haue bin contente to beare wyth theyr follyes, and rather flatter them to haue their fauoures, than with Milions of Gold dwell any while in theyr dislike. And malice is of the nature of Cancker, whyche the longer it is suffered on good mettall, or badde, the further and déeper it eates, and rusteth the thing it taketh holde of. Or hatered may better be compared to Gunnepouder, that the longer it is dryed, the sooner it taketh fire, and when one corne thereof is touched with a ho
                  •…
               e coale, it not only consumes it selfe with a flasshing flame, but burnes or hurtes all that standes néere it,

or commes in the compasse of his flame and furie. And commonly malice is neuer quenched, till reuenge hathe produced some notable mischiefe, and so y• person y• striketh, and body that is striken (eyther by rigour of law, or violēce vsed by weapon) end in a short season, their liues, that long haue bin a nourishing. Wherefore as diuers affirme & confesse, there is not a greater enimie to cōmon wealthes and Countreys, thā that gnawing worme of continuall malice & hatered, which for small offences, hath made so greate a dissention, that mighty Monarkes haue bin shaken downe withall, & many a state at this day stands tottering thereby, & are readie whē a rough tempest doth blow, to tipe in y• dust, or féele the force of a terrible b
                  •…
               ast. God graunt that Flanders he not the first, that hatred and malice (by mean of dissention) shall bring to decay. So now to my matter, as bréefely as I meant to penne out this discourse.
            The comming dōwne of Don Iohn to the low Countreys, made the Spanyards looke for some succoure, and moued the people of Flanders to thinke and looke of other ma
                  •…
               
               ters, and in a while they openly published, that they coulde not abide the behauiour of strangers, and woulde not permitte any 
                  •…
               o to enter and gouerne, before the Spanyardes wer e
                  •…
               pulsed or drawn by the King from their territories, offering all obedience and duties to the King of Spayne their Maister, if the Spanyardes and strangers were taken from thē. But their offer and demaund toke suche small hold in the fanour of Don Iohn, that great matter grew therof, as I might p
                  •…
               rceiue, being in Bruzels, by their musters there, and Don Iohns preparation lying at Lusenbroeg, and after, at a Towne called H
                     •…
                  : The States, I meane suche as held against Don Iohn, somewhat standing on their gard, made streight orders for the Spanyardes, if they vsed violence, and hadde so good an eye ouer them, that at a tune, when the Spanyards thought to do some erployte, a Gētleman of Scorl
                     •…
                  d, named Captayne Bassorde, lying in a village

with his regiment of Scottishmen, had suche a hande ouer the Spanyards, as they no whit liked, and yet they assaulted the Scottishmen, whiche at that time were but ill prouided. All this season, and a long whyle before, was the right Honorable Maister Doctor Wilson (now Secretary to the Quéenes Maiestie) Lorde Embassador in Flanders: and two seuer all times was sent in Embassage thither, at that time, the Captayne of the Ile of VVight, called Mayster Edward Horssey, for to make peace, and for suche causes as pleased our Prince.
            Embassadors were sente thither from the Emperoure, and from the Electors and States of Germany, and in long debating of matters (to the which the Bishop of Leeg came, a great Segnior, and stoute Prelate) a peace was concluded, and for the ioy thereof, I saw a generall Procession in Bruzels, where all the Embassadors and States were (sauing the Embassador of Englande, and all the Nobilitie of Flaunders) whiche made such a shewe, and reached suche a length in the stréetes, and tarried so long there, as was a wonder to beholde, and the strangest viewe that hadde bin séene in that place many yeares before, the number of Gentlemen was so great, and the commō people so many.
            But all this reioycing turned to woe & lamentatiō within a short term after, for whē the Spaniards wer gone, there 
                  •…
               ell out such matter betwéene ye States and Don Iohn, that the Spaniards came agayne, but not to Antwerp, for that the States had politikely possessed, & many other Townes before, of great importance & strength: and Don Iohn and his people were assembled in Namure, & much businesse was set abroche betwéene these two sides (after Don Iohn had bin triūphātly receiued into Bruzels) and either of these parties armed thēselues, & wrought for their aduātage what pleased best their fancies, some sending into Spaine, & some sending otherwhere, the necessitie of both their causes so required, & the troublous time they felt, enforced those causes.
            
               The estates nowe beganne to leane to the Prince of Orange, and deale throughly and playnely with him, whyche was a greate strength vnto them, and an occasion to reforme the rest of the nobilitie to drawe one kinde of way, if they determined to withstande Don Iohn, as they made shew they would. But some that made promise there vnto, brake suddayncly, and turned to Don Iohn, who was leauying of a power to inuade Flaunders, and had togither both footemen and Horsemen, a very gallante company, and those were auntient and perfite Souldioures, that had serued many yeares in great aduentures and hazards. And to speake as the common fame wente (and right wise and noble men did report,) Don Iohn for his owne person was a wise and most famous noble man, that well was worthie (for many good partes in him) to haue had the leading of a Camp as great as King Alexanders army of Macedonie, whose men of warre were at the conquering of most parte of the worlde. Thus was Don Iohn and his power in a manner readie to marche, and lay aboute Namure, to tarrie the comming of some such bands of Horsemen as he looked for, and be fully furnished of such things as he wanted.
            The States had in like sorte assembled a very great armie, and were as readie to marche, as occasion fell out: and knowing that their enimies must haue much adoe, before they could winne any Towne of credite, the States determined to wéerie Don Iohn, and so by policie and practise to striue with him, rather than with playne force and fight to encounter him: for their mightie walled Townes were a great blocke in Don Iohns way, whiche neyther coulde bée wonne by their enimies, nor yet well could be beséeged, but that the States hadde a meane to aide the Townes, and power ynough to rayse the seege, and could at any aduantage giue Don Iohn battell, without whiche aduantage it were no wisedome to deale with a strong and stout enimie.

And on that resolution stande the noblest Souldioures now liuing. And woulde to God that towardly Prince and good Gentleman, the King of Portingall, had stoode on that poynte, whiche shall be spoken of in another matter, God sparing me life. But now to my purpose I procéede. But as the States looked to take Don Iohn at aduantage, or awéerie him and his Souldioures with long warres and much labour, Don Iohn and his company were so well experimented with paynes, and accustomed so often to suffer the miserie of warres, that they had such able mindes and bodies to endure and beare off the burthen of aduersitie, yt the states should not easily that way haue had their willes, ouer them, although that the Spanyardes, by long rest and delicacie of Flaunders, were become some what slouthfull and effeminate: yet are they of such courage and complexion, when force doth compell them to trudge & to toyle, that straightwayes, theyr nature is conuerted to their old maner and custome, and they coulde for a néede frame themselues to a new trade of trauell. Whiche shewes them as well armed within their mindes (where the man is beste knowen) as clad and defenced without, where nothing is good, if the minde set it not forwarde, and maintaine it to the vttermost. And the opinion of some souldiers is, both at home and abroade, that who so euer is daintie and vnseasoned, and can not martch in hardnesse, without a bagge and a bottle, were better be by a warme fire, thā in a cold field, & will do more harme in a little péece of béefe, than he cā to good in a great battaile, he is so loaded with his trinkets, & mindes so much his meat. And although in a splene I haue spoken of the Spaniard, (yet no other than he deserues) so haue I séene both Frenchman and Borgonyon (and somé of our owne nation besydes,) that in the féelde are more gréedy of glorie, than hungry in the house, when a banquet is on the table. I must leaue off this spéech, and follow another humor. So Don Iohn & the states, as you haue heard,

deuised how the one might deceiue the other: and yet neyther of them both ventured further than good occasion commanded them. And in this colde kind of seruice, the souldiours remayned, amyd the heate of Sommer a long season, till Don Iohns power began to bidde the bace, and by a great mischaunce tooke the power of the states at aduantage, and slewe some of them, and hadde the reste in chace as farre as they durste followe, and so that byckering ended.
            The states vpon this little ouerthrow (wherin the Scottish bands had the most hurt) attended both horsemen and footemen, out of Germanie, & gaue Don Iohn leaue a while to march about a péece of the Countrey, minding as soone as the Cassemeer came down, to goe to the fielde agayne. And in the mean time, the states put their people in garrisons.
            Their enemies hauing a little leasure & romth giuen thē (more for some coulorable cause, than any constraint) begā to spurre about, and espy their commoditie: and by sleyght and force (as a camp can not want neither of thē both) slipped into some simple seates and townes, & carrying away credite with them, bycause they kept the fielde, were receiued into many places, and chiefly into Louain. And some such as would vntwist the fast thr
                  •…
               d of Faith & Promise, became so 
                  •…
               pper of their wordes (when they minded to breake that the states coulde not holde them: and so after flickering fortune 
                  •…
               hey fled, a matter worthy to be touched, but left off by me, to a riper iudgemente, that clearelye can construe the reason of these rotten causes.
            A notable souldier called Monsieur de la Moet, gouernour of Gra
                     •…
                  eling, went from the states at this time (as hée sayd) to keepe the town, for the king. And diuerse others as the Count D
                     •…
                  nes, Monsieur Barlymont, and more than I can name, made their owne way to go whether they pleased: and for the time, the world in Flaunders was quicke, &

dead: they were in dolor and heauinesse, that had not a light minde to comfort a sad hart: for the world was so sorrowful, or so suttle, y• a man might not scarcely at that season laugh with his friend, nor trust his owne brother. For cunning and craft, had put constancie out of countenaunce, and finesse, with 
                  •…
               icklenesse, were matched togither in one corner of Flaunders, or another: and so the world wagged, & the weakest were thruste to the wall, and the strongest coulde struggle and striue againste all things, but the streame.
            When time came on to set abroch matters that mighte not runne cleare till the lées were settled (and Wine wold be knowne frō vineger & Ueriuice,) the euents of weighty matter burste out, and made euery man of both the sids, Don Iohns, and the states, loke wel to their footing: for of necessitie, and countreys cause (besides the desire of fame & honour) both these armies must march, to view the one the other, and in open field, do somewhat for reputations sake, and that they came for. And as farre as I can iudge, prince Cassemeer at this time was not come to the states. Well, the campes were in march, and both of them desirous to do what best became the time: and among the states, were 
                  •…
               repte (for seruice sake alone) some English Gentlemen, with such bandes as they coulde happen vpon, and furnishe at their own charges. And with these English Gentlemē, ioyned for good will in the fielde, the Scottish regiment (as I hearde.) And the English had an intente to march to the Camp, of the states. Don Iohns power hauing intelligēce therof, made haste to preuente them, and so the skirmishe beganne, and lasted a long season, and for certainetie, had not the Englishe and Scottishe nations done theyr duetie and verye well withal, they hadde bene repulsed, and peraduenture ouerthrowen. I woulde praise and commende anye manne that did well that daye, but for that

I am ignoraunt of that which was truely done, and would be loath to flatter one, and offend another, I omitte al their names, but master Iohn Norrises, for this presente, til my next booke of other warres be printed and published, at whiche time I shall know the truth of that I treate of.
            The Casameer with a greate power of horsemen, and footemen, was come at this presente, or in a short while after, and Don Iohn then was to consider and aide the daunger might haue followed, for his armye was a great deale lesse in number than the power of the states, and oftētimes the states were in minde to besiege Louaine, but neuer vnreadie to watch for the enemies, & offer the battel, whyche was loked for daylye: the Burgonions side were also well disposed, & it was certainly thought, that Don Iohns side was as gallaunt. Nowe were pollicies and stratagemes to bée séene. Nowe the shewe of warre, and clattering of armes might be hard. Now the poulder and bullets were prepared, and stoute and manly skirmishes began afreshe, and the souldiers bespredde the plaines, as thicke as the blacke crowes, that flyes swarming out of the wilde wooddes: and the whole people and commons of Flaunders thought they should be rid of their enimies, that so long had enpouershed their rich and plentifull countrey. For they smarted (poore soules) that often had bin spoyled, & they felt al the wrong, that knewe not howe to righte themselues, but by Gods grace, and gaping after victorie.
            At this present time, victualles began to be maruelous déere, and after the Rutters and Casemeeres company were payed, money among other bandes was harde to come by, and in that sort, a verie long time was spent and consumed, yet some were relieued with that treasure the States could spare: but in fine, suche scarcitie and miscrie came on and fel among thousāds, that both sicknesses and sodaine death ensued. And at length, the plague, (of whiche manye made an ende of their liues) was sparkled both in Campe and in

Country, & no one place was frée from one disease or other, that either stoode neare the Campe, or where the sicke souldiers repaired. And some of our English Gētlemē dropped downe in that visitation, as Mayster Thomas Cobham, and others, no greate number. This sorrowfull and fearefull sicknesse as much vexed & troubled the poore people, as any miserie they felt, & made the troubled conscience more afraid, than the view of all Don Iohns power.
            Much practising and working there was for a peace by oure Princes Ambassadors, that were sorie to sée so much bloudshed and mischiefe as might fall oute vppon a battell. And manye times peace was expected, and likely to haue happened, if Don Iohn woulde haue agréed to any reasonable conditions. But in conclusion, Don Iohn, by a hope hée had in some faction or practise (either among Pater Noster men, a company so called, or others fauorers to Don Iohns doing) woulde not agrée to the peace, nor do any thing that stoode againste his determination. So, continuing in a resolute minde, he thruste diuers bands of Spaniardes, and other souldiours, into such Townes and Fortresses as hée hadde possessed, and with suche power as he had lefte, marched towardes Namure or those parties, meaning not, as he made shew therof, to trouble the States any further for a seasō. There were some that threw down churches and vexed and troubled religious persons, againste whome rose a company of Wallons, naming thēselues Pater Noster men, & sometimes encountred those that destroyed religious houses, & made slaughter on thē, as they might make their partie good: & that matter is not yet pacifyed, for about Gaunt & other townes are many that séeke to doe mischiefe, & namely to their owne nation and countreymen. Which is a beginning of sorrow, & a sore dangerous thing to continue.
            The power of Don Iohn in manye sortes of seruices hath done what they coulde, to vistresse the bandes that the states giue entertainement too, but the states and their

people are, and haue bin too strong for Don Iohns power. Sundrie skirmishes, & oneof thē before L
                     •…
                  ine, I could a little write of: but, for that no great thing was atchieued by thē, I lap thē vp among other matters, that I neither haue occasion much to dilate off, nor you are desirous to heare. For, he that shall write of euerye thing was done, hadde néede to haue manye bodies, to be in euerye place at once, and twice so many eies, to note in what order the thinges fell out, or otherwise he maye misse of the troth, as some haue, that were in the fielde when seruice was to be séene, whose intelligence I hadde, and yet an other in the same company doth tell me a contrary tale: For whiles one is in the skirmishe, and another is a forraging, they are seuecallye occupyed, and will make sundry discourses: and for my owne parte, I proteste before God, I hadde rather followe the truth of the matter, than the flatterie of the time: so that if anye error haue passed my pen, it oughte to be pardonable, for that I hate to publishe & set out a fable, and loue to preferre the knowledge and vnderstanding of a troth: and speaking of any man or matter, enimy or friend, I woulde yéelde them due praise and commendation, not onely for to winne my workes the more credite, but lykewise to vse a kinde of duetifull courteste, and so to pay in reporte euery person lyuing, the debt that I do owe him.
            Nowe it is to be vnderstoode, that whiles Don Iohn was busie aboute his warres, the Quéenes Maiestie sente Embassadours to treate of amitie and peace, (as you haue hearde before) and the laste that went ouer aboute these chargeable affairs, were two most honorable personages, the Lord Cobham, & sir Francis Walsingham, on whom attended as gallant a traine of Gentlemen, as wente from hence to Flaunders these twenty yeares. And as the true reporte goeth, these noble Embassadoures helde and kepte suche chéere (in a déere and scarce season for victualles) that the like hathe not béene séene, neyther of late, nor manye

yeres agoe. And the bountie that one of the Embassadours vsed (whose déedes shall shewe his name) out of hys owne purse and francke liberalitie, excéeded, and is to be honoured for euer. And when these Embassadors had laine there a greate while, (and finished that was thought necessarie & méete) they returned to the Courte. Since whiche time (as God ordaines all thinges) Don Iohn is dead, and many other noble men more. And the plague is so hote among the Spaniardes, and the rest that lies in camps (as is to bée proued) that euen as a shephearde doth point oute his shéep
                  •…
               , and 
                  •…
               ulles out those lambēs that he sendes to the slaughter house: so God (as it séemeth) with his stretched out arme, toucheth whome hée pleaseth, & by the finger of hys wrath and scourge of plague, 
                  •…
               ings thousandes vnderfoote, and tūbles thē in their graue. And this is a thing maruelously to be noted (not specially abroade, but wisely here at home) that some haue no power to goe from the plague, and some, goe where they will, the plague doeth followe them. For it skippeth ouer houses and housholdes, and enters in their doores, that maketh sa
                  •…
               e bothe doores and windowes, not brought altogither by infection of clothes and garmentes, but sent for foule offences, by a power past our iudgemēts, and is to be presupposed a messenger of Gods anger, & an Angell of yre, that waytes as well on the good, to take thē from the badde & wicked of this worlde, as followes the wicked, to make Gods power knowne, and man confesse his own faults & follie. Now, if men would looke narrowly into the sore affliction of Flaunders, for the space of thirty yeares, they would thinke they haue had plagues ynowe (if God so were pleased) besides the fearefull pestilence it selfe, which of all things is most terrible, and yet the more is the pitie, there cannot be a worse plague among Christians, than disagréement, and publique dissention, whiche is to bée feared hathe taken suche déepe roote in Flaunders, that it wil not, nor can not be holpen, but by the

pollicie of puissaunt Princes, and prayers of good people.
            Thus farre haue I gone (Gentle Reader) to make thée conceiue howe mercifully God hathe dealte with oure Countrey, and howe sharply our neighbors hau
                  •…
                bi
                  •…
                afflicted, in a manner rounde aboute vs, whiche I wil (God willing) speake of in an other volume, if fououralby you can afoorde to giue this my bare and barraine Discourse youre good reporte, and at the least (for my study and labor (althoughe you mislike it) recompence me with silence, or else, as this was done in little time, so take what leysure you list, and write another worke of more value & weight, whiche I shall be as gladde to giue commendation vnto, as I shall be sorie, when I knowe these paines haue not contented you: as witnesseth our liuing Lorde, who multiply his graces among vs, and sende concorde and quietnesse to the iarring and troubled state of Flaunders.
            
            
               Finis ꝙTHOMAS CHVRCHYARD.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ To the VVorlde.
            
               GO sillie Booke to suttle Worlde, and shevv thy simple face,
               And forvvard passe, and do not turne agayne to my disgrace.
               For thou shalt bring to peoples eares but troth that needes not blush,
               And though Maell Bouch giue thee rebuke, care not for that a rush,
               For euill tongs do ytch so sore, they must be rubbing still
               Against the teeth, that should hold fast the clapper of the Mill.
               Desire those men that likes thee not, to lay thee dovvne againe,
               Till some svveete nappe, and harmelesse sleepe hath settled troubled brayne.
               And vvhen one house doth shutte thee out, creepe to another streight,
               And though thy mayster be but playne, yet looke thou vse some sleight
               To purchace loue, and credite both, for that shall breede good bloud,
               And thou vvith prayse, and honest brute, mayst do thy Maister good.
               
                  But if they reade thee in disdeyne, slippe from them if thou may,
               Let enuye svvell, and malice poult, I heare not vvhat they say.
               I made thee for to please the best, the vvorst may mend the vvhile,
               So vvisedome bids thee vvelcome Booke, thou mayst at folly smile.
               An ounce of prayse from vvise mens mouth, vvayes dovvne a pound of fame,
               That fooles do giue, vvhose slender skill, scarce scannes mens honest name.
               If Court embrace thee for my sake, to Countrey then in post,
               Be sure then neyther thy bare vvords, nor my poore vvorke is lost.
               Where Souldioures are, aduance thy selfe, for though some faults they spye,
               Their martiall minds vvill make them cast on thee a friendly eye.
               Among Diuines and Scholemen oft, come not, but for a change,
               For at thy levvde and rubbish phrase, the learned vvill looke strange.
               To men of Lavv do freelie goe, for they good fellovves are,
               
                  And can vvith toyes sometimes vvell ease, the vveight of Countreys care.
               With Merchant men make thine aboade, vvho loues to heare of Peace:
               So shall it be, vvhen bloudie broyles in Flaunders ginnes to ceasse.
               Thus haue I taught thee vvhat good course thou oughtst of right to hold,
               Thou art a Booke, goe vvhere thou vvilte, like Bayard blind be bold.
               Thou shalt haue mates to follovv thee, and help thee if thou fall.
               I haue vvide scope at vvill to vvalke, yea Penne and Muse at call,
               And other Bookes that I must needes committe to Worldes report.
               He is thrice blest that vvell doth vvorke, our time is heere but short.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   