
      
         
            
            
            The moste true reporte of
Iames Fitz Morrice death, and o
                     thers
the like offēders: with a brief
discourse of Rebellion, dedicated to the ribht
worshipfull my louyng freende M. Drewe
Drewrie, brother to the honourable sir
Willyam Drewrie, lorde Iustice
of Irelande. Written by
Thomas Churchyard
Gent.
            Imprinted at London by Edward
VVhite, dwellyng at the little
Northdore of S. Paules
churche, at the signe
of the Gunne.
         
         
            
            
            
               IF I had been
forgetfull of a
willyng promes
made for
a gifte, I
thoughte too
presente you
withall (notwithstandyng
tyme lappyng vpp
many matters preuented me) yet
your courtesies towardes my self,
as generally to the worlde where
you like, commaunded me to remember
what I had spoken, in effect
not perfourmed. And further,
your iuste and honest life (wheron
good credite & worship hath waited)
a double occasion gaue me to
present you some matter worthie
to bee seen of many, because your
eyes and iudgement not alone, but
with noble companie (your honorable
brother sir Willyam Drurie the
cheef) haue pitied the miserie of mē
               
y• lately by desarte are in disgrace,
and namely the rebellion of those
that thought theim selues, bothe
wise and honourable. So for a
welcome home from soile, where
sedition hath been to often seen, I
committe this my simple gifte to
your protection and well likyng,
and what is spok entherin, God &
good men maie defende, though it
wanted a sufficient patron to maintaine
and manifest a troth, thus
reioysyng in the continuaunce of
your accustomed vertues, I trouble
you no further, but desire you
to read that followeth, and fauor
and countenaunce the same, as
our vpright iudgement
shall leade you.
            
               Yours in that he maie,
at commaundemente
Thomas Churchyard.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               EMong all the cruell and
combrous chaunces of
this worlde wherin busie
heddes, and wicked
wittes are occupied (to
the bodie and soules destructiō)
is no onething
so perillous, as the pestilent plague and smotheryng
smoke that ciuill dissentiō bryngeth.
Whiche is bredd in the bowells of rebellion,
noursed vp in vile and naughtie Nature, and
brought to a full perfection, by the pride or
conceite of hatefull persones, and vnnaturall
practises. And surely no matter more to bee
lamented, then to see one member corrupte
an other, and the foote or inferiour partes
(whose forse is small, and feeblenesse greate)
strine with the hedde, or deuie to dooe their
duetie, and beare that thei are able. For in a
maner it is a monsterous vewe to beholde,
some branches of a tree yelde but bitter berries,
and all the reste of the bowes to beare
moste sweete and acceptable fruite. And a
more odious sight it is to see a ciuill manne,
become a sauage beast, vertue and valliauncie,
conuerted to villanous vice and trecherie:
The subuersion of kyngdomes, and corrupter

of all Common weales, whiche ruste
and canker once takyng roote, destroyes not
onely pure and fine mettall, but maintaineth
grosse and foule infection, the mother of mischeef
and disorder, whereby cleane life and
good maners is forgotten, and leaude behauiour
is moste in mynde, and embrased.
            In the daies of oure Forefathers many
hundreth yeres agoe menne were so noblie
bent and disposed (and honoured their Countrey
so dearely) that no hazarde nor attempte
was refused, that might aduaunce the publike
state, or enlarge the boundes and liberties
of the same. And some one to ridde their
countrey of Plague, or noysome afflictions,
haue offered their liues, and sought death as
willingly as life and worldely felicitie, is emong
the greatest nomber desired, the courage
of Marcus Curssius, and many others
of manly minde beares witnesse to that matter.
Yea, some to ridde good and peaceable
people, that wisheth quietnesse, from wicked
warre (and the pride of a tyrant) haue aduentured
to worke wonders: and bryng to passe
thynges, beyonde the common compasse of
mannes pollicie. Lette the boldnesse of Musius
Sceuola stande for an argumente sufficient

in the proofe of this cause. And so sonderie,
yea, a multitude of renowmed personages
(their order of life and death reuiued)
brynges recorde enough of their noble deedes,
and vertuous dispositions. But as those
worthies did weare awaie, and the season became
old (through continuaunce of tyme) so
newe fashions and maners wared ripe in a
little while after, and were so well liked for
their sodaine chaunge, and alteration of spirite,
that the olde fidelitie and value of mens
estimation, beeyng waied in the ballaunce of
newe found fancies, beganne to lose weight,
and wanted many graines of goodnesse (that
our Elders honoured) it hath suttellie been
solde, and finely laied vp, yet vsed ouer often
and tasted to muche, and yet the custome is
not so good, that it maie breede a Lawe in
mannes Nature, nor make men leaue the vsage
of olde vertue, for the cumiyng trade of
finenesse newe vice, that euery daie changeth
condition, and lookes neither to GOD, the
worlde, nor well doyng, but passeth to sonderie
practises in some kinde of sorte, againste
heauen and yearth, and so is carred cleane
from all hope of repentaunce, rounyng headlong
into a heape of hazardes.
            
               
The newe treasons, daungerous deuises,
deuelishe attemptes, and rebellious rages of
diuers wretched people (that for the reuenge
of a little wrong, settes abroche many broiles)
argues a marueilous decaie in the myndes
of men, that hath been giuen to doe good,
and expresseth plainely that our auncestours
noblenesse is out of memorie, and the worlde
is wonderfully enclined to followe badde customes,
and curious knackes of crueltie,
murtheryng freendes that neuer offended,
and fauouryng foes that daiely seekes mischeef.
The bloode of that honeste gentleman
Harry Dauells, cries out vppon those filthie
practises, and the murthers without mercie
committed of late, doeth manifestly declare,
the villanous exchaunge of this inconstaunte
worlde, whiche nouseleth bloodie hartes in
tyrannie, and bringes forthe the curssed fruit
of Caine, that God did not leaue vnpunished.
            You maie read of some noble warriours,
that after thei were banished their countrey,
through the furie of the people, and mutabilitie
of Fortune: yet thei behaued them selues
so worthely, when thei looked backwarde to
the bodie and bowelles of the natiue soile thei
were borne in, thei refrained their handes frō
               
dooyng violence, and kepte their hartes and
their heddes from woorkyng of iniuries, especially
towardes their Prince and Countrey,
whiche modeste and gentilnesse (when
it was well considered of) wan them a greater
credite then thei had before, and brought
them home againe, and in a good likyng of
the Commons euer after. But as you maye
read in many good aucthours, the goodnesse
of suche menne that honoured their countrey:
So maie you see the lightnesse of some people,
ledde so farre beyonde the boundes of obedience,
and loue of their Prince, that thei
leaue no shamelesse matter vnsought, nor no
mischeef vnministered, where thei ought to
bee profitable members of the state, and preseruatours
of the common weale.
            It is assuredly more thē miraculous (and
as wee might properly saie, a thing paste all
reason) to see a manne forsake his Countrie,
and cutte hymself in peeces, by abandonyng
the same, and then to runne a gaddyng after
euery shadowe, and giue hym self ouer to the
leadyng and gouernemente of a straunger,
who can not inwardlie esteeme hym, because
he hath betraied the bodie whereof he was a
member, and deceiued his owneself by sowyng

dissention, where duetie commaundeth
concorde, and he of duetie ought to bee a subiecte,
a matter that if menne would wisely
waye (and throughly looke into) might kepe
them from witlesse wanderyng abroad, and
preserue them at home in more quietnesse of
mynde.
            Well, now beholde what brusteth out of
rebellion, and chaunge of good conditions,
and regarde how God prepareth instrumentes,
to put them doune that Sathan hath aduanced,
and you shall finde that the almightie
fighteth the battaile, when the pollicie and
power of man faileth, or waxeth feble. You
maie remember, that markes this worlde,
how Shaen Oneall was strong in the feelde,
and yet wanted force and cunnyng, to keepe
his hedde on his shoulders. And an other called
Roorioege who delighted in rebellion,
was lefte headlesse ere he was ware, and all
by the prouidence and iuste Iudgemente of
the Almightie, who holdes the bridle in his
owne hande, and tourneth bothe horse and
man, the verie same waie he hath appoincted
for their destruction. And where one rebell
by sufferaunce escapeth the scourge, a thousande
lighteth in the lashe, and feles the whip

of Gods wrathe and displeasure.
            And maie not this laste example bee rehearsed,
for a testimonie of Gods veugaunce
when he listeth to strike: yes vndoubtedlie,
it maie hee recited, because Fitz Morrice
was thought wise, valiaunt, strong, learned,
experimented in Marshall affaires, and a
greate trauailer to sturre vp troubles, which
fell vpon his owne hedde, when neither wisedome
could preuent it, nor his rebellious power
could withstande Gods doyng and ordinaunce,
and who so deepely noteth the manner
of his death (and daungerous deastenie
that drewe hym to his ende) shall see the infinite
Maiestie of God shine, in the purpose
and determinations of men, especially when
thei goe about good thynges, whereby God
is knowen and glorified, and the worlde in
those purposes is dispatched of troublesome
rebelles.
            I praie you was not this a deuine worke,
when men of his owne nation and acquaintaunce,
were moued in courage, either to cō
               quere
Fitz Morrice, or suffer death in the attempte.
And after this resolution, wente so
manfully aboute their businesse, that all was
brought to suche passe (though with losse of

life to the executioners therof) as better could
not be deuised, nor be brought to effecte. The
acte was noble: the hazard greate: The manheade
not little. And the matter shall remain
regestered in the booke of Fame, whiles any
Borrowe, Borcke, or Toune, can sett forthe
good seruice, or shewe any notable exploite.
            Now the maner of his death is looked for,
but first the lādyng of hym self and his whole
companie should be spoken of, whiche was so
simple and so farre paste his hope, as neither
it dooeth merite remembraunce, nor carries
any pece of credite with it, recite it who pleaseth.
For albeit he made muche adoe, to bring
to passe muche matter, little was performed
to the purpose, in the answeryng of his owne
exspectation, for in deede diuerse thynges
whe
                  •
                contrary to that he desired: And albeeit
some strength by fortification he sought, yet
weakely and barely he beganne, and foolishely
ended his life. Though animated with
worse in condition then hym self, he tooke in
hande a greate aduenture, and dallied a while
on the hazarde of happe, and the aduaunture
of tyme: the one doubtfull, and the other subiecte
to chaunce, yet neither Fortunes daungerous
dealyng, nor tymes mutabilitie could
daunte his outragious desire, nor at any season

make hym shunne the daunger he was
in. But busiyng his braines and senses, about
needelesse sleightes, and subtile seditions, he
fell in the handes of his enemies, who charged
vppon hym moste valliauntly, and with
muche adoe ouercame him (because he stoutly
made defence) and stroke of his hedde, whē
least he looked for suche a desteuie, and shorte
dispatch of this world. Some reportes there
are bruted abroade (to affirme it for trothe I
can not) that one Borcke a gentilman for a
pardon graunted by the Lorde Iustice, for
the losse of a hande made promesse with the
same pardoned hande, to purchace the Princes
fauour, and so to kil Fitz Morrice, But
how soeuer the matter went, or the brethren
called Borcks agreed in that poinet. Foricertaine
Fitz Morrice loste his life, beyng hurt
by the Borckes, and shotte into the hedde by
a good and perfite Hargabozier, and had his
hedde striken of, although those that came against
him, were muche lesse in nomber then
hym self: A thyng to bee noted, and a matter
wherein often, right and trothe euer hath shined,
and gotten greate glorie, whiche is a
signe that victorie restes not in a multitude,
but dependeth rather in Iustice, and equitie

of the quarrell and cause.
            Thus the worlde maie beholde the wonders
that God woorketh: Good people maie
be ware, how thei offende the prince, and their
countrey. And rebelles are curbed, and made
holde in heddes by this open rebuke. And to
conclude, the opinion of thousandes is suche,
that a rebell liues without loue, wāders with
out witte, feightes in feare, dyes without honour,
and lies without graue, as a prey to the
wilde wolffe, and foode to the carren Crow,
lest as a spectacle for many eyes to loke into,
and shall reste as a perpetuall wonder to the
wise, and matter of reproche for euery tonge
to talke vppon. Now if better occasion had
procured me to put penne to paper, you had
not receiued this simple discourse at my hā
               des.
Thus farewell good Reader, till my
booke long promised bee Printed, that presently
is commyng out, and hath changed
the name of Chippes, and is
called Churchyardes
Choice.
            
         
      
   