
      
         
            
            
            THE Epitaph of Sir Phillip Sidney Knight, lately Lord Gouernour of Floshing.
            
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London by George Robinson for Thomas Cadman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the greate North-doore of S. Paules Church, at the signe of the Bible.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            To the right Worshipfull and vertuous Ladie the Ladie Sidney, that was wife of Sir Phillip Sidney now deceased.
            
               GOod Madame as my boldnes may be rebuked for this wilfull presumption, (in setting forth Verses of so vertuous a Knight whose value my knowledge cannot vtter) So ye forwardnes of my goodwill (if any offence happen) may be pardonable & make a free passage to the wofull Epitaph of your Ladishippes worthie Husband. But so excellent a Personage, (beautified with such noblenesse and learning) ought not to bee described and handled with the ignorant pen of so simple a writer. For who should speake of Achilles praise but Homer: yet good Ladie, in the bare & plaine phrase, of a meane writer, true things may be couched, and from weake and base words, some stately and hie matter may be gathered. For as out of Chaffe good Corne is sifted, and fine golde is drawne from the grosest Drosse: so out of little Flint stones men strike out great sparkes of Fire, and from many a small trifle great wealth & treasure doth arise. What needeth this Florish to bring in good liking and credite my sillie knowledge? or to what end serues these drie discourses in so flowing a world? where the sweete Fountaine and moysture of the Muses in this most fruitfull tyme, findes Tydes and seasons so replenished with water springs, that no soyle nor peece of ground in our land, but hath taisted & felt the gracious dewe of the Heauens:

I meane the bountie of this age (touching the quicknesse of sharpe sperites) is so beneficiall to thousands who haue reaped the chiefest Corne, that there is left no Seede nor Graine to no such an infortunate Gleaner as my selfe: Their workes, their Bookes, & their learned arguments in sondrie maners, doth shewe they haue happely gotten and gathered ye first crop of knowledge into their Barne: so that they which shall come after must either lose their labour, or bee driuen to walke peaking about the feelde to picke vp such forgotten eares of Corne, as the Reapers haue unwillingly left, or the ouersight of the world did carelesly looke vnto. The consait of these causes hath almost astonyed my muse. For the matter I treate on hath bene before both learnedly and sententiously spoken of. What course then can I holde, or compasse can I keepe? for both our speeches attends but to one purpose: which is but to shewe the life and death of one onely Parragon and renowmed Knight of England. When the substance of a true tale is at the first throughly conceiued, I can find no inuention to perswade a beleef of a second trueth to bee vnderstood. And when an other man hath tolde as much as I can imagine, my silence were as seemely as my further dispute of the matter. But yet by the way (vnder fauour be it spoken) though at one present instant, two seuerall Mothers haue brought into the world two sondrie Children yet neither in nature, shape nor cōdition the one proueth like the other: it may so fall out of these two Epitaphes (written on Sir Phillip Sidney) whose varietie, and inuentions, by strangenes of style may moue many Readers to consider the better of the matter penned. This my worke presented to your good Ladiship craueth that

credit, that as it may bee looked on, So it may passe as a memoriall, of such a worthie man, as it maketh mention of. I write not to renue any sorrowe (where there is to much sadnes alreadie) but to reuiue the heart with hope and gladnes, when it shall call to remembraunce, the generall loue and affection of the people towardes this rare Gentleman: whose noble inclination and forme of life, is as well seene & heard by the common report of the world, as though we sawe him aliue againe amongst vs. What greater ioye can a good wife haue then the hearing of the honorable report of so worthie an Husband? What Picture or Image can set forth any such presentatiō (to please either the mynd or eye) as true penned Uerses both voyde of flattry or any vaine respect? Or what can touch so nere the worthinesse of man, as the Pen that searcheth the secretes of nature, gropes the inward motions of the mind, and sets forth the hidden giftes of grace. If Appelles were aliue, he could but with his Pensell paint out the fauour and proportion of your Ladiships most well beloued: but an honest true Writer with his Pen, explayneth and setteth open al the vertues belonging to a noble Personage. So as farre as my poore knowledge and cunning may reach, I haue stretched my iudgement and opinion, of one in deede of the worthiest that euer I knewe borne in our tyme. Trusting that your Ladiship will giue good countenance to my labor, and doubting no whit but the world enbraseth my trauaile. For the generall consent of many multitudes procured my Pen to set forth this work, as knoweth God, who possesse your Ladishipp with peace rest and blessednesse.
            
               At humble commaundment, Thomas Churchyard.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The vvorthie Sir Phillip Sidney Knight his Epitaph, that was of late Lord Gouernour of Floshnig
            
            
               
                  A Greater losse then world well waies ‖ or may be toucht with pen,
               No lacke so much (in these our daies) as want of worthie men:
               Whē wealth is gon, yet wit or hap ‖ may quicklie get more good:
               But when the Tree hath lost his Sap ‖ farewell both braunch and bud.
               What sighes or sobbes shall now suffice ‖ to counterpaise the paine?
               What floods of teares, or weeping eyes ‖ may bring our losse againe:
               No sorrowe serues, we wayle to late ‖ our Jewell gay is gon,
               A speciall member of our state ‖ had Natures course held on.
               For kind did lay a liuely plot ‖ that farre surpass our skill,
               To long at large to tell God wot ‖ her cunning worke at will.
               But I may shew, how from a Child ‖ she fostred vp this man,
               And fraught him full of maners mild ‖ when he this world began,
               First knowledge ripe, in Schoole he caught ‖ to whet his noble spréete,
               As he had bin by Tully taught ‖ to flowe in sentence swéet.
               Both pen and tongue did aunswer mind ‖ as water-streames had r
                     •
                  n
               From Fountaine head by course of kind ‖ from whēce great floods be gon.
               A wit that could conceiue as fast ‖ as went quick view of eye:
               A sence that swift as Swallow past ‖ through matters rare and hye.
               His eare no sooner heard the sound ‖ of voyce or déepe foresight,
               But straight way iudgemēt passage found ‖ to bring dark words to light.
               His bountie blased like Torch by night ‖and dimde their Candles all,
               And 
                     ••
                  aynd both Lampe and Lanterne light ‖ where sparkes from flame did fall.
               His life with chast desires was deckt ‖ where euer he becam,
               
                  
As he had bin the Lords eleckt ‖ and made a chosen Lam.
               His countnaunce gaue a gladsome grace ‖ with manly pleasant showe,
               To  all that did beholde his face ‖ or would his fauour knowe.
               His learned speach had force to breake ‖ the thick and hardest yce,
               And looke what tōgue and mouth did speake ‖ the mind held most in price.
               In prime of youth Embastor sent ‖ to Emprour farr from hence,
               And wan such credite where he went ‖ that made him honord sence.
               Ranne faire at Tilt, like Mars his Sonne ‖ with couched Launce on brest,
               And good report of people won ‖ that passed all the rest.
               A man made out of goodliest mould ‖ as shape in waxe were wrought,
               Or Picture stoode in stampe of gold ‖ to please each gazers thought.
               An Heire in déede of great accoumpt ‖ whose hope great hap might haue,
               Yet muck made neuer mynd to mount ‖ for ought that Fortune gaue.
               His silent lookes sayd wisedome great ‖ did lodge in loftie brow:
               His patient heart (in chollers heate) supprest all passions throw.
               His inward gifts could closely shroude ‖ in humble courties cheere,
               As Phoebus hid his head in Cloude ‖ to shine at length more cleere.
               A portly presence passing fine ‖ with beautie furnisht well,
               Where vertues buds and grace deuine ‖ and daintie gifts did dwell.
               Well seene and read in diuers Artes ‖ his works they shewe the same:
               Well trauayld to, in sondrie partes ‖ to purchase péerelsse Fame,
               Brought home both language lawde and lore ‖ & might ye Lawrell weare,
               And crownd with Garland be therefore ‖ and style of Honor beare.
               In Conscience cause and Countries care ‖ to bloodie warres he went,
               Where loe on murthering Shot vnware ‖ alas his life he spent.
               To farre he ventred for renowne ‖ to short he made his skope:
               To soone that stately stalke fell downe ‖ in whom was such great hope.
               To late this world will warned bee ‖ to quick comes our dispatch:
               To blind is dazeled eyes to see ‖ where Death for life doth watch.
               Though manhood runnes in Armor gay ‖ where great exployts haue bin,
               Yet courage casts more men away ‖ then all the world can win.
               For Sidneis sake (O wicked Shot) our natiue Countrey cryes:
               Yea though his death great glorie got ‖ and Fame thereby doth rise,
               In wretched earth and Tombe God wot ‖ his worthie bodie lyes:
               Who left behinde by heauie lot ‖ a world of weeping eyes.
               But chiefly Prince and publick weale ‖ who waies his worth a right,
               
                  
A secret sigh or two they steale ‖ in thinking on this Knight.
               He feard no death, when one did craue ‖ if he would dye or no,
               Yet wisht some longer life to haue ‖ if God were pleased so.
               First to amend his life he sought ‖ a respite for a space,
               To purge his Soule that Christ had bought ‖ and therby purchase grace.
               Next only for Religions sake ‖ he crau'd a yere or two,
               Before from world he leaue did take ‖ that he some good might do.
               And last of all for Common weale ‖ he wisht a while to liue,
               That to the honor of our state ‖ he might some councell giue.
               Oh what desire was this of his ‖ from whence came that great minde:
               Was euer heauenlier thing then this ‖ brought forth of humaine kinde:
               No no, the Pearle of precious price ‖ is lost or stolne away,
               The head where dwelt each deepe deuice ‖ will here no longer stay,
               His trends and kindred wring their hands ‖ and heauie hearted goe:
               His wayling wife like Image stands ‖ and cannot speake for woe.
               His Seruants shake their heads and say ‖ (as men orecome with rage)
               Where is our Maister and our stay ‖ in this hard haples age.
               His Sisters life consumes away ‖ like Snow against the Sunne,
               His Brethren ban that dismoll day ‖ when his short race was runne.
               His Soldoiurs dolefull Dromme doth sound ‖ & march in mourning sort,
               And trayles the Ensigne on the ground ‖ in signe of sad La mort.
               
               But with exchaunge all chaunges goe ‖ for life comes death in place:
               For ioy comes payn, for wealth comes woe ‖ for woe & grief comes grace.
               So leaue his Soule, where saeftie is ‖ embraest in Abrahams brest,
               There let him sléepe with endles blis ‖ that here could take no rest.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   