
      
         
            
            
            An exhortation to all menne to take hede and beware of rebellion: wherein are set forth the causes, that commonlye moue men to rebellion, and that no cause is there, that ought to moue any man therevnto, with a discourse of the miserable effectes, that ensue thereof, and of the wretched ende, that all rebelles comme to, moste necessary to be redde in this seditiouse & troublesome tyme, made by Iohn Christoferson.
            ¶ At the ende whereof are ioyned two godlye Prayers, one for the Quenes highnes, verye conuenient to be sayd dayly of all her louing and faythfull Subiectes, and an other for the good & quiete estate of the whole realme.
            ¶ Reade the whole, and then Iudge.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the mooste excellent and vertuouse Queene, Marye by the grace of GOD, Quene of England, Fraunce, and Irelande, and defendour of the fayth, Iohn Christoferson her graces Chapleyne, & dayly oratour wisheth a long, a quiete, and a prosperous reygne with the daylye encrease of al godly vertue.
            
               LYke as there be manye and sondrye diseases (most gratious Soueraigne) which chaunsing to a mans body, so sore manye times trouble and vexe the same, that they not

onlye put it in great perill and daunger of death, but also at lengthe kill and destroye it altogether: So in a realme or common welth (whiche maye well be compared to a mans bodye) there are manye sore sicknesses, that oftentimes so greuously noye the same, that yf remedye be not founde out betime, they not only put it in great daunger of perishynge, but also in conclusion worke the vtter ruine and destruction thereof. And as when the bodye is sicke, Phisitions by frendes are diligently sought for, and medicines to cure the sicknes be with all spede prepared: So in a realme or common welth, that is with anye sore sicknes infected, euerye

one that fauoureth the same, is bounden to seke remedye therfore. For yf frendes for a priuate mans sake, wil (when his bodye is diseased) gladlye take paynes bothe to learne what disease he is troubled with, and also to gette 
                  •
               ome good Physycke for him, to thintent he may be deliuered from his disease, and restored to his helth agayne, muche more all those, that loue their countrye & the cōmon welthe thereof, whensoeuer it is with anye troublesome sicknesse anoyed, ought earnestly to trauayle: first to know what the sicknes is, and then to prouide some holsome medicines to put it away, yea and to seke al meanes possible clearely to del
                  •
               uer

their countrye from all perill & daunger thereof. We reade in the excellent Historiographer Herodotus,
               
                  Herodot. in his bo
                  
                     •
                  e called Clio, whych is the firste booke of his story. howe that the Babilonians made a lawe, that whensoeuer anye man fell sicke amonges them, he shuld be caried into ye market place, and there lye, to thintent that he might demaunde of euerye one, that repayred thither, whether they hadde bene troubled with the like disease, & how they were cured & made hole, so that the sicke man lying there, might by the same meanes, that they had vsed, be deliuered frō his sicknesse, and recouer his helth agayne. And by that lawe also euery man that came thither was bounde bothe to aske the

man, what sicknes he had, and also to shewe him. yf he knewe any remedye, that were good for it. By the example whereof euery one, that hartelye loueth his countrie, & earnestly tendereth the helth & welthe of the same, whensoeuer he seeth the body thereof (which lieth open before al mens eyes) with any kind of disease infected▪ & hathe learned what the sicknesse is, and eyther by experience, or otherwise can tel, what is good for it, is bound in conscience to declare it, to thende that his coūtry which is so vexed, may find some reliefe, and fare the better by it. For he muste consider, that in relieuing the whole bodye, he relieueth him selfe to, beyng a

membre thereof. For lyke as when the body is sicke all the members be partakers of the griefe and payne, that it suffreth: So agayne when the body findeth any ease, the mē
               bres to find great reliefe therin. Wherfore I for my parte because I playnlye se, that the bodye of my countrye (which I do greatlye lamente) hathe bene lately sore troubled with ye greu
                  •
               us sicknes of rebelliō, and as yet perhappes hathe some seditiouse folkes in it, thought it my moste bounden duetie to set forth in writynge suche a poore medicine for the relieuing of the same disease, as I iudged mete & cōuenient therefore. And albeit there be many remedies▪ which be noted

of learned men & good writers, whereby this grieuouse disease is wont to be cured:Remedies against rebellion. as diligent inquisition, that no vnlawful assembles be gathered: as graue and wise counseile, that when such are made they may be shortly by policie dissolued: as reasonable cōditions for the dissoluing therof to be offred: as force of armes when as no other meanes wil serue: as due execution of iustice vpon all such, as be offenders therin: as taking awaye of the causes, whereof rebellion commonlye groweth: and as that al suche, as haue rebelled, be spoyled of theyr harnesse, wherewith they defended themselfes in the time of rebellion. with diuerse other

suche lyke remedies, yet in mine opinion no more fitter remedye can there be founde, then that seditiouse mens hartes by gentle exhortatiō maye be throughly persuaded: firste that in rebellyng they mooste grieuously offende their lord God, & so putte their soules in ieopardie: secondarely yt they go aboute thereby to destroye theyr bodies, which shal therfore be put to a moste vyle and shamefull death: thirdly that they shall loose al yt they haue, by meanes therof, vndo theyr wiues and children, & disfame all their posteritie: laste of all that they shal be occasion, that their countrie shalbe most miserablye spoyled, and come to vtter ruine: For no man is so

farre from al reason (I truste) or so blinded with malice, that will not eyther with the feare of Gods plages, or with the daunger of his soule, or wyth the death of his body, or wyth the care, that he taketh for his wyfe and children, or with the losse of his goodes, & his good name to, or with the destruction of his countrie be moued to take hede alwaye, and be well ware, that he neuer auenture for any cause at all to rebell agaynste his prince, whome he is by God cōmaunded mooste hūbly to obeye. And we reade in good writers, that many rebelliōs haue bene appeased by the good & discrete exhortations of wise and learned men. For the people of Rome, whē
               
they were gathered together in a hyll,
                  Cicer. de 
                        〈◊〉
                      ora.
                called the holye hyll, neare vnto ye riuer of Aniene, thre myle frō the citie, & were fully minded to make rebellion agaynst their rulers, Marcus Valerius by a wise & an eloquent oration that he made, brought so to passe, that theyr heartes were by & by so well pacified, that they quietly departed euerye one home to theyr houses. The lyke dyd Lucius Valerius Potitus at such tyme,
                  Cicer. de 
                        ••
                     ar. orat.
                as the people of Rome had cōspired the death of ye senators: for by his graue & discrete exhortation, yt he made vnto thē, he so handled the matter, yt their furious rage was out of hande not only abated, but also throughly aswaged. Was not the souldiers

likewise of Publius Scipio,
               
                  Li
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     s decad. 
                        ••
                      lib. 8. whiche made a sore rebellion in their campe, quieted onely by an oration made by the same Scipio? Therfore this remedye of exhortation haue I prepared to relieue the sycke bodye of my countrye, whych is not yet throughlye recouered of the disease of rebellion, but hathe (I feare me) euen styll some rebelliouse hartes within it, whiche haue nede of such a medicine to cure them: most hartely beseching al my countrye menne to take it in good parte, and accepte good wyll, where as lacketh habilitye. For although there be manye learned men in thys realme, who for theyr excellent knowledge and wysedome coulde

muche more connynglye haue made this medicine▪ then I, & so haue tempered it wyth the goodly pouders of perfyte eloquence, that it shoulde perhappes haue wroughte much more effectuously in the patientes bodye, and bene more able to haue cured the dysease therof, yet none is there, that for the feruente loue he beareth to his countrye. woulde eyther more gladlye haue attempted it, or more wyllynglye to hys power accomplyshed the same. Wherefore my sure truste is, that bothe your hyghnes (mooste gratious soueraygne) to whome I offer thys my lytle treatise, and all other youre graces louynge subiectes, for whose be hofe I

haue wrytten it, wyll gentely accepte my paynes bestowed therein. And yf it so come to passe, that my laboure not onlye be allowed of youre grace, as I doubte not, but also worke in the readers hartes thereof suche an effecte▪ as I wishe it may, then shal I think that I haue receaued a worthy recompence for myne endeuoure. For neyther gayne, for whyche (God knoweth) I passe not, nor commendation, for whyche I loke not, moued me hereto, but only the harty affection, that I owe to my countrye, & my bounden duetie vnto your highnes, who of youre bountefull goodnesse where as I was destitute of all ayde and succoure, hath so

liberally prouided for me, that nowe I maye withoute care serue God, go to my booke, & do my duetie in that vocation, to which God hath called me. Which I beseche God I may do to his glory, and your graces honoure, for whose quiete and prosperouse raygne I shall not cease moste earnestlye to praye my life enduring.
            
               Your hyghnes Chapleyne and daylye oratoure Iohn Christoferson.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            An exhortation agaynst rebellion.
            
               ALbeit (mooste deare and welbeloued country men) many thinges bothe there be at this present, & also haue bene now of late yeares in this oure natiue contrie, that wold greatly pitye any faythful and true Englyshe mans hart to consider, as our outragiouse misbehauioure in worshyppynge of God, oure abhominable blasphemy agaynst him, & his blessed spouse ye catholike church, our wicked geastyng and raylyng agaynst the holy Sacramentes thereof, oure detestable swearyng by all the members of oure Sauioure Iesu Christe, oure presumptuouse

hartes puft vp with vntolerable pride, our gredy couetousnes, that can neuer be satisfied, oure extreame oppression of the poore and neadye, oure maliciouse hatred one against another, our bribery, extorsiō, and oure false dealinge: for all whych (excepte we earnestlye repent vs and amend betime) God wil powre downe his vē
               geaunce vpō vs, & wyth some miserable plages miserablye destroye vs, yet nothynge is there in mine opinion, that euery good manne ought with wepynge teares so sore to lamente, as to remembre suche deadly dissention & discord, as of late hath bene amonge vs, and as yet is, insomuche, that one cruellye seketh to shed an

others bloude, & one doth reioyse in an others destructiō. Wherby we well declare, that bothe the feare of God is banished from vs, wherewyth a Christen mans lustes and affections shuld be bridled, and charitie also, which is ye bonde of perfection, vtterlye broken amonge vs: for yf we feared God, we wold not so boldelye breake his holy will and commaundement, who hath most streyghtlye charged vs, that we beware of sedition & sheddyng of bloude. Or yf we loued one another, as we ought to do, we wold not one be glad of anothers displeasure, & one seke anothers death, but contrarywise, one reioyse in anothers welfare, and one studye

to defende another, one gently beare with another, and laboure by brotherlye loue to ioyne oure selues together agayne, whome discorde hathe so piteouslye torne asonder. But we fare lyke a noughtye surgion, that doth not go about to cure the wound of his patient, but layeth suche playsters vnto it, as may encreace it, and so prolonge the time, to thintent that he maye gayne more moneye thereby: for wheresoeuer we fynd but a litle sparkell of dissension, we so kindle it and set it on fire, that it turneth into a great flame, insomuche that where as before it might haue bene quenched with smal trauayle, now it is almooste vnpossible too

quenche it.
            Suche folkes as go about so wicked an enterprise,Makers of dissension. do litle remembre Salomons wordes, where he sayeth thus.Proue. 6.
               Sixe thinges there be, that oure Lorde God hateth, and the seuenth his soule doth specially abhorre: Prowde hyghe lookes: a lying tonge: handes, that shede innocent bloude: an hearte, that forgeth noughtie diuises: feete, that be readye to runne vnto mischiefe: a deceptfull witnesse, that vttereth lyes: and one, that soweth discorde amonges bretherne.
Nowe therfore seing, that we be all bretherne, partly by reason we professe one fayth, and partlye that we all be borne & broughte vp in one countrye, whosoeuer they be, yt seke to set vs at debate, they hepe vp ye hatred of God agaynst thē: for suche (as Salomon hathe told you) the soule of our lord

God dothe vtterlye abhorre. Let them be wel assured, that albeit they be spared at Gods hande for a season, to thintent that they maye forsake their synne betyme, and hartely be sory therfore, yet yf they walk forthe in their wyckednesse, they shalbe payed home at length for altogether, & then bewayle the tyme, that euer they were borne: and say with Hieremye the Prophete:Hier. 20.
               Cursed be the daye of our birth, and cursed be the tyme, that our mother brought vs into the world: and wyshe styll for death, and shall not dye.
This kynde of men doth continually trauayle to make strife, not only betwixt neighbor & neighbor, betwixte children & their parentes, betwixt husbandes

and their wiues, betwixt seruauntes and their maysters, but also betwixte subiectes & their Prince, and encourage them bothe to grudge at him, to disobey him, & also to make opē warre in the field agaynst him. And to thintēt that they may moue men more easely to such a mischeuouse enterprise,The wordes of rebelles. they cloke the matter with a goodly pretense, and tel them, that they intende nothynge elles, but to deliuer the poore commons from oppression, to restore them to their olde liberties, to cause the fermes yt be enhansed, to be lette for the olde rente, and the common pastures, that be taken in by gentlemen, to be layd open agayne, and to se that iustice be

executed in all partes, where as nowe moneye only (as thei saye) maketh a mans matter eyther good or badde, & whosoeuer wyll spede hys suite, must giue large rewardes, so that the poore manne, be his cause neuer so iust, shall haue a fall. They tell them besyde, that euerye man is bounde to loue his countrye, and to seke for the preseruation thereof, yt the good state of it do not decaye by meanes of euil rulers & counseylours. As for their Prince (they saye) they wyll dye and lyue with him, & they meane no more harme to him, then they doe to their owne soules. Be not these I praye you goodly paynted wordes to blynde the symple people

withall, yea and able to make men thynke and saye to, that suche folke meane well, & are faythfull Englishe menne, and tenderly loue their contrye? But it shalbe wisdome for euerye one of vs herein to folowe the example of the great wise man Vlysses, who saylynge by a daungerous sea, wherin were certayne mōsters called Sirenes,
               
                  Homer. libr. 12. Odyss.
                (whych were wont with their swete & pleasaunte songes to allure the passengers to approche vnto them, and then to drowne them & their shyppes to) both caused hym selfe to be fast bounde to the maste of the shyppe, & also with waxe stopped ye eares of all his felowes, that were in companye wyth him, to thintent that neyther

he, nor they should fall in anye peril by hearing of their swete voyces. For yf we suffer oure eares to be open, and let suche gaye glosynge wordes enter thereat, we shall surely be deceaued, as they be, that heare the sugered voyces of the Sirenes, & shall runne or we beware into extreame daunger, bothe of bodye and soule. For these folkes because they haue caste away the feare of God,The fashions of rebelles. which worketh in mens hartes humble & dewe obedience to god & their Prince, and also are eyther so desirous of honour, or so farre forth gone in obstinat heresye, that they passe not. what wickednes they attēpt: they runne forth headlyng to all kynde of mischiefe, and because

they loue well to haue company, they trauayle by all meanes to drawe other wyth them, & to make thē as madde as they them selfes be: And to thintent they may more easelye wynne them, they fall to flatter thē, & so (as the cōmon prouerbe is) with fayre woordes wold make fooles fayne, & tel thē one thing, whē they intend another, & saye they seke their welth, whē in dede they seke their destructiō: for it hath bene a cōmon practise alwayes amōges ye captaynes of rebels, to giue the simple people gaye wordes, & wt subtile driftes to entyce thē to myschiefe. Therfore let al subiectes, whē soeuer they are by anye suche cursed counseyle prouoked to

rebellion, and that they heare ye authors thereof vtter suche goodlye fayre wordes to perswade them, thynke verelye that those men are the deuyls ministers, and that they mind nothyng els, but the destruction bothe of their Prince▪ and their contrye to. But here let vs consider, yf their purpose were good, as thei wold make menne beleue, whether they ought to go aboute by force & rebellion to bringe it to passe, or rather to suffer theyr wronges patiently, and praye God hartely to reuenge them, yea and with an humble hart confesse, that such plages are iustlye fallen vpon them for theyr offēces, and earnestly beseche God to pardon them, and to

delyuer them from miserye, when his wyll is:
for our lord God sayeth vnto all suche,Rom. 13 as are wrongfully oppressed, that they muste referre their wronges vnto him,Psal. 49. and he wyll reuenge them: And call vpon him in their tribulation, and he wyll ayde and comfort them. But of this I purpose hereafter to speake more at large.
And nowe wyll I first brieflye note both in what poyntes rebellion consisteth, and also the causes, that moue men specially to rebellion, & then se whether there be any cause at all, that oughte to moue them in anye wyse thereto.
            There are three poyntes,Three poyntes, wherein rebellion standeth, wherein rebellion agaynste a Prince chiefly dothe consiste: murmur and grudge of mind, malitiouse and sclaunderous

wordes, and open force of armes and violence: Of the first growe priuie conspiracies, & misconstruing of all matters: of the seconde false rumours, and raylynge libelles: of the third mortall warre and cruel bloudeshed.
            The causes that specially moue men to rebellion,The causes of rebellion. as the excellent and greate learned Philosopher Aristotell writeth, are lucre,
                  Polit. 5. losse of goodes, honoure, dishonoure, welth, feare, contempt, and diuersite of maners or contryes, where vnto we may very well adde, the diuersitie of opinions and religion.
            And nowe to beginne with the first cause, and so to come to the rest in order, those that

for lucre and gayne make rebellion,Lucre are of two sortes, eyther they be poore and desyre to waxe riche, or els they be riche, and are not cōtented but still wold haue more, & thinke them happiest, yt are richest, so that theyr myndes are alway vnquiete, & care not by what meanes they get goodes, so they may be satisfyed.
            Suche folkes oftentymes do make sedition, thinkinge therby to come to theyr purpose. For the poore trust to be made riche by the spoile of the welthye,Poore men. wherevpon a great nombre of late yeres not only in forreyne realmes,The rebelles of Neathfolke. but also here at home amonge vs beinge blindely persuaded, that all mens goodes ought to be

common (which is an opinion most wicked and damnable) thought they shulde do god highe seruice, if they ridded al gentlemen out of the waye, robbed them of theyr riches, and made euery man equall with other.
            
               Riche men.The riche likewise, whose hartes the vncurable disease of couetousnes hath so sore infected, because they can no otherwise comme by more ryches, laye theyr heades together, and with folye so flatter them selfe, that they thynke with a litle money to make so many men, that none shalbe able to resiste theyr pestilent purpose, and so shall they get more richesse vpon one daye▪ then they had gathered all

theyr life before.
            Other there be,Losse of goodes & oppressiō. yt for losse of godes, as for that thei haue bene, or are with taxes and tributes sore oppressed, do desperatly aduenture to make rebellion, and will eyther by force ease them selfes of suche oppression, and wynne theyr libertye, that they hope for, or elles loose all that they haue, and theyr lyues to.
            Some folkes are so ambitiouse, yt all be it percase they be worthye no honoure,Ambitiō & desyre of honour yet will they seke alwayes possible to comme by honour, and whē no way els can be found, whereby they maye acheue theyr deuelishe desire, runne they headlyng to rebellion, & eyther with wickednes will

they wynne the horse (as the prouerbe is) or els loose bothe the horse and the sadle to, to theyr vtter confusion.
            Agayne manye there be, that when they haue bene in great honour,Losse of honour. and be eyther throughe theyr owne demerites, or otherwise depriued thereof, are so sore bitten by the stomake, that nothyng is there, that canne contente them, but they fume and frete, and fare like madde men, in so muche yt being weary of theyr lyues, they care not what become of them, and muche rather hadde they aduenture some wicked enterprise, and therein to dye, then longer to lyue in suche heauye miserye, & often repete thei with them

selfes thys sentence of Cicero:
                  Epist. 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     
                     li. 6. epi. 3
               when a man is not, as he hath bene, there is no cause, why he shuld desyre to lyue, and then go they forward in theyr frā
                  tike folye, & settinge all vpon sixe & seuen, thinke to be reuenged by trayterouse rebellion.
            
            Certayne are there, that welth maketh so wanton, that they wishe for warre to proue theyr valiantnesse,welth: and they counte peace to be cause of ydlenes, & that it maketh men hodipekes and cowardes. Therefore (saye they) menne must haue warre for the triall of their manhode. Suche folkes when they can pike anye pretēsed quarel agaynst their Prince, they thynke it but a pastyme to make sedition.
            
               Some also haue there bene in the worlde,Feare of punyshment. that for feare of punishment for their offences committed, became rebelles, & muche leuer had they to fight it out, then to fal into the handes of those, that had aucthoritie to punishe them: and because they were well assured, that yf they were ones taken, they shuld dye some shamefull death, coūted it better to take their aduenture in the open fielde, & rather so to dye wyth honour (as they thought) thē both to be pined in prison, and also to suffre deathe wt shame.
            Sometime rebellion chaunseth,Cont
                     •
                  pt. by reason that the prince is a person of no good qualities, but is peraduenture deformed, or croked, or hathe lytle

witte and lesse experience, or is a cowardly caytife and dastarde, or is corrupted with al kynde of vyce. For when the subiectes playnelye perceaue these defautes in the Prince, they begynne to contemne & despyse hym, and muche desyryng to haue a chaunge, they fall to make insurrection, and eyther by openforce, or priuie conspiracie they seke to rydde hym oute of the waye, trustynge thereby to gette them a better gouernoure: for so was both Sardanapalus spynnyng amonge women slayne,
                  Arist. Polit lib. 5. and Denyse the lesse also because he was a dronkarde, by Dion with thaduyse of the people killed.
            Manye tymes also ariseth sedition, by meanes that men

be of diuerse maners,Diuersitie of maners and contries. diuerse contries, and diuerse sortes of religion: for euery man loueth him, that is lyke in conditions to himselfe, and hateth the cō
               trary: so that faythfull frendshyp spryngeth of likelynes in maners: for whosoeuer is not delited wyth suche fantasies as we be delyted with, we can in no wyse hartely loue hym.
            The same happeneth amonges suche, as be of diuerse contries: for it hath oftentimes bene sene, that in cities where two sortes of people beyng of dyuerse nations haue dwelled, because that one could not beare another, they haue caused notable sedition, as we reade of the Troezenians & Achaeanes in a citie called Siba
                     •
                  is, and of the

Iewes and Gentyles in Hierusalem, & of the Catanianes and Siracusanes in Sicilie, of the Scottes and Pictes in Scotlande▪ and of the Saxones & Britones here in Englande.
            The same cometh often to passe, when as menne be of diuerse opinions,Diuersitie of opinions and religion. concernynge their fayth and religion: for albeit that many other matters make one to hate another, yet nothing is there. that bredeth so deadly hatred, as diuersitie of myndes, touching religion: whych thyng caused many notable and cruell cōmotions in the noble citie of Alexandria.
            
            And yf it so be, yt the Prince be of one fayth, and manye of hys subictes of another, although

he be neuer so good a ruler and gouernoure otherwise, yet can they by no meanes fauoure him, by reason of his religion, but sore grudge and repine styll at hym, & studye alwayes that they can, to withdrawe the heartes of all men from him, and at lengthe when they se occasion, openly rebell agaynst hym.
            Thus haue you heard shortlye the speciall causes, yt moue men to rebellion. Then let vs nowe wel weye, whether any of these, or anye other, that a man can ymagyne, oughte in anye wyse to make men aryse & rebell agaynst their Prince and gouernoure.
            If men be poore and neadye, and thynke they haue

wronge, because they haue no more good,Rebelliō of poore men for iucre and riche
                     •
                  . and therfore wyll by force shyfte for them selfes, and hazarde their lyues rather, then they wyll lyue anye longer in suche pouertie, such haue forgotten God, and do not remember,Prou. 2
                     •
                  
               
               that our Lord (as Salomon saith) made both, ye rich and the poore. And this they must cōsider, that there be degrees in euery cōmon welth, whiche be necessary for the good state thereof:
and some be higher, & some be lower, as it pleaseth God to appoynt them, & the one canne not lacke the other. For lyke as in a natural body there be some mēbers of more excellencie then the rest, partlye for the preseruation of it & partly for ye beautifying therof:

So there be in euery realme and common welth ryche and poore, gentlemen and simple▪ rulers and subiectes. And euerye one are placed in their degree. And as necessarye is it for the poore to haue men of hygher estate to defend them from the assaultes of their enemies, as it is for men of honor to haue poore men to toyle & trauayle for them: for we see, that the hyghe trees in euery foreste do defende the vnderwoode from all stormye and violente blastes. And albeit yt percace great men sometimes do not defende the poore, as they shuld do from wronges, but rather doe them wronge themselfes: yet let the poore praye God to amende them, &

by that meanes seke for remedye, and not repyne agaynste them, and so be disappoynted of all remedye. Besyde thys poore men (me thynke) shulde be ryghte glad of their estate, seyng that they be much more farther from daunger, then great men be, as daylye experience doth teache them.
            Agayne yf they would wel weye wyth them selfes, for what purpose menne be made poore by the hande of God, & that manye good folkes are pinched wt pouertie to proue their patience withall, to thin tente that they maye be more perfyte: and many euyll to are punished therewith for theyr synnefull lyfe to make them amende, and that god alwayes

dothe all for the beste, and maketh men eyther riche or pore, as he knoweth is mooste mete for them, they wold patiently suffer their pouertie, & thanke God hartelye for it, and of the miserye that their bodies are bewrapped with. they would make a soueraygne medicine to heale their sicke and sinfull soules withall. And yf they woulde learne this one lesson of saynt Augustyne, & practise it, I doubt not, but they shuld make their punyshmente medicinable.
                  Super Psal. 99. The lesson is this.
My sonne yf thou wepe, wepe wyth deuotion, wepe not wi
                     •
                  h grudge, nor wepe not wyth any token of stubborne pr
                     •
                  de: why wepest thou I praye th
                     •
                  e? because thou suffrest paynfull misery? That is a medicine for thee, and no punyshmente: It is to correcte thee, and not to dam
                     •
                  e thee: Go not aboute to putte the scourge

from thee, yf thou wilt not be put from the heritage of heauen, whych is prepared for thee.
                     De ue
                           •
                        . Apo. Se
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      28. 
               And agayne he sayth in another place thus: Lette not thy pouertye agreue thee, because thou can fynde nothynge, that is so riche as it. 
                     •
                  or what treasure can be compared with heauen, whyche is the rewarde of pouertie?
                     Epist. a
                           •
                         Heb. ho
                           •
                        
                      18.
                And S. Chrysostome sayeth: None is richer then he, that wyllyngly loueth pouertie, and embraceth the same wyth a gladde and ioyfull heart. Therefore let suche as be in pouertye, learne to suffre it patiently, and quietlye beare suche temporal punishment, yt they maye be rewarded therfore eternally.
And whensoeuer their deadly enemy the deuil dothe make thē grudge at their pouertie, & moueth them eyther by robbynge, or by rebellion to seke for ryches, let them remembre, that yf they

eyther robbe their neyghbor, or rebel agaynst their Prince: firste their bodies by the lawe shall iustly be put to most vyle and shamefull death, and after their cursed soules, that haue wroughte suche wyckednesse agaynst the expresse commaū
               dement of God, shalbe by most horrible feendes perpetually pyned in hell. But some synful wretches will not let to saye, that for an howre hangynge they wyll not lyue in care all their whole life. Such miserable folkes I feare me (I praye God they do not) thynke that their bodyes and soules dye both together, and that there is no other lyfe but thys: But alas they shall fynd after their departyng hence suche a lyfe,

or rather suche a myserable death, wherin they shall continually dye, and neuer be dead, insomuche that they shal most wofullye crye: wo be vnto vs, that when we liued in ye world passed, we wold neuer thynke vpon this worlde, that was then to come. Wherfore lette menne that eyther be borne in pouertie, & so cōtinue, or haue bene riche, and by their misdemenour are fallen into pouertie, remembre these lessons, & so shal they wel perceaue, that neyther ought thei to grudge at their pouertie, whyche is sent thē for their soules helth, nor go about to spoile, or make rebellion▪ which be playnly agaynst the cōmaundemente of God:
for he sayth, Thou shalt not

steale or robbe.And saynt Paule sayth: 
                  Rom. 13. That euery man ought to obey yt higher powers, because they be ordeyned of God: and whosoeuer withstandeth the power, withstandeth the ordinaunce of God.
If they then wyl wythstande Gods ordinaūce, they wrastell with their better, and shalbe shortlye ouerthrowen to their great confusion. For what became of the beggerye armye of Viriatus a thefe & a robber? Albeit that they (because they were poore and loked to get goodes by rebellion) wroughte muche wo to the Romaynes, agaynste whome they rebelled,
                  Oros. lib. 5. Cap. 4. and sore spoyled the noble countrye of Spayne, yet at lengthe were they by Fabius ouercome, and their captayne by the traynes

of his owne men was murdered. We reade also of a greate nombre of slaues, that rose in Sicilia who beinge persuaded, yt by rebellion they shulde bothe wynne their libertie, & also be come riche men,
                  Oros. lib. 5. ca. 9. made a sore commotion, and sore troubled the countrye of Sicilye, and some partes of Italy to, wher they hadde a great nombre to ioyne with them. But in conclusion they were rewarded accordyngly: for at a towne in Italye called Sinuessa, iiij. thousand of them were killed, and at Minturne an other towne in Italye foure hundreth were hanged. Such lyke lucke had the poore slaues, that rose in Sicilie, when Rutilius was Consul: for when Rutilius had taken

               Taurominium and Aetna, two of the strongest holdes, that the rebelles had to succoure them, there were slayne aboue .xx. thousande of these slaues and rebelles.
The cause of whych warre (as Orosius writeth) was miserable and wretched: for yf (as he sayeth) these slaues had not bene resisted, theyr maysters and rulers had bene vtterlye vndone and destroyed. And yet neyther part had any cause to triumphe: for both in the greate and heauye miseries, that this warre brought with it, and also in the vnluckye gayne that was gotten in the victorye, euen those that wanne the victory, hadde as greate a losse, as those that lost the fielde.
Wherefore no cause hath anye man to rebell for pouertie sake, and thereby to make him selfe riche, seinge that pouertie is the waye to perfection. (as I sayd before)

and rebellion leadeth a man to destruction of both body & soule: who then is so madde, or hath so lytle regard of hys owne helth, that wyll forsake that state, whyche God hathe sent him for a remedy, wherewyth to saue hys soule, and by vnlawfull meanes seke for yt state, that the deuyll dryueth hym to, therby to damne hys soule?
            As for riche men yf they rebell to encrease their ryches,Rebelliō of riche men to encrease their riches. their cause surelye is muche worse then y• cause of ye poore▪ whych is (as you haue heard) very nought to: for suche haue no neade at all, as the poore haue, except we cal those neadie, that are neuer contented, and so all couetouse wretches

may be wel called neady. But these folkes haue no neade to seke for liuynge, because they haue ynough, or elles a great deale to muche. And yf they hadde neade, yet neade is no cause (as we proued before) to moue a man to fall to rebellion.
For albeit that gready gaping for godes is daūgerous, And all they that desire to be riche (as wytnesseth Saynte Paule) fall into temptation,1. Tim. 6 and into the deuils s
                     •
                  are, and into many vayne & noysome despres, whych dryue men downe to vtter ruine and destruction, yet those that by violence trauayle to be riche, shall at lengthe loose their riches, and become pore or they beware.
For the holy Prophete sayeth, wo be to thee y• spoyleth men by force,Esa. 33. for thou shalbe

spoyled.I
                        •
                     ac. 2.
                And Abacuc the Prophete sayth lykewyse, That because thou haste robbed muche people, they that shal remayne, shal robbe thee,
And besyde this al riche folke that by reason of their greadye desire are moued to make commotion, shoulde consider with them selfes. that the gouernement of a Prince is the sauegarde of all their riches: for when gouernement is taken awaye, the lawes are troden vnder mens fete, and euery seditiouse personne will do what hym lyketh, because he feareth no punyshmente. So y• robbery then shalbe thought wel gotten good, and he that hath mooste yf he be feble and faynte harted, shall shortlye haue leest, and he that hath no

thyng, yf he be stronge & couragiouse, shall sone become a ryche man. Then is it not better for riche men euermore to beware of rebellion, and so quietlye to enioye that, that they haue, then for greadynes of gettynge more by some mischeuouse enterprice to loose all yt they haue? For he were a very foolishe marchaunt, me thynke, that when he passeth by the sea, & hath a fayre wind to driue him to the cōmon hauen, where he shoulde arriue, wold leaue his cōmon course, and trustyng that by saylyng throughe a certeyne daungerous sea, he shuld come to a cō
               trye, where he shoulde fynde muche riches, and althoughe he were in maner assured, that

in that peryllous passage he shulde drowne his shyppe and hym selfe to, yet wold he aduē
               ture, and so loose all the substaunce, that wyth great trauayle he had gotten before. Wherfore all they that by rebellion seke to be riche, seke in dede to be poore: Insomuche that suche haue no cause, why they shoulde rebell, but greate cause haue they, why they shuld by all meanes auoyde rebelliō, both for that they most greuously offende theyr lord God therby, & also that when soeuer it chaunseth they stand in daunger of loosyng all that they haue, and theyr lyues to. And as for ryches, seynge it oftentimes hurteth manye yt haue it, and that it is a greate

care both safely to kepe it, and godlye to bestowe it: I meruayle, that men eyther make so muche of it, or wyll by vnlawfull meanes go aboute to get it.
                  Augusty. e
                        ••
                     . 140.
For saynte Augustyne sayeth, That yf we lacke worldly ryches, let vs not by wycked wayes seke it here in this worlde, and yf we haue it, let vs by good dedes doyng lay it vp in heauen.
Whych thyng consydered, let all riche men contente them selfes with that, y• they haue, and care more for the well bestowynge of it, then for the gettynge of more, and alway beware, that neyther by rebellion, nor by no other vnlawfull meanes they seke for ryches.
            But nowe let vs see what cause they haue to rebell, that

be sore oppressed with taxes,Rebelliō for oppression in hope of libertie. and tributes, with pollynge & pilling, with rentes raysed, and with pastures enclosed: such perhappes haue cause to complayne, but no cause at all to make rebellion: but put the cace that y• prince be a noughty man, and so sore infected we the sinne of couetousnes, that he passeth not howe he come by money, so that he haue it, & so polleth the people with sore subsidies to satisfie hys vnsaciable auarice withal, must men therfore being thus piteously pylled, reuenge their owne quarell, and rebell agaynste hym, and goo aboute so to set thē selfes at libertie, or rather putte their whole matter to god, & pray to hym earnestlye,

to be their succoure. For it is wrytten of the children of Israell, when they were in Aegypte,Exod. 5. and were wt intollerable laboure and trauayle very sore afflicted by Pharao, king of that contry, howe that thei went vnto hym, & complained of their grefe, & made humble requeste, that they myght be more easely delt with, but nothinge got they at his hande, but a frowarde answere: And albeit that they coulde haue no remedy, yet wold they not rebell agaynst him, but went to Moyses and Aarō, & made their cōplaynt to them, & said: Oure lorde loke vpon vs. and iudge our cause: by reason wherof Moyses sayd to god: why lorde d
                     •
                  ste thou suffre thy people thus to be troubled? Then sayde oure lorde god to hym agayne:Exod. 6. Tell

the children of Israell, that I wyll both leade them oute of the paynfull prison of the Aegyptiās, wherin they be so sore afflicted, and also deliuer them oute of their thaldome and bondage▪
                If men that be vnder an euill prince, wolde earnestly weye this storye, they might learne two profytable lessōs of it: one to make their complaynt to ye prince, and humbly desire him to relieue them, and not by force to resist him, and rashely to rebel agaynst him: another to committe their matter to god, and complayne to hym, and truste suerly, that he will at lengthe deliuer them from their trouble, as he dydde the children of Israell. Agayne ye chyldren of Israel,Iudic. 3. when they were made slaues to Chusan Rasathaun the kyng of Mesopotamia,
               
and lyued vnder hym in sore seruitude the space of viij yeare, they went not about to ryse agaynst hym, and so to deliuer them selfes oute of bondage, but called to GOD for helpe and succoure, and he deliuered them by the helpe of Othoniel. And after that likewise whē they were brought into bondage by Eglon,I
                     •
                  d. 3, the kyng of Moab, and lyued vnder hym in great thraldome & misery .xviij. whole yeares together, they made no insurrection agaynste hym, that by that meanes they myghte be deliuered, but humblye suited to God for ayde: who mercifully lokyng vpon them, delyuered them by the handes of Aod, the sonne of Gera.

Wherfore yf it chaunce at any time, that an euil Prince hath the gouernement of a realme, let the people first make theyr humble petition to the prince, and beseche hym to be fauourable to them: and yf that wyl not auayle them, to seke then to his counseyle, and cōplayne vnto them, desyryng them to gyue him good aduertisemēt and entreate hym to be good to hys subiectes: for oftentymes good counseyle maye do muche in suche a cace. And let them neuer contrary to gods wyll & pleasure, eyther iudge of their Princes cōditions, because God is his iudge, nor seditiously lyfte vy theyr swordes agaynste hym, but folowynge the example of the chyldren

of Israel, let them wholy referre their cause to God, & make their humble petition to hym to be relieued, and they shal vndoub
                  •
               edlye at his handes haue remedye. Furthermore it were wysedome too thinke, yea & we must neades beleue it to, that Princes are appoynted by God: for Salomon sayth in the person of wisdome,Proue. 8. which is God him selfe, That by me kynges haue their rule. And then to ponder wel with our selfes, for what purpose God hath sent vs suche a wicked prince, whether through our noughtye lyfe we haue deserued to haue such a noughtye ruler, or yt God hathe suffred him to reygne ouer vs for a trial of oure patience. If we

haue deserued by our noughtye demeanour to haue suche one, as it may well be, that we haue, (for Iob sayth▪
               Iob. 34. that god sendeth a noughty dissembling ruler for the synnes of the people) then let vs do penaunce betyme, and by feruent prayer aske God hartely of pardon, & desyre hym, that whē he hath wel punished vs, to be merciful vnto vs, and deliuer vs from our misery, & alway earnestly beseche hym to giue y• prince grace to amend: for so shal we both helpe to saue him, & our selfes to. Agayn if such one be suffred to rule ouer vs for a trial of oure patience, thē leest we loose our patience, & the reward therof wt al, let vs patiētly beare him, & by patient suffringe encrease our patience. Furthermore yf

be, that we be by him so sore afflicted, that we can not possibly beare suche a burden anye longer, then muste we call to God for helpe and comfort▪ At whych tyme wythout doubte he wyll saye thus:Psal. 11.
               For the misery that the neady suffre, and the lamentation that the poore make to me, I wyll now aryse.Iob. 36. And so (as Iob sayeth) he wyll deliuer vs from our oppression.
In suche aduersitie we maye not loke to be deliuered, when we wil our selfes, but we must tary Gods pleasure, hauynge sure trust, that he will deliuer vs at length: for Salomon wryteth thus.Pro. 20. Tary for thy Lorde God, and he wyll delyuer thee. Lyke as the husbandman by & by after he hath sowen his ground loketh not to reape the frute

therof in all haste, but tarieth for a season: So we, when we haue made our petitiō to god, we muste patiently abide his pleasure, and he wyll surely send vs succour, when he shal thinke it moste conuenient for vs. Thus by prayer and patient suffringe shall we obtein oure purpose: And not onely that, but shalbe highlye rewarded to at goddes hande for our godly patience. Therfore all such as are for a season wyth sore paymentes or with enhansed rentes, or by any other meanes sore oppressed, let them neuer by vnlawfull wayes seke their deliuerye, & so be the cause of their owne destruction, seynge that they maye be well assured, that by

prayer and patience they shal not only haue their requeste, but also greate thākes of god, to whose wil they holy betoke thē. For yf a man were set fast in a close prison, and there sore pāged with painful tormētes, the same man yf so be, that he had a sure promisse of hym, yt had authoritie to deliuer him, that he should not only come forthe therof at a certein day, but shulde besides haue some liberal reward to recompence his greuouse punishment, yt he hadde so patientlye borne, were he not then worse then madde, if he would go aboute eyther to fight with ye gailour, auenturing with ye ieoperdie of his lyfe to get out by strong hande, or els to digge vp the

foundation of the prison, or to breake out, & so perhappes fall in hazarde of hanginge? wherfore whosoeuer is thus troubled, and longeth for the day of his deliuery, let hym passe on y• tyme wyth patience for a whyle, and take good comforte in his care, because he is assured, that god wyll at lengthe mercifully delyuer hym. But some men wyll say percase we shalbe deade, or ye day come. It may be so in veri dede, and therfore muche lesse nede they to passe for their tribulation. For yf death come, then shall they be not only of good comforte, because they haue borne their trouble patientli, but also glad of their paynes passed, because yt then shal

they be rewarded for them. Yet som there be, into whose heades these thinges wil not syncke, but they saye styl, why shulde we be obedien
                  •
               e to a noughty prince, or why shuld he haue al, and we littel or nothing?
These haue not lerned S. Peters lesson,1. Pet. 2.
                that men ought to obeye not only good godlye princes, but also such, as be threwed & rigorous.
For yt is verye cōmendable, yf a man suffre trouble, and that wrongfully to, because he knoweth the same to be acceptable before GOD. Nor they haue not redde the fable of ye belye and the other members of ye body,
                  Liu. Dec. 1. lib. 2. which Menenius Agrippa recyted vnto the people of Rome, when as they beganne to rebel against the consules and

chiefe rulers of ye citie, & were al ready gathered together in the hyll called Auentine, whych fable is written in Liuie after this sort.
            
               At such tyme as the mēbres & partes of the bodye did not, as they do now agree altogether wt one consent, but euery membre vsed his owne counseyle, and coulde speake for hymselfe, the reste of the members muche grudgynge, that by their care & trauayle al thynges shuld be soughte & gotten for the belies vse, and that ye bely shuld do nothinge, but lye at his ease in the myddest of them, and enioye suche pleasures, as they had prepared, conspired, and agreed together, that from thenceforth neyther the hand shulde lyfte

the meate to the mouthe, nor the mouth shoulde receaue it, nor the tethe shulde chowe it. Wherefore whyle as for thys displeasure, they went aboute to tame the bely with hunger, all the members and partes them selfes, yea and the whole body to, was in a maner clean consumed. Whervpon it well appeared, that the ministerye and seruice of the belye is not ydle or vayn, but that it nourisheth ye other partes, aswel as it is nourished it selfe, because it spreadeth abroade into all partes of the body the bloud, whych is cause of our life and strength, and the same when the meate is digested, is diuided into the vaynes to. Thus telleth Liuie.
               
                  
Christes disciple, and I praye God I set at nought all thynges visible & vnuisible, to thintent I may wynne my Lorde Iesus Christ. As for burning in a hoate fyre, as for to be hā
                  ged vpon a crosse, to be assaulted of wylde beastes, to haue my bones all to wrinched and frushed, to haue my membres cut all in peaces, to haue my whole body gronden with milstones, yea and to haue all the tormentes, that the deuyl can deuy
                     •
                  e, to fal vpon me, I passe not, so that I may wynne my swete sauiour Iesus Christe.
            
            Here you maye perceaue the stoute courage of Christes mightye champion, & the sore bruntes that he was mooste gladde to abide for the obteynyng

of that heauenlye victorye. For he knewe, that after this sort only shulde Christes souldiars fyghte. Lykewyse dyd the holy and blessed martyr Polycarpus,
               
                  Euseb 
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 4. when men were sent to take hym, and to bring him to the offices of that countrye, that he might be tormented for Christes fayth, came downe to them, & with a pleasaunt and mild countenaunce talked wyth them, and commaunded a table, and greate plentye of meate to be prepared for thē, and prayed them to eate & make good cheare: & desyred them, that in ye meane season he mighte haue licence to praye. Whych done, he dyd not resiste them, nor wente aboute to prepare a companye

of men (whych he being so wel loued in that countrie, might belike easelye haue done) to fight wyth them, & so to saue him selfe from theyr tormentrye, but most mekely & gentlye wente he forth with them, and after longe talke, that he had with the officers, as touchyng hys fayth, most frely & frankely in a greate audience of people defended it. Wherevpon all the people cried, this is the greate doctor of Asia, the father of the christen men, and ye destroyer of our Gods. Let hym be burned quicke. So when the fyre was made ready, he most wyllyngly lowsed hys gyrdell him selfe, and put of his clothes. And when thei would haue nayled hym faste

to the stake: no, sayd he, let me alone, as I am. For he that giueth me strength, to endure the hoate flames of fyre, wyl, I doubte not, gyue me grace stedfastly to stande by it without anye naylinge. So yt they dyd not nayle him at all, but onlye bounde his handes behynde hym. That done, he made his feruente prayer to GOD. Whyche ones ended, they set the stacke of woode on fyre, where was sene a wōderful miracle. For ye flame of fire lyke to a sayle clothe puffed ful of winde, compassed his body much like a vaulte, and his fleshe within was like burnynge golde. And there was felt a swete odour commynge from hym lyke frankensence

lye killed, and the other by a conspiracye murdred in the common counseyle house of Rome. Therefore ambition may be wel compared to a viper, whose bely the yonge vipers,
                  Aristot. lib. 6. de histor. anim.
                that she hath conceaued, eate oute, and so destroye her. For euery ambitious wretche that seketh by sedition to obteyne his purpose, when he hathe conceaued his trayterouse diuises, & goeth aboute to put them in practise, he accordyng to the vipers example is by the same broughte to his destruction.2. reg. 15. So dyd it happen to Absalon in old time whych hauyng a very ambitious mynde, sought by al meanes possible to withdrawe the hartes of the people from his

good godlye father king Dauid.
And standynge at the entrynge in of his fathers gate, said vnto euery one that came thither as a suiter: of what citie arte thou, or what is thy matter? Whych when he had hearde, me thinke (quod he) thou sayest good reason: but alas that I were a iudge, that al men that haue anye matter in suite, might come vnto me to thintent, that I might giue iust iudgement in his behalf.
And vnto euerye one yt came vnto hym, and hayist hym, he put forth his hand, and not only louingly embraced him, but kyndely kyssed hym to, supposing by that meanes to winne the heartes of the people. Whyche done, he gathered a

great armye, and made rebellion agaynste his owne naturall and most louynge father, thereby to dispossesse him of his crowne. But in the fielde a great nombre of his menne were slayne, and he hym selfe rydynge throughe a thycke woode, was taken betwixt ye bowes of a tree, and piteously hanged by the heere of hys heade. So that through hys presumptuouse ambitiō, whiche he thoughte to satisfye by rebellion, he came to a miserable & wretched end. Wherfore all ambitiouse folkes, that auenture suche cursed enterprises, let thē loke for the lyke, yf they take not hede, & beware betyme. For what broughte the wretched tyraunte Maximus
               
to vtter ruine, but that in the Emperoure Theodosius dayes,
                  Socrates lib. 5. hist ecclesias.
                when Valentinian (to whom thē
               pire of the West partes apperteyned) was but a childe, he made a sore rebellion, & was in good hope by force of armes to obteyne themperiall crowne. But Theodosius themperour being at the same time in the Easte partes, sore agreued with those newes, gathered a great power to fyght agaynst this rebelliouse tyraūt Maximus. And came in al haste to Melane, where the tyraunte was. Then the souldiars of Maximus hearyng of the cōming of themperour Theodosius, were sore affrayed of the matter, & streyght waye toke Maximus amonge them, bounde him, and

ledde him by and by to Theodosi
                     •
                  
                us. Who anone after receaued the rewarde of his rebellion, vnto whyche his ambitious heart had broughte hym.
                  Socra. lib. 5. histor. ecclesias.
                Agayne what a wretched end had Andragathius, an ambitiouse wretche, who by a priuie conspiracie kylled Gratianus themperour? Dyd he not in conclusion as sone as he hearde, that Maximus his mayster was putte to death, lepe into a riuer, and drowned him selfe? We reade also of one Eugenius a tyraunte,
                  Socra. lib. 5. histor. ecclesias.
                that in the sayde Emperours dayes blinded with ambition, aduentured too conspyre the yonge Emperoure Ualentinians death. And that he might more easelye brynge hys matter to passe, he vsed the counseyle

and ayde of Arbogastus, a man mete for suche a purpose. These two together wanne wyth fayre wordes and large promises themperours chamberlaynes, and made them kil their owne lord and mayster. Which done, Eugenius obteyned thempire of all the West partes. Wherfore Theodosius assone as he was certified hereof, takyng the matter very greuouslye (as he hadde good cause) streyght way prepared an armye agaynste hym, and made as muche haste toward hym, as he could possibly. And whē the armyes mette together, and that Theodosius hoste was in the field sore discomfited, Theodosius fallyng downe vpon hys knees in the middest of the armye,

prayed God most hartely to ayde and succoure him in that daungerous conflicte. And by and by all the dartes that were caste, and the arrowes that were shotte by Eugenius souldyars agaynst Theodosius men, were with a vehemente wynde dryuen backe agayne vpon them selfes: and the arrowes of Theodosius souldyars came also vpon thē with much more violence, wherewyth when Eugenius see his men sore endaungered, runnyng wyth all spede to Theodosius, fel downe at hys fete, most humbly besechyng hym of pardon. But or euer he had made an ende of hys tale▪ he was miserablye slayne of the souldyars.
            Many mo stories could I

recite for the proue hereof, but these at this present shall suffice▪ seing that by these onlye euery man may playnlye perceaue, that all those, yt seke for honor by rebellion, come at lengthe to a miserable and a wretched ende. And therby it well appeareth, yt their cause is moste wycked & damnable. For cōmonly whēsoeuer men take any enterprise on hande▪ yf their cause be iust, God will prosper them therein, but yf their cause be noughte▪ then shal they spede accordinglye.
            
               Pro. 5.For as Salomon wryteth, Wycked men shalbe catched in their owne cursed diuises, and fast fettred in the boundes of their offences.
Putte the case yt honor wolde make a man good, as it manye tymes

doth the contrary, shuld thou then labour to be good by vnlawfull meanes, or rather be good before yt thou mighte be better, when thou comeste to honor.Rome. 3.
               Fro
                     •
                   we must not (as saynt Paule writeth) do euill, that good may come thereof, but we must (as ye holy Prophete Dauid monisheth vs) eschue euil,Psal. 33. and do good, & euery daye ware better & better, & thinke yt when we are best of al, we be bad ynoughe.
Moreouer me think we shuld rather wisely despise worldly honor, then wretchedly desire it, both because yt those, yt haue it, manye times, yf they vsed not wel, are in daunger bothe of body & soule throughe it, & also yt whosoeuer commeth to it, by reason of their shorte &

transitory lyfe, they shall not long enioy it:
                  Epist. 82.
and beside this, (as Seneca saith) Riches, honor, authoritie, & suche lyke, which be in our conceite muche estemed, and yet of them selfes be very vile, do wythdrawe vs from that thinge, whiche is certaine, and yet haue they nothinge in them so gay and preciouse, that shulde allure oure myndes so to esteme thē, but only because we vse to set muche by them. For they are not praysed, because they be desyred, but they are desyred, because they be praysed.
            
            Nowe yf so be, we be desyrous of honoure in thys worlde, then seynge (as we reade in Aristotle) that honor is the reward of vertue, lette

vs earnestly studie for vertue, & vndoubtedlye we shalbe rewarded with honour. Let vs feare god, whych is the roote of wysdome and vertue, and honour shalbe giuen vs without our seking. But yf we wil walke in the pathes of vnrighteousnes, & go about to winne vs honour by wicked wayes we shall at length haue shame therby, and great dishonour.
For the Scripture sayth,Eccle. 10 
               that the sede of men, that feare God, shalbe honoured, and such as transgresse gods commaundementes, shall haue dishonor and shame.
And who I pray the transgresse and breake the cō
               maundement of GOD more, then rebelles, seynge that all men are strayghtly commaunded to honour their Prince, &

obeye him? Thus we see, that honor ought to cause no man to make rebellion, but all those that desire it, muste go the ryghte waye to it, that is to say, by vertue. There were in olde time at Rome .i
                  •
               . temples, thone called the temple of honoure, and thother the temple of vertue: and no man coulde comme to the Temple of honor, except he passed thoroughe the temple of vertue.
And Saluste sayeth,
                  Salust. in coniur, 
                        •
                     atil.
               
                yt a good man goeth the right waye to honor: but a wretche, because he lacketh good qualities, trauayleth to gette it by subtyll dryftes, and crafty deuises. Therfore whosoeuer longeth to gette honoure, lette hym

practsie him selfe in the schole of vertue, and he shal not fayle to come by his purpose.
            The same is to be considered of all suche,Rebelliō for ye losse of honor. as throughe theyr owne demerytes, or otherwyse are put from theyr honoure. For yf they be iustlye depryued, then no cause haue they to grudge or complayne. And yf they be wrongfullye, lette them commytte theyr matter wholy to God, and he wyll surelye reuenge them.
For GOD reuengeth the quarell of all those, that suffre iniurye,psal. 10
                     •
                  . and (as Dauid sayeth) sheweth them mercye, and ryghteouslye iudgeth theyr cause.
            
            If they haue iustlye deserued

suche a fall, then the beste is to thanke God hartelye for it, & to thinke that therby thei shal learne to feare God, to acknowledge his iustice, and to knowe them selfes to, whiche they percase wold neuer haue done, yf suche a chaunce had not happened.
            And if they patiently beare their aduersitie & become better by it, both god wil promot them to honoure agayne, and euery good man will haue pitie vpon them, will loue them, muche esteme them. and be glad to do for them. So that no cause haue they to be sory for suche a pr
                  •
               fytable and lucky losse. for as muche as by the losse of transitorye honor they haue wonne them gods

fauoure, and therby sure to haue eternall honoure: yea & whereas before by their misdemeanour they were so hated, and vtterly dispised, now thei are hartelye loued of all men, and muche estemed: for albeit that euerye man, yt is in aduersitie, if he patiently suffer ye same, is muche pitied, yet men of honour in such like case are muche more lamented.
And therfore Cicero sayth,
                  Orat. pro le. Manil.
               
                that the misery and heauy chaunses of princes and noble men moste of al other moue mens hartes to pitye. Why will then suche folkes seke any other remedy to recouer their honour, then patience, seinge that therby they shall gette them selfes very honoure in dede, whereas

they had but the shadowe of honour before.
For although that men be honored, yt haue great possessions and landes, be they neuer so bad, yet those only deserue honour, yt lyue a godly lyfe, and embrace all kinde of vertue. In whiche poynte, if a man be surely persuaded, bothe will he be contente wyth a meane estate, what honoure soeuer he haue had, and thinke to that he lacketh no honour, if he haue the fauoure of god, whiche farre passeth all worldlye honoure. But when a man is put from honour, eyther that he hath deserued it, or elles that ye rulers vniustlye so order hym, & can in no wise patiētly beare it but sekethe to reuenge hys

quarell by rebellion, then men that somethinge perhappes estemed hym before, beginne to abhorre hym, & all ye worlde, excepte those, that be his complices, crye out vpon hym, So that if he be neuer so noble a man borne, he shalbe from thence forth of all menne dispised, and his house & familye wyth all his posteritie therby much desteyned. For whē any of his children after his death falleth at wordes with anye person of estimation, he shalbe called by and by a traytours sōne. Whych word wil pearce him to ye very hart, because he perceaueth his stocke so sore dishonored. Whyche thinges depely cōsidered, these yt be in suche case, yf they haue anye

regarde eyther to their bounden duetie to Godward, or to the safegarde of them selfes, or to the estimation of theyr stocke, muste neades quiete theyr myndes, and contente thē selfes with the state that God hath sent them.
            
               Rebelliō 
                  
                     •
                  ōmynge of welth.As for those that fall to rebelliō through welth, I neade not to speake of them, because that eyther some of the foresaid causes, or els som of those yt folowe, do cōmonlye muche more moue thē, thē their welthe, so yt with those lessons, yt partly go before, & partli come after, they maye, I trust, be satisfied.
            
               Rebelliō for feare of punishment.Nowe as for suche, as make rebellion for to auoyde any daunger or punyshment,

when they labour to eschewe the lesser daunger, or euer they beware, they fall into the greater. For yf they haue cō
               mitted any offence, that deserueth punishment. yf so be thei patientlye suffre the punyshment, and thynke that they are worthelye punyshed, then men wyl pitie them, & thanke god for them, and wishe them wel, and wel report them. In somuche, that by their punishment they shall please God, & recouer their estimation agayne. But suche as for feare of punyshmente, whyche they haue most iustly deserued, wil spurne agaynst it, & to auoyde it, wyll make rebellion, where as by patiente suffrynge they myghte easelye haue made amendes,

& 
                  •
               o saued thē selfes and their estimation to, nowe most worthely shal loose both, & prouoke the indignation & wrath of God agaynst them. But yf so be they did remēbre, yt men ought not to lea
                  •
               e thē, that haue power to kill only ye body,Mat, 10. but him▪ that maye caste both body and soule into the paynful pitte of hel, they wold neuer for the sauing of ye one, put in aduenture the loosinge o
                  •
                both. Were not he, I praye you, a very foole, yt woulde rather, then he would loose one poore peny, loose al yt he hath, and for the auoydynge of one dayes punishment, and yt with out any daunger of his lyfe at all, wold lye lingeryng all the dayes, yt he hathe to lyue in a

most greuous and paynful prison? Or were not he wel worthye to be sicke, that rather then he wold take a medicine, whyche shoulde putte hym to payne but for a whyle, continue in hys sicknesse styll, and at lengthe put hys lyfe in ieoperdy therby? What causeth a wyse mayster of a shyppe, when he is in daunger, wyllyngly to cast out some of hys goodes, but that he had leuer loose some parte for sauynge of the reste, then loose altogether and hym selfe to? Wherfore all suche as feare punishment, it is better for thē with a shorte punishmente to paye their raunsom, then wt vnlawful eschewinge thereof, fall in daunger of perpetual punishmēt.

Cause then haue they none, yf they well consider, to make rebellion for feare of punyshement.
            Some there hath bene in the world,Rebelliō cominge of contēpt that by reason they did see their prince lacke good qualities, or for that he was croked or deformed, or that he was a noughty vicious liuer, haue rebelled, because they thoughte by y• meanes to get thē another.
But such litle remēbred the sayinges of Salomon & Iob, yt I recited before, of whyche the one telleth vs, that kynges and rulers be appoynted by God: and the other, that God oftentimes sendeth a noughtye dissemblyng Prince for the synnes of the people.
For yf the prince lacke

good qualities, it is not oure part to fynde faute with him, but to desire GOD to sende him better. Or yf he be deformed, we blame the worke of God, yf we disprayse him. For he made not him selfe, but god made him. Or yf he lyue vitiouslye, we be bounde to praye God hartely, that he wil vouchesafe to amende him, and to send him good counseyle, that maye and wyll earnestlye admonyshe him. As for to rebell agaynst him, because Goddes lawe, and the lawes of manne to do expresselye forbydde it, we oughte euermore to auoyde.
            But now let vs well weye the cause of those,Rebelli
                     •
                   for religion. that rebell for religion sake, whyche is

thought to some a mooste vrgent & weyghtye cause. Here men wyll saye, that yf they be constreyned by superiour powe
                  •
               s to forsake anye parte of their fayth, by which they are wel assured to be saued, that then they must rather obeye God, then man: and put their lyues in ieoperdie, rather thē they wil leaue their religion. This is verye wel sayde, and euerye Christen man must so do.
            But howe shuld we obeye rather God then man, or howe ought we to put our lyues in ieoperdie? Must we take the sworde in oure handes, and playe the part, that Peter did at the takyng of oure Sauiour? shall it not be sayde then

vnto vs,Mat. 26. as it was sayd to S. Peter at the same time, Put vp your swordes? For whosoeuer taketh a sword, intending to smite therwyth, shall peryshe by the sworde▪ Had not Peter, think you, as good cause to defend his mayster Christ, as anye man hath to defende his fayth and religion? Yes truelye. For yf we haue any cause to defend our fayth by the sworde, then as good cause had saynte Peter therewyth to defende our sauioure, the author of fayth. Why dyd not the holy Apostles, when they were commaū
               ded,Act. 9. that they shulde preache no more in Christes name, & that they were beaten for the same, defende them selfes by

stronge hande, and fight with their enemyes in such a good quarell? Or why did they patiently suffre persecution, and went their waye, much reioysyng, that they were thought worthye to suffre rebuke and displeasure for the name of Iesu? It is not in thys warre, yt menne make for their Lorde Christ, as it is in the warre betwixte prince and prince. For in the warre of worldly princes, suche alway gette the victory, as eyther by force beate downe their enemyes, or by policye putte them to flyght. But in Christes warre, those wynne the fielde, that beare awaye the strokes, & he that suffreth most, getteth ye moste noble victory. For the blessed

martyr Ignatius,
               
                  Euseb. histo. eccles. lib. 3. when he was conueyed out of Syria to Rome by tenne rigorous and rough souldyars (whome for theyr crueltye he calleth tenne leopardes) and was miserablye torne in peaces by wylde beastes▪ got a more excellent victorye, then euer dyd eyther Scipio Africanus, or Pompeius Magnus, two of the mooste noble captaynes of the Romaynes. And yet dyd he neuer eyther grudge at the matter, or giue them euil wordes, or lyfte vp hys hande to smyte eyther man or beast, but most feruently desyred to be beatē & buffeted, to be assaulted him selfe & tormented. For by that meanes was he assured, that he shoulde receaue at Christes

hande the victorious crowne in martyrdome, as it doth wel appeare by his owne wordes in an epystle, that he wrote to ye Romaynes,
                  Euseb his j
                        •
                     o. eccle. li
                        •
                     . 
                  
                     •
                  . wherin he saith thus.
Wolde to god I had ye beastes, yt are prepared to deuoure me, whome shortlye to find out is mine earnest desire: whome I shall flatter & make muche of, to thintente they may out of hand deuoure me. For I wolde not they shulde so handle me, as they haue done other, whome for feare thei did not ones touche. But if so be they be lothe to medle with me, I shal prouoke them to teare me. Pardō me good frendes I praye you, for I know, wh
                     •
                  t is expediente for me.
Nowe begynne I to be Christes
            
               So surely it fareth in a cō
               mon welth, when as the people grudge, yt their heades & gouernours lyue at ease, and eate vp al, as they thinke, that they wyth muche toyle and trauayle haue gotten, iudging him to be an ydle and an vnnecessarye membre, & therfore do they cōspire & rebel agaynst him. So yt therby it cometh to passe, y• with miserable spoyle & cruel bloudshede ye members of all the common welthe are in short space most miserably cōsumed & wasted. Therfore lette no man, that eyther loueth god, his contry, or hym selfe, when as he is oppressed, go aboute to seke remedy by rebellion, seinge yt both his cause is very nought

and that therby he shall not only prouoke Goddes wrath agaynst hym, but also put his contry and hym selfe to in ieopardye of destroynge.
            
               Rebelliō for ambition, and desire of honor.But nowe there be an other sort, that are so sore inflamed with ambition & desire of honor, yt thei think euery howre a day, and euery day a yeare. vntyll they may winne their wicked purpose. They be like to men that be sicke of a feruent burninge feuer, whiche drinke styl, and euer are drye, and the more that they drink, the more they desier to drink: Euen so it fareth wyth ambitiouse folke, whiche yf they come to anye worshippefull estate, are not so contented, but labour by al maner of meanes

still to clyme higher: & when neyther by flattery, nor frindshippe, nor liberall rewardes they cā satisfie their wretched desier, then fall they to conspiracy, & folow the steppes of cursed Catiline,
                  Salust. in coniur. Catil.
                whiche made men wene, that he mynded to reforme the common welthe of Rome, & restore ye libertie therof, when he intended nothinge elles, but to put downe the noble and wise rulers of ye citie, and place him selfe & his complices in their honorable rowines. But he was shortly spied out, and by the wyse policye of Cicero cleane disappoynted of hys purpose. What made Caesar and Pompeye the great to make ciuil warre, but only ambition? For as ye good

historiographer Dion sayeth▪
               
                  Vide Epit
                        •
                     nen Di
                     
                        ••
                     is in ui
                     
                        ••
                      Pōpeij
                albeit that manye other causes of that sedition were rekened to be, yet the verye cause in dede was their greate desire of honoure.
For the same wryter reporteth, that Pompeye would be inferiour to no man, and Caesar desired to be aboue al men.
Therfore caring nothing what became of their noble countrye, they thought to trye their manhode in ciuil warre. And so was law layde downe, and might was made ryght, and a roughe souldiar was more estemed, then a graue counseyler. But bothe twayne had an euyl ende. For the one (Pompeye I meane) was miserably at lengthe put to flight, & in conclusion cruellye

kensence. At lengthe, when the officers see, that the fyre woulde not burne hym, they commaunded the hangeman to thrust hym through with a sword: Out of which wounde there issued so muche bloude, that it quenched all the fyre, insomuche that it made the people greatlye to merueyle. Thus thys gloriouse martyr by his patient suffring wonne the fielde, and gotte a mooste glorious victory.
            Lykewyse a blessed Martyr,
                  Euseb. histo. 
                        •
                     ecles. lib. 5. whose name was Sanctus, when he was wyth all kynde of tormentes by the wycked paynems assaulted, to thintente that he shoulde denye CHRIST, and forsake his fayth and that he ioyfullye

suffred all, & constantlye stode in his profession, and therevpon at length had hoate burnyng plates of brasse layed to hys bare naked body, wherewyth hys skynne was so sore blistered, and bowned vp, that no man could knowe him, and after that because his enemies purposed to vanquish him, was tormented a freshe, whē his body as yet was all full of blysters, thys blessed martyr I saye, gladlye suffrynge all these bitter bruntes, gotte a more glorious victorye, then euer dyd the great conqueror Alexander. For Alexander got onlye a worldly estimation, ye shortly dothe fade & fall. But Sanctus wyth hys paynefull passion wonne himself such renowne

and glorye, as neuer shall perishe: Alexander by sheddynge of other mennes bloude became a conqueroure. But Sanctus by sheddyng of hys owne bloude gotte thys noble victory. Alexander had alwaye wyth him in his warres a greate and hughe hoste of men. But Sanctus armed wyth sure aff
                  •
               aunce in God, foughte the fielde alone withoute ayde and helpe of any man. Alexander ouercame only his worldlye enemyes, but Sanctus ouercame both worldly and goostly. So that such as valiantlye fyghte in Christes warre, gette a more glorious victory in suffryng thē selfes, then the most couragious captayne of all the worlde getteth in beatynge of other.

Wherefore whosoeuer wyll fyghte for hys fayth, muste fyght after this sort. He must not by moneye or fayre wordes gather together an hoste of men, and so make his partie good, but he muste by feruent prayer seke for helpe and ayde at Goddes hande, and so prepare him to the battayle. He must not put vpon him an helmet of steele, but he must put vpon him the helmet of helth.He must not arme him selfe with an habergeon of yron or syluer,Ephe. 6. 
                but he must arme him with the habergeon of fayth and charitie. He muste not take a sworde in his hande of mans makyng,1. thess. 5.
                but he muste take the sworde of Gods spirite, whyche is the worde of GOD.
And when he is thus armed, he

muste not rashelye vncalled steppe forth, and offer strokes to his enemyes, but he muste fyrste eyther moued by the spirite of God, offer him selfe, as many martyrs haue done, to suffer death, or elles be called forthe for the trial of hys fayth, and then gladly go, and abyde mooste greuouse and bitter tormentes, rather then he wyll denye anye parte of hys fayth.
            Thus the blessed and holy martyrs of Christe dydde alwayes in suche a lyke case. For those that suffred persecution in the two cruell tyrauntes dayes Decius,
               
                  Euseb. his sto. eccle. li. 6. &. 7 and Valerian, when the paynems went aboute by violence to destroy the fayth of CHRIST.

they made no conspiraces or rebellions agaynst those wycked princes, nor putte no harnes vpō their backes to fight openly in the field with them, nor intended not by force to withstande their deuelishe diuises, but mekely offred them selfes to dye for oure Sauiours sake, and besides they so embraced theyr enemies. that tormented them, that they prayed God most earnestly to pardon them.
            So dyd also ye godly martirs,
                  Euseb. his sto. eccle. li. 8. &. 9 that were cruelly persecuted by Diocletian & Maximine, two most fearce & frantike emperours. For when they did se not only their churches pulled downe to the grounde, but also many christen men violently hayled

and pulled to worshyp Idols, albeit that they were sore dismayed with the matter, yet woulde they not gather them selfes together, and make rebellion, and by that meanes defende bothe their fayth and thē selfes to, leste they might so loose the gloriouse crowne of martirdome, yt christe their head capitayne had prepared for thē. But when time came, yt they shuld be examined cōcernynge their fayth, they frelye confessynge the same, offered them selfes to be put to paynfull tormentrye, whyche they were farre more glade to goo to, then any man is to go to a feast. We read also a very notable story of the inhabitaūtes of Edessa:
                  Socra hi
                        •
                     
                     stor. eccle. lib. 4.
               It chaunsed on a time

that the Emperoure Valens, which was an heretike of the Arrians se
                     •
                  te, & bare deadlye hatred agayns
                     •
                  e all catholike folke, came thether, and commaunded all the folkes of that cytye, because they were very catholike, and hated his opinion, that they shulde not vpō payne of death come together to praye. Yet they not wythstandinge his cōmaundement the nexte daye after came to ye churche, as they were wonte to do. And when thēperours lieuetenaunt accompanied wt a great nomber of souldiars, mynded vpon the emperours cōmaundement to put thē to death, a pore woman with her childe braste throughe the middest of the souldyars, purposing

posinge to go to the churche. Wherewith the lieuetenaunt being sore offended, called her to hym, & asked her, whither she ranne so faste: And she answered, to ye churche, whervnto other folke resorted. Then the lieuetenaunte sayde. haste thou not hearde, yt the Emperours lieuetenaunt wil kil al, yt he shal find there? Yes verely, sayd ye woman: & therefore I make hast, yt I may be foūde among thē. Whiche when the lieuetenaunt heard, he muche maruayled at the madnes (as he thought) of those, yt so notwithstāding themperours cō
                  maundement, repayred together to ye churche. Whervpon he came to thēperour, & tolde him, that they were all verye

ready & willing to die for their faith.
These folkes albeit they were a great nōbre, yet would they make no resistence, but mekely offred them selfes to suffre death for their faythe, & so to declare their obedience both to god, and to the prince to. Saynte Ambrose likewise writeth of the cit
                  •
               zins of Melane,
                  Ambros. ad Marcel Soro
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     pi
                        •
                     t. 33. where he was byshoppe▪ that when themperor yonge Ualentiniane wold haue had them to haue delyuered vp their churches into the hādes of Auxentius an Heretyke, and ye rest of his adherentes, they refused to do hys cōmaundement, & yet neuertheles wold they not by force withstand or rebel agaynst him, but went & made humble suite vnto hym▪
               
and sayde:
We come to make request vnto your grace (most noble Emperour) and not to fyght with you. As for death or punyshmente we feare not, but we humbly beseche youre hyghnes to be good vnto vs. Thus to do, sayeth Saynte Ambrose, is mete for christen men, to thintente that bothe peace may be soughte for, and also the cōstant mayntenaūce of fayth and trueth shall not for daunger of death be giuen ouer.
Thus wryteth Saynt Ambrose. Lykewyse dyd the souldiars,
                  Socr
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     istor. eccle lib. 3. that were of Iuliane themperours garde, of whome a great nombre (amō
               ges whyche were Iouiniane, Ualentiniane, and Ualens, who were Emperours afterward)

when as they were cō
               maunded eyther to forsake their fayth, and to do sacrifice to Idols, or els to leaue their 
                  •
               owmes, and get them oute of the courte, were not onelye contented to loose their rowmes, but also all their goodes and lyues to for the defence of their fayth. And not ones dyd they murmur or grudge at the matter, nor wente not aboute to rebell agaynste Iulian, beynge a wretched tyraunte, but were ryghte glad to suffer wronge for Christes sake. And thus all godlye and blessed folkes vse to obeye rather God then man, and are well contented to dye for the mayntenaunce of their fayth: whyche rule euery good christen

man oughte alwaye to obserue. For when the prince commaundeth him to forsake hys fayth, then muste he prepare hym selfe to suffre all kynde of tormentes, rather then to fall from God, and his fayth. But yf the deuyll do moue hym to rebell and fyght agaynste hys Prince, and tell him that so he shal obeye God, do hym good seruice, and defende hys fayth, then lette hym remembre, that he is cō
               maunded by the holye worde of God, to be obediente not onely to good princes, but to noughtie princes to, and then let him tell the deuill, yt he lyeth, because al men are bidden to be obedient by expresse and plaine wordes of ye scripture.
            
               
               Mat, 
                     •
                  6.And our Sauiour Christe him self hath giuen vs a playn example thereof.
For when saynt Peter woulde haue defended hym with the sworde agaynst his enemyes, he sayd to hym thus: Doste thou not thynke, that I can make requeste to my father, and that he wyll sende me mo, then .xi
                     •
                   legions of Aungels to helpe me?
Therfore to be obedient, and to suffer for oure fayth, is Gods holy wyl and pleasure. But we neuer reade neyther in Scripture, nor in no holye wryter. that we shoulde eyther for our fayth, or for anye other cause ryse and rebell agaynst oure prince, nor arme o
                  •
               r selfe to fyght wyth him in the open fielde.
For whosoeuer

do so,Rom. 13 they (as witnesseth saynt Paule) seke theyr owne damnation.
Yet notwythstandynge yf the prince commaunde any thyng contrarye to the wyll of GOD, neyther must we do it, lest we highlye displease God, nor we muste not by force of armes resiste the Prince, lest we damne our owne soules, but bothe we must obeye God in styckynge fast to our fayth, and we must obeye the Prince to, I meane not in doing hys commaundement, whych is damnable, but in patient suffryng of paynful tormentes, that he will putte vs to, by reason we refuse to do that, that he biddeth vs. For thus wylleth y• scripture vs to do, and thus hathe all

good godly men done in time paste, and wyll do styll euen to the worldes ende. Yet lette men be well ware,We must weye, whether our fayth be sounde or no. and take good hede, whether their fayth, that they wil suffre for, be sounde or no. For manye due hath herein bene sore deceaued.
We read in Eusebius storye of Montanus a pestilent heretike,
                  Euse. histor. eccle lib. 5.
                that when he and his adherentes were conuyc
                     •
                  ed of theyr heresie, and so confounded, that they had nothing to saye, they began to boast, that they hadde many martyrs of their secte, & that that was a sure argument, that they had ye spirite of god. Unto whome it was aunswered, yt that was not alwayes true. For certeyn other sectes of heretikes

there be, that haue their false martyrs, but yet for all that we will not agree with them, and saye that they haue the trueth of their side. For the Marcionites, which do denie Christ, saye that they haue verye manye martyrs.
Thus wryteth Eusebius. Lykewyse now of late yeares, since Wicliffe here in Englande, Hus in Boheme▪ Luther in Germany, and Occolampadius amōges the Swichers began their he res
                  •
               es,Our f
                     ••
                  
                  se martyrs. many haue there bene in England, Fraunce, Germany, and in other countries to, that stiflye standynge in their fond opinions, haue bene burned at a stake. By reasō wher of amonge them, that fauored such false doctrine, they were taken for martyrs.
            
               But suche folkes lytle consider, what saynte Augustyne sayeth in an epistle, that he wryteth to Festus, as touchyng the Heretykes called Donatistes in thys wyse. 
What is more wretched, or more peruerse, then that menne (as the Donaristes do, whyche boaste themselfes, that they suffre persecution) wyll, when they be punyshed for their wickednesse, not only not be ashamed thereof, but loke to be praysed therfore. Who truelye are so enueygled eyther with a meruelous blindnes, or with a dā
                  nable presumption, that they wyll not knowe, or elles they make, as they dyd not know, that the paynes, that the martyrs do suffre, do not make

them true martyrs,
                     
                        •
                     span; maketh no
                        •
                      martyr
                        •
                     
                     ▪ but the cause. 1. P
                        •
                     t. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   but the cause, wherfore they suffre. For what thanke shall menne haue, as saynt Peter sayeth, yf they suffre as synners, and be well buffeted and beaten therfore? Then what reward shall those haue, that beynge infected with heresye, wyll rather dye, then reuoke ye same?
But many y• see the outward conuersation of diuerse of thē the pretensed vertue and holynesse,
                  
                     •
                  he 
                     〈◊〉
                   crisis of heretik
                     ••
                  
                the zeale yt they seme to beare to Gods trueth, the simplenesse, that appeareth in theyr life, the contempt of the worlde in apparence, the stedfast sticking in their opinions euen to then duryng of moste greuouse tormentes, do not onlye saye, but thinke to, that

they be very saynctes, and wil not let openly so to call them. Yet shall it be very necessarye for those folkes to take diligent hede, leste they be not by suche hipocrisie farre deceaued. For it is not ye outwarde vertuous behauiour onlye, yt maketh a man perfect and holye, nor it is not his stiffe sticking in errour and blindnesse, that maketh him a martyr. Wherefore suche men as pretende such holinesse, are most of al other to be taken hede of,
                  
                     •
                   heretike of honest life is moost peritious. by reason yt they seming holy to the world, most easelye deceaue ye people.
For Origen in an homelie vpō the .xvi. chap. of Ezechiel sayeth thus. 
            
               In my iudgement an heretike of honest

life, is muche more perillous & noysome, and his doctrine hath much more authoritie then his, whose noughty life dothe defile his doctrine. For he that leadeth his life in vice, can not easelye allure the people to heresie▪ nor can not by the shadowe of holines deceaue the simple hearers▪ But he yt is geuen to peruerse doctrine, & is an enemye to the doctrine of helth and saluation, and yet for all that is of an honest and sobre behauioure, intendeth nothyng elles, but to apparell hym selfe with the cloke of an honeste pretense & a sobre lyfe, and to couer hys craftye diuises with it, to thintente he maye the more deceaue hys hearers.
               
                  
Therfore let vs most diligently beware of heretikes, that be of honest and ver
                     •
                  uous behauiour, whose lyfe percase y• deuyll rather then God, hath so formed and framed. For as fowlers laye bates to allure byrdes wythall, to thintente they may more easelye catche them, so the deuyll hath a certeyne pretensed honestie, that is to saye, a snare to deceaue mens soules withall▪ to thintente that by suche honestye such meke behauiour, & suche righteousnesse, he maye more easelye catche mens soules, & by false preaching bring them into the snare. For the deuyill fyghteth by dyuerse subtyll traynes▪ to thende that he may destroye mankynde.
            
            
               
Thus wryteth Origene of the pretēsed vertue of heretikes.The pretensed cō
                  s
                     •
                  antie of heretikes Which as he aduiseth vs, it is necessary for vs to eschewe, leste it at the length deceaue vs. Now as for their earnest sticking in their lewde opinions, is no 
                  •
               ause, why any man shulde the▪ more credite them. For we read of diuerse anabaptistes, which is a sec
                  •
               e of heretykes as 
                  〈◊〉
                as the 
                  〈◊〉
                whyche haue suffred sond
                  •
               y kyndes of sore tormentes, yea and death to, rather th
                  •
               n they woulde refuse their adhominable heresie.
                  Ioan. Gastius de Anabap
                        ••
                      starū erro. lib. 1. For in a citie of Germany called Passakia, eyght of this see
                  •
                were burned vpon one day, and abode the 
                  ••
               hole flames of fyre with suche patience, as they made all men▪
               
that were present, to wonder at thē. Amonges whom was one man, that had two sonnes burned with hym, whome he most earnestli exhorted, y• thei shulde neuer for feare of the fyre, nor for the vntolerable paynes, yt they suffered therin forsake their opiniō. And ofte recited vnto them the martirdome of ye blessed Machabees.
            Agayne at a certayne place beside the ryuer of Rheue, 
                  •
               iue Anabaptistes in their floryshinge age, for their heresie were cast into the sayd ryuer, and drowned. Whyche when they were led to their death,In the same bok
                     •
                  
                not ones shranke at ye matter. At Basile lykewyse two chiefe ringleaders of this sect, when they were ledde throughe the

citie, & beatē with roddes, cast their eyes vpon hym, that bette them, with a mery countenaunce, and exhorted hym stoutly to do his office in that behalfe. For we (sayde they) most gladly do suffre for christ and the true vnderstanding of his worde in baptisme. Now then whēas we see folkes suffer greate punyshement with suche wonderfull patience, & pretende that they suffer for goddes word, shall we saye by and by that suche be martyrs, and take example of them to stycke to heresye, and so caste awaye both oure bodyes and soules? No no god forbyd, y• any christen man shuld do so, & through the noughtye exāple of the deuyls false martyrs,

become as mad as they. For yf constante and patiente suf
               
                  ••
               yng were 
                  •
               noughe to make martyrs, then shulde Turkes be martyrs. For we read of certayne Turkes,
                  Ioan. Gastius de erro. Ana baptistar.
                that had burned a good parte of Transilu
                     •
                  n
                     ••
                  
                and VVulachi
                     •
                  
               : whyche were taken prysoners by Chrystenmen. Who when as they shuld be put to execution, and be beheaded at 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                they were offred their pardon▪ if so be they woulde forsake. Mahometes law, and become christen. But neuer one of them woulde take y• offer, but most stifly standing 
                  〈◊〉
                their wicked profession, willingly went to their death. Wherfore let no man, eyther when he feeth an heretike flie out of his countrye, because he

wyll contynewe in heresye, or is banished for thesame, saye yt he is a confessoure, and suffreth persecution for y• truth, or when he seeth hym gladlye go to the fyre, & patiently suffer it, saye yt he dyeth a martyr, and that twentye thowsande wil rise of his asshes, but let hym be ryght sorye in his harte and lamente, that the deuyll was so great wyth him that he coulde make hym suffer the hoa
                  •
               e flames of fire for his wicked opinion, and so led hym streighte to the 
                  •
               eruente flames of euerlastynge fyre. And let him exhorte al men to take hede betyme, howe they enter into heresy, leste their goostlye enemy leade them so farre forth in it, that they shal

neuer turne backe agayne frō it. And let neyther such sufferynge of heretikes, nor their pretensed holines by any meanes deceaue vs. Nor lette vs not thinke, that any such thinges, howe gaye soeuer they seme in the sight of some men, can in any wise auayle the doers of them, because they be done not onelye agaynste the churche of God, but also without the circui
                  •
               ie & vnitie of ye same, and be contrarye to the catholike fayth thereof.
            For if suche folkes woulde bestowe all that they haue in helpinge the poore,No good dedes anay
                     •
                  eth, y• are done withoute the catholike churche. or if they woulde tame their bodyes wt fastynge and abstinence, or if they so loued their neighbors, that they would be content to

suffre death for theyr sakes, or if they were so earnestly bente to prayer, that they wold not cease to praye continually, or if they hadde suche a zeale to preache, that they wold most diligently occupie them selfes in that behalfe, yet shuld they bestowe all their trauayle in vayne, if so be they haue forsaken the catholike churche, and the true faith therof.
                  De fid. ad Pet.
               
For. S. Augustyn sayth, that neyther baptisme, nor any workes of mercy can profyte a man with out the felowshyppe of the catholike Churche.
                     De baptis lib. 4. contru. donat
                   And in an other place he sayeth, that those workes, that appertayne to the Churche, if they be done without the churche, they auaile nothinge to oure

saluation, because that with out the vnitye of the churche of god, there is no saluation at all.
The blessed martyr saynt Cyprian wryteth likewise,
                  Desimpli
                        •
                      pralat.
                as touching ye same poynte thus:
Such as are gathered together withoute Christes churche, thinke they, that when they be so gathered together, that they haue Christe with them? All suche, yf so be they be slayne for confessing Christes name, the blottes, yt they be defiled with all, are not washed away with the effusion of their bloud. For the heynous and sore sinne of discord is not purged from them by suffringe a paynfull passion.No man can be a martyr, y• is 
                        •
                     oute Christes churche. And a martyr can no man be, yt is not in the churche. Nor

no man can come to the kingdome of Christ, whiche hathe forsaken the churche, that shal reygne with Christe.
Then best it is for euery man, that mynded to be saued, yf he fall in trouble for his fayth sake, first to consider depelye, whether he be a member of Christes churche,Fayth is to be tried & how. and then to weye well, whether his fayth agreeth with the catholike fayth or no. And in weying thereof let him not sticke onlye to hys owne iudgement, which may sone deceaue him, but folowe the iudgemēte of those, whose doctrine hath euer from time to tyme bene by the whole churche of God well lyked & alowed.The spirite to be tried. And besyde to trye ye spirite, wherewith he is moued,

whether it be of God, or otherwise. Whyche maye in dede be very easely tried. For yf it be of God,Gods spirite. it will not resist the authoritie of the churche, nor laboure to disanull the same, but will alwayes submytte it selfe thervnto, as to the true spouse of Chryste, and gladly embrace the doctrine therof, as the doctrine of helth and saluation.The deuils spirite. But if it be the deuilles spirite, it wil then contemne the authoritie of the Churche, and wil trauayle to treade that vnder foote, and lewdly oftentimes belye it to, and rage and rayle agyanst the godly ordre therof, and blaspheme the blessed mysteryes and sacramentes therin, and call fastinge and

praying superstition, and call all them worke wongers, that medle wyth any such matters And presumptuously wil take vpon it to iudge of the depe secretes of the scripture, and despise the doctrine of the old holy fathers & doctors of the churche, & wil say yt they were men, & both might & did erre, and that men must beleue and read nothing but scripture, & allowe none interpretation thereof, but suche as they gather thē selfes by conferringe place with place, & that euery manne oughte to be his owne iudge in yt behalfe. Such a spirite of al those, yt be mēbres of Christes catholike churche, & purpose so to continue, & be saued at length, is to be vtterly auoyded,

lest lyke a snake, when it hath ones gotten in the heade, it drawe the whole bodye after it, and so be the destruction of all them, that receaue it. For suche a spirite will at lengthe moue men to disobeye theyr prince, yf he be a godly catholike man, yea and openly to rebell agaynst him. And hereby it may easelye be perceaued, yt it is not the spirite of God, because it stirreth men to fyghte agaynst God. For whosoeuer maketh warre agaynste hys prince, he maketh warre agaynst God, forasmuch as the prince is (as I sayd before) appoynted by God. And lyke as yf a worldly prince shulde ordeyn an officer, and giue him full aucthoritye to examyne

causes, and to execute suffice vnder hym, whosoeuer shuld withstande this officer, & go about to fight with him, shuld be worthely taken for a traytour, and shoulde haue, as he had deserued. So truelye seynge, that God hath appoynted the prince to be his officer and minister of iustice here in earth, what man soeuer rebelleth agaynste him, is a false traytour to God, and excepte he repente betime, he sha
                  ••
                receaue the rewarde of a traytour in hell. Besydes this the foresayde spirite maye be well knowen by the doctrine, that cometh from it. For the doctrine there of is full of pryde and presumption,The doctrine of y• deuils spirite. full of hypocrisie, full of blasphemie. It is

also contentiouse, stubborne and vnpatient, it is licentiouse and carnall, it is for the moste parte grounded vpon lyes, & blind ignorance.The doctrine of God. Iac. 3.
               But the doctrine and wisdome that cometh from heauen, (as saynt Iames sayeth) firste it is pure, secondarelye it is peaceable, & beside it is gentle, and obedient: it is also full of mercye and good workes: it will not iudge other: finallye it is simple and vnfayned.
Therfore whēsoeuer we be tempted to receaue any newe doctrine,New doctrine how it is to be 
                     ••
                  eyed. lette vs weye wel not only who are the teachers thereof, and whether it selfe haue the qualities of the wisedome and doctrine, that the holye Apostle sayeth, commeth from heauen aboue, but also what fruites springe out of it.
For if we perceaue both ye ministers therof to be good

godly men, and fauourers of Christes catholike churche, & also▪ the doctrine it selfe to be peaceable, gentle, obediente, and mercyful, and finally that it bringe for the suche fruytes, as saint Paul calleth the fruites of the spirite,Ga
                        •
                     . 5. that is to saye, Charitie, ioye, peace, longe suffrynge, gentlenes, goodnes, fayth, mekenes, and temperaunce, then maye we be bolde to embrace it, as the doctrine of GOD commynge from aboue, and to frame oure fayth, and beleue according to it.
But contrarye, yf not onelye the doctrine, that is taughte vs to be busye, vnquiete, headye, dysobediente, and cruell, but also the ministers thereof be hyghe mynded, presumptuouse, enemies

to the churche of Christ, raylers and gesters, lewde in their preaching, & morelewd in their behauiour, authors of carnal liberties, and maynteyners of the same, yea and beside this, if the fruites of their preaching be such,Gal. 5.
as the blessed Apostle Paule calleth the workes of the fleshe, that is to we
                     •
                  e, adu
                     •
                  utrye, horedo
                     •
                  e, filthines, wantonnesse, worshpppynge of Idols, witchecraffe, hatred, stryfe, emulation, anger▪ debate, dissention, sectes enuye, murder dronkennes, riotous ba
                     •
                  kettyng, & such 
                     •
                  ike, then must we thinke▪ that such doctrine is sowē abroad by our deadly enemye the deuyll, to poyson oure soules withall.
And we must be well ware, that we taste not thereof, leste it seminge to vs pleasaunte and swete at the fyrste,

worke in vs at the lengthe a sowre and sorowfull effecte. For yf we be ones infected with it, hardly shall we be deliuered of it. For it is a commō saying in England, that frenesie, heresie, & yelousie are hard to be cured. And yf it remayn styll within vs, it will in conclusion so corrupte oure selye souses, that they shalbe in daū
               ger of death euerlastinge. Therfore let euery man that loueth his soule, and is desyrous to saue it, take hede of peruerse doctrine, & neyther leane to muche to hys owne will and iudgement, lest therby he be foule deceaued, nor aduenture to sticke fast in the defence of a false fayth, and to ieoparde both body and soule

therfore. For yf he stande in it to the shedding of his bloude, althoughe he please him selfe neuer so muche therewith in this life, yet shall he not fayl to receaue the reward yt is prepared for obstinate blindnesse in another life. Of suche folke there be two sortes:Two sortes of stubborne heretikes. one that hath spiced cōsciences, & of a folishe feruent zeale, yt they haue to their fonde opinion, beinge persuaded, yt thei be in a truth wil rather loose al yt they haue & their liues to, thē any thing relent in their pretēsed truth. And no merueyle it is, forasmuch as both they be so with presūption blinded, yt they wil folow no mans iudgemēt, but their owne. & also so wedded to their will, yt they counte all

other mens counseyle vayne madnes & folye. By meanes where of they iudge lyes to be trueth, darkenes to be lighte, lewdenes to be learning, fantasticall folye to be perfite wisdome, blasphemous bablynge to be pure preachinge, vayne wordes to be wise reasons, pestilent heresie to be holesome doctrine, iust punishmente for the same to be persecution, obstinate stubbornesse to be patiente constancie, and death for false fayth to be martyrdome. So yt they may wel say by reason of their vncurable blindenes these wordes of the holye Prophete Esaye.Esa. 59.
               We haue loked for the lyghte, and 
                     •
                  o here is darkenesse, we haue soughte for cleare brightnes, & haue walked in cloudie mistes, we haue

groped for the wall like blindemen, and lyke folkes that haue lost their light, we haue touched the same. We haue stumbled At noo
                     ••
                   daye, as though we hadde 
                     •••
                  ked light, and haue bene besette with darkenes, as though we had bene dead.
For who, I praye you, seketh more for the lyghte of trueth in apparence, then these men do▪ Yet when they haue long loked for it,Truth is onlye in ye church of God. they fynde it not, 
                  •
               ecause that where it is, that is to saye in the Churche of God, they seke it not. Therefore after their longe sekyng▪ they may well saye, lo here is darkenes. They seke also the cleare brightnes of the Gospell, but by reason they take a wronge waye to come to it, they neuer come neare it. For all such folke leauing the high way of the catholike fayth, do

take the pathe of pestilent heresie. And whē they are ones wel entred into their iorneye▪
               The bywayes of heresie. they fynde many bywayes, & one sayeth this is the waye, and another sayth, that is the waye, and the thirde fyndeth the thirde waye, and euerye one taketh his owne waye, in so muche yt after they be gone out of the hyghe waye, they neuer mete together agayne, nor neuer one of them findeth the 
                  〈◊〉
                trueth of the Gospell, that he seketh for, except God sende hym grace to returne backe to the highe waye agayne.
For they that intende to come to the cleare lighte of the trueth must folowe thexample of the children of IsraandThe way to truth. saye as they sayde to the

king of Edom,Num. 20
                we will go the common hyghe waye, and turne ney
                     •
                  her on the ryght hande, nor on the left hande▪
               
By which cōmon hyghe waye is vnderstanded the waye, yt leadeth a man to trueth & life. And yf a man knowe not this waye, & that one tell him this is it, and another tell him that is it, howe shall he then do 
                  •
               o learne it.The guide to truthe is the catholike churche. Sure guyde hathe he none, but only the holye catholike churche, ye true spouse of Christ. Therfore lette hym learne the waye of her, & then shall he not fayle to go righte in his iourneye.
            Agayne that sorte of men, that I a litle before tolde you of, like blindemen they grope for the wall, wherof Christ is the corner stone, but they neuer

find it. And somtyme they stumble vpon some peece of it, but they neuer come within in it, by reason that they will not ones open their eyes to find out the dore, that leadeth a man into it. Yea and if there come anye good manne to the doore, and spye them thus sometyme gropynge, and sometyme stumblynge, and bydde them open theyr eyes, and come to the dore, they go forth gropinge still, and tell hym, that they see verye well, and that he is blind hym
                  •
               elfe, and moue hym to come to them▪ and grope as they do. For they feare nothinge, but that at length they shall finde oute the true dore. Thus for oughte that anye good charitable

man can do, they wil not leaue their groping, till in conclusion they percase stumble vpon some peuish wicket,Wicliffes wicket. such one as Wicliffe made for hys churche, when he had forsakē the churche of Christe. And then thinke they them selfes well spedde, and beleue that that is the true dore, where in dede it is but a very wicket made only to wynde men into the mayse of heresye, in whiche they shalbe alwaye seking, and neuer finde ende, sauing the wofull ende, that the wicked fende leadeth al them to, that haue forsaken the common waye of the Catholike churche, and walke styll forth in the perillous pathes of pestilent heresye.
            
               Another sort is there,The second sorte of stubborne heretikes. that because they haue eyther by preaching, or elles by writing setforth and maynteyned heresye before, they will sticke fast to it, lest yf they should recant, and returne home to the catholike churche, they shulde be taken for light and vnconstant men, and so loose their estimation. Be not these very wise men trowe you, that albeit they knowe, yt the trueth is agaynst them, and that thei haue labored by all meanes to subdue the same, yet neuerthelesse forasmuche as they wyll seme constant, they will not receaue the trueth, but stande stiflye in their opinion▪ and rather suffre death bothe of bodye and soule, then they

will acknowledge their error and blindnes? Might not the Prophete Hiere my speake vnto them,Hiere. 5. as he did in olde time to the Iewes after this 
                  •
               orte.
Heare you folyshe people, which be hartlesse, and haue eyes and see not, & eares & heare not.
For these folke both see and heare the trueth, and yet for wilfull pryde will they neyther see it, nor heare it. They be very lyke to a folishe man, that goeth a iourneye, & when he hath taken ye wronge waye him selfe, and caused other to folowe hym to, at length albeit he perceaueth▪ yt he hath gone amisse, yet neuerthelesse will he holde on styll, rather thē turne to the right waye agayne, because he wyl not 
                  •
               eme to his cōpanye to be

deceaued. But such folke forgette (I thinke) that for the sauyng of their worldlye estimation, they shall loose their estimation with God, and so fall in daunger to be damned for euer. But yf so be they shuld repent their folye, & returne to the catholike fayth, of whome (I praye you) shuld they loose estimation▪ whiche they studye so muche to saue? Of none in dede, saue onely of those, that be blynded, as they be. What greate losse then shall they haue, yf they loose the estimation of suche, as be noughte? Me thynke rather, that they should muche gayne by it. For lyke as a marchaunt that getteth a greate deale of golde for a litle leade,

winneth muche, and waxeth verye riche thereby▪ so those that for loosing the commendation of euill men, winne thē selfes the prayse of good men, hathe vndoubtedlye a greate au
                  •
               untage. Why do they not folowe the example of Hector,
               
                  Ci
                        •
                     er. in epist. ad Catonē. li 14. epist. 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                which sayd, that he was glad to be praysed of him, that was a man worthye of prayse hym selfe. If they wold so do, what a great comfort then shoulde they conceaue in their hartes seing that they might be well assured, that bothe all good godlye menne woulde muche commende them, if they mekelye acknowledginge their erroure, woulde be sorye for it, and God hymselfe to, would be gratious and mercifull to

them. By meanes whereof, they shuld not onlye encrease their estimation in the world▪ but also saue their soules, which shulde otherwise haue perished.
            Therfore for such a fayth, as they hold, let neyther thē, nor no man elles, that eyther feareth GOD, or loueth hys owne soule aduenture to suffre death.
And yf they be troubled for it, and peraduenture shutte vp in prison, lette them not then glorye in their fetters, as though they were Apostles, and write letters of comforte one to another in an Apostles style after this sorte, Grace and peace be with you from god our father, and the Lord Iesus Christe, nor lette them not exhort one

another to sticke fast in theyr fonde opinion,
and say good brother in the lordes name shewe youre selfe nowe to be the true minister of god in maynteyning his holy word, nor let them not craftly couer theyr contagiouse heresye with suche a gaye coloured cloke, lest they both deceaue them selfes, and a great many mo to, for whose soules they shall make aunswere, but let them call to remembraunce the wordes of saynte Paule, that he wryteth to the Corinthians, whiche be these:
Such false apostles are crafty workemen,2. cor. 11. and fashion them selfes to be like Christes apostels: and no marueyle is it. For satā chaunseth hym selfe into the forme of

an Aungell of lyghte. Therefore it is no greate wonder then, yf hys ministers fashion them selfes lyke to the ministers of Iustice. And when they haue throughlye weyed these wordes, let them marke well,
whether they be not such like them selfes, as saynt Paule speaketh of, and so spying at length theyr wrong fayth, let them neuer stand longer in it, nor thinke that they are wiser then all the worlde beside, but like good children with weping teares returne to their mother the church, humblie aske hir spouse mercy, & desire hym to pardon their folie. For excepte they do thus, let them neuer looke to be Gods chyldren.
            
               Because that as saynt Cyprian sayeth,
                  Cyp
                        •
                     lan. in epist.
               
                no manne can haue god his father, excep
                     •
                   he take the Churche for his mother.
Now then seing, that for such a fond fayth no man ought to put him selfe in anye trouble, muche lesse ought he to make rebellion for the maynteynaunce of it. For yf it be true, (as we haue proued before) y• for the syncere and true fayth of Christ no man maye withoute daunger of damnation aduēture to rebell▪ then much lesse ought he for a false fayth to rebell and ryse agaynst his prince. Wherfore when as for anye cause that can be ymagined, our aduersary the deuil, the aucthor of discord moueth vs to rebellion, let vs then remēbre,

that no cause is there▪ (as we haue declared before, for which a man may make rebellion, & so shall we alwayes vanquishe the deuyll, be obedient to our prince, and therin obey god to, and finally eschewe the deuelishe and detestable crime of rebelliō, which bringeth all those, that auenture vpon it, to vtter destruction and ruine. Now moste dearly beloued contrye men, seyng that hetherto we haue both opened the causes, that commonly moue men to rebellion, and also proued, that for none of them, nor no other beside them, men must rebell, it shall be well done hereafter to cōsider likewise the causes. which haue now of late made

men to rebell agaynste oure mooste gratiouse soueraygne Ladye the Queene, and to gyue all men warnynge to take hede from hence forth of suche a wicked and cruell enterprise.The causes of 
                     〈◊〉
                   rebellion. Wise men that haue well weyed this matter, reken two causes specially, that made men this last time make rebellion: One, to delyuer our countrie from the oppression of straungers, as it was reported, and another to restore agayne Luthers lewde religion, which god and the Queenes highnes had lately banished out of the realme. Which two causes may be wel referred to the causes declared heretofore, seing y• in effect they be included in them.

Yet forasmuche as it is necessary at this present particularly to speake of them, I shall hereafter set them forthe at large, to thintēt that al mens hartes may be the better quieted in that behalfe.
            The fyrst cause was only a cause pretensed, and was thought to many men somewhat reasonable, and therby was not a few deceaued with the goodly colowre therof. For when the simple people heard, that the head capitayne of this rebellion, intended nothing els, but to stoppe the Spanyardes from entringe into this realme, and to bring to passe, that no foreyne prince shuld mary with the queenes highnes, lest we shuld by that

meanes (as he sayde) be made bondemen and slaues contrary to the nature of all English menne, and that he loued the Queenes grace & all her subiectes, as his owne lyfe, and sought nothing, but yt shoulde be to her honour, and the commoditie & welth of the whole realme, they thought it was a good godlye purpose, & were by & by persuaded therewith, and sayde that there was no man, that was faythful and louynge to his countrie, but he would be gladde to spend his bloude in such a good quarel.
            Thus were the sely folke, that knew not the very cause, why this rebellion was made, by this subtyll pretense foulye deceaued. And like poore birdes▪
               
that in a great snowe can get no meate, with this bayte were (or euer they wiste) catched to their great confusion. But putte the case. that this had bene their intent in dede▪ shuld they therfore haue gone aboute to make rebellion, and where as they be commaunded by GOD to obeye the Queene, their mooste lawfull heade and gouernesse, shulde they rule her, and in a matter wherin euery bodye bothe by Goddes lawe and mans hath free libertie to do, as hym lyketh, shulde they by force lyke rigorouse tyrauntes, cōstrayn her to satisfie their fantasies, in that behalfe, and to marry whome they would appoynte her? Who hath so muche aucthoritie

(I praye you) in making other folkes marriages, as the parētes haue in marryinge of their owne children? And yet for al that, they may not compell them to marrye, whome they lyste, but they must haue their consent therin.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 24
For so dyd Laban and Bath
                  •
               ell, when their doughter Rebecca shuld be sent with Abraams seruaūt to be married to Isaac, saying thus. Let vs cal the gyrle, and aske her minde. And when she came, they asked her: Wilt thou go with this man? who aunswered: I am well contented to go.
Therefore seing the children, which ought to be at the parentes cōmaundement, muste agree and consent to their owne marriage, shall not princes then, to

whome al subiectes are bound to be obedient, be at libertie to appoynt their owne marriages?What mariage i
                     •
                  . And agayne because ye marriage is a ioyninge together of a man and a womanne freely and lawfullye made for the bryngyng forth of childrē, howe can it freelye be made, when eyther the man, or the woman is by force constrayned therevnto. And lawfull matrimonye can it not be, except it freelye be made by the full consent of bothe parties.
                  Super Mat. hom 32.
For S. Chrysostome sayeth▪ that carnall copulatiō maketh not matrimony, but the wyl & consent of the parties. Then forasmuche as bothe by Gods lawe and mans it playnly appeareth, that matrimony can

not be good, except it be made by the free consent of the parties, let no true subiect thinke muche, that the Quenes highnes hathe bestowed her selfe, where she lyketh and loueth.
No no euery one that loueth her grace hartely, wil be glad that she marieth suche one, as she maye hereafter take pleasure and comforte in. If her grace shuld haue married one that she could not haue fantasied, it shuld so sore haue agreued her, that she woulde haue wished to be out of the world.
And besydes that, it shoulde haue bene occasion of contention betwixte them, whereby God shuld haue bene hyghlye displeased.Cap. 3.
                For wheresoeuer (as witnesseth saynt Iames) is enuye

and contention, there is vnstablenes and all wycked workes.
            
            Ouer thys yf we woulde throughly weye,How the Queenes marriage came to passe. howe thys marriage hath bene broughte to passe, we should haue cause muche to meruayle at it, and not to grudge agaynst it. For when as the Queenes hyghnes was by the Parliamente house most humblye sued vnto, that it woulde please her grace for the quietnes and cō
               forte of the whole Realme to take an husbande, she was in wonderfull doubte wyth her selfe, what she myghte do in y• behalfe. And great payne had she to applye her mynde and fantasie that waye, seyng that her grace had nowe so manye yeares lyued a pure virgine,

and had great pleasure to liue so styll, and so wold haue continued, had it not bene that by Gods goodnesse she myght in lawfull marriage haue issue, (for which it is our bounden duetie earnestlye to praye) to thintent yt all her louyng subiectes therby myght be satisfied, & the whole realme preserued in peace and quietnes. And therfore seing it was a thing most expedient for vs, that her highnes shuld marri, she forced her selfe contrary to hyr owne fantasye thervnto. And to thende that God myght assiste her godly intent fell to prayer, and most feruently called vpon god (seing that for our sakes she shuld marrye) that it wolde please

hym to put her in mynde of suche one, as his glory might be anaunced by, and all her subiectes haue good cause to reioyce in. For as for worldly pleasure, whice folkes commonly take in marriage, she nothinge passed: but her care was only to marry with such one, as myght throughe his singuler vertue please god, through his greate wisdome helpe well to gouerne this realme, and for his noble lynage be occasion of muche honour and quietnesse to our countrye. As for beautye, strengthe of body, talnes of personage, and suche like, to those had her highnes no respecte at all. Therfore while her grace made this godly &

humble petition to almightye god, came there into her remēbraunce this noble prince of Spayne. And sone after were embassadors sent from the emperours maiestye for that selfe purpose. So that it well appeareth, that the first motiō of this marriage came of god, without the counseyle or aduise of any man.
And we must also consider, that the hartes of princes (as we read in the Prouerbes of Salomon) be in the hande of god,P
                        •
                     o. 
                        •
                     . and that he moueth the same that way, that hym liketh. And then howsoeuer the matter seme in oure syghte, we oughte to iudge the beste, and thynke that God by his heauenly wysdome hath done it

for the best▪ and we must hartely praye hym, that hys wyll alwaye maye be done in all suche matters.
For as he is the gyuer of all other good thynges, so is he most specially of a good marriage. And that may we learne of Salomon,Pro, 1
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                where he sayeth:
An house & ryches are gyuen vs of our parentes, but a wyse wyfe is giuen of GOD.
Therefore it is euerye good mans parte earnestly to pray to almyghtye God, that seing that by his prouidence (as we verelye trust) thys noble marriage is made betwixte suche two princelye personages, it maye please hys goodnesse so to worke in that behalfe, as maye be to the aduauncemēte of hys glorye, to both their honours,

and hartes ease, and to the commoditie and quietnes of oure countrye. But it was maliciously and falsely reported not longe ago by the rebelles (as I told you before) that the Queenes Highnesse wold haue marryed a straunger of set purpose to make vs slaues. And they dyd not let to say beside after this sorte. Shall men suffer this,The Kentishe rebels wordes. or shal we haue our heades thrust vnder a straungers girdle, & become his bondmen? Or shal we suffer our wiues & doughters to be rauyshed by vyle velaynes? What true English hart can abide this? And beyng thus vaynely persuaded, rashely without any further delyberation fell they to open

rebellion, & did muche like, as the Iewes did in olde tyme▪ which through ye counseyle of Iudas Gaulanites rebelled agaynste the emperoure of Rome.
                  Iosep. de anti. li. 8. ca. 1.
at such tyme as Qui
                     •
                  inus a senator was sent by thēperour into Syria & Iudaea to sesse these coūtries For this Iudas Gaulanites (as Iosephus telleth) hauinge a companyō muche lyke hym selfe ioyned with him, moued the Iewes to rebellion, and told thē, that this sessinge was for no other purpose, but that they shulde graunt them selfes to become bondemen & slaues: and therfore he exhorted al his contrymen to defende & maynteyne their libertie. For so (sayd he) shuld it come to passe, yt yf they had good lucke, they shoulde

not onelye enioye their owne goodes in muche prosperitie, but also beynge establyshed. in their possessions, gette great prayse for their manhode. And that they must not looke to be helped at Gods hande, except that withall they wold studye to helpe them selfes. The rascold people were glad to heare thys, insomuch that therby they were muche moued to aduenture thys their wretched enterprise. Who for desyre of lucre vnder the pretense of defendynge their libertie so much troubled their whole countreye, as it is not wel able to be told. For where soeuer they came, they murdered men, and robbed them and wythoute respect kylled,

as well frendes as enemyes: and al such as were noble and notable men they rydded out of the way. And whyle as in a furious rage one slewe another amonges them selfes, foreyne enemies dydde inuade them, and greate dearth and famine befell amonge them. Thys telleth Iosephus. So that whosoeuer wyll cōpare these two rebellions together, shal easelye perceaue, howe bothe they them selfes by their detestable enterpryse wroughte theyr owne destruction, and God sent his vengeaunce vpō them besyde, as a scourge for their frantike madnes.
Wherfore yf we wyl saue our soules from damning, saue our bodies from killing, saue our countrye

from spoyling, and auoyd the great vengeaunce of god, let vs frō henceforth beware of rebellion. And surelye persuade our selfes, that our gratiouse Lady & maystresse the Quene, because she is the humble hande mayde of God, elected and chosen by him to rule and reforme this realme, whiche was so farre oute of order and 
                  •
               rame, will go aboute nothyng but that shalbe to gods glorye, and the welth of all vs her louynge subiectes. For all her delyte and pleasure is, to see gods glory auaunced, and this her Realme recouer the honorable state, that it hathe bene in time past.
            Nowe then consideringe her godlye purpose in this behalfe,

it shalbe euerye good mans duetie euerye daye to praye hartely for her, that she may longe liue, & reygne ouer vs▪ & whēsoeuer any enemies go about to assault her, mooste willingly to spende oure goodes & liues to in her defence. As for her mariage, let vs (as I sayd before) referre the matter to God the author therof, & to her owne wisdome, which hath chosen it. For yf we shuld rebel therfore, we shoulde not only seme to be w
                  ••
               er thē god, that (as we verely trust) hath made ye marriage, but also to knowe better then her grace, whome she shulde most loue & like. Now where as some percase both hath said, & as yet do saye, that this noble prince of

Spayne is a straunger, and therfore both thei themselfes grudge at the Quene, because she hath married him, and also make other by their noughtie persuasion to grudge likewyse, herein surelye they not onelye declare their lacke of knowledge, as touching their duetie & obediēce to her grace but also displease almyghtye god her defendour. Therfore it shuld be verye well done for all suche to call to memorye a storye, that is wrytten in holy scripture▪ as concernynge the lyke matter. We reade, howe that Marye and Aaron dyd sore murmer and grudge agaynste Moyses,Num. 12 because he married a wyfe, whyche was a straunger, & borne in Aethiope.

Wyth which their grudge God beinge sore agreued, smote Marye wyth a leprosye, insomuche that by reason that she was so greatly infected with it, she semed as white as snowe, and was in daunger therby to be destroyed. Do we not thynke that God nowe is iuste, as he was then, and is as sore offended wyth our murmurynge heartes agaynst the Quene, as he was then wyth theirs agaynste Moyses, and wyll punyshe our wickednes, as well as he dyd theirs, and the more that we grudge, the more greuouslye wyll he plage vs▪ Why then seynge we haue no iuste cause of grudge, do we not leaue our grudging, for feare

that we so d
                  ••
               please god, that he wyl not only smyte vs with the horrible disease of leprosie in our bodyes, but also punish our soules with euerlastinge fyre.
            And albeit ye priuate grudge that one beareth towarde another, doth muche prouoke goddes wrath agaynst vs, yet the grudge, that we beare towarde our prince is muche more greuouse.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 14 For when the children of Iraell murmured agaynst Moyses and Aaron their rulers, because they 
                  •
               eared to be destroyed of the inhabitantes of Iurye at suche tyme, as they shuld enter into it▪ and wished yt they had died in Aegypte, God was so sore displeased with their grudge▪
               
that he sayde to Moyses, I will distroye them all wyth plage and pestilence, & make thee a ruler ouer a greater numbre of people, and much more valiant.
Agayne when they went from the hill called Hor,
               Num. 
                     ••
                  
                and were with their long trauayle sore wer
                  •
               ed, and by reason therof much muttered agaynst god and Moyses, and sayde, why hast thou brought vs of oute Aegypte▪ that we shulde dye in wildernesse, god sente amonge them fyrye serpentes, which sore tormented them, and killed many of them insomuche that they came to Moyses and sayde.
We haue 
                     •
                  ore offended in that we haue spoken agaynst GOD and the
                     •
                  .
            
            Therefore all they that for

any cause grudge agaynst the quenes grace, let thē looke for suche lyke plages, yf they do not amend, & let thē learne by these examples to laye away their grudgyng heartes, and mekely to acknowledge their folye, to aske God mercy, and to saye with the chyldren of Israell, we haue greuously offended, for that we haue murmered agaynst thee, O Lord, and agaynst our moste gratious Queene. And lette them neyther secretly in their hartes grudge agaynste theyr Prince, nor openlye in theyr woordes speake euyll by her, but folowe the counseyle of Salomon,
                  
                     •
                  ap. 1. where he sayeth:
Kepe your selfes from grudge, whyche au
                     •
                  yleth nothynge, and temper poure

tongue, that it sclaunder nobodye.
For all they, yt eyther in theyr hartes conceaue anye malice toward ye Queene, or grudge at her, or vtter euil wordes agaynst her, are as wel to be cō
               mitted rebelles, as those that beare harnesse agaynste her. For these be the thre speciall poyntes (as you heard at the beginning) wherein rebellion standeth. As for their muttering yt they make for her marriage, yf they knewe, how the Prince of Spayne is vnto vs no straunger, but one of the bloude royall of Englande, by reason that his father the emperours Maiestie,That the prince of Spayne is to vs no straunger. that nowe is, bothe by hys father syde & mothers cometh of the Kinges of Englande, they wolde

perhappes (as they haue iust cau
                  •
               e) lay it aparte, and both thanke god hartelye, that hath vouchesaued by hys diuine prouidence to bringe to passe, that such two noble personages, comming both of one stocke and linage, that is to say, of the moste valiant and famouse Prince Kinge Edward the third, shuld for thauauncement of ye noble bloud of Englande be ioyned together in marriage, & also be verye gladde in their heartes to know, yt such a noble progeny, as themperours is, hathe spronge oute of the race of the kinges of Englād, but to thintent that it may playnely appeare, yt this is of an vndoubted trueth, I shall sette forth,

as it were in a table for al men to loke vpon, the lineall dyscent bothe of the Queenes Highnes, and also of the sayd prince from Kinge Edwarde the thirde, which lineall discent haue I gathered partely out of the stories of England, and partly out of the stories of Spayne, to thintent that the trueth thereof shoulde throughly be knowen to all meane
            
               Hereby maye we wel perceaue, that the Quenes grace taketh no straunger to marry wyth, but suche one, as bothe by father and mother cometh of the royall bloude of Englande, and nowe at lengthe is called home, as it were to hys natyue countrye, insomuch yt no true Englishe man hath any cause to grudge at the matter, but great cause hath he to merueyle at the wonderfull prouidence of god therin, and hartely to thanke him to, that he of hys goodnes both hath so auaunced the noble bloude of Englande abroade in the worlde, by raysing vp thereof so manye noble princes to gouerne his people, & also nowe in the ende hath sent vnto vs

a noble prince of ye same bloud to be ioyned in marriage with the Queenes hyghnes, to the great honour of our countrye and all oure comfortes. For what can be more honorable for vs, then to ioyne with such a prince, whose progenitours haue ben for their noble actes renomed throughout ye whole worlde, and for their singuler vertue moste hyghlye promoted? For manye noble victories haue they gotten, manye countries haue they subdued, and alwayes by their force & policie defended the state of Christendome agaynste oure mortal enemies the Turkes.
            And because they were so muche estemed for theyr excellente vertue, vj. of their familie▪
               
that is to saye, of the house of Austria, hathe bene of late dayes chosen to be emperors. Of whom two were called Alberte, & other two Frederike, the .v. was named Maximilian, and the .vj. Charles that nowe reygneth.
            Or what 
                  •
               an be more comfortable to vs, then that the Queenes highnes shuld haue a Prince to her husband, that cometh of such a noble stocke? Who although he was borne in a straunge countrie, yet to vs, because he cometh of the royall bloude of England (as I sayd before) neyther is, nor ought to be taken, as a straunger. And yf any man doubt of this, let him peruse the cronicles of Englande & Spayne,

and he shall finde my wordes true. Agayne yf we feare him, because he was borne in Spayne, let vs cal to remēbraunce the two most famous and notable Emperours of Rome, Traian and Theodosius the greate, both Spaniardes borne. Who beynge promoted to the Empeyre, so, whyle they raygned, dyd gouerne the same, as euer since of al men in al ages, they haue bene moste highlye commended▪
            
            Lette vs besyde reade the lyues of the Kynges of Spayne, and we shall perceaue verye manye of them to haue bene of suche wysedome and vertue, and of so synguler good qualytyes▪ as they maye be thoughte able too

matche the Princes and rulers of anye other countreye besyde. But now some do say, that the Spaniardes be so proude and hyghe mynded, yt no man can well awaye wyth their behauiour. And ye same reporte oftentymes in other countryes hath gone vpō vs, that we were both proude & stubborne. But put the case, that diuers of them and of vs to were such in dede, shall we by and by iudge al the reste to be of the same sort? Such perhappes of bothe twayne as lacke wisdome, be for the most parte of that condition. But surely they, that be wyse, be al so sobre, discrete and gentle. For wisdome alway worketh suche effectes in those, that

hath it.
            As for the prince hym selfe, he is not only wise and sobre, but also of a very gētle behauiour.
            And good cause surely hath he to be so.The princes quali
                  
                     •
                  ies. For bothe hath he an excellent wyt of nature, & also a father of singuler wisdom to learne at▪ yea & graue counseylours continually about hym, whose sage and sober aduise he is alway readie and willing to folowe. And nothing is there, that more declareth a man to be wyse, then that he wyll stycke to much to his owne fantasie, but gladly both heare those, that be wyse, and also folowe their counseyll. Now that he is of gentle behauiour well appeareth in that, that all his subiectes

so harth loue him, & are very loth to lacke his presēce, which thing they haue of late wel declared. For whē it was knowen amonge them, yt he shoulde come to marrye oure quene, albeit they much reioysed in the marriage, yet they much lamented, & toke great sorowe for his departinge, by reason yt he hathe at all times in all poyntes so gently behaued him selfe toward them, & therfore thei had rather haue dyed, then yt he shuld haue departed from them.Thre speciall vertues of ye prince. And thre special vertues god hath gyuē him to winne mens hartes withal, liberalitie, mercy, and patience. For both to noble & meane men, to gentle and simple, to ryche and poore he is

so liberall, that all, that haue to do with hym, haue greate cause to beare hym good wyl. And agayne yf any man offende hym, yf he be sory therfore, he is readie to pardō him, and mercyfully to deale with hym. And in these pointes he is very like to our moste graous Soueraygne the quene, As for his patience that is so singuler, that for the same he may well be compared with the sage and famouse philosopher Socrates. For those that perfitely know hym, reporte yt no displeasure, misfortune, or aduersitye can moue hym, and that no man hath for any cause sene hym at any time angrie. And although that al other vertues are in a Prince

very commendable, yet none is there, that is so much to be estemed in him, as godly patience.
            Wherfore seing this noble Prince of Spayne is garnished with suche goodlye vertues, as ye Spaniardes haue good cause to lament for hys departing, so we English men haue iuste occasion to reioyse for his comming. By meanes whereof we shalbe ioyned in sure amitie with two or three noble countryes▪ Spayne, Flaunders, & the rest of lowe Germany.
            And greate commodities hath thys realme alwayes receaued by trafike hadde with these countries, as al they, yt vse the trade of marchaundise

beyonde the seas, can very well shewe vs. For what a benefite is it for thys realme to haue free libertie to cōueye suche thinges from hence thither, as we haue plentye of, & to bring in those agayne from thence hyther, that we haue nede of? Ouer thys our countrye hereby shall greatlye be strengthed, and well fortified agaynst our aunciente enemies, who are very sore displeased with this noble marriage, because they feare, that from henceforth they shall not be so able to worke vs displeasure▪ but that we shall be more able on thother syde alwayes by Gods helpe not onelye to defende oure selfes, but also to giue them an ouerthrowe, &

to reuenge theyr malyce agaynst vs. Wherefore seynge that our enemies are so sore a greued with this marriage, it is our partes, yf we loue oure countrie, to be very glad of it. For oure enemyes euermore are sorye for our commoditie, because yt whatsoeuer is hurtfull to vs, they muche reioyse thereat. For men for the most part are naturally enclined to be glad of their enemies harmes. Then let vs not be sorye for that, that our enemies are sory for, leste we seme to haue the same affection, that they haue, and so to hate our countrye, but because they be sory, let vs be gladde, therby declaring, that we hartely loue our countrye.
            
               Let vs folowe the Spaniardes example in reioysing for thys marriage. Who at suche tyme, as sure tydynges were broughte into Spayne, as touchynge the same, they were all so gladde of it, as thoughe they hadde receaued some ioyefull tydynges from heauen. Whyche theyr great gladnesse they well declared at the commynge thyther of oure Embassadours, whome they receaued wyth suche greate honoure, wyth so singuler gentlenes, and wonder full ioye, as the lyke heretofore hath bene verye seldome heard of. Why then do not we the same, and shewe our selfes ready with as glad hartes to receaue them?
            
               If perhappes oure loue toward them be so colde, that it doth nothing moue vs thereto, yet let eyther the honoure of our owne countreye, which we owe speciallye to regarde, or elles the commodities▪ that we shal receaue by them, some thynge moue vs in thys behalfe.
            And suche as at the fyrste can not frame their fantasyes so frely to do it, as it wolde be done, let them yet at the leste dissemble & beare them fayre countenaunce vnto such time, as they shal haue cause by reason of their gentle behauiour, bothe to like and loue them. Agayne sythen that the frendship and amytie of their countrye is so necessary for vs, me

thinke, that we should both be ryghte glad of them, and also muche reioyse in that, whyche is cause thereof. And trueth is it (as Herodotus wryteth) that no one region or countrye is there,
                  Herodot. in Clio.
                that hath not oftentimes nede both of the ayde of any other, and also of the commodities thereof.
            Wherfore suche folkes, as are not contented with suche a noble marriage, may be rekened litle to consider eyther ye welth of their countrie, or the Queenes honoure. Agayne the conditions of the marriage, whych be expressed in an Acte of Parliament, made onlye for that purpose, are so honorable and so commodious for Englande, as all Englyshemen,

that fauoure their countrye, are greatlye bounded to gyue God hartye thankes for suche a marriage. And there be also suche prouisions in the conditions thereof for ye good and quiete behauioure of all those, that shall come in wyth the sayd noble Prince, that no man hath cause to feare anye trouble at their handes.
            Lette vs then behaue our selfes towarde them, as it becommeth vs: And no doubt but that we shall fynde suche gentle frendship in them▪ that we shal haue iust cause to loue them, and gently to entertein them. And besydes this no straunge thinge is it, that the quene marrieth wyth a foren prince. For it is the common

practise of all princes of the worlde in a maner to ioyne marriage for the moste parte with foreyne princes, bothe for to make sure frendship betwixt realme and realme, and also for the cōmodities that comonlye ensue thereof. Yea and good stories make mention, that the like case, that the Quenes Highnes marriage standeth in, hath oftētimes in other realmes bene sene. For Isabell doughter too Iohn king of Castell, that was brother to Henry, when as her brother Henry died withoute yssue,
                  Tarapha. de orig. reg. Histo.
                and that she was crowned Queene of Castle, by & by was ioyned in marriage with Ferdinand ye .v. king of Arragō, & so was those .ij. kingdōs

that marriage made all one. Whyche Ferdinande so well and wiselye gouerned those countries, that al menne both hartely loued him, and greatly also commended hym.
            Besyde he expulsed out of that part of Spayne, whiche is called Granade, the Mores that had by force holden that countrye seuen hundreth yeares. And ouer yt he thrust out a great numbre of Saracenes and Turkes, and banished with thē their false fayth, and after buylded goodlye churches to the glory and honoure of God.
            Marye also doughter to Charles, Duke of Burgundie, being heyre to her father, was married to Maximilian

themperor a forreyne prince. Who was for his excellente wisedome and vertue muche renoumed, and for his noble actes wanne him selfe in the worlde great honour.
            Isabell lykewyse doughter to Ferdinande king of Castle and Arragone, after her brother Iohns, and her eldest sister Isabels death, beyng the heyre to the crowne of Castle and Arragone, was married to Philip Arch. Duke of Austria, a forreyn prince to. Who so noblely gouerned those coū
               tries, that all the people thereof dyd greatlye honoure him, hartely loue him, and mooste humbly obeye hym.
            And many other suche lyke marriages haue bene made in

the worlde, whyche haue had so prosperouse successe, that not onelye the parties, that made them, toke muche comfortes therein, but also the coū
               tries, wherin thei were made, receaued alwayes muche honour and commoditie therby. Therfore this marriage of the Queenes highnes ought not to seme straunge to any man, because the like in other realmes hathe oftentymes bene made before. Agayne manye marriages haue bene made at sondrye times, (as both oure owne cronicles, and the cronitles of Spayne do testifie) betwixte the noble countrye of Spayne and vs, & good successe haue they had, and much frendshyp by meanes thereof

hath growen betwixt vs and them. And bothe the realmes haue muche reioysed therin, & waxed riche and welthie therby, insomuch that al good men and suche as earnestly tender ye good & prosperous estate of our countrie, these causes wel considered▪ wyll reken vs happie, that only God, as it appeareth, hath thus honorably prouided for vs, and hath by this meanes renewed the olde amitie and frendshippe, that hath bene betwixte Englande and Spayne.
            But nowe as for those that rebelled of late, albeit yt they pretended, that all theyr grefe came of this marriage, & gotte them a Spanishe cloke to couer their cursed deuyse

withall, and so shewed them selfes disobedient to God and vnkynde to theyr prince, yet meaned they nothing lesse. For a man may be bolde to say this, yt yf the prince of Spayn had bene a fauorer of heresye, and giuen to suche fonde fantasies, as these folkes were thēselfes, howesoeuer he had bene qualified otherwise, thei would neuer haue made rebellion for the matter, but wyth most glad hartes haue receaued him, hopynge thereby to haue recouered their abhominable and blasphemouse heresye agayne. But because he is a catholike prince, a fauorer & defendour of Christes church, and sonne to the Emperours maiestie, who alwayes hathe

moste earnestlye maynteyned the catholike faith, they could not abyde hym, nor in no wise heare of hys commynge, fearyng that thereby theyr wicked heresye shoulde be banyshed oute of this realme, and all the preachers therof from thenceforth myghte putte vp theyr pypes, wherewith they had (as Mercurye did wyth Argos) not only brought the people a slepe,
                  Ould. Metamorph. lib. 1. but also afterward put out theyr eyes, and made them starke blynde.
            Therfore the verye cause of this last commotion was religion nowe by God and the Queenes highnes broughte agayne to the olde aunciente order and state,The very causes of our last rebellion. appoynted by Christes catholike Churche:

agaynst whych these rebelles dare so deadlye hatred, that they hadde rather haue loste their liues (as manye of them haue done) then to be brought to receaue it.
            And because they mynded to mayntayne theyr wicked heresye still, they purposed like most miserable and cruel wretches by force of armes firste to putte doune the Queenes Highnes, to depriue her of her crowne, to ridde her and all her faythfull counseylours out of the waye, and then to haue set vp suche rulers and counseylours, as wolde haue set forthe heresye a freshe. And after that all the dispersed bretherne, that be of heresyes guylde and fraternitie

shulde haue repayred together agayne, and broched the dregges of their deuelish doctrine to the people, as they had done before. But god, whose glory they mynded vtterlye to desace, whose handmayden they had contriued cruelly to kyl, whose true seruauntes they fully purposed with fire and sworde to persecute, suffred them to runne forth headlyng to their owne destruction, for when as they hoped surelye to haue their purpose, and came euen to the very poynt, sodenly god or euer they were aware, lift vp hys myghtye hande agaynst them, and in a very moment vanquished them, and gaue them into the handes of his

faythfull seruante oure souerayne ladye the Quene. Who while the field was in fyghtynge, was feruentlye occupied in prayinge. And when as tidinges was brought her, that by treason all was loste, she like a valiaunt Champion of Christe nothynge abashed therewith, sayd that she doubted not at al, but her captayne (meanyng thereby oure sauiour Christe) woulde haue the victory at lengthe, and falling to her prayers agayne, anone after had she worde broughte her, that her men had wonne the field, and that Wyate her enemies Capitayne was taken.
            So that hereby euery man maye euidently see, that God

woulde not suffer eyther such a vertuouse Lady, and a pure virgine to be destroyed, or his catholike fayth, whych he had of late by her so gratiously restored, to be by thenemyes of his church with violent force ouerthrowen. Whych thinge he well declared lykewyse in the wonderfull fall of the late Duke of Northumberlande, who rebelled bothe agaynste the Queenes hyghnesse, and also agaynste Christes catholike Churche. Which two miraculouse victories are sufficient to make al men take hede, as they rebell eyther to destroye the true fayth of our sauiour Christ, or agaynst suche a godly heade & ruler, whose greate godlye vertue maye

wel be perceaued in that, that she neuer goeth aboute any weyghty matter, or attempteth any great enterprise, but first entreth she into her pryuye closet▪ and there vpon her knees prayeth god most hartelye, that he wyl of his goodnesse assiste her in that she entendeth, and so bring her purpose to passe, that the same may be to his glory and the welthe of all her subiectes.
            And whensoeuer she falleth into any trouble or daunger, she fayleth not to do the lyke▪ so that men may wel thynke, that hauing god on her syde, as both she most earnestly prayeth to haue, and also it plainly appeareth, that she hath, she shalbe alwayes able to gyue

her enemies an ouerthrow, & saye wyth the holy prophete Dauid,Psal. 26.
                myne enemyes that troubled me are discomfited, and hath catched a fall. But alas what harde hartes haue those, that if she were but a priuate woman, being so gentle of nature, so vertuouse and so merciful, coulde drawe theyr sworde agaynste her▪ and go aboute to shedde such innocente bloude?
For albeit that all bloudeshedde is cruel and horrible in the syght of god, yet the sheddynge of so a pure virgyns bloude, is of all other moste cruell and detestable. For bothe mennes eares vtterli abhorre to heare it, and god hym selfe is moste greuouslye offended with it.
            
               Do we not reade of cruell paynems, that when they had gotten the vpperhande of their enemyes in battayl, and murdered many men therin, alwaies had compassion of the the women, and virgins specially, vpon whome they wold lay no violent handes. As it is written of Alexander the great,
                  Plutarchus in uita Alexandri.
                who when he had ouercomme Darius in the fielde, and taken two doughters of his, because they were virgyns, he had pitye vpon them, and very mercyfully and gentelye entreated them, and wyth most frendly wordes & greate honour enterteyned them. What shuld christen men then do with suche as be virgyns, shuld they, if they were their

dedly enemyes, go aboute to shed theyr bloud? No no they shuld spare them, and for pure pitye they shuld pardon them to. For the Children of Israel were commaūded,Deut. 20 that when they beseged anye citie, they shulde firste offer peace to the inhabitauntes thereof. And if they refused it, then shuld thei kill all the menne, that were founde within it, the women and yonge tender babes alwayes excepted. So that seing al women were excepted, the virgins by this commaundemente in the daungers of warre, were alwayes kepte harmelesse.
            Then forasmuche as virgins, that be our enemies children, muste haue mercye shewed

them, how shuld men vse those virgins, that neuer offē
               ded them, that be their frendes, yea that most hartly loue thē? Or after what sort shuld we behaue our selfes toward our gratiouse Ladye & maystresse, a most pure and perfite virgine, who loueth euerye one of vs as her owne life, who most carefullye trauayleth to enriche vs, & set vs at quiete. Who desireth to liue onlye for oure welth and commoditie. For to dye were muche more acceptable to her, (as she saith oftentimes) then to lyue in this miserable and wretched world.
            Whiche earnestlye considered, great cause haue we to aduenture oure goodes, lyues,

and landes in her highnes defence, and to do,2. Re. 15 as one Ethai Getheus dydde to kinge Dauid, when his sonne Absalon rebelled agaynste hym.
            
               Thys Ethai when he hearde of Dauids trouble, repayred to hym wyth spede. To whome Dauid sayde: Why commest thou from thy place and mansion? Thou comeste but nowe, and arte constreyned to go forthe with vs. But it is best for thee to returne home, and take thy retinewe wyth thee. And for thy gentlenes and fidelitye towarde me, I praye GOD requite thee. To whome aunswered Ethai. As true as God lyueth, and as true as your grace lyueth, wheresoeuer you shall become, there wyll I your seruaunte be, and take such parte, as you shall do, and wyth you to dye and liue.
            
            
               Such hartes ought al faythfull subiectes to beare to their Prince▪ that they vncalled shulde most gladly offer theyr seruice, when occasion serueth and be well contented to aduenture theyr lyues in such a good quarell, and so to tender theyr head and gouernour, as the childe is bounde to tender his mother. And were not he to be counted a cruel wretche, that woulde kill his owne mother▪ as dydde Orestes? Then seyng that our noble Quene is to euery one of vs, as a most tender and louing mother, how miserable a man shuld he be, that wold ones lift vp his hand to destroye her? For albeit that it is a most heynous and detestable acte for a man

to shedde hys owne priuate & natural mothers bloude, yet much more heynous & horrible is it for one to go aboute the destruction of her, that is ye mother of a whole realme. And we shulde herein folowe thexample of the simple bees, whych so tender their king & gouernoure, that yf he haue missed his waye, they wil diligently seke for him, smell hym out, and folowe him to suche time, as they haue found him. And when he waxeth old, and is not able to flye, they beare him vpon their backes, and yf he dye, then depart they al frō that place. Dothe not nature herein teache all subiectes to tender & loue their prince, as the poore bees do their king?

And besides thys we oughte to consider, that she is the anoynted of God, as all lawfull Princes and gouernours be, and that we are commaunded in scripture, that we laye no violent handes vpon thē that be anoynted.psal. 104.
            
            And herein ought we to folowe thexample of the holye Prophete Dauid. Who when he was persecuted by kynge Saul,1. Re. 24 and cōstrayned for safegarde of his life to flye to rockes, and there to hyde hym, & all hys retinewe in a denne, and that Saule entred into the same denne to do hys naturall easement, and that Dauids menne sayd to him, that nowe the day was come, that GOD hadde promysed before,

that Saul should be geuen into his handes, wente to Saul, and didde no more, but priuelye cut away the edge of hys cloke. And yet hys conscience was so agreued for that dede, that he sayde to his men.
            
               GOD be mercifull to me, and suffre me neuer to laye handes vpon my Lorde Saul, the anoynted of God. For I sweare, that as surely as God lyueth, that I wyll neuer laye my hande vpon hym, be
                     •
                  ng the anoynted of God. But he shall for me dye eyther by the plage of God, or by naturall death, when hys daye cometh, or be kylled in battayle. God forbydde that euer I shoulde ones stretche forthe my hande to hurte hym, beyng Gods anoynted.
            
            Suche a conscience hadde Dauid, and so he ynouse an offence thoughte he it to laye

handes vpon hym, that cruellye persecuted him, and was hys deadly enemye. But alas what a sore troubled conscience oughte suche folkes to haue, as mynded cruellye to murder their moste gratiouse soueraygne Lady the quene, who so hartelye loued them, who was alwayes so carefull for them, and tendereth their welthe and cōmoditie no lesse, then her owne? How vnkind folkes be those, that hateth her, that loueth them, and goeth about to reward kindnes wyth kyllyng, and to destroye her, that studieth alwayes possible to saue them?
These men remember lytle the wordes▪ that God sayd to Cain, when he hadde kylled hys brother,Gen. 4.
               
                  
The bloud of thy brother crieth vp to me frō the earth. Wherfore thou shalbe accursed vpō the earth, which is opened and hath dronke vp thy brothers bloud.
            
            And in another place he sayeth:Gene. 9▪
               
               Whosoeuer shedeth mans bloude vpon earth, his bloude shalbe shedde.
And albeit that the killyng of euery priuate person is horrible in the syght of god, and is neuer fusfred vnpunished, yet the killing of a prince is much more detestable, & those that aduenture that wicked acte, escape not at length some miserable & wretched ende. For what became of Abimelecke, ye (to thintent,Iudic. 9. that he might be king him selfe) killed his threscore & tenne bretherne, that shoulde haue ruled and reygned in Sichē with him? Was he not at the last miserablely

killed by a woman? For when he assaulted a towre, & came to the gate therof to set it on fyre, a woman hauinge in her hande a pece of a broken milstone, hurled it downe at his head, and therwith dashed out his braynes? Thus was this wretche rewarded for hys wretched enterprise. Came not the like punishment vpon those,2. Re. 2. 2. Re. 4. that killed Isboseth the king of Irael vpon his bedde, as he was slepinge? whose head afterward they brought to Dauid, thinking therby to get thankes at his hande, because then he shulde be kinge ouer all Israell. But Dauid highlye displeased wyth the murder, cōmaunded his men streight way to kyl them, and

to cut of their handes and fete, and hange them ouer a ponde in Hebron.
            What nede I here to recite you the storye of Achitophell,2. Re. 17 who when Absalon rebelled agaynst his father Kyng Dauyd, sayd vnto Absalon thus:
            
               I wyll appoynte my selfe .xij. thowsand men, and this nyght wyll I pursewe thy father Kinge Dauid, and I wyll set vpon hym nowe, being 
                     •
                  ore weried, and faynte. And when all his men are sledde from hym, and he left alone, then will I kyll hym.
            
            But to what conclusyon came this coursed counseil and cruel entent of his? when as Dauid had escaped this daunger by meanes of pryuye messengers, that were sent by certayne secrete frendes of hys, Achitophel perceauing, that his counseyle was not done,

gotte him home to his howse, and like a miserable wretche hanged him selfe. And so was he moste iustly plaged for hys rebelliouse and cruel diuise.
                  P
                        •
                     lydore Sir Thomas More knight in ye life of king Richard the third. Edward Ha
                     •
                   in the first yeare of king. Richarde the third. Or what shall I nede here to call to memorye a story wrytten in oure owne cronicles of kinge Richarde the thirde. Who when he was Duke of Glocestre, because he woulde be king him selfe, put the children of Edward the .iiij. whiche were the true and lawfull heyres of this realme into the towre, and after lyke a moste cruel tyraunt, caused them to be smored betwixt two fether beddes? But what became of him after? Was he not within short space slayne in the fielde by king Henry the seuenthe, &

so iustly rewarded for the cruell bloudeshedde of those innocent children? Therfore lette no manne, that eyther kylleth the anoynted of God, or elles purposeth to kyll him, thinke that he shall escape vnpunyshed, but lette hym assure hym felfe, that thoughe he auoyde daunger for a season, yet shall he at lengthe be payed home with double punishmente. And let him learne by these examples to eschewe suche an heynouse offence, & whensoeuer he is by the deuil prouoked thereto, lette hym praye to God (as Dauid dyd) and saye:
Lord be merciful to me, and suffer me neuer to laye handes vpon my Soueraygne, nor to contriue any trayterous diuises agaynste

the anoynted of God.
For so shal he disappoynt the deuil of his purpose, and saue him selfe from peryll of perishinge. And yf the deuil wil not thus cease (most louyng countrye men) but still stirre vp oure hartes to make rebellion, yet lette vs consider, that what cause soeuer he putteth in our heades, and laboreth to make vs beleue, that it is a good cause, we oughte neuer to beleue hym, both because that whatsoeuer he telleth vs▪ it is but a lye, by reason that he is the father of lyinge, and also that no cause is there at all, for whyche we maye iustelye make commotion.
            Yea and thys wil I saye, that yf euer we Englyshe men had

cause to be quiete, and to loue oure heade and ruler, nowe is the tyme. For those that be poore, yf they be by anye manne wrongfully oppressed, the Queenes pleasure is, that they shall haue iustice, and recouer their right. Or if they be riche, she is gladde of it, and wisheth that they, (so that it be by honest meanes) waxe more riche. If they be gentlemen, or men of honour▪ they may be assured to continue in their state and degre, so that they do their duetye to godwarde, and beare alwayes a faythfull hart to their prince. But some percase wil say, that iustice is not so dewly executed, as it oughte to be: And that moneye and frendshippe

maketh of a badde matter a good, and of a good matter a badde. And that there is as much bribery, and takynge of rewardes (which is a pitifull hearyng) vsed nowe a dayes, as euer was.
            All thys maye be true, and yet the Prince nothing to be blamed therfore. For seynge yt her grace hath so often exhorted all suche, as be in aucthoritie & office to minister iustice without partialitie, and to beware alwaye of takynge of bribes, yf any cause be vniustly determined, or any bribes taken for anye matter▪ she is discharged thereof, and the burden lyeth vpon their backes, that is the ministers of iustice, and whose handes are replenyshed

wyth brybes and rewardes.
            Therefore sithen that her hyghnesse trauayleth by all meanes to see euerye man to haue his righte, and doubteth not by Goddes helpe, yf God sende her life, to redresse thinges that are out of order, and so to prouide, that all her louynge subiectes shall haue a prosperous and happie life vnder her, me thynke, euery one of vs shuld most hartelye loue her, wyshe her longe lyfe and good helthe▪ praye God to assiste her, and to sende her strength to vanquishe her enemies, and not to hate her, not to wishe her death, not to rebell agaynste her, not to seke her bloud, as men of late haue

done. For then might a man▪ that hartely loueth bothe her grace, and vs, say thus very well in her behalfe vnto vs.
            
               Most dearly beloued country men, what cause haue we to hate our most lawfull ladye & maystresse, placed by god in the gouernement of this realme, and by all our consentes established in the same? What goeth she aboute, that shulde so agreue vs? Doth she not, as much as lyeth in her, labour to auaunce the glory of god, whiche is the especyall office of euery good Christen prince? Doth she not trauayle to defend Christes true fayth, whereby euerye one of vs trusteth to be saued? Doth she not maynteyne the Catholike

churche of god, and the laudable ordinaunces therof?
               Doth she not seke alwayes possible to bringe al those that be infected wyth heresye, to their deare mother agayne, y• spouse of Christ, whome they had of late vtterly forsaken? Doth she not study all that she can to saue vs both body and soule? Yea and she hartelye wisheth euerye one of vs as well to fare▪ as she would her selfe. And suche is her goodnesse, that she prouideth rather for our profyte▪ then for her owne. Besyde this she by all meanes seeth the good lawes of this Realme to be duely obserued. She gyueth also most straight charge to al her officers to execute iustice.

She monisheth all them that be in aucthoritie, to beware of briberye, & taking of reward. And she exhorteth all the clargie of this Realme to be diligent in doynge their dueties. She moueth the nobilitie, y• they be gentle vnto vs, & that they by no meanes go aboute to hurte vs, or with fines & in cōmes empouerish vs? What wold we haue her highnes to do? She laboreth for vs, she lyueth for vs, and she ruleth for vs. For elles why shoulde her grace take the vntolerable paynes, that she dothe, but for vs? She breaketh many a slepe, that we may slepe quiet lye. She taketh muche care & anguishe to auoyde vs from care. She tosseth and turmoyleth

her selfe, to set vs at ease. She taketh no pleasure in thys lyfe, but only for oure cō
                  moditie. For what cause shuld she desire to lyue▪ seynge she hath suche a paynfull lyfe, but onelye to saue our lyues? Or why should she not wishe to be gone out of thys miserye, and to be at rest wyth our Lord & sauiour Iesu Christe▪ but that she woulde fayne, or she wente hence, deliuer vs from misery? Her highnes is appoynted by almightye God to gouerne vs. For what purpose I praye you? To seke her owne pleasure, to satisfie her owne lustes, to studye for her owne priuate welthe? No no she knoweth that God requireth of her, and of all Princes

likewise, that they fede the people, that they norish them, that they promote the good, and punishe the badde: That they loue their subiectes, and loke diligently to them. If we dyd considre, what greuouse cares, what broken slepes, what fearfull dreames, what doubtefull counseylles, what stormes and troubles she hath for our sakes, we shoulde haue iust cause hartelye to thanke her grace, that she wold leaue the quiete state of lyfe, that she was in before, and take thys vnquiete state vpon her, that she nowe lyueth in.
               
                  
                     Plutark.
                  There was a king in olde tyme, that cast downe his crowne vpon the grounde, and sayde these wordes to those,

that were present with hym. If a man perfectly knew, and with al wel consydered, what sorowful cares are vnder that royall crowne, he wold neuer take the paynes ones to take it vp. Therfore thinke this, that the paynes be hers, and the pleasure is ours.
               Then how vnkinde, or rather how hard harted are we, if we go aboute to rewarde her kyndnesse wyth displeasure, and to be vngentle to her, that is so gētle to vs, to fight agaynste her, that laboreth to defende vs, to seke her death, when she seketh our life, to cō
                  triue like cruel wretches to destroy her, seing y• her highnes so earnestly trauaileth to saue vs. Of late we were in bōdage

and god hath delyuered vs by her. We were oppressed with all kinde of misery, and god hath most gratiously loked vpon vs. We shulde haue bene made lyke pesauntes of Fraunce, yt is to say, velaynes and slaues, if god had not had compassion vpon vs through her. And yet doth her highnes chalenge no part of the prayse, but referreth it all to god, who specyally deserueth it. We were before euery day afearde to loose all yt we had, and stode in daunger therof, but nowe maye we quietlye rest, and thinke that we shallbe assured to enioy our owne. For oppression is banished by iustice, and ryght taketh place by the lawe. What cause haue

we then to grudge at her grace, to cōspire agaynst her, to lyfte vppe our swordes as cruell wretches to murder her. Alas what a deadly malice haue we in our hartes, to desyre her bloude, seinge that she sore sygheth and lamenteth, if any of vs miscarye? But some wil say perhappes. that her marriage doth displease them. Why so I beseche you? Doth not she entende to enriche vs therby? Doth not she trauayle (as you haue heard before) to get muche honor to this oure countrye agayne, Whych hath (as Dauid sayeth) bene a mockinge stocke to all other countries aboute it?Psal. 43. If her grace knewe, that any displeasure shuld come to this realme

by her marriage, (for so he
                     •
                   grace sayd openly in ye guylde hall in London) she wolde rather neuer marry whyle she liued. For God did marrye her (sayd she) to this region, whē she was anoynted and crowned our Quene. And as he is an euyll hus
                     •
                  ande, that seketh the wiues displeasure, so is he an euill ruler, that worketh the wo of hys subiectes. Therfore be we well assured, that she neyther doth, nor entendeth to do that, that is like lye to hurt this realme, or to hinder the commoditie of any inhabitant thereof, but muche to auaunce it, and by Goddes helpe to reduce it to the olde estate▪ and honorable estimation agayne. As for straungers

we nede not to feare. For yf they do any iniury to any subiecte of hers, they shalbe punyshed by the lawes of thys realme, as we be. And yf they behaue them selfe gentlye, as it is very lyke that they will, we shall haue cause to loue thē to ioyne frendship with them, and to make muche of them. For so shall we deserue thankes both of them▪ & at goddes hand to, who wylleth vs that we offende not, or hurte anye straunger. And yf her grace marrye after her owne fantasye, me thynke we shuld beare wyth her, yf we loue her. For yf she shuld constrayne anye of vs to marry one, that he could not loue and lyke, he would be litle contented with it. Wherfore

let vs content oure selfes with that, that she doth in this behalfe, and praye God harte lye, that this her graces marriage may haue such successe, as both God maye be pleased therewith, and we receaue benefite thereby, and her highnes take comfort therein. We haue bene well pleased in time past, ye her noble father shulde marrye straungers, and haue ioyfully receaued them. Wherfore we might (me thynke) be muche better contented with her graces marriage, seynge that the noble Prince that she marrieth, albeit he semeth to be a straunger, yet because he cometh of the noble bloude of Englande (as you haue learned before) is in dede no straū
                  ger.

And agayne that oure Lord God onlye moueth her therto for her comfort (as we truste) and all ours to. But I feare ye the matter ye we grudge at, is not the marriage, but her fayth & religion, in ye mayntenaunce where of she hath alwayes frō her tender age hither to constantly stand: & mindeth by gods assistence to cōtinue in the same to her lyues ende. For it is not a fayth newly inuented, and set forth of late dayes▪ but begonne by Christ, taught by his Apostles and their successours, confirmed with the bloude of all holy martyrs, established by ye consent of al good godly wryters, and vniuersally receaued of the whole Catholike

churche of Christ. Which earnestlye to sticke to▪ she feareth not: by whiche to be saued, she doubteth not: & which cōstant lye to defend, she ceaseth not. And be we well assured, yt she would not forsake it (as her highnes hath oftentymes both in word and dede declared) if she knewe certaynly, yt she shulde loose the crowne of this realme therfore, and her life to. For whosoeuer they be that leseth any thing for gods cause and his true fayth, they shall wyn a hundreth tymes more for it, and be gladde of theyr losse for such great g
                     •
                  ynes. And this wold her highnes neyther say, nor do, except she knew suerly the truth to be on her side▪ and that god

is pleased therwith: Which he hathe well declared vnto her highnes in these two notable victories, that of his goodnes he hath sent her of late. If she had bene an aduersarye of his truth, and of his holy worde, as some folkes reporte her, he wold neuer haue so ayded her, & so mightly alwayes agaynst the assaultes of her enemies, defended her, But thus much may her highnes say without boaste, because it is not for her owne glorye, whyche she nothing regardeth, but onlye to declare goddes goodnes toward her yt she hath▪ as becam the poore handmayde of God continuallye synce she was a childe, from tyme to tyme embraced both our Sauiour

Christes doctrine, whyche is the dore vnto truthe, and the catholike fayth of his church, whyche is the staff
                     •
                   of saluation, and so loued both twayne, as she dyd lytle esteme worldly honor, or lyfe eyther in comparison of them. For whensoeuer she was eyther by gentle exhortation, by fayre promyses, yea or by threatenyng (as sometyme she was) moued to forsake the catholike fayth, & to leaue of the godly ordinaū
                  ces of the churche, she neuer wolde relent, but settynge all worldly thynges at noughte, and carynge nothynge for the malice of men, myn̄ded rathe
                     •
                   to dye for the defence of her fayth, then to lyue in honoure wyth the forsakynge thereof.

And this hath her grace done not of her selfe onelye, but by thassistence of Goddes grace, who hath alwaies ayded her. And mercifullye accepted her poore seruice herein, and hath both fauored her therefore, & so will do styll, and not forsake her, as she feareth not, and dayly she besecheth hym hartelye, that he do not: And not onlye her, but al other that embrace the same fayth, because it is y• fayth of his blessed spouse the churche▪ whose lippes be sweter to her husbande Christe,Cant. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   then honye combes. Whose tongue is as pleasaunte as milke and honye. Therefore most dearly beloued countrye menne) thys cause, why we oughte speciallye to loue her

grace▪ because it is for our soules helth, let it not be occasion to hate her. For if we knewe surelye, as she dothe▪ what pleasure we shulde haue in it, what profyt we shoulde take of it, & what daunger we shulde auoyde by it, we wold most harteli thanke her highnesse, who by goddes helpe had brought vs agayne to it. But the mystes of the cloudy and cursed doctrine of Luther & his adherentes haue so dimmed our sight, that we can not se it, & some of vs there be (more pitie is it) that will not se it. But I praye god we may shortly se it, and returne vnto it, and say with Dauid, we will go into the howse of god,
                     
                        ••
                     al. 121. which is the Catholike

Churche. Approche vnto it, and GOD wyll approche vnto vs, because he is within it. And feare GOD, and he wyll fauoure vs, and be obediente to her grace, oure lawful prince and gouernesse▪ and then she wyll not fayle most tenderly to loue vs, to labore and trauayle for our welth and commoditye. And albeit that some of vs haue of late murmered agaynste her, yet let the example of other that dyd so before, and are plaged by goddes iust iudgemēt for their greuouse offēce, be a warninge for vs to take hede. And let vs obey her, not for feare, but for veri loue. For in dede to punis
                     •
                  e vs is her great grefe, because she wold

that the leaste heere of oure heades shuld peryshe. Therefore let vs not force her grace to that, that her nature dothe abhorre. Nor giue her occasion to saye, as her noble progenitor king Henry the .v. sayde after y• rebelliō made agaynst him by Richarde the Earle of Cambrige,
                     Polyd. lib 22. & Henry the lorde Scrupe, and Thomas Gray after this sort.
               Consyder, sayd he, the rashe foly of these folkes: they persecute me, who night and day to thuttermost of my power enforce my selfe to profyt the common welth: And to that ende I toyle and trauayle contynually, and studye alwayes, that I can, to do good to al my subiectes, and thinke

my selfe borne for that purpose. But I pray god, that there be neuer one amonge you, whose trayterouse harte I may worthely blame, and say, that he had rather haue me distroyed, then his contrie to be in good state preserued, and in honour encreased. These wordes sayde Henry the .v. to his subiectes. Which I truste verely hereafter we wil neuer gyue our▪ gratiouse Queene occasion to say. But contrariwise, muche to commend vs to reioyce in our obedyence▪ to take comforte in our peace and quiet behauyour: Which shalbe acceptable to god, thankeful to her grace and very profitable for our selfes to. 
            
            Nowe then (moste

deare & louing contrye men) seing that we are wel assured, that our most gratiouse lady the Quene by reason of her godlye vertue, wherin she excelleth, and for the greate feruēt loue, that she beareth to eueri one of vs, she wil throughly performe these thinges, we haue great cause to gyue god most hartely thankes▪ y• sente her vnto vs, & hath so gratiously delte with vs for her sake.
For it semeth, that as God sayd to the children of Israell in Kynge Dauids tyme,2. Reg. 5
               I wyll by the hande of my seruaunt Dauid saue my people of Israell from the handes of the Philistians, and all their enemyes,
so sayeth he nowe to: I wyll by the hande of myne humble handemayde Marye

saue my people of Englande from the assaultes of their enemyes. If we were oppressed by her, if we were spoyled throughe her meanes, or yf we were cruellye handled at her hand, then might men haue somthing to say. But no suche matter is there. For her grace is so gentle, so buxome, so merciful, so liberal, of so god lye conuersation & excellente vertue, yt if she were amonge Turkes, Saracenes, or Iewes, she woulde vndoubtedly winne their harts, & cause thē both hartly to loue her, & also to be ready to defēd her. How vngentle then maye we be thought, yt can not loue such a gratious lady, & with gladde hartes be obedient to her?

But the very matter of al our grudge is (as we were tolde a lytle before) her catholike religion. Whych howe good and godly it is, we may easely perceaue, yf we compare it with that, that hathe bene nowe of late yeares amonge vs.
            It is grounded vpon the consent of al christes catholike church, which is the sure foū
               dation of truth. Thother is grounded only vpon the consent of a few in corners, and yet neuer one of thē agreeth with another. The religion yt the Queenes grace maynteyneth, is fiftenne hūdreth yeare olde: thys new religion is scarcelye twoo hundreth yeares olde. The catholike religion is, and hath bene vniuersallye

receaued througheoute the whole world: This of theyrs hath bene receaued but here and there in a few places, and of all the worlde besyde condemned. And Vincentius a good holy writer thinketh, that these be the speciall poyntes to trye religion (that is to say) the auncientnes of tyme, the vniuersall receauinge of it,
                  Vincent. lib. aduer sus prophanashae resum nouirates.
                and the whole consent of the churche. For thus he writeth. In the catholike church we muste take diligent hede, that we stycke to that, which is in euery place, alwaies, and of all men beleued.
For this in dede is catholike▪ as the worde it selfe dothe playnely declare, which verely conteyneth al vniuersally. But this

shall we do, if we folowe the vniuersall faythe, and beleue the auncientnesse of tyme and the whole consent of Christes churche. And nowe for the vniuersall beleue, that shal we folowe after this sorte. If we thynke that fayth to be true, whyche all Christes Churche throughout the worlde dothe confesse. As for auncientnesse of time, that shall we folowe, if we in no wyse go from the senses & interpretations of scripture, that we manifestli know to haue bene commonlye vsed and allowed of the holye and aunciente fathers. The whole consent of Christes Churche shall we folowe, yf we submit our selfes to the auncient determinations and sentences

eyther of all bisshops, priestes, and doctours, or elles at the lest of al most al. And the same writer a litle after teacheth vs how to know a true christen Catholike man thus.
He is a true catholike man in dede, whiche loueth goddes truth, his churche, and the bodye of Christe: which also preferreth nothing, that is to say▪ nether any one mans authoritie, nor loue▪ nor witte, nor eloquence, nor knowledge of philosophy, before godly religion and the fayth catholike, but dispising all these, and stickinge sted fastly and surely to his fayth, thinketh that he is bounden to hold and beleue only that, ye he knoweth the catholike church of olde vniuersallye to haue

holden and maynteyned. And let hym suppose surely, that what new and straunge doctrine or order soeuer is couertly and craftly brought in by any one man, eyther beside the mindes of al holy and godly men, or els vtterly cōtrary to them is brought in, not for to encrease mennes deuotion & religion, but only to tempte them with all.
Thus by the wordes of this godly author, who wrote aboue a thowsand yeares ago, we may easely perceaue, what sorte of religion men ought to folowe. Againe the authors of the catholike religion are the apostles, and their successors: As Ireneus, Iustinus martyr▪ Cyprian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origene,

S. Hierom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustyne, S. Chrisostom, Basil, Gregorius Nazianzene, Cyrill, with infinite many mo. The authors of this new sect, are Wic
                  •
               ffe, Hus, Luther, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Bucer, Bullinger, Caluine, and a greate rable beside. The authours of Christes true religion were Martyrs, confessors, and holi sayntes all: The authours of this new religion were Apostatas that is to say, such as had bene monkes and frears, whiche broke their vowes, cast of their cootes, became like lay men, marryed nonnes, called them wiues, and so lyued in abhominable inceste. The authors of the catholike religion were

               
                  ••
               ke, gentle, lowly, full of vertue, and godlye conuersation, despicers of the worlde, and the vanities thereof, chast, auoyde of ambition and couetousnes, gyuen all to fastyng, prayer, and almose dedes. The authours of oure newe doctrine were prowde, stubborne, presumptuous, of smal vertue, and that only in apparence, louers of the world, and muche delited wyth the pleasures thereof, lecherous, and carnal, gready of honour, and of gettyng of goodes: slacke in praying▪ more slacke in fastynge, and altogether negligent in good dedes doynge. For they thought fasting was Poperye, and prayer superstition, & good dedes to auayle

vs nothynge at all. The authors of the catholike fayth and religion were careful for peace, desirous of vnitie, fauorers of obedience, and maynteyners of all good order. The authours of our late religion, were causers of warre not onely bitwixt prince and prince▪ but also bitwixte princes & their subiects, breakers of the vnitie of Christes catholike churche, sowers of sedition, workers of disobedience, and bryngers in of al confusiō & disorder: captaynes of carnal libertie, & defendors of the same. Of these .ii. sortes of mē whome ought we gyue more credite to trowe you? Shall we better trust Wicliffe, that because he could not come by

the Bisshoprike of Worcester, forsoke Christe & his churche, and became an heretike: or holy Ireneus, who for the mainteynaunce of Christes fayth and his churche forsoke both his Bisshoprike and hys lyfe to? Or shall we better beleue Hus, that was a professed frear, and had vowed chastitie, obedience, and wilfull pouertie, and after brake all, became a married manne, and preached heresye in Boheme: Or S. Cyprian, that when he was a yonge man, was taken in loue wyth a yonge woman, and after most earnestly repentyng hym thereof, liued chastlye all his dayes, and ended hys life by martyrdome? What shal we saye to Luther

that lewde lyinge frear, who because he could not obteyne the prefermente of a pardon, whych he would haue hadde thorderynge of, layde awaye his cote and his honestye to, passed not a pinne for ye breche of hys vowe. And then began he to bable and rayle agaynst the aucthoritie of the church, and the Sacramentes thereof▪ And anone got he him selfe a 
                  〈◊〉
                Nonne, so that men loked, that Antichrist shoulde haue ben borne betwixt those twayne, because that it hadde bene sayde of olde, that Antichrist shuld be borne betwixt a frear and a Nonne. And here in folkes were not muche deceaued: For albeit that Antichrist him selfe was not borne

betwixt thē, yet they brought forth a forerider of his, called false doctrine, which hath poysoned a great many, and prepared their hartes to receaue their mayster Antichriste. Shall we then truste better this licentiouse limitour, then S. Hierome, that commendeth vnto vs chaste lyfe and virginitie, and lyued him selfe all hys life time in perfite chastitie? But to compare them one by one▪ it were to longe, and yet not necessarye. For you may learne by these what the rest be. Loke vpon the lyues of bothe sortes, and you shall fynde the one to be corrupt, sensuall and vitious the other to be pure, sobre, & vertuouse.

Consider their doctrine. The one is perniciouse, lewde, and carnall, the other is holsome, substantiall and godly. Reade their bokes, and you shall perceaue in the one blasphemye for blessing, rayling for reasonyng, and malice for modesty. And in the other, reuerente speaking, sound knowledge, and an humble spirite. And this is certayne, that whatsoeuer this new erroniouse writers haue, that is good, they haue taken it out of the olde writers. And whatsoeuer is nought, as the most parte is, that is their owne. Therfore if a man purpose to learne vertue, to learne good knowledge, & to learne the trueth, let hym read the old writers, and

he shalbe satisfyed. For as Plantus sayth, that old wine and old comedies be best, so may we well say, that old writers farre excelleth the new, by reason that the one sort are, as it were pure fountaynes, oute of whiche these other beynge like riuers, are deriued and drawen. And Cicero writeth, y• it is great foly for a man,
                  
                     
                        ••
                      Acad. 
                        •••
                     st.
                that may come to the fountaynes, to 
                  〈◊〉
                to the ryuers. But scarcely may we compare these new noughty writers to ryuers, because they be more like to standing pooles. For the longer they contynue, the more corrupted they seme, and moo fo
                  •
               kes they infecte. But a ryuer the lōger that it runneth, the better is it purged, and

purgeth other thinges withall. Now then seing, that this late religion and sect came out of these new fangled writers, I much maruayle, why men, that mynde to be saued, will so muche esteme it, and put their lyues in ieopardy for it. If a man wold well way it, he shuld easely perceaue it to be nought, by reason of ye noughty fruites, that are sprong out of it. Let our owne countrye only be taken as an example herin.A discourse of ye fruites, y• sprong
                     •
                   of our newe religion in Englande. Diuision from the catholike churche. When sensual lust of the bodye, and selfe will, (two mete mates for it) had ones brought it into this realme, the first thing that he toke in hande, was to cutte vs of, and diuide vs from the whole vniuersall churche of god. And

where as we were in dede but a member before, it wolde make vs a whole bodye, and ioyne thervnto suche a head, as the lyke in all the worlde hath neuer bene hearde of, in so muche that our churche became as monstrouse, as euer was eyther Chimera or Centaurus, that the Poetes speake of. Which ones done, euery man (as Esaye sayeth) waxed wise in his owne conceyte,Esa. 5. Presumption. and so presumed to searche for the secrete misteries of GOD. For as sone as they had the scripture trāslated into Englyshe (albeit very vntruly as it well appeareth! in a great number of places, then begon they,
                  Socrae. histor eccles. lib. 2. as the Arrians did in Constantius dayes, to reason and

dispute, & euery man thought his owne iudgement best, and euery daye in a maner would he haue a newe iudgemente, and contemne al other folkes iudgemente besyde, and saye that the holy fathers and writers aucthorities was but mennes traditions, and that they all were oftentimes deceaued. As for to seke anye doctrine of God at their handes, it shuld be but foly. For euery manne was taughte by the spirite of God sayde they: And so rekened they them selfes, that they were well ynoughe learned, & that they were able to expounde the holy scriptures of God of theyr owne braynes. And when they were ones

thus persuaded,The title of a good iudgemēt they were called men of a good iudgement, which was a great commendation at that tyme: a goodly title to cloke their noughty purpose withall. But how good a iudgement was it, I praye you, that iudged badde to be good, vice to be vertue, and contagiouse heresye to be holsome doctrine. It is an old saying and a true, that blinde men can iudge no colours. But verely this is as true. that blind ignoraunce can not iudge of sounde learninge. Wolde we not call him a Phisition of a noughtye iudgement, that wold when he had sene a sicke mans water, that were sore sycke in dede, saye that this man is not sicke, but

he is I warrant you hole and sounde: So when we hearde in tyme paste a newe brother saye, that a presumptuouse ignoraunt felow, was a learned man, and of a good iudgemēt, myghte we not well saye agayne, that suche a mans iudgement was to be muche mistrusted. For he that wold tell me, that a man, that had a pockye face, had a goodly fayre visa
                  •
               e, might not I saye to him, that he were foule deceaued. But what yf he wold brynge another as blynd as him selfe, to saye the same, then had I good cause to saye, as a good homelye seruaunt sayde ones to his mayster, that wolde nedes beare him downe in a false matter, well mayster well I

will not saye you lye, because it be cometh me not, but neuer the lesse I wote, what I wote. If a man had gotte hym selfe this goodly tytle, that he was of a good iudgemente, then yf he were verye ignoraunte, he shulde be called learned, yf he were but a foole, he shuld be taken for a wise man, yf he were but a verye babler in dede, he shuld be taken for a ready witted felowe: & were he neuer so lewde in behauiour, yet shuld he be coūted a right honest mā. For this good iudgement, yt I spoke of, was a cloke to couer all noughtie cōditions. More ouer a watcheword had they, yt they might be knowen from other. For then wold they not say, our lord saue vs, as al christen

men vse to saye,The lord but ye lord saue vs. Wherby thei wold be knowen to haue a seueral lord of their owne. And albeit that S. Paul very ofte vseth this speakynge (our Lorde) to declare that all we Christen men do serue one Lorde and mayster,Our lord & that we be of one household, yt is to say, of one church, insomuche that we may moste conueniently saye (our Lord) because we be all chyldren of one father, and seruauntes of one mayster, and knytte together with the bounde of charitie, yet woulde these folkes neuer saye (oure Lord) which they sayde was a papisticall terme, but (the Lord) whiche declared thē to be fauorers of gods word, as they thought.

And this terme was so vniuersallye vsed, that the poore beggers hadde gotte it by the ende, by reason that begginge thus (for the lordes sake haue pitie vpon the poore) they thoughte the soner to spede, & you shall heare it of manye of their mouthes as yet. Neuerthelesse the terme of it selfe is good and godly, if it be not abused for such a noughty purpose. For the holy Scripture both in the old testament and the new to, verye often speaketh so. But surely for all christen men, whē they speake of god, it is most conueniente to say, our lorde which is a terme of mutual loue, concord and vnitie. When they had ones learned this wacheword

then beganne they to talke of the libertye of the gospell, and to exhort men earnestly to embrace the same. But what was this same libertye of the Gospell,Libertie of the gospel amō
                  ges oure newe bretherne what it signifieth. was it ought elles, but the libertie of the fleshe? For the deuyll their mayster had taught them this lesson, that they shuld gyue to wicked diuises godlye names: as to call carnall libertie,Godly names for wicked diuises. the libertie of the Gospell: abhominable heresye, true doctrine: scripture falselye interpreted▪ Goddes worde: an
                  •
                arrogant spirite, the spirite of God: bold presumption, a godlye zeale: a blasphemouse raylour, a worthye preacher: bookes full of heresye, good godlye bookes.
            And what folowed thys licentiouse

libertye?Fastinge abolished Was not thē al fasting abolished? Wold not men then, as Eustathius dyd, an heretike condemned in a generall counsayle holden at Gā
                  gris,
               
                  Socra. histor eccle lib. 2. breake all fastynge dayes appoynted by the church, and some would fast vpon the sondaye, and vpon fridaye, which hath euer since Christes time bene duelye kepte, in stede of fasting they fell to delicate fedyng, and in stede of chastising the bodye, nourished it with deynteouse meates, and so made it well at ease? And yf they had had but meane simple cheare all the weke before, that day wold they haue their capons, coneys▪ chekins, and such fine meates to tame their bodies withall. And whosoeuer

wold not thus do, he fauored not Gods worde, as they sayde, but was enemye to the truth, & a papiste to. And they wold bidde men to dinner vpō the fridaye, to thintente that they might allure thē to eate fleshe. For yf they coulde ones bring them to yt, they thought they wold waxe shortly fauourers of Gods worde (as they termed it) that is to saye, of their heresye. Was not thys (trowe you) a goodly memory of Christes payniull passion,Why we fast vpon the Fridaye. yt he vpon the friday suffred for vs? were not these folkes wel cōtented to subdue their carnal lustes as yt day, and to offer vp to god the swete sacrifice of fasting and prayer, thereby to giue him most hartie thankes

for the greuouse tormentes, & sorowfull death, that he suffered as that daye for oure redemption, for whiche ende the catholike churche of god hath moste godlye appoynted that day alwayes to be fasted? No no, where suche good cheare was kept, there was smal remembraunce (I feare me) of Christes holy passion. For to thinke thervpō, was to sowre and bytter sawce for suche swete and pleasaunt meates. Was not this a goodly meanes to make the fleshe obedient to the spirite, and to prepare mens hartes humbly and reuerently to serue their lorde god? Herof came it to passe,Married priestes. that lecherous priestes, that loued no fastinge, sayd:

they must nedes haue women which they called wyues. For it is not possible (sayd they) for a man to lyue chaste. That myght be truely sayd in dede of them, that soughte not the meanes, wherby to lyue chast. For seyng that fast they wold not, and for prayer they cared not, and for studye they much passed not, whiche be speciall helpes to lyue chaste, no meruayle was it, thoughe they were prouoked to leaue theyr chaste lyfe, and fall to wiuing. But yf so be they had tamed theyr tykkell lustes with ofte fastyng, and called vpon God by earnest praying, they shuld neuer haue fallen to such fond folye, for whych they are now at Gods hande most iustly plaged.

And I pray god, as they be worthelye plaged, so they maye humblye acknowledge the same, and with wepynge eyes aske God mercy betime, that a greater plage fall not vpon them at lengthe. Lette them consider their wycked acte in marrying, and their abhominable inceste and aduoutrye therin, & beside that their noughtie doctrine, which thei haue taught since they hadde women, and howe that they wold not let to preache what men wold haue them, because they had nowe gotten their purpose. And men that were thē in greatest authority, (perceauing their folie) thoughte they shuld get thē to say what they wold, when as ones they

had giuen them licence to marrye. And because these lewde priestes shulde not lacke companye, the deuyl moued suche religious folkes, as were of an vngodly conuersation,Religiouse folkes married. yt when they were ones set abroade, & had caste of their cowles, they shulde seke al meanes possible to satisfie their synfull lustes. Whervpon many of them became preachers of this newe doctrine, and made the people beleue, that licentious liuinge (as I sayd before) was the libertye of the Gospell, to thintent that the breaking of their solemne vowes, whiche they had made to god, their taking of women, whome they named wiued & their voluptuouse pleasure, which thei most

earnestly soughte for, myghte be well lyked and alowed of the people. For like as those, that be delyted wyth cardyng and dysing, much trauayle in persuading other, that they intende nothing, but honest pastyme, and that pastime is necessarie for al men to dryue away fantasies withall, so these religiouse, that I speake of, when they had tasted of the cuppe of carnall concupiscence, they told men, that they sought nothynge, but the libertie of the Gospell, and folowynge the fotesteppes of their mayster Martin Luther, became as stowte and stubborne Apostatas, as euer he was him selfe. And these were the great pillours

of our newe English churche, wherevpon menne grounded their fayth, and vpon whose backes they hange their saluation: whose names I could rehearse, yf it were necessarye, & whose licentiouse lyuynge I coulde easelye describe. But both twayne euery man in maner knoweth without any tellyng. And I praye GOD, as they know them, so they may take hede of them, and as S. Paule warneth vtterlye flye from them, yea (and as they haue good cause) sore repent, that euer they knewe them. When these folkes had gottē this fleshly libertie, then heresye went forward apace. But yf they well weye, howe many haue bene deceaued by them,

and how sore, except they repent, they shalbe punished for euery of them, they (me think) shulde haue good cause to put sacke cloth vpon them, and to lye them downe at the church dore, as one Grebolius dyd, and praye all menne,
                  Socra. lib 3. histor. eccles.
                that entre in there to treade vpon them, as being vnsauery salte. And after in open audience to cōfesse their false doctrine, that they haue preached, and willingly to recante the same, and giue all men warning to beware of it, and to returne to their mother the Catholike Churche agayne. And thus both to pacifie Goddes wrath agaynste them, and also to brynge all suche to the sure and sounde fayth of the Churche, as they

haue throughe theyr wycked preachynges vtterly diuided therefro. Moreouer hath not this carnall libertie broughte to passe likewise, that menne that abhorred fasting, beynge delicately fedde, wold to satisfie their wanton lustes, be diuorced from their wiues, yea and after marry agayne,Folkes diuorced did marry agayne. their wyues beynge as yet alyue? And had they not maysters, that wolde teache them this, and preache the same openly, and make bookes in maynteynaunce of suche abhomination? Whyche maysters tolde them, that there were two sortes of fornication, for whiche men or women might be diuorced, one carnal, & another spiritual. Carnall, as whē the wise

had commited aduoutry with another man, or the husbande with another woman. Spiritual, when the woman▪ or man was a papist, and an enemye to Goddes worde, as they called it. For which two kindes of fornication men and women to. might lawfulli (sayd these iolye maysters) be diuorced, and marry agayne. So that both the husband, whensoeuer hym lyste, might at his pleasure cast of his wife and take another, and also the wyfe in lyke maner take another husbande. Was not this very holsome doctrine, I pray you, and mete to be preached in pulpittes, set forth in bookes, and the authours therof worthy to be compared

with Saynt Paule (as they were of many) for theyr famouse preaching? God gyue grace to all christen people to beware of such maysters, lest by them they be ledde or euer they be aware▪ streight to the deuyll the great mayster of al such mischeuouse doctrine: of which as he is the first father and founder, so all they, that eyther teache it, or embrace it, shall in conclusion, except they earnestly repent, be partakers with hym of the painfull pitte of hell. Besides this, it wold pitie anye good mans hart, to thinke, what disorder & disobedience came of this liberty.Discorde and disobedience. Wold not the seruauntes controll their maysters, and tel them, when they were

chekked for leauing their busines vndone,Disobedience of seruaūtes to their maysters.▪
                yt they had bene occupied eyther in readynge gods word, or in hearing some sermon, yea & so godly lessons hadde they learned, since they had tasted of this newe doctrine, ye very few of their maysters could after truste them. And if ye mayster were a catholike mā, & one that feared god, then wold his seruaunte, if he were of a contrary iudgemēt, handel hym like awarde, and in maner make a loute of him, and do his busynesse as he list, and when he lyste, and lette it be vndone, if he list.. For the mayster fearing, that he shuld haue displeasure by him, durst neyther put hym away from hym, nor ones asmuch as rebuke

hym for any matter. After the same sorte dyd children order their parentes,Disobedience of childrē to their parentes. wyues their husbandes, and subiectes their magystrates: So that the fete ruled the head, and the cart was set before ye horse. For childrē when they had bene brought vp in schole a while with some lewd Lutherane▪ then would they write letters to their catholike parentes, and exhorte them in the lordes name to leaue their papistry and blind ignoraunce, that they were in, and fall at lenght to folow goddes worde, and gladly to receaue the truth. And if the parentes would not folowe this their childishe aduise, streight way would they not

let to talke with their companyons, and tell them, that their parentes were blinde papistes. Yea and make a mery mockinge stocke of them, & lay: my father is an old doting foole▪ and will fast vpon the fryday, and my mother goeth alwayes mumblinge on her beades. But you shall se me of another sorte, I warraunt you. For I will neuer folowe no suche superstitiouse folye, nor walke in the Papisticall pathes of my parentes. Were not men well at ease, trow you, when they had bestowed a great deale of money vpon suche graceles graftes, who neyther feared god, nor reuerenced their parentes? Thus did mens wyues to, that were

become systers of the new fraternitye,Disobedience of wiues to their husbandes. order their husbandes. For where as the husbande dyd not fauoure their secte, then would the wyfe no longer go to schole with hym in silence,1. Tim. 2 as Saynt Paule byddeth her, but would boldlye fall to teache hym, and tell hym of his duety.1. Cor, 14 And many of them were offended with Saynte Paule, that hadde commaunded them, that they shuld holde their peace in the churches. For gladly would they haue preached, if they might haue bene suffred, as some of thē neuertheles did in corners. At which tyme also ye deuil, for ye better furtheraūce of heresy piked out two sorts of people, that shuld in tauernes

and innes, at commentables, and in open stretes set forwarde his purpose, as wel as false preachers dyd in the pulpet: that is to say, minstrels and players of enterludes. The one to singe pestilente and abhominable songes, and the other to set forth openly before mens eyes the wicked blasphemye, that they had cōtriued for the defacing of all rites, ceremonies, and all the whole order, vsed in the administration of the beissed Sacramentes. Then the scripture being in suche folkes handes, was sore studied not for amendement of life, which they neuer mynded, but partly to mayntayne their loude heresye, wherwith they were

infected, partelye to controll the priestes, whome they had in great derision, and partlye to find faulte with other, whē they had anye occasion at all. For yf a man were a good vertuous priest, he had bene better a great deale to haue liued amonge Turkes and Saracenes, then amonge this kind of folke:mockyng of priestes by reason that whensoeuer they mette with him in anye place, they woulde aske him: Nowe syr Iohn where fynde you your Masse in scripture, or who gaue you aucthoritie to make god? As though the prieste by his owne power had made Christes blessed body in the holye Sacramente of the aultare, and not the holye worde of God. And then

woulde they saye beside, it is pitie, that anye suche popishe wretches lyues, ye thus haue deceaued Christes flocke. But nowe I warrante you must you turne your tippet, & laye away your olde mumpsimus, and shutte vp youre portesse and your Masse boke to, and putte awaye cleane your purgatory Masses. You must nowe olde foole go to schole agayne, and learne a newe lesson. And agayne whensoeuer they see one of his cote walke by the strete, they wolde whistell and hemme at him, & say, go walke in a mischiefe you bald headed knaue. Yea & as yet thys maliciouse mockers cease not in many places, whē they can spie a prieste, to playe

the like part. But thinke you, that suche mockers shal not at length be plaged for their taū
               tinge of Gods ministers, euen as the children were, that mocked Heliseus the Prophete?4
                     •
                   Reg. 
                     •
                  
                These children that I speake of, as Heliseus the anoynted Prophete of God, went to Bethell, came forth of the citie, & mocked him, saying, walke vp you bald headed horson, walke vp. Who loking backe, & seyng them, cursed thē in the name of GOD: and by and by came two beeres oute of the foreste, and tore in peces two & fourtye of them. Therefore let all men take hede, as they mocke the priestes and ministers of God, whome they are bounde to reuerēce both for Christes

sake,Luc. 10. which sayth, Whosoeuer dispiseth you, dispiseth me, and also for their office sake, which is so necessarye for al mens helth and saluation: And let them remē
               bre no more, but this one example of Chrysostome,
                  Lib 3. de 
                        ••
                     g. sacer The dignitie and auchtoritye of priestes, who wryteth thus.
If a greate prince wold giue this aucthoritie to one of his seruauntes, that he shuld deliuer out of prison, whome he lyste, & whome he lyste shutte vppe in prison, wolde not all menne, and that not wythout good cause, both feare him and reuerence hym to? Howe then shuld men honour the priestes, which hath aucthoritie by Christ, kyng of all kynges, committed vnto them to lowse mens sowles out of the fetters of sinne, and

agayne to bynd them, as they see occasiō? And the same writer sayeth in the same worke, that we can neyther at our comyng into the worlde become Christen wythoute them, nor at oure departynge out of the worlde, receaue the blessed sacramentes of the aulter, and aneyling without thē. Whych thynges considered, lette no man, ye eyther loueth Christe, whiche is the hyghe Prieste of all, and the authour of priest hode, or loueth hys owne soules helth, and purposeth to be saued, mocke the priestes, leste they be worthelye punyshed therfore, but reuerence them, as Gods shepeherdes here in 
                  •
               arth, to whose cure mens soules are committed.
And although

they see some of them eyther lacke good knowledge and learnynge, or to be lyghte and lewde of behauioure, yet muste they not contemne the office for the mens euyll lyuynge. For yf the officers vnder a Prince be of noughtye conuersation, we may not for that say, their office is nought and disobeye the officers, but as the princes officers humblye obeye them, and as euyll lyuers, hartely praye God to amende them. But to returne to the Lutherans libertie, y• we talked of before, was not al thinges through it brought so farre out of order, that vice ruled vertue,Gouernement turned vpside downe. & folishnes ruled wisdome, lightnesse ruled grauitie, and youth ruled age?

So that the olde mens saying was herein verified, that when Antichrist shulde come. the rootes of the trees shulde growe vpwarde. Was there not beside such deadly dissention for our diuersitie in opinions,Dissen
                     •••
                  on for opinions. that euen amōges those, that were mooste verye deare frendes,Hatred & malice for opinions. arose moste greuouse hatred. For the sonne hated hys owne father, the sister her brother, the wyfe her husband, the seruaunte hys mayster, the subiect the ruler. And in euery house, at euery mans table, in euery corner, in euery strete, at euerye tauerne and inne,Unreuerent reasonyng of Goddes word. at all tymes was there suche vnreuerent reasonynge of Gods highe mysteries, that those that mette together frē
               des,

departed enemyes, and sometymes were at daggers drawyng for the matter. And then you shulde haue hearde, thou Papiste, and thou heretike. And in a small number of yeares it came to passe, that no neyghbour could loue another, no man do for another, no one agree wyth another. Thus was the membres of Christes Churche by such deuelishe discorde,The mē
                  bers of Christes Church
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  ne asonder. miserably rent a sonder. Which thinge deepely to thinke vpon, wold make anye charitable mans harte to blede. For if we shuld se before our eyes a mans bodye first to haue the heade cut of, then the fingers and toes, then the handes and fete, after the legges and armes,

then the bowelles piteouslye pulled oute of the belye, and last of all, the rest of the bodye being thus mangled and maimed, cut in small gobbets and peces, woulde we not thinke it a sorowfull and lamentable spectable to behold, and count these folkes very cruell butchers, that thus cruelly had handled it? How muche then ought we to lament, when we se ye churche,Colloss. 
                     •
                  
                which S. Paule calleth ye bodie of Christ▪ thus by debate & strife rufully rent, & so māgled with mischeuous heresye, that the beauty therof is in maner vtterly defaced. Might not we well say thus with the holy prophete Hieremye.Hier. 14. Let our eyes neuer cease from wepinge night

nor daye, because the virgin and doughter of my people is wonderfully brused, and al to broken in peces, and a mooste miserable plage fallen vpon her. But now to make a brefe rehersal of the other noughty fruytes, yt came of thys loose libertye, begon not the authours of it first with the basest ceremonies in the Churche,The basest ceremonies 
                     〈◊〉
                   taken 
                     •
                  waye. and abolished them they coulde not tell why, and after went forth still euen to the greatest mistery of our fayth, and at length made vp their mischiefe with the takinge away of those. For first they dyd forbyd holy bread and holy water to be vsed any longer,Holye bread and holy water what they signifye. two very godly and liuely ceremonyes: thone to put

vs in remembraunce, that as those peces of breade be all of one loafe, so we be all mēbers of one body, ye is to say, of the catholike churche, and kni
                  ••
               e together in one fayth and one charitie: the other to cause vs to call to mynde the passion of Christ, with whose blessed bloud we are sprinckled & wasshed from the fylthines of synne. And then they commaunded Images to be plucked downe in euery churche,Images pulled downe. which put vs in memorye of the holy lyues of confessours, martyrs, and virgins: yea and they were not so contented. but they would haue the Image of our sauiour Iesus Christ likewise spitefully to be hurled downe,Christes Image hurled downe▪
                and eyther

with fire to be burned, or with instrumentes broken all in peces. And some sinfull wretches were there, that digged vp,Crosses in highe wayes why they were sette vp. and ouerthrewe the crosses in highe wayes, whiche were sette vp, partly to make men that passed by, remember Christes death and passion, and partly to shewe them the right way, that knew not the same. Who I pray you would thinke, that these folkes bare any good affection to our sauiour Christ, which could neither abide his Image, nor the holsome Signe of hys crosse. For like as if a man shuld come into the kinges palaice, and first rashelye pull downe the kinges armes, then breake them in peces, and after tread

them vnder his fete, no man woulde suppose, that such one loued the kinge, but that he were a ranke traytoure, and worthy to suffer a most shame full death, so yf a man shuld entre into a churche, whiche is as it were Goddes palaice in earth, and there pluckedowne violentlye Christes owne Image, and eyther breake it, or burne it, and sette vp the kinges armes in stede thereof, because he woulde make him a God (as Caius themperoure did in the holy temple of Hierusalem, where he caused his owne Image to be set vp, and would be called a God, & that the temple there shulde be named the temple of the goodly newe Iuppiter Caius) I beleue,

that no good Christen man woulde iudge hym to be Christes frende, but a wretched heretike, and an arrende traytour both to our sauiour Iesus Christ, and also to hys blessed spouse the Catholyke Churche. But truelye greate merueyle is it, that suche folkes are not so plaged for their abhomination, as was Iulianus Apostata,
               
                  Sozomenus histo. eccle. li. 5. whyche pulled downe the Image of oure Sauioure Christ, & set his owne Image in the place, where it stode. Whych Image of hys was anone after wyth a thunder bolte, cut in sonder euen by the myddel, and hurled downe to the grounde, and he hym selfe to sor his wickednes came at lengthe to a miserable and cursed

ende.
            But for what purpose was thys done, trowe you, of oure goodlye Gospellers? Was it not done onlye to put Christe & all his holye saynctes cleane out of memorye, as they were in dede (more pitie is it) wyth a great manye. For why doth many men desyre to haue the Images of their deare frendes paynted in tables, and honge vp in their chambers, but because they woulde not forget thē, eyther when they be absent, or els when they be dead. Doth not a liuely ymage I beseche you, make folkes remēber the man, that is represented by it better, then a bare naked white wall? or when a man cometh into a house, and

               
                  •
               yndeth the Image of Kinge Edwarde, whether doth he then more remember hym, or when he goeth into another house, and findeth no Image of hym at all? It was wonte to be sayd, that suche as were the kinges very frēdes, wold haue ye kinges Image in their howses, bothe to make them remember their dueties toward hym, and also to declare their good wil, that they bare him. But oure Image breakers be lyke the Iewes, the deadly enemies of our Sauiour,Ware Image breake to be like the Iewes. whych can by no meanes abyde anye Image, eyther of Christ, or hys Saynctes, but they bable and rayle agaynst them, because they wold haue Christe and all hys blessed

Saynctes cleane put oute of memorye.
            After thys was procession abolished,Processiō what it signifieth. which is a common prayer for the whole churche, and by which is signified, that we be all Christes souldyars, and hauynge Christes crosse, as a banner goyng before vs, do fyghte together by prayer agaynste oure goostlye enemye the deuil. And here withall were censynge▪ candelles, asshes, and palmes cleane taken awaye, whyche be not domme ceremonies, as the deuils ministers call them, but very lyuely & godlye ceremonies. For censinge signifieth ye offring vp of the pleasaunt odour of godly prayer,Candels what thei signifie. & thereat the prieste desireth of God,

that the prayers of all that be present, maye ascende vp into his syght, as the swete odour of frankensence.
And bryghte burnyng candels betokeneth Christ hym selfe, whych (as S. Iohn sayeth) is the trewe lyghtes that illumineth euery man,Ioan. 1. that cometh into the worlde.
And so the good godlye manne Simeon vpon Candelmasse daye, when he mette Christe in the temple, & toke him in his armes, sayde:
Nowe Lorde thou lettest thy seruaunte,Luc. 2. accordynge to thy promise, departe in peace. Because myne eyes hath sene the sauioure of the world sent from thee. Whome thou hast prepared in the 
                     •
                  ight of all people to be a lyght to the gentils and paynems, and greate glorye and renowne to the people of Israell.
            
            So that by oure candels bearyng

we declare, that our verye lyght Christe, is come to lyghten oure soules▪ whyche were darkened with ye blacke cloudes of fowle fylthye sinne before.
            Agayne when we are marked wyth asshes in the foreheade,Asshes what thei signifye. we are playnlye tolde therbi, what we be. That is to wete, nothing els, but as Abraham sayd,Gene. 12 verye duste and asshes. And remembrynge the same, haue good cause to laye away oure pryde, to become humble and meke, and euerye daye to thynke vpon oure ende, when as oure bodyes shall become vyle wormes meate, and all our goodly beautie be turned into dust.
            Nowe as for bearynge of

palmes,Bearyng of palmes what it meaneth. that is to put vs in remembraunce of Christes comming to Hierusalem, when as the people cutte bowes of the trees,Mat. 21. & cast them in the way, where he shoulde passe, & that as we be glad to strawe palmes in the way▪ where Christes most blessed bodye is presented, so we ought to garnish the house of oure soules wyth swete floures, & firste washe it cleane with ye cleare water of holsom penaūce, & then straw the pleasaunt Psalmes of perfite fayth & charitie in it, with a sure hope of gods promisses:
& so prepare it, yt it may please our sauior to say,Luc. 19. as he sayd to zacheus, this day must 
                     •
                   rest in your houses.
Withal they toke away creping to the crosse vpō good

friday▪
               Crepinge to ye crosse wherby euery man declareth hys hūble obeysaunce to Christ: & as Christ our sauiour as ye day humbled him selfe to ye death of the crosse,Philip. 2 (as S. Paule" sayth) so euery christen man in remēbraunce therof doth hū
               bly crepe vpō his knees to the Image and signe of the crosse there to do worship to Christ, ye died for him vpon the crosse, & to giue him most harty thā
               kes for the redēption of al mā
               kind, which was done by him vpō the crosse.Halowing of the foute. Then was forbidden also the halowing of ye font, which euen frō the Apostles time had alwayes bene, (as it appeareth by Tertullian, Basile, & other good wryters) wt great reuerence obserued, because it is so necessari in ye churche of god.
            
               And therewithall went away all the other rites and ceremonies, that are vsed vpō Easter euen. When al these godly ceremonies were ridded out of the waye, then in a furiouse rage lyke menne besyde theyr wittes, fell they to pul downe the holy aulters,Aulters pulled downe. where oure Sauiours blessed bodye was wonte to be consecrated, and the same there offred vp, as a mooste pleasaunte sacrifice to God the father.
            And to make vp their maliciouse mischiefe withal, plucked they downe the pixe,The pixe wherin the very body of our lord and sauiour was reserued & kept. And some vyle verlettes, to thintente they might do the Deuyll their mayster better

seruice, hurled the same blessed sacramēt vnder their fete, & certayne of them would not let to say, as the Iewes sayd to our sauiour hangyng vpon the crosse.Mat. 27 It thou be god, saue thy selfe. But suche shalbe wel assured to be at length moste miserably plaged, as the Iewes were, except they betime repent them of their abhomible wickednes and blasphemye. After this was the most holye and blessed sacrifice of Christes body and bloude in the masse taken away,The Masse taken away wherin is commen prayer vsed for the whole catholike church of Christ, and for all states that be in it, and the very passion of our sauyour is there lyuelye represented, partli by the godlye

ceremonyes, that be vsed therein, and partly by the decent apparel and vestimentes, that the prieste weareth in the celebration therof. For al the clothes that Christ dyd weare at his blessed passion,The priestes vestimentes what thei signifie. as the purpel robe, that was put vpon hym by the Iewes, the cordes that he was bounde withall, the clothe wherwith they couered his eyes, when they bette him, and the white garmente, that he was cladde with, when Herode mocked him, are by ye priestes vestimē
               tes represented. For the Ammesse,The Ammesse. yt the priest putteth vpō his head, representeth ye cloth, wherwith Christes eyes were couered, whē Pilates men buffeted him, & in mockage badde

gesse, who smote him, as we reade in the .xxij. chapt. of S. Lukes Gospell. The whyte lynnen albe,The 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                that he putteth nexte vpon him, representeth the white garmente, wherein Christ our sauior was cladde, when Herode mocked him, as it is written by S. Luke in ye xxiij. chapt. The girdle yt the priest putteth aboute him,The girdle. representeth the whippe, wherwt Christ was bette by Pilate, as we read in ye .xix. chapt. of S. Iohn. The stole yt the priest putteth aboute hys necke,The stole represēteth ye cord or rope, wherwith our sauior was bounde, whē he was bette wt whippes as S. Marke declareth in ye xv. Chapter of his Gospell. The fannel, that the prieste

putteth vpon his lefte arme,The fan
                  
                     ••
                  t. representeth the rope, wherewith the Iewes dyd bynde oure Sauiour Iesus, when they brought hym before Annas, as Saint Iohn telleth in his gospell the .xviij. chapt. The vppermoste vestiment, called the tunicle,The tuni
                  
                     ••
                  e. which the priest putteth vpon him last of all, representeth the purple robe, that the Iewes put vpō our lorde and sauiour when they sayd to him in mockage: Hayle kinge of the Iewes. In so much that the prieste, when he is thus apparelled, and goeth to the aulter, doth manifestly set before our eyes our swete sauiour Iesus, whē he suffred his paynful passion, and went to offer vp to his

father his blessed bodye vpon the crosse for our redemption. In remembraunce of whiche holy passion the prieste representing Christ our high priest, whose priesthode contynueth for euer, offereth vp vpon the aulter the very same bodye to god the father, that suffred for vs, & the very same bloud, that was shedde for vs. So that whosoeuer desyre to be partakers of that blessed passion,The hearynge of Masse. let them with moste humble reuerence come to masse, heare it with feruēt deuotion, and earnestly thinke vpon the greate and painfull tormentes, suffred by our sauiour for their sakes, which be represented therin. And gyue hym moste hartye thankes

therfore, and desyre hym of pardone for all their offences committed in tyme past, and to gyue them grace to auoyde al vice and sinne from thenceforthe. For thus shal they vndoubtedli receaue much fruite by hearinge of Masse. And when their deuotion serueth them,Receauyng of ye sacramēte oftentymes. to receaue the moste blessed sacrament therat, were in they shall (if they worthely receaue it) take singuler commodite and comforte. And to do the same at lest at euery solemne feaste in the yeare, or oftener, if they be so disposed. For so we se the people commonlye do in other Christen realmes: Who first do confesse them selfes vnto a priest, and then come they to receaue

that blessed foode with suche lowly reuerence and earneste deuotion, as a good christen man would much reioyce to se them. Which thinge, I praye god, may shortly come to passe amonge vs, and that we may both stedfastly beleue it to be our sauiour Christes blessed bodye, as it is in dede, (and not as our laste wicked and blasphemouse cōmunion boke and all oure newe preachers most vntruely and damnably taught vs, that it was but breade only) and also deuoutly and godly receaue it to our soules helthe and comforte. Nowe as for all the rites and ceremonies of the masse, and al the praiers conteined therin, they are so godly, and so

well placed, as all the worlde is not able to inuente the like, nor so well to dispose and set them together: as all good men, that will deepelye weye them, and consider the order of them, shall easely perceaue. As for suche, as haue mooste wickedlye called the Masse a Maskarye, and the priestes vestimentes,Mockers of the Masse. maskynge clothes, and mocked all the ceremonies thereof, and spytte at them, & did smite the priestes, maye well be compared wyth Pylates menne, who (as we reade in S. Mathewes Gospell) bowynge downe theyr knees,Mat. 27. mocked our Sauioure Christe, spitte at him, & smote him vpon the heade. For surely it is not vnlyke, yt yf Christ

were here amonge vs personallye present in a mans lykenes and nature, as he was then amonge the Iewes, but that these vngodlye folkes woulde take the Iewes part, and mocke him, as they dyd, seyng that they playe the very same partes with hys priestes and ministers▪ that represent hym vnto vs, that the Iewes in olde tyme dydde playe wyth hym. But oure Lorde graunt, that they maye espye betyme theyr 
                  ••
               rye and madnes, that the miserable plages that fell vpon the Iewes for theyr mockyng of Christe, fall not lykewyse vpon them for mocking of his priestes & ministers. But manye grudge and are offended, that the

Masse,Diuine seruice in Latine. and al other diuine seruice is in Latyn, so that when they be in the Churche, they do not vnderstande, what the priest sayeth. I would gladly aske one question of such, why they come to the churche, whether to heare, or to pray: they wyll aunswere, I doubte not, to do bothe. For there they both learne theyr duetye by hearyng of sermons, and also practise it by diligent and seruent praying. Nowe then seynge, that to do our duetie is muche better, then to learne our duetie, because that euery manne learneth, to this ende, that he may practise, although both twayne be good and necessarye, yet the one farre passeth the other. And the one

maye be gotten in shorte space with small trauayle, but the other asketh longe tyme, and much payne to get it. As concerninge whiche purpose we reade a notable storye of one Pambo,
               
                  Socra. hist eccle. li. 4 a man vtterly vnlearned who on a tyme came to learne a psalme of the psalter. And when he had hearde the firste verse of the .xxxvii
                  •
               . psalme, which is thus muche to say in Englishe.
I haue determined with my selfe, that I will so directe and order my life, that I do not offende wyth my tounge: departed, and wolde in no wise heare the seconde verse, but sayd, that one verse was sufficient, if he could practise it in dede.
After that when he had taught hym this verse,

dyd rebuke hym, because he hadde not sene hym nowe the space of syxe monethes, he aunswered▪ that he hadde not as yet in dede learned yt verse of ye Psalme. Agayne along time after▪ one of his familiar frendes demaunded of hym whether he had learned his verse, and he sayde: Now or .xix. yeares passed, and truely, as yet. I haue scarcely learned to practise it. Wherby it well appeareth, that a man maye learne as much vpon one day, at one sermon, as he can well learne perfytly to practise in a whole yeare. Wherfore I haue oftentymes muche maruayled at vs Englishe men of late, that we came to the churche at the tyme of our English

seruice to heare only, and not to pray our selfes. By meanes wherof many folkes are so inured, that they can hardlye frame them selfes as yet to pray in the churche, which, as our sauiour sayth is the house of prayer.Mat. 21. And moste mete were it for folkes comming to the churche, to pray earnestly them selfes, and both to think vpon their synnes. wherewith they haue offended their lorde god, and to be sory for them, and to desire god to forgyue them, yea and beside to gyue hym harty thankes for all his benefites bestowed vpon them, and to beseche hym to assiste them with his grace agaynst the assaultes of their aduersary the deuil. For thus

ought men to spende the holy daye, and thus ought they to bestow their tyme in the churche of God, when they come thyther. For what dyd Anna the doughter of Phanuell, (who had lyued with her husbande .vij. yeares, and after his death continued widowe, tyll she was foure score and foure yeares old, and so died) is it not written of her by S. Luke,Luc. 2. that she departed not from the temple, but serued God there nyght and daye in fastyng and praying? The Euāgelist telleth not, that there she was occupied in hearynge, but that she was occupied in praying. Many heare and eyther they shortly forget, what they haue hearde, or elles yf

they remembre it▪ yet they do not practise it: and one howre spente in practisynge, is more worthe to vs, then twentye spent in hearynge. Therefore when they come to Churche, and heare the priestes, who sayeth common prayer for all the whole multitude, albeit they vnderstand them not, yet yf they be occupied in godlye prayer them selfes, it is sufficient for them. And lette them not so greatly passe for vnderstandynge, what the priestes saye, but trauayle them selfes in feruent praying, and so shal they hyghly please God. Yea and experience hath playnlye taught vs, that it is much better for them not to vnderstande the common seruice of

the Churche, then to vnderstande it, because that when they heare other prayinge with a lowde voyce in the language, that they vnderstand, they are letted from prayer them selfe, and so come they to suche a slacknes and negligence in prayinge, that they at lengthe (as we haue well sene of late dayes) in maner pray not at al. And let thē first thynke thys (for it is vndoubtedly true) that the diuine seruice here in Englande hath euer bene in Latyn synce the first tyme, that the fayth was among vs receaued (saue onlye this .vi. or .vij. yeares laste passed). And then how godly the people all that while were disposed, how many vertuous

and holy men & women haue bene within this realme, and howe God dyd in all thinges prosper vs. And reade who so lyste the godly ecclesiastical story of sayncte Bede, and he shall fynde my sayinges herein moste true. By whych story he shal learne besyde, how the same fayth, the same forme of religion, the same rites and ceremonies, that we now vse in the churche, haue bene since kynge Lucius dayes (in whose reygne the fayth was firste receaued in Englande) continuallye vsed.
                  Bed hist. eccle. li. 
                  
                     •
                   
                  cap. 4. And eyther muste we graunte thys, that there was neuer any godly men in thys realme, neuer one sowle saued, neuer any grace of God among vs, neuer the assistence

of the holye gooste wyth vs, (whych no good, nor reasonable manne eyther can, or wyll graunte) yf thys be not the true fayth and belefe (wherby mens soules shalbe saued), that nowe is amonges vs. For where true belefe is not, there is not God, nor none of hys grace, nor no parte of his holy spirite. And therefore yf thys be a false fayth and belefe that we nowe haue, then god both is, and hath bene most vnkynde, not onlye to vs, but to all Christendome besyde, whiche is in the same belefe, that we be: seyng that he hath not before these .vij. yeares laste passed, reuealed & opened hys trueth vnto vs, but suffered bothe vs, and all our progenitours

and elders to, yea and all Christendome, euer synce Christes incarnation euen to these latter dayes to lyue in blyndnes, and to let vs continue styll in daunger of damnation. But God forbydde, that any man myght iustly, eyther thynke or saye thus, For then myght we, commynge before our sauiour Christ at the day of iudgement, yf we shulde for our belefe be there condēned, aunswere that we were not to blame, nor worthie of dānatiō therfore: because that hys blessed spouse the Catholike churche, hadde from tyme to tyme taught vs thys belefe, & that he hadde promised to be with his churche to the worldes ende. Whyche promyse

caused vs alwaye to giue credence to hys holye Churche, whiche we thought could not erre, nor be deceaued in anye matter concerning our fayth. Therfore no man hathe cause to iudge thys religion, that we nowe haue, to be noughte, and so to thinke, that the worshyppynge of Christes blessed body in the sacrament is Idolatrye (as manye of late haue most wyckedlye both beleued and taught) and by that meanes condemne all oure fathers, grandfathers, and the reste of oure elders, whyche haue so beleued, but verye good cause hath he to suspect the religion, that hathe bene brought in of late, yea and vtterlye to abhorre it, bothe for

that he seeth so playnly before his eyes ye abhominable fruytes, that it hath brought forth in this realme, and also that he knoweth, that it was neuer receaued in thys realme before these laste .vij. yeares paste, saue onelye that wycked Wyclyffe hadde in corners taught the same in kinge Edward the thirdes dayes, whiche his doctrine ended in notable treason, euen as this did that was latelye receaued among vs: as after I shal more playnly declare. But some say that they woulde haue vs beleue,The trade of the primitiue churche. and lyue accordynge as menne dydde in the primitiue churche. Howe was that I praye you? was it as we haue bene taughte of late in beleuing▪
               
that Christes blessed bodye in the sacrament is but a pece of breade, & to abolish the Masse, to cast awaye praying and fastyng? No no: Heare, I praye you,
                  Beda hist. ecles. lib. 1. cap. 26. what saynct Bede sayeth, concernynge the state of the primitiue churche.
            
               Whē as S. Augustyne & hys felowes, that were sent by saynct Gregorye hyther into Englande to preache, had gotten thē a place in kent to soiourne in, they folowed the Apostolicall trade of lyuyng, that was vsed in the primitiue churche, that is to saye, they practysed them selfes in continual prayinge, watching and fastyng, in preachyng the word of lyfe to all that they coulde, in dyspysynge all worldlye goodes, as

not apperteyning vnto them, in takynge those thynges onlye of them, whome they preached to, that was necessarye to lyue wythall, in liuyng according to theyr preaching, and in hauyng a prompte and readye mynde and wyl, bothe patientlye to suffer all kynde of trouble, and also to dye for the trueth, that they preached. By occasion whereof many beleued, and were christened, muche estemynge the simplicitye of theyr innocente lyfe, and the swetenesse of heauenlye doctrine.
               And there was neare vnto the heade Cytye there towarde the Easte a Churche of Sayncte Martyne, whyche hadde bene buylded,

while as the Romaynes dwelled in Englande, in whyche churche the Queene, wyfe to kynge Edilberte (whome we sayde before was a Christen woman) was accustomed to pray. And in the same church sayncte Augustyne and his felowes repayred together to singe, to pray, to saye Masses, to preache, and to Christen.
            
            Thus writeth sayncte Bede, howe sayncte Augustyne and his felowes obserued the order and trade of the primitiue church. Thys was done here in Englande almoste a thowsand yeare ago. And the same forme of religion both was before, and after euen to oure dayes euermore kepte & vsed amonge vs. And here we find

fasting, prayinge, watchynge, singing, and saying of Masses, whyche sayncte Bede calleth the Apostolicall trade of lyfe, that was in ye primitiue churche▪ But our preachers of late when they talked of the primitiue churche, which they wold haue had vs to folowe, they meaned no other churche, but the malignaūt churche of Wicliffe, Husse, Luther, Decolā
               padius, & of suche like heretykes. But to returne to our former purpose, concerninge the wretched fruites, that came of this doctrine, when aulters were pulled downe, and masse put away, then were all churches without any lawe, spoyled of all their ornamentes,The churches spoyled. as of copes, vestimentes, aulter-clothes,

corporaxes, chalishes crosses, candelstickes, censers, cruettes, bokes, and all other thinges belōging therto, and ye same put to prophane vses, as to hanginges of beddes, curteynes, cusshins, and other such like. And some men made Ioly mocking and gea
               
                  •
               t
                  ••
               ge, and called them the priestes masking clothes, as we tolde you before. But I beseche our lorde God, that suche spoylers of the churche, may repent & make amendes for their spoyle, that they haue not the like ende, that one Iulianus had, who was vncle to the noughty emperour Iulianus Apostata
               ▪
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   5 hist 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
Of whom Sozome
                     •
                  nus wryteth, that he mindynge to take away the precious ornamentes

and Iewels of the Churche of Antioche in Syria, whiche were a greate sorte in nombre, and to encrease them perours treasure withal, caused the churche to be shut vp, that no man shuld resort thyther, insomuche that all the clergye apperteynng to that churche, fledde awaye, sauing one priest onelye, whose name was Theodorius, whome Iulianus caused to be taken, because he could tel, where the ornamentes of the Churche were, and first made hym to be sore beaten, & after to be panged with many sore tormentes, and at length to be beheaded. Which done, the sayde Iulianus after he had robbed the church, & takē al the holy ornamentes away,

in great dispite dyd straw thē vpon the grounde, sate him downe vpon them, and so declared his spitefull malice agaynste them. Whose priuye members and the necessarye partes beneath did by and by putrifye and rotte, insomuche that the fleshe beynge rotten, turned al into wormes, and hys syckenes was so greate and greuouse, that it passed al phisicions power to cure it. So that at lengthe after manye paynfull panges he made an ende of hys wretched lyfe.
Thus by the hande of GOD was thys wycked man for the robbyng of Christes churche worthelye plaged. By whose example lette euery Christen man learne thre poyntes: first

that he robbe not the churche of any holy ornamentes apperteynyng thereto. Secondarely that he put them not to any profane vse, as this Iulianus did. Thirdly that he do not make a mockyng stocke of them, and vnreuerentlye handle them▪ lest the same plage, that befell to the sayd Iulianus, fal vpon him lykewyse.
            Then was the holy order of priesthode vtterly disanulled,The order of priesthode taken away so that the name of a priest shuld not be anye longer vsed, but such as shuld preache and minister sacramentes, shoulde be called ministers, & not priestes, and that they shuld be apparelled lyke lay men, so that a minister shuld not be knowē from a laye man, but all shulde

be a lyke: whyche neuer was sene in the churche of God frō Christes tyme hytherto, but only amonges heretykes.
            Then was there meanes founde, that there shuld be many such ministers. For exhibition was begged by certain to be bestowed in the vniuersities. Which ones gotten, they bestowed it only vpon such, as eyther were infected with heresy, or elles in whom men had good hope, that they would in tyme be heretikes. And thus was folkes hyred to forsake Christes catholyke fayth, and not only to deceaue them selfes, but many other beside. Would to god yt men were as wel willinge nowe to giue exhibition to set forward

godlye learninge and vertue, as they were then to set forth vice and heresye. But to come to our purpose. Then became those, yt were lewde & vnlearned very worthy preachers,Lewde preachers yea & suche as had neuer bene at any vniuersitie, wold teach the people, and preache vnto them, and were neuer sente, and boaste of them selfes, that they had the spirite. Truth is it, they had the spirite of error and blindnesse. And the more blind that they were, the more bold and shameles were they, so that the sayinge of Hier
                     •
                  mye the Prophete myghte be well veryfyed in them:Hier. 3.
               They had the shameles forhead of a drabbe▪ and wold not be ashamed at al. For he that was most ignorant, was most

bolde, so that suche dydde wel proue the olde prouerbe to be true, that none is bolder, then blynde Bayarde.
Thys sorte of men stepped stoutelye into the pulpit, and caring neyther for God nor deuyll, kylled mo soules vpon one daye, then all the noughty phisitiōs in Englande hadde kylled bodyes in twentye yeares: and alwayes had they in theyr mouthes Gods worde, Goddes worde, & some of them called it gods boke, whereas their doctrine was nothing els, but lyes and fables forged of theyr owne braynes, and scriptures falsely translated, and more falsely expounded, according as they had learned of Luther, Bucer Decolampadius, Bullinger,

Caluyne, and suche lyke heretykes.
            And all theyr preaching or rather bablyng was spente in raylyng agaynste the order of Christes churche,Our new preachers doctrine. agaynst Images and candels, agaynste Masse and mattyns, agaynste purgatorye and prayinge for the deade, agaynste free wyll and prayinge to saynctes, agaynste crosses and belles, agaynste copes and vestimentes, agaynste the Blessed Sacramentes, whereof the moste parte were by them taken awaye, and the reste were so handled, as would make anye good mans hearte sore to lament therefore. Ouer thys muche pratinge made they of onelye fayth, that thereby we

were 
                  •
               ustified,Onelye 
                     •
                  ayth preached. whereof they talked so longe, that at length a great many had no fayth at al. And in these matters were they so well practised, yt when they talked of them in a pulpit, they semed to the people very eloquent. But yf they at anye tyme toke occasion (as they dydde verye seldome) to speake of deathe or deadlye sinne, or of the feare of God, and his terrible iudgemente, or of good workes as of prayer, fastinge, and almose, they were so baren in their talke, that their auditours thought thē altogyther vnlearned, as they were without fayle. For so haue many of them comming to their triall, well declared of late.
            
               And althoughe they lacked sounde learninge,The presumption of our newe preachers. yet lacked they no arrogant presūption. For some of them woulde not lette to boaste, that they were singulerly learned in Latine, greke, & hebrew, and say, yt thei had red ouer all the ecclesiasticall writers, and often tymes alledge thē for their purpose. But how I pray you?False alledging of authors. Eyther dyd they misconstrue and vntruely expounde the places, that they alledged, or at lest wise falsely alledged thē or elles cut the sentence in the middest, that it mighte seme to make for their purpose, and all that made agaynste them left they clean out. And so like wise hādled they ye holy scripture to: as it well appeareth

in sondrye of their detestable and deuilishe bokes, whosoeuer list to searche them. But they were not the firste,Deprauyng of ye holy scripture. that thus went aboute to depraue both the scripture, and also the old auncient writers. For Asclepiades, Theodotus, Hermophilus, and Apollonius olde heretikes of Artemones sect,
                  Euseb, lib 5. hist. eccles.
                trauayled much in corruptinge the examples of holy scripture, to the intent, that they might bringe scriptures to cōfirme their abhominable opinions wythall. And Denyse the byshop of Corinthe writeth thus of suche like men.
                  Euseb. lib 4. hist. ecclesiast.
               
               At the request of certayne bretherne I wrote certayne epistles, which ye deuils Apostles haue filled ful of cockel, darnil. For some wordes haue they

put out of them, and some added vnto them, for whom the wofull curse of Christe at the day of iudgemēt is reserued. And no maruaile is it, though they wente aboute to falsifye the scriptures of our lord and sauiour Iesus, seing that they haue corrupted these pore simple writinges of mine, whiche are not of such weight, as those be.
Many authors could I alledge to declare, yt heretikes haue alwayes played the like part both with the scriptures & the good interpretors therof, but here it nedeth not. Som other were there of our new preachers, whose presūptuouse arrogancie myght also be well knowen in that, that many of them would preache

and were neuer sent.Preachers that were neuer sene. And a great meany, that had in maner no learninge, and as litle wit, wold start vp into ye pulpet, and tell the people, that the spyrite moued them, and then would they blaspheme and rayle, as though they had bene possessed with an euil spirite, as in dede it is very likely they were. Such are wel described of Saint Peter after this sorte.2. Pet. 2.
               These be welles without water, and mystes tossed with whorle wyndes, for whome is reserued euerlastinge darkenesse. For by vtteringe their presumptuouse bablinge, they allure and catche such, as through the cō
                  cupiscence of the flesh, are fallen in dede to folowe wanton pleasures and contynue in error. And they promise other men liberty, wheras they thē selfes are ye very slaues of filthye corruptiō. Such godly maysters because they ranne and

were not sent (as the prophete saith) came into the shepefold of Christ not by the dore,Hier. 13. but an other way, so that Saynt Iohn the euangeliste, if he had bene alyue, would haue called them theues.Ioan. 10
               And a thefe, as the same euangelist writeth, commeth for no other purpose, but to steale, to kyll, and to distroye.
For first dyd they steale Christes shepe out of the folde, that is to say, out of the Catholike churche, by carnall libertye, whiche (as I sayde before) they craftlye named ye libertye of the gospell. Then killed they their soules with pestilence doctrine, and so at lengthe by their deuelishe diuises so blinded thē, that they destroyed them all together. And when they had thus miserably

handled them, they gloried in their graceles acte▪ as though they had done god good seruyce. But if they would remember what O
                     •
                  igene sayth concernyng suche men, as they them selfes be, and well wey his sayinge, they shoulde haue good cause to leaue their glorying in malice and blindnes, and fall to bewayle the miserable murder,
                  Super epist
                        •
                     ad Roman.
                that they in Christes flocke haue committed. For he sayth that the dānation of al those, that haue eyther preached or wrytten heresye, doth styll increase to the daye of iudgement, that is to saye, as longe as the contagion of theyr heresye dothe remayne, and infect any man. For the mo that

perish through their doctrine, the more greuouse shall their punishement be. Which sentence I beseche our lord god, y• betime they maye earnestlie consider, and yt eyther by reason, learning, and gentle exhortation, or otherwise they may be brought to acknowledge their error and blindenes, to detest it, and to persuade other, that haue bene deceaued by them, to forsake it.
                  Lib. 3. epist. 2.
And let them heare, what S. Cyprian writeth to Maximus and Nicostratus after this sorte. Thynke not (sayeth he) that you defende Christes gospell, while as you diuide your selfes from the flocke of Christe, and from the peace and concorde thereof, sithen that it is

more fitte for the valiant and gloriouse souldiars of Christe to be wythin theyr owne tentes, & there abiding to do, and prouide for those thynges togyther wyth other, that are to be done and prouided for: because that oure vnitie and concorde ought in no wyse to be cut asonder. As for vs, we can not forsake the Churche, go forthe of it, & come to you. Therfore we in al that we possible can, exhort and pray you, that you wyl returne to your mother the churche agayne.
Whych exhortation of saynte Cyprian God giue grace, that those, that haue by heresy diuided themselfes from Christes catholike churche, maye gladlye heare, and thereby be

persuaded to come home, and embrace the holesom doctrine of their deare mother, ye blessed spouse of Christ. For what a comfort shuld it be for them selfes, yea and what a greate ioye for all good Christen folkes, yf they would forsake the synagoge of heresie, & repayre to Christes holye Churche agayne.
                  Epist. 12. lib. 2. Luc. 15.
For sayncte Cyprian writeth that, seing that Christ sayeth in the Gospell, yt there is in heauen the greatest ioye, that canne be, for one synner that doeth penaunce, howe much more ioye is there then both in heauen and in earthe for suche▪ as with glorye and prayse returne to the churche of God agayne: and by their example, by their fayth, and

trial, giue occasion to other to returne lykewyse.
And as it shuld be great comforte for all good folkes to see them returne, so men oughte by diligent preaching, by gentle exhortation, by feruent prayer, and by all meanes possible trauayle to make them returne. And whosoeuer can by persuasion or otherwise pull any of them frō their blinde error, he shal haue great thankes at Gods hande therefore.
For the 
                  •
               olye Apostle S. Iames sayeth,Iac. 5.
                That whatsoeuer he be, that turneth a synner from the errour, wherby he hath gone amysse, shall saue the mans soule from death, and blotte out a great many of hys owne synnes.
            
            But to our purpose. Of these fo
                  •
               kes preachyng spronge all

our sectes and sondrye opinions: whych were so diuers & many folde, that so many heades, so many opinions in maner were amonges vs. And lyke as no fonde opinion was there euer (as we reade in Cicero) that was not maynteyned by some folish philopher,
                  Cicero de diuinat.
                so no lewde heresye was euer inuēted, that had not some wise mayster here in Englande to set it forth, and defende it. For some helde, that all thynges oughte to be common▪ as the Anabaptistes do.Sondrye sectes in England Some said, that all thynges were ruled by destenie and by mere necessitye, as the heretikes called Genethliaci sayd: And so toke they awaye mans free wyll. Some affirmed, that GOD

was the authour of euyll, as we reade of certayne in Basilius Magnus dayes, whyche were without God. Some agayne toke awaye the prouidence of GOD, as the Epicures do. Some beleued not the resurrection of oure bodies, folowynge the heretykes, whyche were named Seuerians. Some dyd mayntayne, that all should be saued, as the Origenians dydde. Some sayde, that Christe toke no fleshe of the blessed virgin Marye, as dyd the Martionistes & Apollinaristes. Some taughte, that he was lesse then the father, as the Arians of old had taughte. Some denyed, that he descended into hell, & sayd, that there was neyther hell

nor heauen. Some preached, that heauen was nothing els, but a quiete conscience, and hell a troubled conscience. Some would saye, that mens soules do sleape to the day of iudgemente: and some beleued that they were mortall. Some thoughte, that there was no predestinatiō. Some sayd, that Christe died as wel for his owne sinnes, as for other mens synnes. Some held, that a man hauinge the spirite of god, myght lawfully lye with another mans wife. Some affirmed, that the inwarde man dyd not synne, when the outwarde man synned. Some sayd, that it was deadly synne to play at anye game for monie. Som taught

that it was lawfull for a man in a Christen commen welth, without imposition of hādes of any bishop to preache openly. Some were persuaded, yt a man might become so perfite in this life, yt he coulde not sinne. But to cōclude, I think verely there was almost no abhominable or fond heresi, since Christes tyme to our dayes, which was not in some folkes heades nowe of late here in England. And thus haue you heard (most entyerly beloued contrye men) a breue rehersal of the perillouse and pestilent fruites that our new doctrine hath brought forth here in our contrye these few yeares last passed. By means whereof Christes true religion hath

bene vtterly defaced. Which truly I am right sory to recite But (as Iosephus sayth) I shuld do my contry smal pleasure to leaue those miseryes vntouched in my wordes, that it hath suffred in dede. If a manne shulde likewise recken vp the great incommodities, that hath chaunsed to the commen welthe of this realme by reason of the same doctrine, he shuld be very longe and percase tedious to. But thus muche will I say, and euery man, that is aboute thirtye yeares olde, shall witnes with me, that I say true, that before we forsoke ye whole catholike churche of god, and made vs a seueral and priuate churche of our owne, our commenwelthe

was so riche, was in such good order. was so strōge and myghty, that no other was there, consideringe the quantitie of it, that myght be compared with it. Agayne if a man would particulerly recite the failes of diuerse noble and gentle men, that partly by reason of the same doctrine haue suffred synce the fyrste commyng of it,Nobility destroyed throughe heresye. he shuld make a longe processe. And seynge that as yet they be freshe in mens memories, as it is not necessarye to tel of them, so let them that be noble and gentle men by their example take hede of such wicked doctrine, lest if they in any poynt eyther further or maintayne it, they folowynge their fote steppes

stomble vpon the same blocke and take a like fall. For it neuer came in any realme yet, where it hath not vtterly in maner destroyed the nobilite. As for example in Germany, where it hath now contynued so longe▪ 
               
                  •
               t hath not onelye destroied the rest of the commenwelth, but also the moste part of the nobilitie. And in diuers rebellions, that were made in that contrye, by reason of it, the rebelles intended to destroy al noble and gentlemen, as it appeareth by their articles, which as yet remayne in writing. For in the articles of the rebelles yt rose at Spiers, whyche Artycles be wrytten by one Nicolaus Baselius and ioyned with the cronicle of Ioannes

Na
                     •
                  clerus, ye fourth is, yt thei intēded to kil al the nobilitie, & all heades and rulers, to thintent that they wold be subiect to no man, but liue at theyr libertye. In an insurrection that was made vnder the pretense of the Gospell, in the yeare of oure Lorde, a thowsande, fiue hundreth, twentye and two, in the same countrie likewyse the rebelles, because they wold be vnder no obedience, purposed to dysanull all lawes, and put away iudges, to robbe churches and monasteries, to kyll all noble menne and gentlemen, because they wolde paye no more rentes, customes, or taxes. Therfore it is all noble and gentlemens partes to be well ware of such

doctrine, yf they eyther loue to be partakers of heauen, or desyre to kepe their worldlye estate, to continue in it, and to haue theyr chyldren quietlye to enioye it after them. For they maye well perceaue by these examples, that where it taketh place, it is the ruine & destruction of al nobilitie. Let them besydes weye wel, what harme it hathe done to theyr chyldren, that were nowe of late brought vp in it.
            And thys wote they well, that the rynge leaders of the Lutheranes or rather Zwin glianes in kynge Edwardes reygne, sought alwayes possible to corrupt al the noble and gentlemens chyldren wythin this realme. And eyther proprocured

they, that they might be brought vp in the courte, or els that some newe fangled scholemayster myght be put vnto them, or els to be put to the vniuersities, and there to be brought vp vnder one of this newe secte. For what purpose was this done, but only to maynteyne their mischeuouse errors withall, and to establyshe the same within our contrye for euer▪ But god by miracle hath ouerturned all their cursed deuises, and suffred them by his diuine prouidence to worke their owne confusion. Now then seing that this erroneouse doctrine hath so harmed both noble & gentle men thē selfes, and their children to,

let them at lengthe spye the wickednesse of it, and helpe be tyme to banishe it out of their contrye, and exhorte theyr children to detest and abhorre it. For so shall they make thē to feare god, and serue hym, to exercise vertue, and eschew vice, and to be humble and obedient to them selfes to▪ As for the yeonianry of our contrye,The decay of the yeomanry wherin dyd consiste a great parte of the force of this realme, it hath so notably decayed synce the tyme, that this pestilent doctrine began first within this realme, that it would pitye any true Englishe mannes hearte to consider it. For where as the yeomen thirty or fourtye yeares passed, were well able to do

theyr prince and theyr countrye very good seruice, when as any occasion required, and that euery one of them dydde kepe a substantiall howse, by reason that theyr rentes then were very reasonable.
            Now since thys perillouse plage of heresye hath infected thys realme, theyr rētes hath bene so enhaunsed. and they so miserably polled, that neyther seruice were they well able to do for theyr prince and countrye, nor to kepe any plenteful house for the relieuynge of theyr poore neyghbours. For men that became Lordes of suche fermes, when as by reason of thys lewde doctrine they had cast awaye in maner the feare of GOD and good

conscience to, & in stede thereof had caught suche couetouse heartes, as wold neuer be satisfied, and ioyned withall a large licentiouse conscience, whych told them, they might go forth in their purpose with out any scruple at al, then doubled they theyr rentes, and some tripled them, and toke suche incommes for theyr leases, as where able to begger the fermers, that toke them: insomuche that where as the fermers had bene verye welthye before they came by this meanes to suche neade and necessitie, that scarce were they able to paye theyr rent.
            The misery lykewise that the poore cōmons haue bene bewrapped wyth since the rereceauynge

of this deuelishe doctrine, can no man without a longe processe throughly declare. For what with taxes and tributes, what with the chaunge of our money and fall of the same, what with gressams and incōmes, what with extortion and briberye, what with puttyng out of their ferme holdes and tenementes, what with craft and false dealing, and what with all other kindes of oppression beside, they haue bene so sore impouerished, that better had it bene for them to haue dyed in their cradles, then to haue lyued to suffer such wretched and miserable calamities. For when cōscience was banished and charitable hartes wa
                  •
               ed

keye colde, then cared no man from the hyest degree to the lowest, how he got goodes, so that he had them, in so muche that this saying of the holye Prophete Hieremye myghte be well verified in them,Hier. 6. that euerye one from the lowest degree to the hyghest had giuen them selfes to couetousnesse. And when this came thus to passe, they that were mooste mightie▪ were greatest oppressours▪ and lyke greate fysshes deuoured the smal. And oftē
               times would they take worke of artificers, wares & stuffe of marchauntes, & differ the payment so longe, yt the poore artificers and marchauntes to, were in maner beggered therby. And when they demaūded

theyr payment, they had of diuerse a froward aunswere: in so much that the poorer a man was, more iniury he suffred at theyr handes, and the vnsaciable hartes of suche couetous men coulde neuer content thē selfes. But wo be vnto al such, excepte they betyme repente them, and if there be any such, lette them thynke, yt at length they shal depart from all that they haue, and remembre, that they for al theyr gaye and gorgiouse apparel, they shal haue no more, but a symple shete to wrappe theyr vyle bodye in, and for al theyr fayre buyldinges and sumptuouse houses, a poore pytte in the earthe to dwel in.
            And wythal let them learne

one preatye lesson, that Eusebius wryteth in the life of Constantine. Thys good Emperoure Constantyne makyng an oration to a great company, that was gathered to heare hym, specially inuehed and spake agaynste those, that were spoylers, and verye couetouse folkes, sayinge thus:
Wyll youre greadye couetousnes neuer haue ende? Then wyth a litle staffe that he had in his hand, he measured vpon the ground the iust lengthe of a man, and sayde:
If a man haue all the riches in the world, & the whole earth in hys possession, he shall at hys ende haue no more, but suche a smal peece of grounde, as I haue here measured.
Therfore let al gready hartes

remembre this wel, and leaue their care, that they take in goodes getting, and consider their duetie in wel bestowing of them, and thynke besyde, howe they haue gotten them.
For euyll gotten goodes (as Salust sayeth) euill cheueth.
Ouer this yf they wold compare their bodies and sowles with their goodes and riches me thynke they shuld beware to loose those thinges that be better, for those that be worse. For goodes and riches be gyuen vs of god for the commoditie and vse both of our bodies & soules. And like as brute beastes are muche better then grasse, strawe, and hay, which be ordeyned to nourishe thē: So is a mans body and soule

more to be estemed, then goodes & riches. whiche be prepared for them. Who then is so vnwise, that wil for the sauing of those thinges, that be much more vile, put in daūger those that be farre more precious? For both oure bodies & soules are of suche estimation in the sight of God, yt for the recouery of them oute of thraldome, he vouche saued to send down into the earth his only sonne, our sauiour Christe Iesus, by whose blessed bloud, which far surmounteth al golde & precious stones, both our corruptible & frayle bodies, & also oure very sicke & sore wounded soules are redemed frō endles dā
               nation, & restored agayne to ye celestiall kyngedome, whyche

was from the begynnynge of the world prepared for them. Therfore seynge, that god of his gratious goodnes hathe taken so much paynes to saue them▪ we throughe our folye and negligence ought not to trauayle to loose them, nor to put them in hazarde, for the loue that we beare to our wel thy estate in this worlde, and so to chaunge heauen with hell, ioye with payne, myrthe with sorowe, quietnesse with trouble, lyfe with death, the▪ pleasaunt presence of god with the horrible syght of the deuyll, and the glorious company of aungels and sainctes, with the hydious and fowle felowship of fendes. In consideracion whereof, because of

the tender and vnfeyned loue, that I (as our lord knoweth) beare to the welth and helthe of all my coūtry mens bodyes and soules, most earnestly beseche almighty God, yt he wil vouchesafe so to prouide, that for euyll gotten goodes no man in conclusion perishe, but that euery man cast away his couetouse harte betyme, and begynne to care for his ende, and searche the bottome of his brest, whether he perfitly beleue,
that both his bodye & his soule shal eyther euer liue in ioye inestimable, or euer dye abiding moste bitter and paynful tormentes. And remēbre as he came naked into this worlde (as Iob sayeth) so shal he naked depart out of it.
            
            
               Agayne amonges these thre sortes of men, the nobles, the 
                  •
               eomen, & the poore cōmons, since the time they had sole or onlye fayth preached amonge thē,Fayth onlye. they haue had such a sel
                  •
               e simple fayth, yt not one in maner could trust another. For as in old tyme a mans worde was as sure as an obligation, so of late dayes wordes were but wind, & writinges to, werby some mē not much wey
                  •
               d. Insomuche yt when fayth toward god was in man̄er vtterly abolished, fayth toward mā was banished therwt, & al good workes was throughe lewde preachyng cleane layd apart: Wherfore our fayth aswel to god, as to mā was so naked & single, yt it might be very well

called a faythles fayth, & likened to a broken staffe, yt deceaueth al thē, that leane vpon it. And as oure fayth was verye badde, so our workes were no whit better. For there was neuer sene such malice & hatred, such deceyte & subteltie, suche pride & ambition, so yt the vnsaciable desire of honor was in conclusion so roted in mens hartes, yt it brought forth such notable treason, as y• like hath not ben heard of in this realme before. And beside it hath stuffed diuerse folkes hartes wt so deadlye malice, yt the wycked works, yt are wrought by such wel declare, yt it is no doctrine come frō god ye father of light, (as I said before) but it (as S. Iames sayth) is ful of car
                  •
               al affections of deuelishe.Iac. 3.
            
            
               For seing that such tumultes, and suche sedition among our selfes, such grudginge against our prince▪ suche blasphemye agaynst god, suche raylinge, and suche vile wordes vsed agaynst his ministers, are growen of it (as to cal them foxes in the pulpit, yea & sometimes while they be godly occupyed in preachinge, to hurle daggers and to shote gonnes at thē) it is a playne argumente, that it cometh from the deuil, the authour of malice, and is as it were some contagiouse veneme spitte out of his brest, to poysen mens soules withal. Agayne the bookes, that be made by ye mainteyners of it, are altogether farsed wyth lyes, as it well appeareth by a

litle peuishe boke, conteynyng the disputation made in the conuocation house, wherin are scarcely two lines true together, as al the learned men, that were there present, can euidently testifye. What shuld I speake of the false rumours that haue bene of late by the fauorers therof spred abroad in this realme, to prouoke the people to grudge agaynst the Quenes highnes? What pestilente libelles agaynste certayne of the Quenes most honorable counseyll, yea and agaynst her graces owne person, haue bene cast in corners to sowe sedition?
            Beside what mischeuouse misconstruyng is there of actes, lawes and statutes, and of all

thinges in maner, that be set forth by the Quenes highnes and her counsayle? yea and will they not say, that when we haue any euyll wether▪ as to much rayne, or to muche drought, that it commeth because the worde of god (wherby they meane their heresye) is suppressed among vs? they wyll neuer say, as all good folkes vse to say, that it commeth, by reason of our synne and wickednesse. But truth is it. that God plageth this realme, and hath done▪ yea and yet wyll do, partly for our wretched liues, and partly for that suche as be infected with heresye, wil not acknowledge theyr erroure and maliciouse blindnes, and turne to the

churche agayne.
            Ouer this are there not diuerse, that for verye stubbornes, wyll in hucker mucker agaynste the lawes of thys realme, yea and agaynst gods will, vse the pernitiouse boke of the last Communion, and teache the Englishe catechisme, to grafte in chyldrens hartes their blasphemouse and abhominable heresye? If men wel consider these folkes wicked malyce, they haue good cause to hate such deuelishe doctrine, while they lyue, and whensoeuer they heare any parte of it, to stoppe their eares▪ that no such cursed blasphemye enter in at them. But to say very truth, it was in maner necessarye, that it shuld

be reuealed, & opened in this realme. For no man woulde haue thought, that euer anye such incomuenience woulde haue come of it, if they had not sene it present before their eyes. So that whosoeuer shal hereafter heare of the abhomination of it, shall haue iuste cause with all their hart to abhorre it.
            Many mo noughty fruites could I reken vp, that haue sprong out of this newe fonde doctrine, but these are sufficient for my purpose, wherby euery man, that is not starke blynde may clearely se, that yf there were anye cause, that shuld moue a man to rebellion (as there is none in dede) this were the worst of all other.

For seinge that not onelye almighty god hateth this doctrine, because it is contrary to his holy worde, contrary to his blessed spouse the chur
               
                  •
               he, cōtrary to the writinges and authorities of al his blessed martyrs and confessours, and of all holy men besyde, and contrary to ye whole consent of Christendome, but also that is the vtter destructiō of al commen welthes whersoeuer it commeth, it is no mannes parte to fight for it, to aduenture his life in the defence of it, but rather to trauayle earnestly to abolishe it, and to exhorte all men euermore to beware of it. Wherfore whensoeuer the deuyll, who is the only authour

of rebellion, goeth about to persuade any man, that suche doctrine is goddes word, and that there is no other truthe but it, and that he ought to sticke faste to it, and feare not to suffre death for it, & if nede be, to rayse vp rebellion, and boldely steppe forth, and fight stoutly agaynst his prince in the maynteinance of it: Then may he well know, that it is neyther the worde of god, nor no truth is there in it, because the deuill, who is the deadlye enemye both of goddes holy worde and of all truth, not only moueth hym to sticke to it, but also with the sworde against his prince manfully to defend it. But if he be by ye deuyll throughly persuaded to

rebell agaynste his prince, rather then to forsake it, yet let hym loke or he lepe, and cal to remembraunce the wretched ende of all such, as hathe for the like quarrel made rebellion. And first let hym wel consider the rebellions, that hath bene made in Boheme for the same religiō. When Wicliffes wicked doctrine was conueyed out of Englande into Boheme, and there by Iohn Hus translated into theyr vulgare tounge, & preached there by the same Hus, and one Hierome de Prage, a great numbre at lengthe were infected wyth it, and because they minded to rule the whole countrie, and to subdue & destroye all, that were contrary to thē
               
in religion,Rebelliō in Boheme for religion. founde they oute a cruell capitayne very mete for their pestilent purpose (whose name was Ziska) vnder whom they wrought much mischiefe to that goodly countrie.
                  Ziska.
                And first buylded they them selfes a citie, and named it Thabor. after the hylles name, where oure sauioure was transfigured,
                  Aeneas Syl. in hist c. 40. Histor Huss. li 5 because they thoughte, yt in that citie all truth shulde be reuealed and opened. And after wold they no more be called Hussites, but Thaborites.
            Then pulled they downe churches and monasteries, & most miserably persecuted all catholike folke, and speciallye priestes. Of whome some Ziska theyr Capitayne caused to be burned quicke, and some to be

murdered with other tormentrye. and the preuie members of some to be cutte of, to thintent that they shuld be a mockyng stocke to the people. Whyche cruell and detestable monstre (for so Aeneas Siluius calleth him) because no mens power coulde vanquyshe hym▪ God wyth hys myghtie hand at lengthe for hys manifolde rebellion ouerthrewe hym. For as he was goyng to Priscouia to mete Sigismundus themperoure, he was by the waye sodenlye taken wyth the pestilence, and so made he an ende of hys cursed life. After whose death the Thaborites gotte them a new captayne, named Procopius: whose cruelty, spoyle, and oppression the Lordes &

barrons of Boheme well perceauyng and greatlye lamentyng, thought suche wyckednesse no longer to be suffred, but to putte in aduenture all that they had, and their liues to, rather then they wolde see theyr countrye by such rebels so miserablye spoyled and wasted. Wherevpon gettynge a great armye together, mette wyth them betwixt Broda & Buris, and sette vpon them sodenly, insomuch that the Thaborytes fledde awaye apace. Wherfore Procopius theyr Captayne, when he coulde by no persuasion kepe them from flyght, lyke a desperate wretche, ronne headlynge into the thycke of hys enemies, where fyghtynge a whyle, and sore

vexynge hys enemyes, at last with an arowe was shotte through. And when the ba
                  •
               
               tayle was ended, an infinite numbre of the Thaborites were taken prisoners,The miserable end of the rebels in Boheme. and after putte in great barnes, the dores shutte vp. And because that countrye shulde no longer be troubled wyth suche wretched people, the barnes were set on fyre, and they and the barnes were burned vppe altogether. Thys woful ende had these seditiouse and cruel heretykes, the maynteyners of Wicliffes and Hussis doctrine, by whose meanes the noble countrye of Boheme, was brought from a moste honorable state, to very slauery, from great ryches to very beggerye,

from good ordre, to vtter confusion, from noble libertye to vyle bondage, and from a royall kyngedome to a wretched tyranny. We reade likewyse of the greate rebellion, that was made in Germanye by the Lutheranes,Loke vpō the chronic
                     •
                  e of the bokes of Burgundye, & the chronicle of Carion called Bellum rusticum, whiche intended to haue destroyed Christes catholike fayth, all the clergye, and all the nobilitie of Germanye, and neuer to haue bene vnder anye rulers or gouernours any longer. For the deuill and Luther together had taught them, that the libertie of the Gospel shuld not be subiect to such tyrauntes▪ as thē
               peroure was: and Luther in hys sermons called themperoure a sacke of wormes, and

sayde, that the greate Turke was a wyser prince and a better, then the gouernours of our Christen commen welth, and vsed commonlye to saye, Lord delyuer vs from suche tyrauntes. Where wythal the people beyng prouoked to sedition, gathered together a greate armye, and yf they had not bene resisted betyme, they had destroyed al Germanye. And when they came to the fielde, and were compelled to make battayle, they fought wonderfull fearslye, so that there were slayne at sondrye conflictes aboue an hundreth thousande men. And both the authors of al this mischiefe in the same battayles were kylled, and all the rebelles beside

were eyther slayne, or taken prisoners. Such cruel bloudshed, and suche manslaughter broughte for the thys cursed enterpryse.
            What shuld I speake of a citie in Germany called Munstere,
                  Monasteri
                        ••
                     .
                which before it was with the perillouse plage of heresye infected, was a very riche and a welthy citye, and meruelouslye dyd flouryshe both for ye prosperouse estate. that it was in, and also for the honest behauiour, and ciuyll maners of the people. But after that heresye was cropen into it, and that the people had receaued it, and a greate numbre of them became Anabaptistes, then would they no longer obey their prince, but

become a fre citye. Then false prophetes arose amonges them, and all good men were thrust out of the cytye, and spoyled of all that they had. After that made they a kynge amonges them selfes, who most cruelly tormented all, yt wold not obey his denelish intentes & purposes, & hanged a great meany vpon trees. But consyder thende of this rebellion. By and by after this, the cytye was beseged, and with in a shorte space taken to. In the tyme of the beseginge wherof, they that were with in the cytye were so famished, that many of them were glad to eate y• coueringes of greate bokes, that were couered wyth leather, & some of them

eate their owne children.
            And yet notwithstandynge al this misery, some desperate wretches would not let to daunce in the streates, and set forth spectacles and showes openly. As for to pull downe churches and chappels, they counted it a good pastime. And they were sore agreued with images, that if they se any picture eyther in walles or in glase windowes. they wold vtterly deface it. But at lengthe when the citye was taken, both the lewde king, that they had made, and all his adherentes, were taken withal, and burned at a stacke, and so receaued the reward of their wicked rebellion. If any man be desyrous to know more of

this story, let him reade an epistle of one Antony Coruine, which he wrote to George Spalatine. What was the speciall cause (I praye you) of the great rebellion, that was made by ye princes of Germanye agaynst themperours maiestye Charles the .v. that now reygneth, but only the maynteynaunce of Luthers doctrine. For albeit they pretended many other causes to cloke the matter, yet in very dede (as Lodouicus ab Auila telleth, by whom the storye is wrytten) the princypall cause was Luthers heresye, that they so muche estemed. But suche as their cause was, such lucke 
                  •
               ad they. For albeit that thē
               perours armye was but smal,

and nothing to be compared in force and power with the Lutherans armye, yet themperor putting his whole affiaunce in god, and trustynge that he woulde assiste hym in maynteynaunce of his church and catholike fayth, gotte by goddes helpe a very notable and merueylouse victorye. For bothe was Iohn Federike Duke of Saxonye taken in the fielde, and Philippe the Landgraue of Hesse, yelded hym 
                  •
               elfe, which be two of the chiefe Princes of all Germanye. And as for the rest of the rebelles, some were taken, & some were slaine, & som put to flyght. By these examples all men may euidently perceaue, that suche as haue made rebellion

for this noughty doctrine, haue euer bene miserably plaged at the ende. But to let passe thexamples of foreyne realmes, and to come home to our owne, as sone as the fauorers of Wicliffes wicked heresye heard, that Hus and Hierome of Prage two of Wiclifs chief scholers were condemned at Constance, and there burned for their heresie, they fell therfore into a 
                  •
               uryouse rage. And first conspired agaynste the byshoppes and priestes,
                  Polydor. hist. li. 22 & then like vile traytours agaynst their liege lord and soueraygne, kyng Henry the .v. because he was a catholike Prince, and a vertuouse. And streyght way made they open assembles, and determined

to maynteine their cursed doctrine by force of armes. Then gotte they them two mete Capitaynes for suche a purpose, Iohn Oldcastell, and Roger Acton: and wyth a desperate company, which were assembled wyth them, made they hast to London, to thintent they myghte take the citie, and so there encrease their army with men much like thē
               selfes, and in cōclusion by that meanes put downe the kyng. But the kyng being certified of the matter, thoughte it necessary to preuente them, and to be readye to set vpon them before they shoulde enter into the citie. Who when he was well prepared for them, pytched hys tētes in a place mete

for the purpose, and taried for their comming. But the wretches assone as they hearde of the kynges cōmyng, streyght waye, as thoughe they hadde lost the fielde, ronne away as fast▪ as their fete wolde beare them. Of whome some were taken in the flight, and by and by committed to the fyre and burned. Anone after their two captaynes were taken, & cast in prison. Beside this, the tragicall ende of our last rebellion made by captayne Wiat, & hys complices for the same religion, may be a sufficient warnyng for all men, as longe as the worlde continueth, to beware both of such a detestable and deuelishe enterprise, and also of the peruerse doctrine,

that droue them vnto it. And let euerye man, that is infected wyth the same doctrine, & loketh for a daye (as a great meanye do) be well assured, that whensoeuer he aduentureth the like acte, he shal haue a lyke daye, that is to saye, a daye of his vtter confusion. For God is al one, and fayleth not to defende all those, that put their sure trust in him (as our most gratious soueraigne Ladye the Queene doth) and punisheth all such, as fighteth agaynste his churche, and agaynst princes, whiche be hys ministers. And whatsoeuer the matter be, that moueth hym to rebelliō, let him thinke surely, that the deuyll, that seketh

to destroye him both bodye and soule, hath putte it in his mynde. And let him waxe wise betime thoroughe other mens harmes. And yf he wyl call to memorye the wordes that certayne of our rebelles sayde at their death,The kentishe rebels wordes at their 
                     •
                  eathe. he shall haue good cause to beware by theyr example. For diuerse of them (as it is reported) said to the people, that were presente, when they were putte to execution after this sort.
Good people, seyng that god for my most greuouse offence commytted agaynst the Quenes highnes hath thus worthely plaged me and punished me with this vile and shamefull death, I beseche you al for your owne sauegarde, learne

by myne example euermore to beware of rebellion. And specially agaynste your moste vertuouse & most gratiouse soueraygne Lady, yt now reygneth ouer you, whom god (as it wel appeareth) hath elected and chosen to gouerne you, & whom he ceaseth not dayly wt his myghty hand to defend agaynst al her enemyes. Wherfore all they, that goeth about to resiste her, or to worke any treason agaynst her noble person, wittingly worketh their owne destructiō. For there is no deceyptful driftes, or force of armes, that can preuayle agaynst the faythful seruaūtes of god. Therfore may I most miserably bewayle my misfortune, that it was my chaunce

to be one of that number, that contrary to Goddes wyll and pleasure, dyd rebell agaynste suche a gracious prince. And well maye I saye wyth a sighinge hearte, alas, that euer I was so madde, as to folow the pestilent persuasion of such, as moued me thereto. But nowe the acte is paste, and it is not possible to call agayne yesterdaye. But notwythstandyng that to late it is to amend the matter, yet it is not to late to repent. And remedy fynde I none, but only to be sory for it, and hartely to beseche both almyghtye God to be mercifull vnto me, and the Queenes hyghnes of her goodnesse to pardon me. And I exhorte all you, that be present to beware

by me, and that my plage may be a plaster for all them, whose heartes be wounded wyth wycked rebellion. And I praye God, that all Englyshe menne maye take hede by me▪ and learne to obeye theyr Prince by mine example, and waxe wise throughe my folie.
Suche like wordes sayde diuerse of the late rebelles at theyr death. But to be shorte, there was neuer rebellion yet, for what cause soeuer it was made, that euer hadde prosperouse ende.
            And yf a manne woulde recite foreyne rebellions, that haue bene done in other realmes, he shoulde be very longe in the matter. But lette vs at thys presente go no further,

but to oure owne countrye, and we shall fynde thys, that I haue sayde, to be vndoubtedlye true. For Iacke Strawe & Watt Tyler,Iacke Strawe. Captaines of the commotion, that was in Kente, in kynge Richarde the secondes dayes,
                  Polydor. hist. li. 20 when they had taken South warke, spoyled it, broken vp the prysons, lette out the prisoners, and after robbed the whole citye of London, and kylled meanye, both straungers and citezins, and ioyned to them all ruffians, theues, slaues, and vile velaynes, that were within the citie, at laste the Lord Maior, whose name was William Walworth, and all the Aldermen of the citye sore moued wyth the matter,

gathered a cōpanye together well armed, and the sayd lord Maior, whyle all men prepared them selfes to go agaynst these rebelles, hauyng a companye wyth hym, at the kynges commaundement wente into Smithfielde, where the rebelles were. At whose comming the rebelles being some what abashed, 
                  •
               uffred hym to entre in amonges thē wythout any harme. Then the lord Maior toke aparte Iacke Strawe, pretendyng that he woulde be glad to make peace wyth hym. But assone as he had gotte him aside, in a great rage drewe he hys dagger, & kylled hym out of hande. Whych when the rebels ones perceaued, they fledde awaye

apace, and in the flight many were taken, and manye were slayne: and so for their outragious acte receaued they worthy punishment.
            The lyke ende had the great captayne of the Kentyshe rebelles, called Iacke Cade.Iack
                     •
                   Cade. Whyche Iacke in the reygne of kynge Henrye the .vj. toke Southwarke,
                  Polydor. hist. lib. 3. and when he was assaulted of one Mathew Goth at mydnyght, stoutly resisted him, and droue him back to the bridge: and so hard pursued hym, that he fledde into the citie agayne. Then Iacke wyth hys men sette fire vpon the houses, that were on the brydge: where was sene a lamentable spectakle to behold. For some flying the daunger

of the fyre, ranne vpon the drawen swordes of theyr enemies. Some piteouslye cryinge for helpe, were choked vppe wyth the smoke. Some that coulde not escape oute of the houses, were miserablye burned. Some to auoide ye perillouse flame, lept downe headling into ye middest of Temes, & there were drowned. Somwere oppressed with the fal of the houses. O what a miserable sighte was it, to see yonge children sprauling in the middest of the fyre, & to heare thē crye out so rufully? Or what a cruel wretche was he, yt had bene ye cause of suche a cruell tragedy? Then the king seing that these rebelles could not by force be vanquished▪ made

a proclamation, that all that would depart quietly home to their houses, shulde haue their pardon, saue only Iacke Cade, ye author of al ye misery. Whervpō ye rebels departed, & so was Iacke Cade taken, & shortly after put to death, as he had wel deserued. Further more what was ye ende of the greate rebellion, yt was in the North, in the time of king Hē
               ry ye eyght. Were not a great nūbre of ye rebels in conclusion hanged vp? Had not also ye rebels in Northfolke & Deuonshiere, in the reygne of kynge Edward the .vj. such like successe? were not an infinite nū
               bre of them slayne, and manye after the battayle was ended put to a vile & shameful death?

Therfore let no man, of what degree soeuer he be, that aduentureth to worke such wickednes, thinke that he shall escape such lyke punyshment, as these foresayd rebels haue suffred: for God, which is the author of peace & concorde, by whome all princes haue their rule & gouernement, will not suffer to escape vnpunished suche, as agaynst his expresse will and commaundemente do make rebellyon. Ouer this seinge that a Prince,2. Reg. 5 as god said to Dauid, is appoynted to fede & nourishe the people, what an vnkynde subiecte is that, whiche trauayleth to destroye the prince, who by al meanes seketh to fede & nourishe him? And if a man be neuer

so high in honor being no prince, yet let hym take hym selfe but as a subiecte, and let hym behaue hym selfe, as an obediente subiecte to, and alway be well ware, that ambition crepynge into hys brest, moue hym not to couet the crowne, leste therefore he be crowned at lengthe with an hatched. And let hym contynually remember this wittye and wise sentence of Sayncte Gregorye Nazianzene.
                  In oratione de 
                        •
                     rdine.
                Why goeste thou aboute to make thy selfe a shepeherde, beynge but a shepe?
Or why laborest thou to be a heade, seing thou art but a fote? Or why wilte thou become a captayn, where as thou art but a souldyar?
That is a very vngētle shepe,

that will go aboute to destroy ye shepeherd, who doth so carefully prouide for it, and saueth it from the daunger of the wolfe. And so is that a wretched fote, that will labour to cut of the heade, to thintent it may become a monstruouse heade it selfe, seing yt the true head doth study so diligently to kepe it from all harme and incōmoditie. Yea and an vnkynde souldyar is he, that wil trauayle to put downe his captayne, by whose polycye, wisdome, and force he hath at all tymes escaped the handes of his enemyes. And as the shepeherde is the defence of the shepe, the head of the fote, the captayne of the souldyar, so in very dede the Prince is

the tuition and safegard of all his subiectes. And our prince and gouernesse the Quene, requireth nothing of vs agayne but gentle & obedient hartes, which if we shewe vnfeynedly towarde her grace, we shall saue our soules, our bodyes, our goodes, & our coūtry therby. For as disobedence damneth our soules, killeth our bodies, spoyleth vs of oure goodes, & destroyeth our coūtrie: So obedience is the helthe & safegarde thereof. What mischiefe, disobedience,The harm
                     •
                  s that c
                     •
                  me of rebellion
                     •
                  
                & rebelliō worketh in euerye countrye, where it cōmeth, we may easelye learne by ye exāples before recited. For whē rebelliō reigneth, then peace which is cause of plenty is broken. Then all

concorde and vnitie, whiche byndeth the felowship of men together, is cleane takē away. Then all charitie whiche is mother of all godly vertue, is banished out of mens hartes. Then all lawes, wherwith the commen welthe is gouerned, is vtterly disanulled. For then (as Seneca sayth) law standeth onelye in force of armes. Then all officers that cause good order to be kept, and do minister iustice, are displaced. Then graue wysedome and policye, whereby holesome counseyle is gyuen, are thrust out of the doores, and rashe foly and headynesse take their p
                  •
               aces. Then all good order, which is the beautye of euerye commen welthe

is troden vnder fote, and misrule and confusion haue the vpper hande. Then foloweth spoylinge of mens goodes. burnyng of theyr houses, cruell murder and bloudshed, rauishinge of mens wyues, deflowring of their doughters, rape, incest, & all beastlye vice. Thē fal they to set at nought al religion, to contemne God, and to blaspheme his holye name, & in conclusion destroye they them selfes & their countrye to. For when men are by spoyle sore impouerished, and their strength and courage by ciuill dissension greatly abated, then shall they be a preye for theyr enemyes. And then shall it so come to passe, as Horace sayth by Rome,
                  Od. 16. 
                     
                        •
                     pod.
                that that

noble citie, whyche no foreyne enemies coulde ouercome, is nowe by ciuill warre and sedition come to vtter ruine. For lyke as in a mans body, yf the fo
                  •
               e shuld fight with the hand, the heade with the necke, the backe with the belye, and euery part with other, the bodye shuld vtterly perishe, so a contrye, where the inhabitaūtes make warre one agaynst another, & one seketh to destroye another, must nedes come to vtter confusion.
For the holye scripture can not be false,An
                     •
                  . 11. whiche sayeth, That euerye kyngedome diuided within it selfe, shalbe destroyed.
            
            And Gregorye Nazianzene asketh▪ what is ye worst thinge & most noysome in the world: and by and by he aunswered:

discorde. And then asketh he agayne:
What is the best? and streight he aunswereth, peace And Democritus a wise Philosopher sayeth, that ciuill dissension is daungerouse and noysome for both parties. For it is the destruction as well of those that get the victory, as of those that lese it. For then commeth foreyne enemyes, and inuade the countrye, and easelye vanquyshe it.
For like as when two dogges fyghte for a bone (as the prouerbe is) oftentymes the thirde commeth, and catcheth it from them bothe: So when two partes of a realme stryue for the gouernmēt, their enemies enter, and take it from them.
            For howe wanne Willyam

duke of Normandy this contrye of ours,
                  Polydor. lib. 8. but only through the sore dissension of two bretherne, (whose names were Haralde, and Tosto) that contended for the crowne. For the ciuill warre & sore bloudeshed that they made, by reason therof, so abated the force and strength of this realme, that the sayd Wyllyam arryuing at the same tyme vpon the coastes of England, easely entred into it, and after one battayl foughtē with Harald, toke it. Or howe wanne the Turke all grece, and toke the goodly cytye of Constantinople, but only by meanes that the princes and rulers of that contry could not agree within themselfes. And I praye

god that the deadly dissension and cruell warre, that is now in Christendom amonges the princes therof do not make awaye at the lengthe for the Turke to subdue all the reste of Christendome. For nothing is there that maketh so much, for his purpose, as our ciuill warre and discorde. Therfore let vs pray god earnestly, that it wil please hym to pacifye the hartes of all christen princes. And all we, that be true English men, let vs laye away our maliciouse heartes, and betime reconcile vs one to another, and seke not the meanes to destroye our countrye by discorde. For as mariners, that be in one shippe together, yf they fal at variance

when they be vpon the sea, and euery one fight with another, and care not what become of the shippe, it is likely that when the tempeste commeth, they shall al perishe, and their shippe to: Euen so when the inhabitauntes of one contrye are at debate within thē selfes, and passe not at all for the daunger▪ that is lyke to fal to their countrie, then when they are by foreyne enemyes assaulted, they are by and by or euer they be aware ouerthrowen and vanquished.
And then God sendeth vnto them the foure plages, that he sayde, he wold sende vpon the chyldren of Israell for their wyckednes,Hier. 15. that is to saye, the sworde to kyll them, dogges to teare

their bodies, byrdes of the ayre to eate them, and wilde beastes of the earth to d
                     •
                  uoure them. And after shall the whole countrie be spoyled of all her welthe and riches, and become a slaue to her enemyes, and repent her of her wyckednes, when it shalbe to late, and crye with Hieremye,Hier. 15.
               Why good Lorde is my sorowe endles, and how chaunseth it, that my plage is vncurable? Therfore let al true harted Englishe men for the loue that we owe to GOD,
for the good will, that we are bounde to beare to our prince, and for the feruēt zeale, that we haue to the safegarde of our countrye, refrayne from discorde, represse our rebelliouse heartes, and beginne one to loue another, one to do for another,

and neyther by discorde make a waye for our enemies, nor by malice wyshe them to come agaynst vs, but hartelye loue our most gratious soueraygne Ladye the Queene, and most willingly obeye her, loue our natiue countrye, and gladly spend our goodes and liues in the defence thereof: & lette this deuelishe dissension reygne no longer amonge vs, and consider that no commen welth can stande, where it taketh place. For a house or familie where discorde is, dothe neuer prosper, but by litle & litle it commeth to misery. Wherfore seing that almyghtye God of his mere goodnes hath sent vs such a vertuous Lady to reygne ouer vs, and

by her delyuered vs from bondage and tyrannie, and by her broughte vs from blindnesse and heresye, and by her reconciled vs to his spouse the Catholike Churche agayne, and so by her saued both our bodies & our soules, it is al our partes to seke alwaies possible to set vs at peace and concorde, which shal at length make our countrye to florishe a freshe, & to banyshe all malice and hatred, all diuision and discorde, whiche hath bene the cause of our miserye. And firste those that be of the clergye,The clergies duetie. as Bishops, priestes, and other ministers, let them partly by diligente preachinge them selfes, partly by sending learned men to preache, & partlie by godly

visitations, call home the people to true fayth agayne, and teache them the feare of god, whiche is farre to seke in many mens hartes. For yf they ones feare GOD, then wyll they easelye conforme them selfes to the godlye order of Christes churche, and bothe serue God reuerently, and also humblie obeye their prince. For all these that so rage agaynste the blessed spouse of Christ, and so blasphemouslye mocke the ministers thereof, and so outragiouslye rayle agaynst the blessed misteries & sacramentes therin, and caste bookes and libels abroad, and disperse false rumors euerye where (as I sayd before) both to maynteyne their heresye,

and also to sowe sedition therby, they neyther loue GOD, nor feare hym, nor take anye care for eyther soule or body, nor willinglye wil they obeye their prince. For suche verely are the children of Core.Num. 16 Dathan, and Abyron, who so sore grudged at Moyses & Aaron for that they only shuld minister in the tabernacle of God. But let thē, yf euer they mind to be saued, repent thē betime of their greuouse grudge, & maliciouse hatred, that they beare to Christes Catholike churche, lest eyther the earth open and swalow them vp, as it dyd wyth Core, Dathan, & Abyron, or els at length, whē they shal depart thys life, hell open (whych God forbid) and

most miserablye deuoure thē.
And lette all other that well knowe them, folowe the xample of the people, who seynge when Core, Dathan, and Abyron were swalowed vp, fledde awaye. and sayde: Let vs gette vs hence, lest perhappes the earth deuoure vs lykewyse.
Besyde let the clergye not onelye in their preaching, but also in their liuinge so behaue them selfes, as becometh the true mynysters of God, to thintente they maye gyue suche example of al godlye vertue to Christes flocke, that the same flocke being prouoked by their good workes, may become such lyke, as they be.Osee. 4.
For as the Prophete Osee sayeth, Suche as the people be, suche are the priestes, and contrary wise

suche as the priestes be, suche are the people.
For if the priestes be noughte, the people be also nought: but if the priestes be honest, vertuouse, and godly, the people folowinge theyr example, will become like vnto them. Lette the noble and gentlemen also,Noble & gentlemens d
                     ••
                  tie. and all magistrates of this realme do their dueties to God and to their prince, & se all those, that they haue cure ouer, to be kepte in good ordre, and to correct and punishe, as apperteyneth to their office, all them, that be stubborne & disobediente, and speciallye suche as be rebelles to God, and to his Catholike churche: and then this realme shal not nede to feare any ciuil warre or rebellion: and they

in so doyng shall highly please GOD, do their prince verye faythfull seruice, and both get them selfes greate honor, and also preserue the honorable state, that they haue gotten. But yf they be slacke herein, and wynke at wycked folkes actes, and namelye at those, that be detestable in Goddes sight, and iniuriouse to Christes holy churche, and the catholike fayth, then shall they vndoubtedly at lengthe loose al their honor, loose their estimation, putte their prince in daunger, and their countrye to. For when men that be in aucthoritie, be slacke in maynteynyng and furtheryng the Catholike fayth, then by lytle and lytle groweth heresy, and

spreadeth abroade, that at lengthe, except menne be well ware, it preuayleth, and destroyeth the countrye, where it reygneth. It is wel compared by S. Paule to a cancre. For as a cancre,2. Tim, 2 yf it be suffred encreaseth daylye, and so crepeth forwarde, that in conclusion it corrupteth the whole body: so heresye, whensoeuer it is entred into any commen welth, it so goeth forwarde, yf it be not repressed, that in the ende it destroyeth the whole, as the xamples before rehearsed, do wel declare. And truth is it, that no common welthe can stande, yf religion be neglected. In consideration wherof all they, that in olde tyme wrote of commen welthes, as

               Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and many other besyde, thoughte it moste necessary for the gouernours of euery commen welth, chiefly to trauayle in establyshyng religion. Whych done it shuld be easye to kepe the people in good ordre. For the verye paynems & infidels, to whom they wrote, hauynge a greate feare and a reuerence to the false Goddes, that they worshipped, were gentle, meke, humble, and very obedient to their rulers: So all Christen men withoute doubte, yf they be keped in the feare of God. and in the true religion of his catholike churche, they wyll moste willinglye obeye their prince, obserue the lawes of their countrye, and quietlye

behaue them selfes euery one in their vocation.
            Ouer thys let all parentes haue a diligent eye to the bringynge vp of their children in the feare of God,Parētes. in his holye seruice, & in all godlye vertue, and teache them to obeye God, to obeye his Churche, and their lawfull prince. But yf they them selfes percase fauoure not Christes churche, nor the order therof, and their children folowinge their fotesteppes, do the same, and so continue in their foly, and reioyse in the same, let the children loke for as wretched an ende,1. Reg. 
                     •
                   and .4. as euer had Helyes children, and the parentes to be punyshed for bearynge wyth their childrens offences, accordyng

as Hely hym selfe was. Therfore let al parentes take hede, and chastice thei
                  •
                chyldren in dewe season. For yf the children throughe the parentes defaulte fall into heresye, or any kynde of vice, the parentes shal make aunswere for them, and shall at lengthe suffre greuouse punishmente for not correctynge them.Ephe. 6. For S. Paule cōmaundeth them to brynge them vp wyth due correction & discipline. Which yf they do, they shall haue louynge and obediente children both to God, and their prince, and to them selfes to.
            
               MaistersLet also all maysters take hede to their seruauntes and prentises, that they learne to feare God, learne to faste and

pray, and to leade a godly life, and not to folowe their sensuall appetite and carnal lustes, as a great sort do, and thinke that they be fauorers of gods worde, because they can take their libertie: and counte thē selfes wittie, yf they can make a merye mocke at the Masse, and at the ceremonies therof, and geste at priestes, Goddes ministers, and prate and bable agaynst the holy sacramentes of the churche, and the diuine seruice done therein.
But for suche mockers (as witnesseth Salomon) Gods iudgementes are prepared,Pro. 1
                        •
                     
                   and beatynge hammers for suche fooles bodies. But yf al maysters woulde do their dueties in correctynge their seruauntes, they woulde not thus behaue

them selfes, and prouoke Gods wrath agaynste them.
But it is to be feared, that suche as the seruauntes be, suche be their maysters. For if their maysters were good & godly, they wold neuer suffer their seruaūts to be so noughty. For as a man y• as he rideth by the highe waye, letteth the bridell go, & suffreth his horse to breake downe hedges, and to destroye mens corne, it is not lyke, that he is vnwilling, that suche harme shuld there be done: euen so a mayster that letteth his seruaūt haue his owne swinge, and suffreth hym to mocke & geste at gods mysteries, no man wil thinke, but that such one is well wyllyng, that he shuld so do, yea &

glorieth to in that he hathe suche a iolye man. But let him take hede, howe he suffreth his seruaunte so to runne at large. For it is not vnlyke, that suche seruauntes besydes other greuouse enormities, wyll at length fal to spoyle their maysters, and so shal the maysters be iustlye punyshed here in thys lyfe for the licentiouse libertie, that they gyue to them: yea and moreouer both the mayster and the man shall one daye, excepte GOD sende them grace to amende, most earnestlye repente them, and bewayle the time that euer they were borne: and specially ye mayster, because that hauing charge of his seruaūt, and seyng him so farre oute of

order, wold neuer correct nor chastice him. Let all maysters therefore betime take hede to their seruauntes, al parentes to their children, all superiour powers to them, whome they haue in theyr gouernemente, and cause them leaue their contentiouse reasonyng of religion, and fall to stedfaste beleuynge, and throughlye persuade them, that in matters of our belefe, our senses and reason muste alwaye gyue place to fayth. For so shal God be reuerentlye serued, so shall oure most gratiouse and vertuous Soueraygne be duelye obeyed, so shall al rebellion be easelye auoyded, so shall peace and concorde reygne amonge vs, and so shall our countrye, that

of late hathe bene mooste miserablye spoyled, waxe riche and welthye agayne, and recouer the honorable and noble estate, that it hath bene in, in tyme paste. Therefore most hartelye beloued countrye menne, seynge that GOD of hys bountefull goodnesse hathe of late bene so mercyfull to vs, and deliuered vs from mooste cruell tyrannye by hys dearlye beloued handmayde, our most noble quene, and hathe sente vs suche a maystresse and gouernesse, as thys Realme hath not hadde the lyke, and that she so tenderlye loueth euerye one of vs, careth so muche for vs, studyeth mooste earnestlye, how to auaunce vs, seketh nothing

els, but the welthe, safegard, and honor of oure countrye, taketh so greate paynes for oure cōmoditie, watcheth for vs, prayeth for vs, & moste mercifullye dealeth with vs, let vs altogether with one cō
               sent, most humblye obeye her, most tenderly loue her, & with our goodes & oure liues most willingly defende her. And because she is the very faythfull seruaunt of God, as bothe almightye God by miracle hath playnly shewed, and also she in her most godlye conuersation doth dayly declare, lette vs in all thynges folowe her example, and become lyke vnto her, and beleue as she dothe, feare GOD as she dothe, serue God as she doth, and laboure

to kepe his cōmaundementes as she laboreth, be merciful as she is, be lowly and humble as she is, be charitable as she is, cast awaye malice as she doth, be ready to helpe the poore as she is ready, be gētle to speake to, as she is gentle, kepe oure cōscience cleane as she kepeth hers, take hede of briberye, as she dothe, abhorre couetousnesse as she doth, hate oppression as she hateth it, hate debate as she doth, loue one another, as she loueth vs all, care one for another as she careth for vs all, loue al godly vertue as she loueth it, flye from all vice as she doth, & to be short, fashyon our lyfe to her lyfe in all poyntes, that the sayinge of Plato may be verified in vs

that such as the prince is, such are the people, and so vndoubtedlye shall we please our lord GOD, and seme to be thankefull to hym for hys benefytes bestowed vpon vs of late, please our gratiouse Queene, that is delyted wyth al goodnesse, please all good Christen folkes, that longe to heare of our vertuouse behauiour, reconcile oure selfes wholye to Christes Catholike churche, from whyche we haue so long bene diuided, saue oure selye soules, which otherwise were like to haue perished, saue our bodies, which shuld haue bene oppressed with miserable seruitude, saue oure goodes, whereof we should haue bene vtterlye spoyled, saue oure

countrye, whyche was likelye to haue bene brought into perpetual thraldome, recouer the honour thereof, whyche was altogether defaced, and both in this life lyue well & welthelye, and after oure death receaue at Goddes hande the crowne of glorye, that neuer shall decaye, in his celestial and euerlasting tabernacle.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A prayer for the Queenes highnes, very conueniente to be sayde daylye of all her faythful and louyng subiectes.
            
               
                  O
                Moste gratious & most merciful lord, whose power is almyghtye. whose workes are merueylous, and whose goodnes is infinite, graunt I beseche the to thy most humble hande mayde Quene Marye, our most gratiouse soueraigne ladye & maystresse, suche perfite and excellent wisedome, as thou vouchesafed to giue vnto Salomon, to the intent she may so gouerne this noble realme, that bothe thy glorye may be auaunced therby, and all the people thereof maye

learne to feare and loue the, to obey her grace, to study for peace, to loue one another, and to delite in vertue and godly conuersation. Graunte her also, I beseche the suche strength, as thou dyd to Iosue, who through thyne ayde and helpe ouercame all his enemyes,Iosue. 1. and safely conducted the children of Israell into the lande of Beheste, and say vnto her, as thou saydest to him,
Take a good harte and be strong, feare not I say, feare not, because that I, which am thy lorde and god, wil be with the in al thine affayres, to thend she maye (as Iosue did) vanquishe all her enemyes,psal. 128. and say with Dauid,
They haue euen from my tender age oftentymes assaulted me, but yet could they neuer preuaile

agaynst me.Gyue her besyde (Good Lorde) such trust and confidence in the, that she may truly rehearse these verses of the prophete,Psal. 26. 
               God is the defender of my lyfe, therfore whom shall I feare? GOD is my helper,Psal. 17. and in hym wyll I putte my truste.
And sende her more ouer such graue and faythful counseylours, as wyl bothe without flatterye tell her the truth, and also gyue her such wise counseyl, as shal be most expedient, not onlye for her graces safegard, whiche they are bound speciallye to care for, but also for the safegarde of al her louing subiectes, whose welthe they oughte also to consider, yea and for the good gouernemēt of the whole realme beside, for

which purpose they are called to that dignitie. And withall send her highnes such a good will to heare thē, that as they be readye to gyue her good counseyle, so she may be ready alway to folowe it. Saue her (most gratious lorde) from al pryuye conspiracies, and send her the grace before any peril fall to spye out all treason and trayterous diuises contrined agaynst her, that both the authours therof may be duely punyshed therfore, and her graces person preserued alwaye from daunger. Good lorde gyue her grace to beware of all flatterers and dissemblers, whose tounges vttereth pleasaunte wordes, when theyr hartes are full of

greuouse grudge and malice, and by thy goodnes so bringe to passe, as eyther her hyghnes at lest maye gyue no credite to thē, or els they may vtterly forsake their dissembling and flatterye, and place truth in stede therof. Most merciful lorde,Gene. 21 who sent Sara a sonne, when she was very olde,1. Re. 1. who caused Anna ye wife of Eleana by meanes of her earneste prayer to bringe forth a child,Luc. 1. & who gaue vnto bareyne Elisabeth well growen in yeares fruite of her wōbe, vouchesafe of thy bountefull goodnesse to sende oure gratious Queene fruite of her body, to thintent y• thy holy name may be glorified thereby, & her grace take comforte therin, and all our

countrye by meanes thereof longe contynewe in peace and quietnes. O lord vouchesafe beside so to adorne her family and houshold with all godlye vertue, that all those that be placed therin, may for theyr true fayth and feruent deuotion to God warde, for theyr faythfull hartes, and due obedience to her grace, and for their earnest loue and hartye affection one to another, be an example for all the whole realme to folowe. Ouer thys graunt (I moste hartelye beseche the) that al her subiectes maye remember the wonderfull myracles, that thou haste nowe of late wrought for her, and the great benefites, that they haue receaued by her, to

thintent that they may not only glorifye thy name, and dayly gyue the moste hartye thankes for thy goodnes, but also al murmuryng & grudge layd aparte, humbly obey her grace, louingly embrace her godly lawes, and thinke verely, that thou haste sente her to delyuer thys realme, bothe from heresye and blyndnesse, and also from most miserable thraldome and tyranny, and perswade them selfes, that whatsoeuer she goeth aboute, the same shalbe to their welth and commoditie, because thou lorde, is alway presente with her. Uouchesafe also good lord for thy tēder mercy sake, that as thou hast begon with her, and preserued her hetherto

from the handes of the cruell enemyes, so thou wil continue thy great goodnesse towarde her, and sende her suche grace, that she may not onlye contynewe in the vertuouse trade of lyuynge, which she hath euen from her childhode most diligently obserued, but also dayly more and more encrease in al godly vertue, both for her owne soules helthe, and for our example besyde. And graunte her most mercyfull father a longe raygne for the welth and commoditie of our contrye, a prosperouse raygne for her owne hartes ease and comforte, and a quiete raygne for to auoyde al murder and bloudshed, that both thy glorye and true relireligion

may be therby auaunced, and her grace also, and al we her louyng subiectes may lyue together in peace and vnitie, and wyth one voyce prayse and magnifie thy most blessed & gloriouse name thorough our lord Iesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holye ghooste be all honoure and glory worlde withoute ende. Amen.
         
         
            
            A Prayer both for to giue God thankes for hys benefites bestowed of late vpon this realme, and also to desire hym to preserue the same in a quiete and prosperouse estate.
            
               ALmyghtye and euerlastynge God, the maker of heauen and earth, and Lorde of all creatures, by whose myghtye hande the humble and lowlye are auaunced, & the prowde and stubborne are thruste vnder fote, we thy seruauntes gyue the most harty thankes for thy greate and bountefull goodnesse, which thou hast of late without our deseruynge

bestowed vpon vs, both in delyueryng vs from the cruell tyrannye and bondage, wherwith we were of late oppressed, and also in restorynge vs agayne to oure deare mother the Churche of Chryste, and the catholyke fayth therof. For which thy singuler benefytes, and gratious liberalitie, because we are in no wise able to render vnto the worthy thankes, therfore we make oure humble suite and request vnto the (O Lorde) that it may please the for thy holy names sake, to accept our good willes in this behalfe. And to gyue vs grace all the dayes of our life to remembre thys merueylouse worke of thyne, that partely by the deuoute

and feruente prayer of thy humble handmayden, our moste gratiouse Queene, and other of thy people, and partly by the sure confydence and trust, that her grace euermore dyd put in the, thou hast without the force & strengthe of men, put downe not onlye her enemies, but also al those, that dyd both fyght agaynste thy blessed spouse the churche, and trauayled by all meanes to disanull all the godly ordinaunces therof. Which wonderfull and miraculouse acte, as thou hast moste graciously begon, so we beseche the for thy tender mercyes sake to go forwarde with it, so to establishe it, as thy glorye may be auaunced therby, and all

the crafty diuises and malicyouse assaultes of the deuyll and his ministers cleane ouer throwen and subdued. And nowe moste mercyfull lorde, thou, that art our heade byshop and priest, graunte that all oure Byshoppes, priestes, and the reste of the clergye maye so diligentlye occupye thē selfes in preachinge to thē that be ignoraunte, in good counseyle gyuyng to suche as lacke it, in exhortynge those that be blinded, to returne to the truth, in correctynge the badde, that they may amend, in commendynge the good, that they may contynue, that the ruines and decayes of thy holy church may be repayred and buylded vp agayne. And

ouer this that they may so vertuouslye order their lyfe, and so deuoutly behaue them selfes in al their doinges, that ye light of their good workes may shine cleare in the flocke of Christ, to thintent, that all that shal loke therevpon, may prayse & magnifie thee, o lord, that vouchesafest to sende vs suche pastores and guydes. And so assiste them (most mercyfull lorde) with thy heauenly grace, that al worldlye respectes layd aparte, they may frely open the truthe, mayntayne the same, and what stormes of aduersitie soeuer fall vpon them, that they neyther for losse of ryches, or promotion, neyther for feare of paynfull tormentes, or death

it selfe swarue in any poynte from the sounde and syncere fayth of the catholike church. And make them (good lorde) as readye and willinge in all that they may, to set forward the same faythe, as false prophetes and blynde preachers haue bene of late to set forwarde peruerse doctrine and heresye. Gyue also vnto the nobilitie of this realme suche a zeale to the maynteynaūce of thy holy churche, and suche harty good willes to the good gouernement of this our coū
               trye, and suche charytable hartes to the poore cōmons. that both the godlye orders, vsed in thy diuine seruyce, may be duely and reuerently obserued and kepte, and also

the whole realme by their wisdome, may be wysely ruled, and the poore, that haue bene of late dayes sore oppressed, maye throughe thy lyberall goodnesse be mercyfully relieued. And graunte them (O lorde) alway to care as much for the commoditie of them, that be their tenauntes, as for theyr owne, and so to loue them, as the parentes do loue their children, and in no wyse to pyl and impouerishe them. And thou (O lorde) whiche art the gyuer of al good thinges, graunt them suche an earnest desyre of vertue, and yt they may so in theyr lyuing practyse it, as both they them selfes for theyr owne soules helth may please the therwith

and also all those, that be vnder theyr rule, maye be by their godly example prouoked to folowe the same. O moste gratiouse lorde, whiche art the aucthour of peace and concorde, powre downe vpon all the people of this realme the pleasaunte dewe of thy grace, and so mollyfye theyr hartes, that they may waxe gentle, sobre, meke, patiente, and charitable, to thintente that the deadly dissension that is amonge vs, ye great grudge and malice, that we beare one to another, may be vtterly taken away, and gyue vs (good lorde) one hart and one way, as the Prophete sayeth,Hier, 32. that amitye, loue, peace, concorde & vnitie maye reygne in stede

therof. And sende all suche as be proude and stubborne humble and lowlye myndes, that they may acknowledge both them selfes vile and wretched synners, and the onlye to be theyr lorde and god. Graunt also (good lorde) that those, that haue greadye couetouse hartes, may earnestly thinke vpon their ende, and consider not only, that nothinge shall they carye with them out of this wretched worlde, but also that they shal render a most strayght accompt to god, both howe they haue gotten theyr goodes, and also howe they haue bestowed them. Therfore we beseche the to sende them grace betyme to repent them of theyr abhominable

couetousnes, and to make amendes to all them, whom for the satisfyinge of theyr vnsatiable desyres they haue so miserably oppressed. Most myghty lorde, which arte the shilde & defence of all such as put their trust in thee, so ayde vs agaynste all forreyne enemies, as both they may, when soeuer they shall assaulte vs, be by thy helpynge hande ouerthrowen and vanquyshed, and we thy seruauntes contynewe in peace. Most mercyfull lord, which art the wel of trueth, and verye trueth it selfe, which art the authour of light, and very light it selfe, gyue vnto all such, as by the deuilles ministers persuasion haue forsaken the truthe, and

fallen to heresye, and through blind ignoraunce and proude presumpsion haue gone from the pure lyghte of thy holye churche, and cropen into the darke corners of cursed error, that they may throughe thy gratiouse goodnesse bothe be so touched in their hartes, that they will frely confesse thy fayth catholike, and also so illumined with the cleare light of true knowledge, that they from henceforthe moste humblye will submitte them selfes to the godly order of theyr blessed mother ye churche catholike, wherevnto whē they be throughly reconciled, we besech the, that they may continue still in it, and euermore with glad heartes embrace

al the holsom rules and preceptes therof, to thende yt at length they may be pertakers of thy glory with all the blessed sainctes in heauē. And moreouer with a moste feruent desyre we do besech the, that it may please thy goodnesse, not only to purge thys realme of al heresy & false doctrine, which haue bene ye cause of all our misery, but also so to preserue vs euermore from the same, that neyther the deuyll with al hys wilie craftes, nor his ministers, with all their wicked endeauour, shall euer be able to 
                  •
               rynge it into our countrye agayne. And thou lorde that hath with thy blessinge alwayes endowed this realme, so blesse vs all at

this present, yt we maye nowe and euermore be diligent in praysing thy most holy name, in gyuing thankes to the forthy goodnes, in earnest penaūce doing for our sinnes, in askinge 
                  •
               orgiuenesse at thy hande, in calling for grace by feruēt prayer, in relieuing of ye poore, in abstinence and fasting, in patient suffring, in recōciling our selfes one to another, in doing good one for an other, in speakyng wel one by another, in agreynge in one fayth and belefe, that so we all beynge ioyned together with the bonde of perfection, which is charitie, & dwellyng wythin one churche here in earth, may at our death come & dwell with the (good lord)

in thy heauenly palayce, and there with thy blessed aungels and saynctes prayse and magnifie thy holy name worlde withoute ende. Amen.
         
         
            ¶Imprynted at London in Paules churcheyarde, at the signe of the holy Ghost, by Iohn Cawood, Prynter to the Queenes highnes.
            
               Anno Domini. 1.5.5.4. 24. Iulij.
            
            Cum priuilegio Reginae Mariae.
         
         
            
            ¶Fautes escaped in printing.
            
               
                  
                     Lefe
                     Side
                     F
                           •
                        autes
                     Corrected
                  
                  
                     D. 6.
                     1.
                     thaldome
                     thraldome
                  
                  
                     E
                           •
                        d. 7
                     1.
                     vy
                     vp
                  
                  
                     G. 4.
                     2.
                     offices
                     officers
                  
                  
                     H. 4.
                     1.
                     commaunded
                     cōmaunde
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     I. 1.
                     1.
                     whole
                     hoate
                  
                  
                     I. 5.
                     1.
                     minded
                     mindeth
                  
                  
                     I. 8.
                     1.
                     vs to be busie
                     vs, be busie
                  
                  
                     Eod.
                     2.
                     liberties
                     libertie
                  
                  
                     K. 7.
                     2.
                     chaunseth
                     chaungeth
                  
                  
                     M. 5.
                     1.
                     committed
                     counted
                  
                  
                     Eod. 5.
                     2.
                     England, but
                     Englād. 
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     N. 7.
                     1.
                     Arch. duke
                     Archduke
                  
                  
                     Eod.
                     2.
                     comfortes
                     comforte.
                  
                  
                     O. 2.
                     1.
                     destructiō, for
                     destructiō. for
                  
                  
                     Eod. 4
                     1,
                     a pure
                     pure a
                  
                  
                     P. 6.
                     1.
                     reward.
                     rewardes
                  
                  
                     E. 8.
                     1.
                     spectable
                     spectacle
                  
                  
                     Eod.
                      
                     Chriss.
                     Christ
                  
                  
                     Eod.
                     2.
                     misterie
                     misteries
                  
                  
                     U. 4.
                     2.
                     eyes hath
                     eyes haue
                  
                  
                     U. 5.
                     1.
                     we 
                           •
                        e. That
                     we be, that
                  
                  
                     Y. 8.
                     2.
                     cokkel darnel
                     cokkel
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        a. 
                           •
                        
                     
                     2.
                     reasonable. Nowe. &c.
                     reas
                           •
                        nable, nowe
                  
                  
                     Eod. 3.
                     1.
                     where able
                     were ab
                           •
                        e
                  
                  
                     Bb. 8.
                     2.
                     were 
                           •
                        ore
                     were so sore
                  
               
            
         
      
   