
      
         
            
            
            A
Scourge for Rebels:
            Wherin are many notable
seruices truly set out, and
thorowly discoursed of, with
euerie particular point touching
the troubles of Ireland, as farre
as the painfull and dutiful
seruice of the Earle of
Ormound in sundrie
sortes is manifestfestly
knowen.
            Written by Thomas Churchyard
Gentleman.
            Imprinted at London
for Thomas
Cadman.
1584.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Churchiards Armes.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Right honourable my verie
good Lord, the Lord Haward of Effingam, Lorde Chamberlaine
of the Queenes Maiesties houshold, one of her
Highnesse priuie Councell, and Knight of the most
noble order of the Garter, Thomas Churchyard
wisheth increase of honour, and
many happie newe yeeres.
            
               AS all worldly giftes, good tournes, faithful
friendship and true affection springs
of good wil, so my good Lord, a certaine
kind of seruiceable liking towards your
Honour, thrusteth me forwarde to this
boldnesse, in presenting your L. a little
bare worke of mine, being stirred thervnto.
First, for the general fauour that the world beares
you (a loue not wonne without desert) and next, for the
fauour your noble Parents shewed me, I am encouraged
not onely to proceede to present some matter meete for
you to reade, but likewise to shew my selfe thankefull for
fauour receiued. So in waying those causes (as becomes
me) and knowing the good consideration your Lordship
carries (in sounde iudgement) of friendes that time did
plant, trueth makes growe, and triall doeth gather, I bethought
me of the Earle of Ormounde, who honoured
your Parentes, and loueth your selfe, in whiche conceite
of mine, I found that you hearing well of that woorthie
friend by my meanes, woulde beleeue I were zealous of
your Honour, and a fauourer of noble actions.
            Wherefore, and in respect a writer ought to be plaine,
I treate plainly in my booke of the Earle of Ormoundes

seruices (knowne to many, and hid to a few) naming him
the scourge of Rebels as truely I proue.
            Which presumption of mine, in that regard and glorie
of his in gayning good report, I trust your Lordeship
will peyze in ballaunce of equall weight, iudging me to
boldnes as I merite, and his deseruings, as they shal compell
by proofe to credite. So wishing great grace & good
happe to your L. I present this my first new yeeres gift in
the latter time of mine age to your Honour, and the
worldes iudgement.
            
               Your L. humblie at comment.
Thomas Churchyard.
            
         
         
            
            To the louing Reader.
            
               MY waking goodwil to the world, first for the
pleasuring of friends, generally to please
the multitude, keepes my 
                  〈◊〉
                alwaies occupied
in suche matter as the time bringeth
forth, whiche time is mother & nurse aswel
to bad causes, as to good actiōs. And it is sufferable
to a true Writer, to treate of both the

                  ••
               des, as the maner and nature in thinges discoursed of, giueth
light vnto. So finding plentie & store of matter, both to study on,
& trauaile with, I cannot but (for easing my burden) impart a
peece of my study with thee (of vertunous disposition) good friendly
Reader, not that my wordes haue such effect to worke a common
commodity, & leade thee to like my doinges, (voyde of cunning,
style, & eloquence) but to winne thy fauour, creeping as I may,
vnder thy sounde consideration, I laye my selfe playne & open to
the iudgement and hastie opinions of many, which sodainely condemne
& slowly allow the labour of willing writers. The grounde
whereof proceedes not of enuie, but of further cause then I name,
(Ignoraunce peraduenture a let for the true vnderstanding of
matter well meant) yet my hope is, thy grauitie and goodnesse,
(that beares with my ouerbolde presumption) will accept my
good meaning, & passe ouer the faults of my booke & fantasies I
had, when I took in hand to write this Discourse. The truth is in
sleeping softly on the cushion or carpet of peace (where age is contente
to take a nappe) the sounde of Drumme and Trumpet
awakened my muse. For a loude blast and brute of Irishe warres
bade me looke about me, and here what might be saide by good
seruices for the scourging of Rebelles. Then hearinge the

fall or tragedie of Desmond, the faithful seruices and noblenesse
of Ormound: with many more thinges then nowe I expresse: I
tooke pen and registred in memorie, what was moste meete, and
fitte for thee to knowe in causes not yet published by anie true
report or Writer, doubting not, though the matter be but little,
the trueth thereof shal greatly delight thee. So commending all
that followes to thy vpright iudgement, I craue and earnestly desire
thee wishingly to reade this small discourse, called The
Scourge for Rebels. Promising out of hande to print another
woorke, called A rebuke to rebellion, and a triumph
to true Subiectes. So farewell.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Scourge for Rebels,
of matter touching duetifull seruices,
that merites immortall fame: wherein rebels are scourged
and discoursed of, which seruices chiefly by the
Earle of Ormound (and noble Souldiers vnder
his charge) were manfully begunne, worthily
mainteined, and happily ended.
            
               WHereas men of good mindes, studious to
set out trueth, Louers of vertue, Haters of
vice, & Fauourers of common weale, haue
framed themselues members of the state, &
writers of good thinges woorthie memorie
(that craueth witnesse of the beste wittes)
haue taken paines in publishing manye volumes
well penned, and printing of bookes needefull for this
time, & necessary for al ages to read & behold in time to come:
and in manner written partly on reportes, and partly on experience
by viewe, haue set downe not onely their owne opinions
(in matters treated of:) but also haue made rehearsall of
many mens actions, and last out the seruices of a very honourable
and valiaunt Earle (named the Earle of Ormounde)
whose noblenes both in nature and condition argues a great
minde, and commands a multitude to speake wel of.
            For which cause, & the rather to encourage valiant hearts
to continue in vertuous actions (a thing looked for in eche degree
and calling) that may aduaunce the hardy and stoute parsonages,
I haue aduentured to put pen to paper, in the behalfe
especially of some heretofore long forgotten, and others, both
presently to be praised, and hereafter may be worthy of great
renowne and credit.
            And to be plaine, writers are so small regarded, worlde so
enuious, and people so greedy of their owne glorye, that fewe
goes about to blow the blast of good fame, towardes any worthy
mans aduancement.
            
               
Such is our weakenes of goodwill, and shortnes of breath,
that we can spare no speeches (wel spent and bestowed) to the
benefice of such as deserues wel, whose doings, claimes good
liking, and a generall good report of the world.
            Yet commonly the best sort of companies, being inclined to
noble disposition are glad to heare the worthy commended, &
with sweete wordes furthers the fame of any one that merits
commendation.
            The trueth of things is wel bestowed among such people &
nothing should be hid from their knowledge, that so thankfully
welcomes the wel doing of others.
            And in effect no enterprise of value is taken in hand, but
in hope that labour and paines shoulde reape commodity and
praise, a good worke may not scape vnrewarded, and what better
worke can there bee, then to cut off sicke and rotten members
from a sound and hole bodie?
            I meane who can be better occupied then those that would
weed out of a common weale, a number of cankred mindes infected
with corrupt manners that may sodainly wound harmlesse
hearts, and breake the common society of good men?
            Is there any labour more laudable, seruice more famous,
life more toilesome, or exercises more noble, then stil to be busied
for the preseruation of a Prince and countrie?
            And who I pray you liues in more hazard, eates with lesse
quietnes, sleepes in more daunger, or tasteth so many miseries
as the Souldier that only seekes his countries glorie and his
owne credite?
            Deserues not that man an euerlasting renowme, that refuseth
no iourney, shuns no seruice, nor auoydes no action to
doe his countrie good?
            Ye shal reade how the Romaines rewarded the valiancy of
men with a Crowne called the Crowne Ciuique, which albeit,
it was but of speciall greene leaues, yet was it as muche or
more esteemed then some golden crownes that Emperors ded
weare in triumph, as diuers Authours thereof makes mention.
            
               
And where such Souldiers (crowned in this manner) repaired
either in open pastimes, priuace playes, and Comedies, or
in any noble assembly where honour is to be receiued and looked
for, the sacred Senate, and generally the whole Senators
altogether would arise from their seates of maiestie & shewe a
certaine salutation towardes the honourable souldier, at his
comming to their presence, and further to animate couragious
mindes, there was alwayes an honourable place prepared (a
part from common people) for the souldier.
            Wherby the world might see the souldiers worthines, and
learne to regard men worthely, whose seruice deserued great
reputation.
            But looke now what great & mighty matters were brought
to passe in that age, what victories were woonne, what tryumphs
were obtayned, and what riches and treasure was gotten
by the inuincible courage of meane, and by meane of the
honour that souldiers and citizens of Rome possessed.
            Among the East Indians at this present day, souldiers are
so reuerenced and made of, that the meane people muste not
onely giue them way & curtesie, but also must labour for their
maintenance, yea their stipends and liuing are so greate (by a
publike prouision) that they alwayes liue and feed on the common
treasure, and euery thing is allotted and appointed them,
as it came by inheritaunce, and were possessed from their parentes.
            Did not king Alexander the great, in the beginning and
middle of his conquests, cause souldiers to be honoured, made
orders and lawes that no man should doe them iniurie, & since
his dayes as wel as before his time, when a souldier should be
iudged (by a free libertie graunted from kinges) he might appeale
to Cesar from the lawes of the land, and so in euery sort
his priuiledge was so great, that al manner of men knew him
to be honourable.
            Though duty and good disposition halleth men forward, to
aduenture great attempts and seruices, if same should be kept
from them, their warme good willes woulde waxe colde, and

wearines would quickly ouercome the willingest mind, that euer
followed marshall affaires.
            For as the dumbe beast being cherished and comforted with
his maysters sweete entertainement, drawes (as seemeth)
with a better delighte in labour, and forsakes neyther foule
waye, nor harde aduenture for eache sensible manne feelinge
some encouragemente in his traueile, goes on Iustely
to his businesse, and thinkes the lesse of greate burdens, because
some hope leades him forewarde, and helpes to ease
his ouercharged Bodye, and shoulders: fayre woordes (with
some fruit) and gentle behauiour, I tel you, towleth some forward,
that otherwise would dragge farre behind, & perswades
great content to an aspiring mind, that gapes after glory, and
is nourished with good hope.
            Nowe since in our elders dayes (of great antiquity) souldidiers
had countenance and credite, that qualified their carefull
turmoylinges, and recompensed their labours, with a blast of
noble reporte, this our tyme presente muste of compulsion (by
meane of their prerogatiue) yeelde them praises condigne for
their deseruinges, and fit for personages of manly spirite and
towardnes.
            So if all nations & times allow necessary fame to valiant
mindes, and reason graunts that good men should be honored,
(especially in a naughty world) because desire of fame breedes
many woorthy actions, wee may the better (and with greater
holdnesse) enterprise to register them in the renowmed booke
of commendation.
            All this before by me written, meante onely of souldiers,
that serue and haue serued agaynste forraine enemyes. Then
what Tytle, what honour shall I giue them? and what style
shall I holde in the honouring of those that continuallie agaynste
Rebelles, haue shewed theyr vttermoste force and
pollicye, whiche seruices of theirs, springes of maruellous
trueth and affection, and ought not to be forgotten of no posterity
nor nation: the consequent is so greate thereof, and
the constancie so muche in them, that pursues Rebelles,

that no mannes penne is able sufficientlie to prayse them aright.
            For they are suche profitable proppes and pillers of the publike
pillers of the publike weale, that they maye marche nexte
vnto honourable Councellours whose wisedome trice out follies,
and whose grauity graciously gouernes.
            And so to be short, if conscience confesseeth that eche man
dooynge well, shall possesse immortall prayse, I may not forgette,
and vtterlye leaue out the noble. Actes and seruices of
mine auncient Friende the woorthye Earle of Ormounde,
whose deedes when you heare, (thoughe you were mortall enemyes)
you shal maruel of: and when you consider the
the substaunce thereof throughlye, you that haue power and
abilitie, shal imitate his steppes, and bee followers after the
light of so noble a lanterne, that in the darkest times, doubtefullest
dayes, and most obscure season, hath shewed brightnesse,
and like a blasing starre hath stood stiffly in a fixed place, and
cast a cleere light, so farre, that al the beholders may be gladde
thereof, and wel therein.
            First, for that the Countrey of Irelande hath beene a long
whyle subiecte to sundrye seditions and sorrowful calamities
moste miserable for them selues, and chargeable to the
Prince, the reformation whereof hath coste manye a woorthye
mannes lyfe, and the greater hath growen the griefes
because diuers of that Nation neglecting their dueties, haue
hadde small care of the common tranquillitye and peace of
poore people, by which insolence, rebellion hath beene bredde:
and shamelesse dissention set abroche. And continuing in extremitye,
verye sore woundes and maymes the publique
state hath sustayned, til GOD of his goodnesse raysed vppe
some suche members as sought nothing but redresse and quietnesse.
            It happened in a number of seruices that one Noble
manne was so fortunate (because of his fideltye) that manye
of the reste didde feare him, and therefore soughte

his ouerthrow, but he being armed with a iust quarrel and minding
to scourge Rebels, omitted no occasion to take the enemies
at aduantage, but howsoeuer he chaunced to finde them,
he fortunately suppressed their pride, and followed the faithful
course and forme of a most noble captaine.
            And because it shalbe seene to the worlde, orderly what heedid,
herein shal bee set downe the matter, place, and time, of a
part of his honourable seruices, to the intent it shall not dwell
in forgetfulnesse, and to encourage other noble personages in
doing their countrey good to treade the steppes of the noble
Earle of Ormound.
            I remembring his forwardnes in the young king Edwards
dayes (with whom he was brought vp) and the charge he had of
some horsemen in Queene Maries raigne against Rebels in
England, haue called in like manner to minde, the seruice hee
did against the Omoores and the Oconnors in their rebellion
of Ireland, also the ouerthrowing of Dunloghe, Oswilleuane
Moores chiefest house, is woorthie note: for it was in time of
Rebellion, with other ordinary seruices, that alwaies did testifie,
that this Earle was a sharpe scourge to Rebels.
            And to proue that his daily desire thirsted after noble enterprises
(for the punishment of malefactors) he serued chargeably
and in no little daunger (on his owne proper coste and
expence) with two hundred footemen, and fiftie horsemen in
Ulster, the North parte of Irelande against Iohn Oneale,
who was in open action of rebellion manie and sundrie seasons.
            In the like manner all on his own charge, he serued against
the scot, called Iames Maconell, in Ulster, whose force he ouerthrewe
to the number of two thousand men, and in the ende
droue the scot to flye away.
            Then hauing charge of Thomounde (by vertue of the
Queenes highnes commission) hee tooke all the Castles and
ho
                  ••
               es thereof in spite of the Earle of Thomounde (who was
in rebellion) slue diuers of his men, and brought others of them
to submission, compelling the Earle, himselfe (for safegarde of

his life) to flie into Fraunce, where hee remayned, vntill her
Maiestie on her meere clemencie, pardoned his life, and restored
his landes. The Earle of Thomoundes mother notwithstanding,
was Aunt to the Earle of Ormounde, which shewes
that neither respect of blood, nor friendship could hinder any
peece of dutiful seruice.
            In another greate seruice the Earle of Ormound hearing
that Desmound went about to annoy Syr Maurice fitz Gerralt
(late vicount of the Desies) he raised a power and mette
Desmounde in the fielde, gaue him battaile at Athmanie, slue
fiue hundred of his men, tooke himselfe captiue, and sente him
into England where he remayned till the Queenes highnesse
vouchesafed to remit his offence, and returned him home to
his countrey.
            Nowe in processe of time, my Lord of Ormounde by the
Queenes appointment, became gouernor of Mounster in the
beginning of Desmondes last reuolt, when hee had of Rebels
about him, two thousand able men, but he was folowed so fast,
and so hardly beset (by suche as were appointed for that purpose)
that he was driuen to manie extremities, partely by the
ayde and aduice of the L. Iustice, Syr William Pelham, and
partly by the policie and power of the Lord Gouernour (who
chiefly was general in the field) that of two thousand men, the
Desmound was left but one bare hundred, and as it seemed,
and may be prooued, the Earle of Ormounde was cause of the
weakening of the enemies force, as hereafter you maye reade,
when it comes to that point.
            But the L. Gouernour being remoued from that charge,
came into England, from whence after some time spent there,
about necessarie causes, he was sent againe to his former gouernement
of Mounster with most noble authoritie and commission,
and being arriued in Irelande, he made heade against
the Desmound with whom was a thousand tall souldiers that
were gathered together in the absence of the Earle of Ormound.
He comming to scourge these Rebels, and finding the
enemies force strong, tooke order both by watch, spial, disciplyne

of Warre, and warlike deuises, to supplante Desmoundes
determination, and marchinge in marshall manner
towardes the enemyes, his verye countenaunce daunted so
muche Desmoundes companye, that they fell to their woonted
feare, where they thoughte them in moste safetye, but
beeynge painefullye followed, and pursued moste fiercelye
as Rebelles shoulde bee, they fell from flyinge and fightinge
to yeeldinge and crauinge of mercye, so euen as the matter
fell out in the pursuite, yee shall reade as followes the names
of some fewe of the chiefest that were slayne beeyng Leaders
of companies, and menne of accounte amongest the traytours.
Henry fitz Gerralt, base brother to Syr Iames fitz Gerralt of
the Desies.
            Kennedy mac Bryen, mac Brien Ogonaghs, sonne Gibbon
Roe, Lord of the great wood. The Deane of Brohils sonnes,
the Earle of Desmoundes receiuer, Connoghore O Multean,
Daniel Mantagh foster brother to Sir Iohn of Desmond.
Rowrie Moel mac Conoghane. Mac Thomas thiefe of his
name. Mauryce Uale, Iames Uale, Brownes of the Earle
of Desmoundes foster Brothers. William Graueye sonne
to mac Bryen Ogonagh with manye more too tedious, to
be recited, besides two hundred fortie sixe of their menne and
confederates that were put to the sworde, and executed in such
manner as diuers other Rebelles (beeyng greatlye terrifled
therewith) were fayne to submit themselues to the Queenes
Highnesse mercie.
            And further, the Lord Gouernour caused al the Cattle of
the Countrie, to bee brought out of Desmoundes reache, into
places of strength, whereby Desmounde and suche of his
companye as remained with him, were brought to most miserable
state, & driuen for want of other relief, to feed vpon horsefleshe
and carrion in suche sort as with very harde shifte, they
saued them selues from being sterued.
            And thus was the Earle of Desmound of al his force consumed
and lefte accompanyed onelie with seuen menne and
his Priest, who from the tenthe of the laste Iulie, hidde them

in a glinne within Sleaueloghra, hauing no other foode the
space of seuen Weekes there, but sixe Plowegarrans, whereon they fedde without eyther breade, drinke, or other sustenaunce.
            About the twentieth of September laste, Desmounde
beyng hardly followed by certaine Kearnes appoynted by the
L. General to serue against that traytour, his priest was taken
from him, with another of his men, and brought to the Earle
of Ormound.
            Since whiche time, the Earle of Desmounde was relieued
by a Captaine of Galloglas (called Gohorra mac Donnagha
mac Sweenye) whereof the Earle of Ormounde hauing
aduertisement by suche as hee imployed to doe that seruice,
pursued hym into Olearies Countrie where hee tooke
the moste parte of his goodes, and lefte no reliefe for him
nor Desmounde, insomuche as the first of the laste Nouember,
the sayde Gohorra was enforced to repayre to Iniskiue
mac Carthy Reoghs Countreye, in the Countye of Corcke,
and there tooke thyrteene Cowes and eyght Garrans from
one Donogho mac Teig of Iniskiue aforesaide Gentleman:
whiche Donnogho with tenne more in his companye made
pursuite after the sayde Gohorra, rescued his Cowes and garrans,
slewe the saide Rebell, and sent his head to the Earle of
Ormound.
            The eleuenth of the sayde Nouember, the Earle of Desmounde
for wante of the sayde Gohorra, to brynge him hys
woonted nourishement was vrged with meere famyne, and
pinchinge penurye, to sende to one Daniel mac Daniell Omoriherteighe
to seeke some reliefe, whiche Daniel made answeare
to him that brought the message, that hee was bounde
in band, and by othe sworne to the Lord Generall, and also that
hee had deliuered his pledge into the Generalles handes for
performaunce of dooynge good seruice against Desmounde
and his Adherentes: wherefore, he would giue him no reliefe
at all.
            Wherupon the Earle (being almost famished with extreame

hunger) determined a desperate action. First, for relieuing his
necessitye, and after, to escape the daunger of other fortunes
that might followe, and in that resolution hee aduentured to
pray where he thought for that purpose, and because the verie
trueth of his doinges then, and the manner of his death shalbe
well knowen to the worlde throughly, heere is sette downe an
examination of one that was at his ouerthrowe, and sawe his
head cut off.
         
         
            
            The Examination of Owen mac
Donill, Omorihertegh, taken the xxvj. of Nouember,
1583. before those whose names are heereunto subscribed,
of the manner and discourse how the Earle of
Desmound was pursued and slayne.
            THe said Owen being duely sworne and examined vppon
the holie Euangelist, by vertue of his othe, deposeth, that
on Saterday (beeing the ix. of this present Nouember) the
Earle of Desmound departed, the woods lying neere the Iland
of Rierye, and went Westward beyond Tramore to the
wood called Dorremore neere Bongoinder, from whence he
sent ii. of his Horsmen (called Conoghore Nescolly & Shane
Deleo) with xviii. kearns to bring him a pray (hauing himself
and Iohn mac Ullug, and two or three footmen stayed there at
Dorremore for them) which company (by the said Earles direction)
went to Cahir nefahye (lying by west Gregories Castle
by the Sea side) and there tooke the pray of Maurice mac
Owen brother in law to this Deponent, and the pray of Robert
mac Edmound being Tenauntes to this deponent and to
his eldest brother, called Donil mac Donil Omoriherteighe
in that town: that is to say, forcie Cowes, niene capples with
great store of other goods and houshold stuffe, and stripped naked
the said Maurice his wife, and children. At the takinge of
whiche praye (to terrefie the people from making pursuit) the
said traytors published and saide that the Earle of Desmound
lay neere them with the rest of his companie, to ayde them, if
pursuite had beene made after them. Whereuppon the saide
Maurice sent worde to Liuetenant Stanley (then beeing in
the Dungle) and also to this deponent and to his sayd brother
Douil mac Donil (being then at Castle dromin neere Castle
Maing) of the taking of his pray.
            Whereuppon this Deponent and his said brother Donill
mac Donil (hauing also word sent them from Lieuetenaunt
Stanley, to pursue and tract out that pray, and to call to their

ayde, the ward of Castlemaing, and that he and the countrey
were making ready to followe them to rescue the same) hauing
respect chiefely to their othes, assuraunce, and promise
giuen and made to the Lorde General, to doe seruice, set forwarde,
being xiiii. proper Kearnes in companie whereof two
were shot. And this Examinate went to Castlemaing, and
tolde the Cunstable Cheston of the whole matter, and besought
him to rise out (according to the Lieuetenaunts direction)
to followe the praye in the companie of him and his brother
Daniel, to which Cheston aunsweared, that he could not
himselfe depart his charge, and saide, he woulde let him haue
some of his companie, to go with this Examinate, and so sent
away fiue Souldiers with him. This Examinate, and those
fiue Souldiers came together to the Mountayne of Sleauemisse,
where his Brother Daniell mac Daniell wayted
for them, and from thence they came altogether toward Tralye
in the Euening a Sunday (beeing the tenth of Nouember)
in hope that they shoulde ouertake the praye, before the
same, shoulde passe the straight of Tramore, where they were
sure (as they thought) to rescue the same praye from the traytours
if they had ouertaken them there. At their comminge to
Traley, they found the tracte of the pray, going Eastwarde
to Sleaueloghra.
            Whereuppon, the Souldiers whiche came from Castlemaing
beganne to stay, and sayde they woulde traueyle no farther
after the praye, but turne backe to theyr charge, till at
length this Deponente perswaded them to staye, and keepe
him company to pursue the pray, promising them two biefes
of the pray if it had beene theyr lucke to rescue the same from
the Traytours, if not, that he woulde giue them a Biefe of
his owne in respecte of their trauayle. Uppon whiche promise,
the Souldiers agreed to goe forwarde: the tracte was
followed by daye light to Balleore, and by mooneshyne towarde
Glamagnitie at Sleaueloghra, where then the Elder
Brother Daniell, and this Examinate tooke aduice to gette
vppe aboue the Glinne to viewe whether they might see anie

in the Woode, or heare anye stirre, and hauing come to
the heyghte ouer the Glinne, they sawe the fire vnderneath
them.
            Whereuppon Daniell sayde that he woulde goe to spy,
whether the Traytours had the praye there with them, whiche
hee did, and came backe to the companye, and tolde there
were some of the Traytours there, whiche hadde no Cattell
with them, and sayde it were beste not to assaulte them beefore
the praye and them selues coulde bee founde together.
            Whereunto this Examinate agreed. In the dawninge
of the daye, on mundaye the eleuenth of Nouember, they
put themselues in order to set vppon the Traytours in their
Cabbins. This Examinate and his Brother Donill with
theyr Kearne, tooke the forewarde, and appoynted the souldiers
to keepe the rewarde (sauinge that one Daniell Okelleye
a Souldier whiche hadde but his Sworde and Target,
stoode in the forewarde with them) they all makinge a
greate crye entered the Cabbin where the Earle laye, and
this Examinate ranne thorowe the Cabbin after the Earles
companye, whiche fledde to the Wood, and at his retourne
backe to the Cabbin doore, the Earle beeynge stroken by
one of the companye (by whome certayne hee knoweth not,
but that all the Footemenne and Souldiours were together
within the Cabbin) hee discouered him selfe, sayinge:
I am the Earle of Desmounde, saue my life. To whome
this Examinate annsweared, thou hast killed thy selfe longe
agone, and nowe thou shalte bee Prisoner to the Queenes
Maiestye, and to the Earle of Ormounde Lorde Generall
of Mounster. Wheruppon hee tooke him by his arme (beeing
cutte,) and willed the Earle (who was slowe in going) to
make speede, else they woulde carrye awaye his Heade,
seeynge the Traytours drewe verye neere to haue him rescued.
            Whereunto Daniel mac Daniel sayde, I will carry him

on my backe a while, and so shall euery one of you. Daniel caried
a good while, and being weary he put him off: the Traitours
being at hand, al the companie refused to carry him any
further, considering the eminent danger they stood in the traitours
drawing neere.
            Where at this deponent Owen mac Donil willed the souldier
Daniel O kelleye, to cut off the Earles head, for that they
could not apply to fight and carry him away, to whose direction
Kelley obeyed, saying: he would so doe, drawing out his
sworde, and striking off the Earles head, whiche they brought
to Castle maing, where this Examinate and his brother Daniel
mac Daniel deliuered the same to be kept (as in her Maiesties
Castle) til they had made themselues ready to bring the
same to the Lord General, and haue sent woorde to Lieuetenaunt
Stanley (who followed them in armes with the force
of the countrey, hauing the charge of the seruice in those parts
by the L. Generals appointment) of their happye successe, &
willed him to take his waye to Castle maing, to meete them
who came thither with his companie.
            And the forenamed Daniel O kelley (being likewise examined
before these, testified that the Earle of Desmounde was
pursued in the order and maner afore written, and that he him
selfe wounded the said Desmound within his Cabbin, and after
cut off his head (least he should be rescued) and that hee the
sayd Daniel mac Daniel layd vp the same head to be kepte at
Castlemaing, til it had beene brought by them to the Lorde
General.
            
               These thinges beeyng saide by othe before the right
Honorable the Earle of Ormound, the Bishop of Oshry,
and the Soueraigne of Kilkenny.
            
            NOw may you that wishe wel to the worthye sort of men,
behold how manfully good minds goes forward in scourging
of rebels. And so may you note, how by Gods ordinance,
al naughty practises are supplanted, the wicked rooted vp &

the worthie preserued, and briefly to rehearse the noble exploites
brought to good passe by the Earle of Ormound, it shall
make thousandes thinke, that a secrete deuine grace vpholds
the true subiect, and a prepared plague (from aboue) plucketh
downe the pryde of false people, that delights in paltry rebellion:
for the good and sound quarrel, alwayes ouerthrowes the
ficke and charged conscience, as is seene by this seruice.
            First marke, this Earle serued against his owne nation, against
his owne blood, against his familiars, and against all
forreyne power and deuises, against whom often he obtained
victories, and neuer tooke foyle, where his Aduersaries were
conquered, and broughte to vtter subuersion. Truely a matter
to be maruelled at, and a terrible example to all those that foolishely
committe offence. For trueth is so watchful, so stoute
in right, and strong in battaile, that falshood can finde neyther
force nor cunning to auoyde and resist. This Irishe action &
scourge of Rebelles, may warne the busie wittes and wanton
heades to beware of punishment, and make retchlesse children
feare the rodde. Which rodde and scourge, euery noble mind
beares openly and awfully, to make the miserable offender
quake and tremble, not onely at his owne treacherie, but also
at the view of a true mans face, which forceth a Rebel to blush
and turne backe vnto, and either mainely to run away or feebly
to fight. Yea, and though a while the rebel waxeth wilde
& wanders at pleasure. Yet sodainly he is made tame, and taken
in a net like a wyld goose, that knowes of no danger, till
the fowler hath him in his fingers.
            Nowe by this notorious seruice of the Earle of Ormounde
(and forwardnesse of good souldiers) the whole realme of Ireland
may see that trueth hath euer the victorie, and treason is
put to shame and dishonour, which iustice of God and fidelitye
of man shalbe I trust, a myrrour for al kind of nations to look
into, and shal cause to be made cleane al infected consciences,
and blottes of the browe that defiles the faces of many wicked
people.
            
               
So thus farre I haue gone in the rehearsal of a portion of
the Earle of Ormoundes seruices, meaning to write more as
time permitteth me. And thus was the rather taken in hand &
finished in haste, because your good Lordship shall see howe I
imploy mine aged yeeres. For the exercises of pen, and trauell
of body, makes me looke so young: And now to knit vppe my
careful pilgrimage, I frame my selfe daily to purchace noble
friends, whose power may further my good fortune here, and
yeeld some sparke of good reporte, when I am gone, and my
candle is cleane burned out, for which intent only I haue presented
your honourable Lordship this litle booke.
            A peece of forgetfulnes hath hindered my memorie, & left out
a great matter which shold haue bin mentioned in order, amōg
the rest of this seuere Earles seruices, who as I haue sayd before,
took no regard of blood, birth, friendship, familiarity, nor
personage whatsoeuer, when it came to ye point of iustice. For
in execution therof, all people were alike vnto him, were they
neuer so neere of his kin or consanguinity, as appeareth plainly
by the hanging of his owne base sonne, (and his Brothers
sonne) of late: with a number hanged likewise of their folowers,
which noble and seuere deede of his, as it is rare and most
to be marueiled at, so is it an act cōparable to kinges, that spared
not their owne children in causes of punishment, and shewing
good example. And as the other his worthie doinges, merites
an euerlasting same: so this deserues a perpetuall renowne
and praise, as all iust men I knowe wil confesse. Further
as I saide, I forgate some matter, so the taking and beeheading
of Syr Iames of Desmound (which was when the
Earle of Ormound was Gouernour of Mounster) must be remembred,
for I mind at the length to bring most of al his good
actions to light.
            
               Your L. humbly and loyally in al
at commandement.
Thomas Churchyard.
            
            
         
      
   